,. I ef lin'. 
Bj No. 6l ol.!!!9 
mE SCHEDULED CASTES AND THE SCHBDttLED TRIBB8 
(PREVENTION OF ATROCITIES) BILL, 1988 
A 
BILL 
to prevent the commission of offences of atrocities against the members 
of the Scheduled Castes aM the Scheduled Tribes. to pr'otJide for 
Special Court8 for the tricl of such offences aM for the reli~ and re-
hcIbilitation. of the victims of I1ich offences and fOf' m4ttersconnee ted 
t"erewith Of' incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fortieth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
CHAPl'ER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes (Prevention of AtrOCities) Act, 1989. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on su~h date as the Central Government 
10 may. by notification in the Official Gazette, appOint. . 
z. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "atrocity" means an offence punishable under section 3; 
(b) IICode" means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; 
Short 
title, 
extent and 
commen. 
cement. 
Deftnitiona. 

Puni8h. 
men. for 
offences of 
atrocitie.. 
" f" 
(c) "Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes" shall have the 
meanings assigned to them respectively unde.r clause (24) and clause 
(25) of article 366 of the Constitution; 
(d) "Special Court" means a Court of Session specified as a 
Special Court in section 14; 5 
(e) "Special Public Prosecutor" means a pUblic Prosecutor speci-
fied as a Special Public Prosecutor or an advocate referred to in sec-
tion 15; 
(t> wO,1'cis and expressions used, but not defined in this Act and 
defined in the Code or the Indian Penal Code shall have the meanings 10 48 f 1860 
assigned to them respecttvely in the Code, or as the case may be. in 0 • 
the Indian Penal Code. : 
(2.) Any reference in this .Act to any enactment or any provision 
thereof shall, in relation to an area in which such enactment or' such pro-
Vision is not in fO,1'ce, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, 1 S 
if any, in force in that area, 
CHAPTER II 
OFFmNcm OF ATROCITIES 
3. (1) Whoever, not 1Ieing a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Sche-
duled Trlbe,-
l,i'~~faDa. ~'TI;W,;h;aer of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe 
to ~ 9J? e~ W;~_~ W Q~~ ~~). 
o 
(ii) acts with intent to cause injury, insUlt or aimoyance to any 
member of a Scheduled Caste or a ~heduled Tribe by dumping ex-
creta. waste matter, carcasses or any ~er obnoxious substance in his 2S 
p.remises or neighbourhood; . 
~J fQrciJtly ~v~ ~~ frQ~ ~ ~, ~ a .. ~~eJi Qf a 
$ch~ed C;:~~oli a ~~lled T~be or ~aPes ~ ~ed- 01; wi~ 
~~\ fA~, Qf' boc4': o~ CQ~ IplJ ~ 4pt whJ.R' i~ ~~atory 
to human dignity; 30 
(iaI~ w.ro~ ~pies QJ;, ~hratel ~y land, oWDe4 ,y: Of· 
allotted to, or notified by any competent authority to be.~" ~ " 
member of a Scheduled Caste o~ a. S.G~y,ed Wbe or, gets the land 
allotted to him transferred; i, ' 
4~ ~ql1~ 4isP,os~, a .~~ q( a, $c~'4~ Gw Df-. a 3 
Scheduled Tribe from his ~ 01' Pf~_ Q~ b)ter,feJ:~ wi~ tl)e 5 
~oyment of his .ri~~ts over any l~nd, premises or water; 
(vi) compels or entices a member of a Scheduled Caste OJ[ ~I 
~~~~t ~+~; ~. d~ 'befl~' Qr ~t~e~ s~~il,.r forms, of fp~ed, Qr 
bonded labour other Ql~ an~ ~~ulS9~ service for, p'lJ;Qlic p'~r- 4,Q, 
poses imposed by Government; . , 
(~:.), fq:rR~~ q~ iD~hJ~~, a, 'n~~pe!, ~f B:. ~!N..ul!4. Ca~ or 
a Scheduled Tribe not te vote or to vote to a particul8l' candidate or 
to vote in a man .. other. thaD that provided by law; 

s 
(viii) inatitutes falsej malicious or vexatio~ ~t or, er,iminal or 
other legal proceeding againl~ a member of a Sched.u1~ Cute or a 
Scheduled Tribe; 
. - .. '. " (ioT). gives any false or ,frivolous information to any public ser-
S vant and thereby causes such public servant to use his lawful power 
to the inJUl'y or annoyance of a member of a Scheduied caSte or a 
Scheduled Tribe; 
(z) mtentionally insUlts or intimidates with intent to humiliate 
a rdemher of a Seheduled Caste fir a Seheduled Tribe in any place 
10 within public vil!W; 
(xi) assaults or uses force 110 any woman belonging to a Sched-
uled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe with intent to dishonour or outrage 
her modes$}'; 
(rii.) being :i1'1 a position to dominate the will of a woman be-
IS longing to a Sheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe and ases that 
position to exploit her SftUally to which she would not have other-
wise agreed; 
(.12iii) corrupts or fouls the water of any spring, reservoir or 
any other source ordinarily used by members of the Scheduled Castes 
20 or the Scheduled. Tribes so aB to render it less fit for the purpose tor 
which it is ordinarily used; 
(xiv) denies a member of a Scheduled Caste or , 9:beduled 
Tribe any customary right of passage to a place of public resort or 
oMfue'ts s'Deh ~ef sCi as t> }We-ooehf hhii frOtit Usirt~· or baving 
lS acee~s to a p'laee 'Of pubffc' MBort tb whlet% 6ther meiri6f!rs Of public 
or any seelkm tliei'ebf Fttlve' a rfgflt (0' o.iJ€ Ol" ~d t6'; 
(xv) forces or causes a member of a SehecJuied Caste or a 
Scheduled 'ttribe to leave hls house, vUlage or other place of resi-
dence, 
30 shall be punishe.ble with imprisomnent for a term which shall not be 
less than si'X months but which may extend to five years and with fine. 
(2) Whoever, not being a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Sched-
ul«!d 'Pribe.~ 
(i~ givet or fabrieates' faa evidence intending thereby to C!ause. 
()r knoWing it· to' be likely tba(. he' will. thereby c8Wle, 'any member 
of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled' Tribe to be ~onvicted of an 
offence which is capital by! the laws for the time being in foree shall 
he punished with- imprisonment for life and with fine; and· if an in-
ROCel'1t mem'ber of a Schedttled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe be 'con-
victed and executed in consequence of such false or fabricated eYi-
dence, the person who gives· or fabricate9 such false evidence shall l 
be punished with death; 

Puniah· 
ment for 
neglect 
of duties. 
Enhanced 
punish-
ment for 
'Jubeequat 
conviction. 
:" 4 
(it) .",.- or 1abria.tes fa18e evidence intending thereby to 
I. callie. Or lmo\Pling it 'to be likely that he wil,I thereby C&UIe. any 
member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe to be convicted 
of an offence which is not capital but punishable with imprisonnumt 
for a term of, seven' years 01' u~rds, he shall be punishable with S 
impriBonment for a 'term which shan not be less than stx; months but 
which may extend to seven years or' upwards and with fine; 
(iii) commits mischief by fire or any explosive substance in-
tending to cause or knowing it to be likely that he wiU thereby cause 
damage 10 any property 'belonging to a member of a Scheduled 10 
Caste or a Scheduled Tribe shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may 
extend to seven years and with fine; . , 
(iv) commits mischief by fire or any explosive substance in-
tending to cause or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause 15 
destruction of any buUding which is ordinan1y used as a place of 
worship or as a place for human dwelling or as a place for custody 
of the property by a member ofa Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled 
'Iiribe shall be punishable with imprisonment for life and with fine·; 
(v) commits any offence under the Indian Penal Code punish- 20 45 of 1860. 
able with imprisonment for term of ten years or more against a per-
son or property on the ground that such person is a member ota 
Sched.uled C81!te or a Scheduled Tribe or such property belongs to 
such member, shall be punishable with imprisonment for life and 
with fine. I 25 
(vi) knowingly or Jlaving reason to believe that an oftence has 
been committed under'this Chapter, causes any evidence of the 
commission of that offence; to disappear with the intention of Gcreen-
in~ the offender from legal punishment, or with that intention gives 
any information respecting the offence which he knows or believes 30 
. to be. false shall be punishable with the punishment provided for 
that offence: or 
(vii) being a public servant, commits any offence under this 
section shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be less than one year but which may extend to the pun.ish- 3S 
ment provided for that offence. ' 1 
4. Whoever, being a public servant but not being a member of a 
Seheduled Caste ora Scheduled Tribe, wilfully neglects his duties re-
. quired to be performed by him under . this Act shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but 40 
whtch may extend to one year: j 
5: Whoever, havinga~dybeen convieted of an offence under this 
., Chapter is convicted for the second offence or any oft'enee subsequent to 
" the second ofte'lice, shall be punishable with imprisonment' for a term. 
which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to the punish- 4S 
ment provided for that offence. . , . 

10K SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE SCHEDULBD CASTES AND THE SCHEDULED TRIBES (PREVENTION OF 
A'IROCITlES) BILL, 1989 
(To be/As in troQ..U2Jl.ill...lQ.lL§atlla) 
1. page 2, a~a1nst line 10, in the margin,-
.f.2:£.. '148 0 f 186o" .£W "45 0 f 186J" 
2. page 3, line 2,-
for ''pr.ceeding'' ~ ''proceedings'' 
. " 
3. page 3, line 15,-
e. 
for "S£teduled Caste" read "Scheduled Oiste lt 
4. page 3, line 37,-
f.Q.L "laws" read 
page 4, line 5,-
''law'' 
omit "he" 
6. Page 4, line 21,-
aft-er "for" inser t 'ta." 
7. page 4, line 42,-
for "alredy" read "already" 
8. page 5, line 10,-
after "to" omit" the" 
9. page 5, line 30,-
fo r "1 t is" ~ "i fit" 
10. page 5, line 36 ,-
ror "excercisable tI read "exercisable" 
11. page 7, in the marginal heading to clause 12,-
fo r "Yil en an" reag 
12. page 8, line 3,-
"whom" 
bero re "Dep u ty" in ser t .. ua " 

13. Page 8, line 5,-
fo r "gro p " re~d ~I gro up " 
14. page 8, line 13,-
f2!:. lip ro vison s" read "nro visions It t 
15. page 2, line 26,-
for "any II ~ "an" 
16. page 9, line 40,-
for "He ues" read "Houses" 
NEW DEIHl; 
August 8. 1982 
Sravana 17,1911 (Saka) 

•. Subject to the ot!ler provlsfons of this Act. the provtslons of sectl= 
46 of 1860. 34, Chapter In, Chapter ''N, ehaptet. 'V, L."'hapter VA. section 149 and 
Chapter XXIII of the Indian Penal Code, shall, 80 far as may be, apply 
for the purposes of this Act as' theY apply for the purposes of the Indian 
5 Penal Code. 
'1. (1) Where a ;person has been convicted of any offence punishable 
under this Chapter, the Special Court may, in addition to awarding any 
punishment, by or~ in writing, declare that any property, movable or 
immovl'ble or both,~bItlonging to the person,. which has been used for the 
16 commission of that ~oftence,. shall stand forfeited to the Government. 
(2) Where any person is accused of any offence under this Chapter, it 
shall be open to the Special Court trying him to pass an order that all or 
any of the properties, movable or immovable or both, belonging to him, 
shall., during the period. of such trial, be attached. and where such trial 
15 ends in conviction, the property so attached shall be liable to forfeiture 
to the extent it is required for the purpose of realisation of any flne im-
posed under this Chapter. I 
8. In a prosecution for an offence under this Chapter, if it is proved 
that-
20 (a) the accused rendered any financial assistance to a person 
accused of, or reasonably suspected of committing. an offence tinder 
this Chapter. the Special Court shall presume. unless the contrary 
is proved. that ~uch ~rson had abetted the offence; 
(b) a grouA' of persons committed an offence under this Chapter 
25 and if it is proved that the offence committed was a sequel to any exis-
tillg dispute regarding land or any other matter, it shall be presumed 
that the oftence was eommitted in furtherance of the common inten-
tion or in prosecution of the common object. 
Applica-
tion bf 
certain 
provisions 
of Indian 
Penal 
Code. 
Forfeiture 
otpropei'. 
ty~cer_ 
tain per-
sons. 
Pi"esump-
tion as to 
offences. 
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code or in any Confer-
30 other provision of this Act. the State Government may, it is considers ment of 
it necessary or expedient so to do,- powers. 
(a) for the prevention of and for coping with any offence under 
this Act. or 
(b) fOr any case or class or group of cases under this Act, 
35 in any district or part ther.eof. confer, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
on any officer of the State Govern~ent, powers excercisable by a 
police officer under the Code in such district or part thereof or, as the 
case may be. for such case or class or group of cases. and in particular, 
the powers of arrest, investigation and prosecution of persons before any 
40 Special Court. . ! . I . , 
(2) An. officers of police and all other officers of Government shall 
assist the oftlcerrt!ferred to in sub-section (1) in the execution of the 
provisions of this Act or any rule, scheme or order made thereunder. 

Removal 
ofpereon 
likely \0 
commit 
ofleace. 
Procedure 
on failure 
ofpe1'8OD 
to remove 
himsell 
from 
area and 
enter 
thereon 
after 
removal. 
(3) The provisions of the Code sball, so far ... may be, apPly ~ the 
exercise of the powers by an offieer \In_ M-section (1). 
CHAPTER m 
EXTERNMENT 
10. (1) Where the Special Court is satisfied, upon a complaint or a S 
pollee report that a person is likely to commit an eBenee utlder Chapter 
II of this Act in any area included in 'SohedUled Areal' or 'tribal areai', 
as referred to in article 244 of the Constitution, It ~ay, by ordet 11'1 wi'lt-
ing, direct such person! to remove himself beyond the limits of auch are., 
by such route and Within such time as Ittay be apeoifted In the arcter, and It 
not to return to that area from which he was directed to remove himself 
tor such period, not exceeding two years; as may be spedfted 1ft the Order. 
(2) The Special Court shall. along with the order under sub-sectlcm 
(1), communicate to the person directed under that 8ulHection the 
grounds on which such order hal been tnade. 1 S 
(3) The Special Court may revoke or modify the order made under sub-
section (1), for the reasons to be recorded in writing, on the represelltation 
made by the person against whom such order has been made or by any 
other person on his behalf within thirty days from the date of the order. 
n. (l) If a person. to whom a directioll hall beeD is!Med Uftder section 29 
10 to remG'Ye himself frOID anr are.-
(a) fails to remove himself as directed; or 
(b) having so removed himself enters such &tea· witlUn the 
period specified in the order. 
otharwiaI! tbm with the per .... ion in wr1ti:nl of •• Sp!clal Court under 2S 
sub·section (2), the SpeciaJ Cout may c:allR IiIIID to be arrested and 
removed in pOlice custody to such place outside such area as the Special 
Court may I~ify. 
(2) The Special Court may, by OItler ia wri-" permit aay pers<M. 
in respect of whom an order under section 10 has been made, to return 30 
to the area trom which he was directed to remove himself for' such tem· 
porary period and subject to such conditions as may be gpeeifted in such 
order and may roquire him ,to execute a bend with or without surety for 
the due observation of the conditions imposed. 
(3) The Special Court may at any time revoke any such permission. 3-S 
'4) Any pe:rson.. WRO wWa. such pwmiasion RtuJaa to the area bOIIl 
which. Jae wu· cmected to remove laimself shaU obilerve'the coRditioDs im· 
posed, and at the eXpiry of the temporary period for whicah· Ile wa., pe1'-
mitted to return, or on the revocation of such permission before the expiry 
of such temporal:? periGQ., shall wmove lUmtJetf outaide web area' and 40 
shan. not retum. tbawtG wi'bhiD, 1iae unexpirecl ~D- apeciAad under 
section to- without. a f.reth,. pumi8Iion. ' . 

7 
" (S} If awsoll faUff tQ Qbierve an,y of the conditions imposed or to 
reJIlove hims~, q,cco.r.diqgly qr baving so J.'I~ved himself enters or 
retlM'ns tQ .y,crh,ilre$. wlthou~ fresh pennission the Special Court may 
~a\lMe him to. be ~~ and remov~d in police custody to such place 
5 out~~Q.., ~ych, ar~a u tbe ~ial Court may apecily. 
If. (1) Every ~l"8On against whom an order has been made under 
section lOshall, if so requirec:l by the Special Court, allow his measure-
.J;nents and photo~apl\s to be taken by a police oftlcer. 
! .' ". , 
1(1) Dany person Nferred 116 in .,,&'seetion (1) when required to' 
10 allow his measurements or photographs to be taken resists or refuses tb 
allow the takini of sqch ~e~uremen.t$ or photographs, it shall be lawful 
to use' aU necessary tneans U; ~e the taking thereof. 
Taki.ni 
meUUl'e-
menta and 
photo. 
graphs, 
etc., of 
persons 
against 
when an 
., . ~, ~'ia~. to. or refus~ to allow the taking of measurementi (lr 
p~~ ~ sub'llectiO;l1 (a) s.ba1l be deemed to be an offence 
45 of 1860 15 unde~ ~~ 186. Qt ~ ~ P@81 Code. 
order 
under 
section 
10 is 
made. 
22 of 1955. 
(4) Where. ai\ orc;let under sectiQn 10 is revoked, an measurements 
(and photographS (including negatives) taken under sub-sectfon ~) 
shall be destroyed or made over to the person against whom such order 
is~~ 
20 13. Any person contravening an order of the Special Court made Penalty 
for nen,.. ... under section 10 shall be punishable 'with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one year and with fine. 
CHAPI'J:R IV 
&r.cr.u. CO;l1RTS 
co11lPliace 
of .ur. 
un'" aecttOa 
10. 
25 14. For the purpose of providing for speedy trial, the State Govern- Special:' 
ment shall, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court, Court. 
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify for each di'atrict a Court 
of Session to be al Special Court to try the offences under this Act. 
15. For every Special Court, the State Government shaD. by notifica-
30 tion in the Official Gazette, specify a Public Prosecutor or appoint lUI 
advocate Who bas been in praeti~e as an advocate! for not less than seVeD 
Special. 
Public 
Proee_ 
cutor. 
35 
y..- .... 8.peeial ~c· ~utor far tlae P1IrlJO$e of cqgducting c....-
iD .... ~ , 
CHAPrER V 
)(JsCELLANllOUS 
16. The- provisiOns of seeilI!on· lOA oft Ute fIroteetaoa 01 Clv.il BighU>· PoWell of, 
Act, 1955 shall, so far' as may'., apply. tor th. pl.IrpG8II all bDpDaitUm· . State 
and! ~tiiUl, of, ~tilM finelUl.ct fQr all. other matte(S connected Govem .. 
therewith under this Act. ment. 10· imp<*! 
collecti,... 
fine. 

Preventive 
action to 
betaken 
by the 
law and 
brder 
machinery 
Section _ of the 
Code not 
to apply 
to~ 
committinf 
an otrenee 
\D1der the 
Act. 
Section 
360 of the 
Code or 
the . , 
Probati'on 
of 
Offenders 
Act not to 
apply to 
persons 
guilty of 
an offence 
under 
the Act. 
Act to 
override 
otha-
laws. 
Duty of 
Govern-
ment to 
ensure 
effective 
implemen-
tation bf 
the Act. 
8 
17. (1) A District Magistrate or a Sub-divisional. MagIstrate or IUl1 
other Executive Magistrate or any police officer not below the rank Of 
Deputy Superintendent of Police may. on receiving lnfonnatioo and after 
such inquiry as he may think necessary, has reason to believe that 
a person or a grop of persons not belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the 5 
Scheduled Tribes, residing in or frequenting any place within the local 
limits of his jurisdiction is likely to commit an offence or haJ threaten-
ed to commit any offence under this Act and it of the opinion that 
there is suftlcient ground for proceeding, declare such an area to be 
an area prone to atrocities and take necessary action for keeping the 10 
peace and. good behaviour and maintenance of public order and trail .. 
quillity and may take preventive action. 
(2) The provisons of Chapters Vill. X and XI of the Code shall, 90 far 
as may be, apply for the purposes of sub-section (1). 
(3) The State Government may, by' notiftcatton in the OfBclal Gazette, 15 
make one or more schemes specifying the manner in wbieh the oftlcers 
referred to in sub-section (1) shall tab appropriate aetton speclflecl in 
such scheme or schemes to prevent atrocities and to restore the feeling 
of security amongst the members of the Scheduled Cutes and the 
Scheduled Tribes. 28 
18. Nothing in section 43'3 of the Code shall apply in relation to any 
case involving the arrest of any person on an accusation of having 
committed an offence under this Act. 
I'. The provisions of section 380 of the Code and the provisions of the 
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 shall not apply to any person above 2S 24' of 1"1. 
the age of eighteen years who is found guilty of having committed any 
offence under this Act. 
ZOo Save as oti"erWise . proVided in this Act, the provisions of this Aet 
shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith c0n-
tained in any other law for the time being in force or any custom or 30 
usage or any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law. 
Zl. (1) Subject to such rules 85 the Central Government may make 
in thI& bebaH, tJae State Gevenunent .Ihall taM such measures 88 IQY 
be Deeeuary fer the. eftectiw imp~tation of this Act. 
(2) In particular. and without prejudiee to the ..,aetaJity.of the fore.. 35 
10iDI provisions, such measures may inelude,-
(i) the provision for adequate facinties, ineludilll l"1el ald, to 

9 
,:the P,~ 'SubJected to atroci~es to enable them to avail them- , 
selves of justice; ! 
5 
10 
(ii) the provisiChl for traveUing and maintenance expenses to, 
witnesses, .i,neludin~ the victim$ of atrocities. during investigation 
and trial of offences 'Under this' Actj 
(iii) . the ptOvisiOl1 for the ~onomic and aoeialrehabilltation of 
the' victims of tbeatrocities. I 
(iii) . the appointment of officers for initiating or exercising 
supervision over prosecutions for the . contravention of the pro~j­
sions of this Act; 
(v) . the ~etting up of comm.ittees at such appropriate levels as 
the State Government may think fit to assist that Government in 
formulation or implementation of such measures; 
(vi) . provision for a periodic survey of the woItdng of the pro-
15 visions of this Act with a view to suggesting measures' for the hettel" 
implementation of the provisions of this Act; 
(vii) the identification 0: the areas where the members of the' 
Scheduled Ca"tes an(~1 the Seheduled Tribes are likely to be subjected 
to atrocities and adoption of such measure'! so as to ensure safety for 
20 such members. 
(3) The Central Government shan take such steps as may be neces-
sary to co-ordinate th~ measures taken by the State Governments under 
fiub-sectjon (1). 
(4) The Cen.tral Government shall, every year, place on the .table 
25 of each House of Parliament a report on the measures taken by itself 
and by the state Governments in pursuance of the provisions of this 
section. ; 
22. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the 
Central Government or against the Stat.e Government or any officer or 
authority of Government or any other perosn for anything 
30 which is in good faith done or intended to be done under\ this Act. 
U. (1) The Central Government may. by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the pwposes of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
35 alter it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in. ~ession 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised. in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the sessiOn or' .the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
o both Houes'- agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall there-
4 after have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect., as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule. 
Protection 
of action 
taken in 
gOOd 
faith. 
Power to 
make 
rulel!l. 

S'M..TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Despite varioul measures to improve the socio-economic conditions 
of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. they remain vulner-
able. They are denied number of civil rights. They are subjected to 
various offences. indignities, humiliations and harassment. 'nley have, 
in several brutal incidents, been deprived of their life and property. 
Serious crimes are committed against them for various historical, 
social and economic reasons. 
2. Because of the awareness created amongst the Scheduled Castes 
and the Scheduled 'I7ribes through spread of education, etc., they are 
trying to usert their rights and this is not being taken very kindly by 
the others. When they assert their rights and resat practices of un-
touchab!lity against them or demand statutory minimum wages or refuse 
to do any bonded and forced labour, the vested interests try to cow 
them down and terrorise them. When the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes try to preserve their self-respect or hon(1UJ' of their 
women. they become irritants for the dominant and the mighty. Occu-
pation and cultivation of even the government allotted land by the Sche-
duled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes is resented and more often these 
people become victims of attacks by the vested interests. Of late. there 
has been an increase in the disturbing trend of commission of certain 
atrocities like making the Scheduled Castes persons eat inedible subs-
tances like human excreta and attacks on and mass killings of helpless 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and rape of women belonging to 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. Under the circums-
tances, the existing laws like the protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955 and 
the normal provisions of the Indian Penal Code have been found to be 
inadequate to check these crimes. A special legislation to check and 
deter crimes against them committed. by non-Scheduled Castes and non-
Scheduled Tribes has, therefore, become necessary. 
3. The term 'atrocity' has not been defined so far. It is considered 
necessary that not only the tenn 'atrocity' should be defined but strin-
gent measures should be introduced to provide for higher punishments 
for committing such atrocities. It is also proposed to enjOining on the 
States and the Union territories to take specific preventive and punitive 
measures to protect the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes 
fl'orn being viclimised and where atroe1ties are committed, to provide 
adequate relief and assistance to· rehabilitate them. . 
4. The Bill seeD to achieve the above objects. 
N£1N Da.Hl; DR. RAJENDRA .KUMARI BAJPAl. 
The 7th A uguat, 1988. 
10 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 15 of the Bill provides for the appointment of Special Public 
Proseeutw from amongst the advocates also by the State Governments. 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 21 of the Bill provides that the State Gov-
ernments shall take such measures as may be necessary for the effective 
implementation of the provisions of the Bill after it is enacted. Sub-
clause (2) of the said clause, inter alia, provides for the following mea-
lures, namely:-
(a) payment ot travelling and maintenance expenses to wit-
nesses including the victims of atrocities during investigation and 
trial of atrocities; 
(b) facilities for economic and social rehabilitation of the vic-
tims; 
(c) appointments of officers for initiating or exercising super-
vision over prosecution. 
(d) setting up of committees to assist the Government in formu-
lation and implementation of such measures. 
It is not possible, at this stage, to make accurate estimate of the amount 
which may be required to make the aforesaid appointments and to pro-
vide for various measures. According to the present estimate, it is ex-
pected to be around Rs. 5 crores per annum. The Central Government 
shall bear the entire expenses of the Union territories which may be 
estimated at around Rs. 25 lakhs. '!be expenditure of the Central Gov-
ernment shall be from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
The provisions of the Bill do not involve any other expenditure of a 
recurring or non-recurring nature. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (3) of clause 171 of the Bill empowers a State Govern-
ment to make a scheme or schemes. The said sub-clause enumerates the 
matters with respect to which the scheme may be made. 'IUle matters 
inter alia, relate to prevent atrocities and to restore a feeling of secu-
rity amongst the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
~~. I 
2. ClaUSe 23 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to give effect to the previsions of the Bill when enacted. The rules, 
if any, will be confined to matters of procedure and othe~ matters of 
minor detail including enforcement of the various provisions in-
cluded in the Bill. 
3. As such the proposed· delegation of leSislative powers is of a nor-
mal character. I 
12 

;,,'.' ':. I; '\ 
LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
! ; , 
to prevent the .......... _ of ofreDces of atrocitiea agaiDat the membeaf 
of the Scheduled Cutes and the Scheduled Tribes, tD provtcIe far 
Special Courta for the trial of such oJfencea aDd: for the relt.ef and 
rehabilitation of the victims of such oJrenct!l and for matters conneet-· 
eel theretrith CJI' IDcldeDtal thereto. 
(Dr. Jt&jend,.. lCum&ti Baj/'td. 
JftftllMr C1J SCaee of 
the .~ 01 Wei,.,.., 