" ~ .. 
i', ',' 
Il " ~
':\:'.' 
, ,.', rt,t .: 
" 
~:.~ 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SARHA ON 
2 9 AU6 "" 
Bill No. 63 of 1966 
THE ROAD TRANSPORT CORPORATIONS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1966 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Road Transport COrpOrations Act, 1950. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows: 
'. 
i,., 1. (1) This Act may be called the Road Transport Corporations Short 
~
:' Amendment) Act, .1966. . title and 
. "') com-
i:.'.'· . r:.~. ) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govem- mence-
)i M, ~ may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. ment. 
,:·.,r(,' 

Amend_ 
lllL'nt of 
s('dion 1. 
In,;crtiun 
of Schc_ 
dule. 
Constitu-
tion of 
Road 
Transport 
Corp ora-
tion. 
2 
2. For sub-sectwn (2) of section 1 or thl' Road Transport Corpora-
,ons Act, 1950 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the 64 of 1 
following sub-section shall be sUbstituted namely: 
"(2) Itcxtcn,ts to the Whole of India: 
Provided that in :ts application t~ the Union territory of 5 
Delhi, Ai -,baa be subject to the mDdificationi specified in 
thc Schedule." 
:1. After section 48 o'f the principal Act, the following Schedule 
shall be inserted, namely:-
'THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 1 (2)] 
1. Section 5. -For section 5, substitute:--
"5. (1) A Corporation shall consist of a Chairman, to be 
appointed by the State Government, and five other members 
of whom-
(a) two shall be elected by the members of the 
Metropolitan Council cf Delhi from among themselves; 
(b) one shall be elected by the membersof the 
Municipal Corporation of Delhi from amo?g themselves; 
(c) two [to be designated respectively as Member 
(Finance) and Member (Engineering)] shall be appoint-
~?!!..~~,.~ ed ~ the State Government. 
(2)' 'rile S~ate, Gov~ent 'may, if it so thinD'.fit, ap-
point one of the elected members as the Vice-Chairman of the 
Corporation. 
(3) The term of office of, and the manner of filling 
casual vacancies among, members of the Corporation shall be 
such as may be pre~cribed. 
(4) The ralary and allowances and ether conditions of 
s~rvicc of thc Chlirmln, the Member (Finance) and the Member 
(Engineering) and the allowances payable to the elected 
members ot the Corporation shall be such as may be pres-
cribed. ' 
, (5) The Chairman and any other member of the Cor-
•• "j,.' . 
• . t' ... 
""poration shall be eligible for re-appointment or, as the case 
maybe, re-election.". 
.' ! 

5 
[0 
~\ 
j<., 
15 
. , 
3 
2. Se. lLn 6.-0mit sub-section (2). 
3. Sec/ion S.-Om·t the prov;so. 
4. Section 12.-
(a) in 'Clause (b), after "Vice-Chl.irman~'; iosat "or to the 
Member (Fir.ance) or the MC'mber (EngineeriRl)";' , 
(b) in clause (c), for "the Chief Executive Officer or 
General Manager or any other officer of the Corporation", 
substitute "any offiCer of the Corporation". 
5. Section 13.-
For "the Chief Execptive Officer or General Manager or 
any oih.er offtcer·of the Corporation", substitute- "any officer 
of the CorPoration".' . '. 10 :';'" 
6. Sections'i4'a~d 15.-For sections 14 and:.l~ •. ~q~titute-
'4. (1) A CorPoration may appoint such:' nUmber of Officer. 
officers and servants as it con~iders necessary for the efficient and s!,rf• 
rf ~'t f t" vantso pe ormance O.lr'l S unc Ions. the Cor. 
(2) The ctmditions of appointment and service and scales poraUon . 
of pay of the officers and servants of a, Gorporat~,?n shall be 
~uch as may, subject to the provisions of section 3"4, 'be deter-
.. mined ,by regrHlatibns' made under· thfsAct:, T, ,.~,'. '1": n 
'. ,r.S.,"(f),.Tl\'e.'!CbaJrman olJh~;C01"pQl'1ltiQn,shall be the Powersof 
executive heaq·tJutr~and all pftJ~ ~'-='Y.~~ the ChairmaD; 
Corporati~~ sha~ be subordinate to him.. ." :(i) ~~:::e). 
(2) The member '(Finance) shall be the Chief Accounts etc. 
Officer of the Corporation and shall have the right to record 
his views on every proposal involving expen.ditUlMit from the 
fund of the Corporati,on prior to the con~id"'ration of such 
proposal by the CorpOratilln. 
(3) The Member (Engineering) shall be the 'Chief 
]\1'f'chanienl EngineE'f of the Corporation.". . ... 
7. NetlJ seclion I9A-After section 19. insert-
"19A. In the exercise of any of 'its powers under this Act, 
the Corporation shall n ... • incur on any single work"lRrvfce 
or scheme or for nny other purpose a capital expenditure of 
more than five lakhs of rupee<: except with the previous a~ 
proval of the Central Government.". 
":orpora-
tion to 
obtain tbe 
approval 
01 Central 
"in consultCltion with the 
Govern-
mentin 
State certain 
cues. 

4 
9. Seerian 23.-(a) For sub-section (I). substitute-
II (r) The Central Government may provide to a Cor-
poration any capital that may be required by the Corpora-
tion for the purpose of carrying on the undertaking or for 
purposes connected therewith on such terms and conditions, 5 
not inconsistent with the provisiollE. of this Act, as that Gov-
ernment may determine."; 
(b) in' 8ub-section (2), for lIthe State Government", substi-
tute lithe Central Government"; 
(c) for sub-section (3), substitute- 10 
II (3) The authoriHd capital of the Corporation shall be 
·divided into such number of ehares as the Central Govern-
ment may determine' and th! Dumber of shares which shall 
be subscribed by the CentrJl Government and other parties 
(including persons whose undertakings have been acquired IS 
by. the Corporation) shall .. also·be· determined by the Central 
Government."; 
(d) in sub-section (6), for lithe State 
substitute "the Central Government". 
Government" , 
IO"Sections 24. 25. '1:7 and 29.-For lithe State Government", 20 
wherever occurring, substitute lithe Central Government". 
u. Sedion. 26.- (a) In. 8Ub-Ro~iOD (I) for "the State Govern-
.t"~ sUbstitute "the Central G,P;ebDnent"; 
~. '-: 
(b) In sub-section (2), omit ."the State Government and". 
-, " 
12. Section. 28.-(0) In su]).;section omit "and the State 25 
Government" and "the State Government in con~.ultation with"; 
(b) In sub-section (2), omit "'the State Government in consul-
tation with". 
13. Sections 33,35 and 37.-For lithe Legislature of the State", 
substitute "the Metropolitan Council of Delhi". 30 
'4. Section 39.-ln sub-section (2), for lithe Central and the 
State Government", substitute ''the Central Government". 
IS. Section 44.-ln sub-section (2) ,-
(CI) for clause (a), substitute- -1 , 
CI(CI) the 881arv and allowances and other conditions 35'j 
of servite of th"! Olairman, the Mcomber (Firance) and ,~ 

5 
5 
the Member (Engine~iJ'lg) srd the allowances payable to 
the elected members of the Corporation;"; 
(b) in clause (b). omit "members of the Corporation or 
other"; 
(c) omit clause (e); 
(d) ill c)ause (",). for. "under section 40" substitute 
"under sectio' 40 or section 48". 
16. Seetion 45.---ln claus: (c) of sub-section (2), omit "other 
than the Chief Executive Officer Or General Manager and the 
Chief Accounts Officer". 
17. For section 47, 47A ard 48, stibStitute-
'47. On the establish'inent ofa· CCJrpCJrtttioh under section 3 ve.ti~i!· 
(hereinafter in this section and in aection048 referred to as ofcertain 
"the neW Corporntion"),- properties in the . 
Corpora-
(a) all properties, movable and immovable, and all tion and 
interests of whatsoever nature and kind therein belong- provWona 
ing to or vested in the Municipal Corporation of Delhi relUdinl 
for the purpose ~f the Delhi .Tr~port Undertaking im- ::~~ ..• 
mediatelY before such NtablishDiellt !1J1ui1l vest in the new Hems, etC~· 
Corporation; ... 
(b) all deets, obligatiohs and'lfabilities incurred, all 
contracts entered into, and all matters and things engage 
ed to be done by. with or for the Municipal Corporation 
of Delhi for the purpose of the Delhi Transport Uuder-
taking and subs,istin'g immediately before such establish-
ment shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into 
or engaged to be done by. with or for the new Corpora-
tion; 
(c) all licences and permits granted to the MUnicipal 
Corporation of Delhi for the purpose of. the Deihi Trans-
port Undertaking and in force immedflrtely before such 
establishment shall be deemed to have been granted to 
the new Corporation and shall have effect accordingly; 
(d) all suits, prosecutiollSo and other legal proceed-
ings instituted or which might ha~e been instituted by, . 

•. j •• ' 
Payment 
of val UP 
of assets 
and Jia-
bilitits 
6 
for or against the Municipal Corporation of Delhi for the 
purpose of the Delhi Transport Undertaking immediately 
before such establishment may be continued or instituted 
by, for or again!'lt the new Corporation; 
(e) all bye-Iaw~ relating to transport services made S 
by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi under sub-section 
r .. , of sectign 481 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation 
",,-t, r957 a"ri in force jmmArtiately hefore "uch 66 of 1 
establishment, shall. in so far as they are not 
inconsistent with the provisions of th:s Act, continue 10 
in force and be deemed to be regulations made by the 
new Corporation under rection 45 unless and until they 
are superseded by regulations made under that section; 
(/) notwithstanding anythjng contained in section 
14, every officer an'd other employee of the Municipal IS 
Corporation of Delhi appointed or deemed to be appoint-
ed for' the purpose of the DPlhl Transport Undertaking 
shall be transferred to, and become an officer or other 
employee of, the new Corporation with such designation 
as the new Corporation may determine and shall hold 20 
office by the rame tenure, on the same remuneration and 
under· the same terms and conditions of service as he 
would have held the same if the new Corporation had not 
. b~n es~b&hed., and shall continue to be so unless and 
. unijLSl.u:lfa tenure, remuneration and terms and condi- 25 . 
dons of serviCtl are duly altered by the Il(!W Corporatio~: 
Provided that the tenure. remuneration and the 
terms and conditions of service of any such officer or 
other employee shall not be altered. to his di~advantage 
without the approval of the Central Goy-emment: 30 . 
Pro.vided further that any service rendered by any 
stlch officer or other employee before the establishment 
of the new Corporation shall be deemed to be service ren-
dered under that Corporation. 
48. (I) Where the sum total of the value of the propE'r-
ties and int~rests therein vested in the new Corporation under 
r 1<tUo;.. (a) of section 47 (hereinafter in this section referred 
to as "the assets") exceeds the sum total of the debts, ohl ij!a-
tions and liabilities which are deemed. to have been incurred 
.by the new Corporation under clause (b) 01 that section 
(hereinafter in this section referred to as "the liabilities"), such 
excess shall be paid by the new Corporation to the 

5 
10 
7 
Corpor',ltion of Delhi on ~uch term~ and conditions itS ID"lY he 
determined by th:! Cent rill .Go\'ernm~nt is this bch.llf. 
(2) Where the sum total of the liabilities exc:!eds the 
sum total of the valu:! of th~ as.'lCts, such excC5.'i sh.lll be p.lid 
by th,. Municipal Corporation of Delhi to the neW G.>rp lr,lti(n 
on such terms ~nd conditions ~:s m~y be determined by the C(ntral 
Government in th~s b(.hal~. 
(3) The sum total of the valu'! of the assets and the sum total 
of the liabilities sball be such amounts as maY b~ arrived at by 
agreement between the Municipal Corporation of Delhi and the 
new Corporation and where no such agreement can be reached, the 
amounts shall be determined by an arbitral tribunal consisting of 
one nominee of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, one nomin~e 
or the nevi Corporation and a chairman to be nominated by the 
Chief J~tice of the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation 
to the Union territory of Delhi. 
(4) An appeal shall lie to the aforesaid High Court against the 
decision of the tribunal and the order of the High CoUrt on such' 
appeal shall be final.' 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
On the 18th Augu~r, 1965. in reply to a starred quc3tion in 1 he 
Lok Sabha, the important changes contemplated in the organis:t-
tional set up of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, were indicated 
by the Government. It was then stated that the exir,ting Delhi 
Transport Undertaking of the MuniCipal Corporation of Delhi would 
be replaced 'by a separate statutory body. This Bill has been 
brought forward to give effect to that proposal. 
2. It is intended that the statutory body in place 0' the Delhi 
Transport Underta~ing should be the Road Transport Corporation 
establi£hed under the Road Transport Corporati~n Act, 1950 (here-
inafter referre4, to as the principal ~ct)..At present the Road 
Transport Corporations Act, 1950. does not, extend to the Union 
territory of Delh,i .... Accordingly the Bill seeks to extend this Act 
to the Union territorY'of DeDii subject to·the·modifieations specified 
in the Schedule contained in the Bill. .' 
3. The important modifications are as under:-
(1) Having regard to the ~pecial requirements of Delhi, 
paragraph i of the Schedule seeks to modify section 5 of the 
principle Act to provide inter alia thaL the Road Transport 
Corporation will consist of six members. Of these, two will be 
elected by the members of "the Metropolitan Council of Delhi 
and one bY the members of the Municipal Corporation of .Delhi, from 
among themse1ves. The remaining three members, including the 
Chairman, will be appointed by the State Government. 
(.2) Paragraphs 13 of the Schedule seeks to modify sections 33,35 
and 37 of the principal Act to provide for the laying of the 
accounts of the Road Transport Corporation and the audit 
report thereon,. the 'returns, statistics and other inforDution 
with respect to the property and activities of the Corporation 
and the notification issued under section 37 assuming control 
over a part of the Undertaini of the Corporation, before the 
Metropolitan Council of Delhi. 
(3) On the establishment of the Road Transport Corpora-
tion for Delhi, the properties of the Delhi Transport Undertak-
ing and its liabilities as well as the officers and other emplo-
yees of that Undertaking will stand transferred to the Road 
Transport Corporation. Provision has also ~een made for the 
8 

9 
determination of the value of assets and sum total of the liabi-
lities transferred to the Road Transport Corporation and the 
financial adjustments in respect thereof between that Corpora-
tion and the Municipal Corporation of Delhi. New sections 47 
and 48 proposed to be inserted by paragraph 170f tM Schedule 
see.,. to make provisions for these pUrposel. 
4. Opportunity has also been taken to extend the principal Act 
to the States of Jammu and Kashmir and Nagaland and the Union 
territories of Dadra arid Nagar Haveli. Goa, -Daman and Diu and 
. Pondicherry. 
NEW DHLHI: G. L. NANDA. 
The 2ISt August, 1966. 
S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
TIlE CONSTITtmON OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 3/3/6S-SR (R), dated the 23rd August, 1966 
Shri Jai Sukh Lal Hathi, Minister of S~ate in the Ministry of Home 
to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
__.. further to amend the Road Transport Corporations Act, 1950, recom-
':~~ds, under clauses (I) and (3) of article 117 of the Constitution, the 
f~uction of the said Bill in and its consider-eltion by the Lok S~bha. 

FINANCIAL J\IEMORANDUM 
Under section 23 of the Road Transpon Corporations Act, 1950, 
as proposed to be modified by paragraph 9 of the Schedule to the Bill, the 
Central Government may provide to a Corpcration any capital that may 
be required by it for the purpose of carrying on the undertaking or for 
purposes co~nected therewith, That section also makes provision for 
sUbscription by the Central Go\'ernment in the shares issued by a Corpo-
ration for its authorised capital. 
!-:ection 24 of the A~l as proposeJ to be modified by paragraph 10 
of che Schedule authorises a Corporation to raise further capital with the 
approval of the Central Government by issue of new shares and makes 
. provision for the subscription by the Central Government in the new 
shares. 
Section 25 of the Act as proposed La be modified by paragraph 10 
of the Schedule provides that the shares of a Corporation shall be guaran-
teed by the Central Government as to the payment of the principal and 
the payment of the annual dividend at such minimum rate as may be 
fixed by the Central Govemment at the time of issuing the shares. 
To meet the capital requirements of the Delhi Transport Under-
taking of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, loans amounting to Rs.9O 
lakhs and Rs. 130 lakhs Were advanced to the Undertaking by the Central 
Government during 'the years 1964-65 and 65-66 respectively and a 
provision of Rs, 100 lakhs has been made for the; purpose during the 
c·urr..:nt financial year, i.e. 1966-67. Assistance on theselines by way ofloan 
and/or participation in the shares issued, if an y, by the new Corporation 
for its authorised capital or for raising further capital maY have to be con-
tinued for a few years more to meet the requirements of that Corporation. 
10 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATIUN 
Section 44 of the Road Transport Corporations Act. 1950, em-
powers the State Government to make rules to give effect to the 
provisions of the Act. Sub .. section (2) of that section. as proposed 
to be modified by paragraph 15 of [he Schedule to the 
Bill, provides for the matters with respect to which such rules may 
~ made. These matters inter ·alia include the salaries and allow-
ances and other conditions of service of the Chairman, Mem'ber 
(Finance) and Member (Engineering) and the allowances payable 
to the elected members/of the Corporation the term of o8lce :of and 
:. the manner of filling casual vacancies among, members of the' Cor-
, poration; the manner in which the shares of the Corporation shall 
~,be allotted, transferred or redeemed; and the manner in' which the 
~~t., profits of the Corporation shall be utilised . 
.. 2. Section 45 of the Act empowers the Corporation to' make re-
gulations .1Ot inconsistent with the Act and the rules made. there-
under for the administration of the affairs of the Corporation. Sub-
_~iOn (2) of that section, as proposed to be modified by paragraph 
:16" ;" of "the Schedule to the ~ Bill, provides for the matters 
~ .rtJf!·respect to which such regulations may ,be made. These mat-
: 'linter 'alia include the ;manner in which and the purposes for 
.pe~ons may:.be· associated:, with the' Corporation under sec": 
~.-",,,,- 'time and place of meetiugs of the Corporation~d the' 
Mll"e" to be followed in regard to transaction of business at 
MIleI~t1l11lS; and the issue of passes to the employees of the Cor-
~ •.. , .... '.. and other persons under section 19. 
':·\~:3~ T);le matters with respect to which rules under section 44 ~d 
,.•. , . tions under section 45 may be made are matters of a routine 
. .. :~It:e or of detail and the delegation of legislative power is, there-
ore, of a normal character. 
'f~{ , 
'I . 
11 

Short 
title, 
extent 
4UHIcom-
mence-
ment. 
Constitu-
tion of 
Road 
Transport 
Corpora-
tion. 
Disquali-
fication 
for being 
chOleDaa. 
orfOl' 
beina. a 
member 
of. Cor-
J)Ol'atioD. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE ROAD TRA~SPORT CORPORATIONS ACT, 1950 
* • 
(64 0,. 1950) 
* • 
CHAPTER I 
PJaJ'MDl'AIIY 
1. (1)· * • 
• • >I< 
* 
• • 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu 
abd Kaihmir and the Union territory of Delhi 
• • • • • 
So (1) Subject to rules made under this Act, a Corporation Ihall 
consist of a Chairman and such number of other members as the 
State Government may think fit to appOint:·· 
(2) The State Government may, if it so thinks At, appoint one 
of the other members as the Vice-Chairman of the CorPoration. 
(J) Rules made under this Act shall provide for the representa-
tion both of the Central Government and of the State Government 
concerned in the Co~poration in such proportion as may be agreed 
to by 'both the Oovemments and of Domination by each GoverDJ1lent 
of its. own representatives therein, and where the eapital df a Co~ 
ration is raised by the issue of shares to other parties under sub-sec-
tion (3) of section 23, provision shall also be made for the represen-
tation of such shareholders in the Corporation and the manner in 
w~ich the representatives shall be elected by such shareholders. 
(4) The term of office of, and the manner of ftlliDg casual vacan-
cies among, members of the COrpOration shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 
6. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Nothing in clause (d) of SUb-aectioD (1) shall be deemed to 
disqualify the Chief Executive Oftlcer or GeDeraI Mmager of a Cor-
poration for being chosen as, or for being. a member thereof. 
* * • ... 
12 

13 
. .• 8. The State Government may remove from office the Chairman Removal 
'. ~r any other member of the Corporation wh<r- of Chair-
man and 
,I (0) is or becomes subject to any of the disqualifications members 
mentioned in section 6; or from 
•. '" p~'-
•
' .. 
. ..~:·~ ... tt'· 
,~ . 
(b) without excuse sufficient in the opInIon of the State 
Government, is absent from more than four consecutive meet-
ings of the Corporation: 
Provided that no member nominated by the Central Govern-
shall be removed from ofllce witho~t the concurrence of that 
• • • • • 
office . 
may, from time to time, by resolution 
• • • • • 
passed Power.to· 
appoint 
commit-
tees and 
delegat~ 
functions. 
(b) delegate to any such committee or to the Chairman or 
Vice-Chairman, subject to such conditions and l~mitations, if 
any, as may be specified in the resolution, such of its powers and 
as it may thi·nk fit; 
(c) authorise the Chief Executive Officer or General Mana-
or any other officer. of the Corporation subject to such cqn-
and 'limitationi, . if any, as may be specified in the resO-
toexereise' such powers and . ~rfonn ~~h duties as it 
deem necessary for the efBcielit' day 'to day aaDiinistration 
Its business. . 
All orders and decisions of a Corporation shall be authenti- Authenti-
the signature of the Chairman or any other membtD" autho- cation of • 
•. by the Corporation in this behalf, and all other instruments ~~::~ 
by a Corporation shall be authenticated by the signature of truments 
Chief Executive Officer or CJeleraI Manager or any other officer of a Cor-
Corporation authorised in like manner in this behalf. poration. 
~ . 
14 (1) Every Corporation shall have a Chief Executive OfBcer Officers 
_Ileral Manager and a Chief Accounts OfBeer appointed by the and ser-
,Oovemmenl vanta of 
the Cor-
A Corporation may appoint such other ofBc:ers and servants poration. 
eaaalden Deee&S8ry for the eftlcfent performance of its fUDe~ 

The Chief 
Executive 
Officer or 
General 
Manager 
and the 
Chief 
Accounts 
Officer. 
Capital of 
the Cor-
poration. 
14 
(1) The conditions of appointment and service and the scales of 
P.l y of the officers ;lnd servants of a Corporation shall- " 
(a) as respects the Chief Executive Officer or General 
Manager and the Chief Accounts Officer be such as may be 
prescribed, ~nd 
( b) as respects the other officers and servants be such as 
may. subject to the provisions of section 34, be determined by 
regulations made under this Act. 
15. (1) The Chief Executive Officer or General Manager shall 
be the executive head of the Corporation and all other officers and 
servants of the Corporation shall be subordinate to him. 
(2) The Chief Accounts Officer shall have the right to record 
his views on every proposal involving expendit~e from the fund 
of the Corporation" prior to the consideration of such proposal by 
the Corporation. 
* * * * * 
CHAPTER IV 
; FIN AN1C~, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
• • • 
Z3. (1) The Central Government and the State Government may 
provide to a Corporati()D established by the State Government, in 
such proportion as may' be agreed to by both theGo~emments, any 
capital that may be required by the CorporatiQD fQr the purpose of 
carrying. on the Unde;ftaking or for purposes connected therewith 
on such terms 'and concUtio~, not incorisistent with the provisions 
of this Act, as the State Government may, with the previouS appro-
val of the Central Government, determine. 
(2) Where the capital of a Corporation is not provided under 
sub-section (r), the Corporation may ralse; by the issue of shares, 
such capital as may be authorised in this behalf by the State Gov-
ernment. 
(1) The authorised capital of tlie CorpofatioD shall be divided 
into such number of shares as the State Government may determine; 
and the number of ~hares wnich shall be subsctibed by the State 
Government. the Central Governmeat and o:her -par.ties. (including 
persons whose undertakings ha,'c been acquired by the .. Corporation) shall 
also b'! determined by the State Go"emment in co~sultation with rhe 
Central Government". 
* * • • • 

.' (6) Th! CorpQ~·~\tio.1 m(~ at any time, with the previous ap-
. 'plOva} of the State Government, redeem the shares issued to the 
other parties under sub-section A) in such manner as may be pres-
cribed. 
. 24. If, after' the issue of shares under section 23, a Corporation Additional 
.' .'requires any further capital, the Corporation may', with the previ- C~Pital of 
ous sanction of the State Government, raise such additional capital ~o~~~:~. 
:by the issue of new shares and the p~ovisions of sub-sections (2), 
~S:'tt), (4), (5) and (6) of the said sectio:J. shill apply to the' issue of 
R ~SIIch shares. 
t .. 
,:~ :. 3S. The shares of a Corporation shall be guaranteed I:»Y the State Guarantee 
'Yernment as to the payment of the principal, and', the payment by the 
j.. the annual dividend at such minimum rate as may be ft~ed by State 
~the State Government by notification published in the Official Gov~rn-
" zette at the time of issuing the shares. men . 
,:::' z6. (1) A Corporation may, with the previous aPPJ'oval .of the Borrowing 
Government, 'borrow money in the open market or otherwise powers. 
the purpose of raising its working capital. 
(2) With the previous approval of the Stat~, Government and 
Central Government, a Corporation may also borrow money in 
open market for the purpose of meeting any ~xpenditure of a 
......... _.1 nature . 
. (1) Every Corporation shall have its own fund and all receipts Fund of 
Corporation shall be carried thereto and all payments by the the ~r-
.... "' ... ,f'i" • ." shall be made therefrom. poratJon . 
. (2) Except as otherwise directed by the State Government, all 
belonging to that fund shall be deposited in the Reserve 
of India or with the' agents. of the Reserve Bank of India, or 
.. ted in such securities as may be approved by the State Gov-
,i;;ta;'38. (1) Where the capital of a Corporation is provided by the Payment 
:~al Goverrunent and th~ State Government under sub-section of interest 
of section 23. the Corporation shall pay interest on such capital and divi-
IIIPI1l1l!h rate as may, from time to time, be fixed by the State Gov- dend. 
~!lellt in consultation with the Central Government and such in-
be deemed to be a part of the expenditure of the Cor-
... Where the Corporation raises its capital by issue of shares', 
pay dividend on such shares at such rate as may, from time 

Provision 
for depre-
ciation 
and 
reserve 
and other 
funds. 
Accounts 
and 
Audit. 
16 
to time, be fixed by the Corporation, subject to any general limit" 
tions which may have been imposed by the State Government il 
(~onsultation with the Central Government, and such dividend shal 
oe deemed to be a part of the expenditure of· the Corporation. 
%9 • (1) A CorpolAion shJJI make such provisions for cJepreci.t 
tion and for reserve and other funds as the State Government rna. 
from time to time. direct. 
(2) The management of the said funds, the sums to be carrie 
ft'om time to time to the credit thereof and the application of th 
moneys comprised therein shall be determined by the Corporation: 
Provided that no fund shall be lltilised for any purpose othe 
than that for which it was created without the previous approva 
()f the· State Government. 
• • • • • 
33. (1) The Corporation shall maintain proper accounts and):h:· 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including th 
profit and loss account and the balance ~heet in-such form as may be 
prescribed by the State Government in consultation with th~ 
Comptroller and Auditor- General of India. 
(.2) The accounts of a Corporation shall be audited annually b 
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or his nominee an 
any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shal 
be payable by the Corporation to the Comptroller .and Auditor 
General of India. 
( 1) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any pel' 
son appo~nted by him in connection with the audit of the accoun 
of a Corporation shall have the same rights, privileges and auth 
dry in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor 
General. of India has in connection with the audit of the Govern 
ment accounts and. in particular, shall have the right to deman 
the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other 
-:iocuments and· papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Cor-
poration. 
(4) The accounts of the Corporation as certified by the Com 
lmller and Auditor-General of India or any person appointed bY 
him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be 
forwarded annually to the State Government; and rhl!t Governm eD 
shall cause the same to be laid before the Legislature 'of the State. 

• 
r" I 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
• • 
35. (1) Every Corporation shall furnish to the State Govem- Returns 
~. JDent such returns, statistics, accounts and other information with an~ re-
o respect to jts property or activities or in regard to any proposed port~, 
scheme as the State Government may from time to time require . 
.. "(2) Without prej~dice to the provisions of sub-section (1), a 
.' shall, ·as soon as possible after the end of each financial 
, submit to the Central and the State Governments a report on 
exercise and performance by it of its powers and duties· under 
Act during that year and on its 'policy and programme. 
(3) The State Government shall cause the annual report refer-
to in sub-section (2) to be laid before the ;Legislature of the 
• * • • • 
(1) If on receipt of the report of any ·inquiry held under Power to 
36 or otherwise, the State Government is satisfied that it control a 
tDI~S.sal'Y so to do' in the public interest, the State Government =.:::~ 
. ~~. notification in the Official Gazette, alithorise any person to in, of a 
.. . from the 'Corporation, and ~o long as that notification is Corpora-
to admlnster in· accordance wifh such directions as D)ay be tion . 
. time to time by the State Government such part" of tbe 
of the .corporation as may be specified in the notiftca-
an, persOn so authorised m.ay, for the purpose of so ad-
the said part of the undertaking, exercise all or any 
powers of the Corporation or of any oBlcer o.f the Corporation 
t"h Act, issue such directions as he thinks fit to the officers 
...... [ ... 10< of the Corporation ana employ any outside agency . 
. State Government may by such notification direct that 
1QI1r2t!S and expen"es incurred by the person so authorised to-
with such remuneration as the State Government may allow 
to time to such person shall be paid within such time as 
bed by the State Government from the fund of the Cor-
and if the expenses are not so paid, the State Govem-
· make an order directing the persons having the custody 
to pay to the person so authorised such expenses in 
· any other charges against such fund and he shaU, so far 
to the credit of the Corporation admit, comply with 
,the State Government. . 

Liquida-
tion of 
Corpora-
tion. 
Power 
to make 
rules. 
. _ .• Ii,. 
Power to 
makere-
CUI.tions. 
18 
(J) Every notification issued under this section together with a 
report on the circumstancea klaclini t.o its issue shall be laid before 
the Legislature of the State, as soon as may be, after it is issued. , 
• • '. • • 
• • • • 
. (6) In the event of a Corpc)ration heml' plaeed in liquidatlO1l, 
the '.asse .... aftbe, CorporaUo~ •. a.ft~~ m~ti~>j theliabilitiea, if any, 
. .un t,. .cihrid~ among the Ceubal .an4. the State Government ,aDd 
,auc4"p.~f, p~t~ if . ..,-.,8S.;1!J4l, n-.ve li~b8eribed to the capital tn 
proportion to the contribution madf by each of them to th, total 
capital of ~!COllW11Iiiou..,,:; "1 p',~( d', b,i; •. , " 
• • • • • 
44. (1) • • • • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the fol-
lowing matten, namel,:-
,,~, t;(4~ ·tI~e~rtditlQ~ 'iind' Mrier)4 ~ppo~tment o.f members 
.. , oi":~" ~~~po~ation, th~ rf!P~~.J\~~~op)n ~he Corpt,ratroftof the 
~nirlir and, the State. GOv~~~t. ~~ I wher~ shar~ a~, ,issued 
to other parties under sub-sectJ~n. (3J of seCtion 23, o( such 
shareholders. and generally all matters relating' to, the constitu-
tion of the Corporation: . 
. ,(~):-remuneration allowailall or feel to be paid. to the mem-
bers of·· the CorporatiOD or otJier pei'IoDs .. ociated with the 
Corporation under section 18: 
• • • • • 
(e) toe conditions of appointment and service and the 
scales of pay of the Chief Executive Of!lcer or General Manager 
and the Chief Accounts Officer of the Corporation; 
• • • . (' 
• 
CS. (1) • • • • • • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
Mregoing power, such resuIationa ma,. provide for ail or any' of the 
following matters, namely:-
• • • • • 
(c)' the conditions of appointU1ent and service and·the Icales l.1 
. of pay of oftlcers and servanls of the Corporation other' than the J 

19 
_I' 
~~~~;l;.QW· lhecutiV. Officer or General Manager Bnd the Oief 
,J,J.. , 
.,\,!\~ ..... ta OIlcer; 
t~i''j'i ,-. • • • • .:~.:. 
~ .;;(J) ~be body known as the Bombay State Road Transport Cor- Special 
= tile Board thereof. referred to-in the notil\cation of the p.l'O\'I-
! . t of Bombay, No. 1780,6, dated the 16th November, 1949 S10~S re-
. '.. I8ferred to aa "·the existing Corporation" and "Board" latmg to 
~:' . Bombay_ 
. . shall, notwithstanding any defect in, or invalidity df, 
___ t, or order under which they were constituted be d..-
1Idl11l)1Ii1l'flll" tobave .beea validly CODBtltuted as If all the prwt.. 
.... ,,"" ......... &aid notification had been induded and enacted In this 
{ .... r.1 and this·section had been in force continuously on a:acI ftolft 
•• ', aDd accordingly- . : :;j\!":::~~4 
.• t', , 
., 
r au' aCtion· by. and all tfansact~ wit~ the elIiRinl·E'lot .. 
_~ .. or Board, including BDy action or tfansaetion by, whieh 
.r,.,D,:f,)p~¥,. asset or right was aoq\Iired or any HabUit}'· or 
)lil!~tion. whether by contract or otherwise, was incurred; shall 
deemed to have bee~ validly and lawfully taken or done; and' 
··f. 
0" f 
,~ ,(b) no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
:oLGlliCUI.IDt. tbe GOVernn;l.ent o'f Bombay or any member of the Board 
(dB~r or servant of the existing Corporation iJl. ~t of 
~etl'(l ~Q taken by, or in relation to the setting up pf, the mating 
1fWt!~ltf"~n or Board merely on the ground of any defect ~, or 
of, the enactment f!r order under which the existing 
.. Nftj .. ~ Board was- Constituted. 
a ! \ 
~liahment .of • Co~_ UDder sedion • ID the 
.tSOml:NlY '(hereinafter referred to as "the new Corpora-
I 
the existing Corporation and Board shall be deeme4 tQ 
.JII-md and shall cease to funeti~; 
...... ' (I) an ·propertY and assets vesting in the existing Corpora .. 
ion shall vest in the new Corporation; 
".'~') 
Ni>-,:' (c) all rights, liabilities and obligations of the existing Cor-
. poration, whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, shall 
•• te the rights, liabilities and obligations, n!Speetiftly. of the new 
~tb'pora.tiOl[l;· and 
JJf.) all licences and permits granted to, all contracts made 
and all instruments executed on behalf of, the existing Cor-
or Board shall be deemed to have been granted to. made 
.91' ex:~uted on behalf of, the new Corporation ud shall 
.6ct accordingly. 
~ , :,. 

Special 
provision 
forrecon· 
stitution 
or dissolu-
tion of 
certain . 
Corpora~ 
Hon!'. 
~o 
47"- (1) Where on account of the reo:rganisationof States under 37 (: 
the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, or any other, enactment relat-
ing to reorganisation of Stat~s, the whole or any part of a State in 
respect, of which a Corporation was, immediately before the day on 
which the reorganisation takes place, functioning and operating, is 
transferred on that day to another State and by reason of such 
transfer, it appears to the State Government necessary or expedient 
that the Corporation should be reconstituted or reorganised in any 
~anner whatsoever or. that It should be dissolved, the State·.Govern~ 
ment may frame a Scheme for the -reconstitution, reorganisation or 
dissolution of the Corporation .including proposals regarding the for-
mation of new CorporatioDs, the 'amalgamation of. the Corporation 
with any othe.r Cor.ponatioa;;·body corporate or a commercial under-
taking of another State GoVernment, the transfer of.theassets, rights 
and liabilities of the' Corporation in whole or in part to any other 
Corporation: body corporate or a commercial undertaking' of another 
State Government, and 'the transfer or re--employment of any work-
men o'f the Corporation, and the State Government may' forward the 
scheme to the Central GOVernment for approval' 
Explanation.-For the purpose of framing any scheme under this 
sub-section, "State Government" ,-
(i) in relation to the ,Bombay State Road Transport Cor-
poration, shall mean the Government of the State of Maharash-
tra or of 'Gujerat as fonned under the Bo~~y Reorganisation ,,; 
'Act, 1960; and ' ., . . ..' .. ,], . 
. (ii) in relation 'to the pEPsu Road Transport Corporation,: 
shall mean the GoveriuDeai of the state of Punjab, as fonned " , 
under theprovisfoD8 of the State Reorganisation Act, 1956_ 37 
(2) On receipt of any scheme, the Central Government may, after 
consultation with the State Governments concemed, approve the 
scheme with or without modifications and for the purpose of giving 
effect to the approved scheme, the Central Govenunent may, from 
time to time, make such order in relation thereto as it thinks fit and 
every order so made shall have effect notwithstanding anything con-
tained in this Act. 
(3) Any order made under sub-section (2) may provide for all or 
any o'f the following matters, namely:-
(a) the dissolution of the Corporation, notwithstanding any-
. thing contained in section 39; , 
. (b) the reconstitution or reorganisation, in any manner 
Whatsoever, of the Corporation :including the establlsl¢lent, 
where necessary, of more than one Corporation in any State, 

(c) the amalgamation of two or more Corpol'ations, or of one 
Corporation with any other body corporate or a commercial 
undertaking of any other State Gov_rnn_e n: 
(d) the extension of the area for which the Corporation is 
established, or the exclusion of any area therefrom; 
(e) the transfer, in whole or in part, of the assets, rights and 
liabilities of the Corporation including the transfer of any licences 
or pennits granted to the Corporation, to any other Corporation, 
body corporate or a commetcial undertaking of any other State 
Government, and the terms and conditions of such transfer; 
(I) the transfer or re-employment of any workmeD of the 
Corporation to, or by, any such transferee, and, subject to the pr0-
visions of section 111 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, or 
any other enactment relating to reorganisation of States the 
terms and conditions of service appUcable to such workmen after 
such transfer or re-employmentj 
(g) such incidental, consequential and supplemental ma~rs 
sa may be necessary to giv~, effect to the approved scheme . 
. (G- ~ an orcler ~ _made ~der this section transferring the 
Daaa,Ta rights and liabilities of any Corporation, then, by virtUe of that 
, such assets, rights and liabilities of the Corporation shall vest 
and be the ar.sets, rights and liabilities of, the transferee .. 
Notwithstanding anything ~ntained in section 47A, it shail be ~ 
for the Government of the State of Bombay to frame a scheme tlaa.l 
sub-section (1) thereof and forward the same to the Central ==-
~ve!l1Ulnent before the 1st day of May, 1960, and in such a case, the to BombItr 
conferred on the Central Government to make an order under State 
Ml8ett(lln (2) thereof may be eJ;ercised before that day but no order Road 
shall take effect till that day.· Transportc 
orpora-
tiOlL 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
" . ,': 
f~lfther to amend the Road Transport Corporations Act, 1950 . 
• 
(Shri Gul.arilaJ Nanda, 
Minister of How. Affairs) 