As INTRODUCED IN Lor.. SABRA ON 
1, SfP-. 1"~ -,._. 
Bill No. u .f I"" 
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE REGULATION 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1964 
A 
BILL 
furtheT to amend the Foreign Exrnll lfle Regulation Act. 1947. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in : he }t'i:teenth Yeal' of the Repuhlic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Foreign Exchange Regulation Short title 
(Amendment) Act, 1964. and com-
mence-
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern- ment. 
ment may, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In sub-aection (2) of section 1 of the Foreign Exchange Regula- AmeDd-
7 of 1947. tion Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the meat of 
words "and to bran~hes and agencies outside India of companies or section 1. 
10 bodies corporate registered or incorporated in India" shall be insert-
ed at the end. 
2 of 1934. IS 
II~ 
~ 
J,O 
986 (B) LS-l. 
3. In section 2 of .the principal Act,-
(i) in clause (g), the words, figures and letter "but does not 
include special bank notes Jlnd ~ecial one-rupee notes issu£a 
under section 28A of the Reserve Bank of IndiaAct, 1934" shall 
be inserted at the end; 
.\ 
(ii) after clause (0), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:- .~I' :~ ... 
'. "1",."., ',-,< 
• (gg) "Indian customs wRter.( means the -!V'aters exten~. 
ing into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles mea-
Amend_ 
mentol 
section 2. 

InsertIon 
of new 
sections 
2Aand 2B. 
Ofticers 
of Enfor-
cement. 
Entrust-
mentof 
functions 
of Dir-
ector or 
other offi-
cer of En-
forcement. 
Amend_ 
mental 
section 4. 
Amend. 
mentol 
sectionS. 
Amend_ 
mentof 
:::ection 8. 
Amend-
mentol 
section 10,' 
2 
sured from the appropriate base line on the coast of India 
and includes any bay, gulf, harbour, creek or tidal river;'; 
(iii) in clause (k), after the words and figures "Public Debt 
Act, 1944,", the words and figures "savings certificates to which' 
the Government Savings Certificates Act, 1959, applies," ShAll be S 46 of 1959. 
inserted. 
4. After section 2 of the principal A.ct, the following sections shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"2A. The Central Government may appoint a Director of 
Enforcement and as many Deputy Directors of Enfor('cment, 10 
AasiJtant ~dors of Enforcemen: and such other officers 85 it 
thiDkl fit to be 08i.cers of Enforcement for the purpose of enforc-
ing the provisiona of this Act.' 
2B. The Central Govern~nt may, by order and subject to 
such limitations and conditions as it thinks fit to impose, autho- 15 
rise any officer of Enforcement, or any officer of customs or any 
Central Excise Officer or any police officer or any other officer of 
the Central Government or a State Government to exercise such 
of the powers and discharge such of the duties of the Director of 
Enforcement or any other officer of Enforcement under this Act 20 
as may be specified in the order.". 
5. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the 
words "buy or borrow from", the words "buy or otherwise acquire 
or borrow from" and for the words "sell or lend to", the words "sell 
or otherwise transfer or lend to" shall be substituted. 2S 
6. In sub-section (1) of section 5 of the principal Act, after clause 
(a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
." (a.a) receive, otherwise than through an authOrised dealer, 
any payment by order or on behalf of any person resident out-
side India;". 30 
7. In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the 
words "any gold", the word "fewellery" shall be inserted, and for 
the words "obtained from an authorised dealer", the words "obtained 
by him from an authorised dealer" shall be substituted. 
8. In sub-section (1) of section 10 of the prinCipal Act, in the 35 
opening paragtaph, for the words "do or l'efrain from doing any act 
with intent to secure- aJ, !he 1Vorfh "do or ·l'efrAin from doing any-
thing 0" :·~'i~~~ 6r refrainJrom taking any action which 'has the effect 
of 8a;~: i"J' tilDall be substituted. 

3 
t. In sub-section (2) of section 12 of the principal Act, in the Amend.. 
opening paragraph, for the words "do or refrain from doing any act me~t of . 
with intent to secure that-", the words ,jdo or refrain from doing sectIon 12. 
anything or take or refrain from taking any action which has the 
5 effect of securing that-If shall be substituted. 
Amend-10. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4) ,-
ment of 
(i) in clause (b), the word "or"fibaIl bl! inserted at the end; section 13. 
(ii) after clause (b), the following clause shall be insert~d, 
namely:-
10 "(c) transfer any share from a register outside India to 
15 
20 
30 
35 
a register in India.". 
11. In section 17 of the principal Act,-
(4) in sub-section, (1) ,-
(i) for the words "settle any property, otherwi!le than 
by will, so that a person who at the time of the settlement", 
the words "settle, or make a gift of, any property so that a 
person who at the time of the settlement or the making of 
the gift" shall be substituted; 
(ii) the words ",other than by will," 5hall be omitt~di 
(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-.section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(2) Any settlement or gift made or any power exer-
cised as aforesaid without the permission, of the Resen:e 
Ba~ shall not be invalid merely on the ground that such per-
mission has not been obtained, but no payment or remittan-
ce in pursuance of such settlement, gift or power shall ~ 
made to, or for the credit of, or on behalf of any person 
resident outside India, elsewhere than in territories notified 
by the Reserve Bank, except with the general or special 
permission of the Reserve Bank which may be granted con-
ditionally Ql' unconditionally.". 
Amend-
ment of 
section 17. 
12. In section 18 of the principal Act, after gub-~ection (3B) the Amend-
following sub~tion shall be inserted, namely: - ment of 
section 18 . . , 
"(3C) Except with the general or speclaL,permis~i~n of the 
Central Gov8J1UIlent or the Reserve Bank, no person resi~nt in 
India shall give a guarantee in respect of aqy debt or" other 
obligation or liability of a person resident out!l~~ 'l::·-'~'·:.;:t;' 

Insertion 
of new 
sections 
1BA and 
laB. 
Restric-
tion on 
appoint-
mento! 
certain 
companies 
ancIflrms 
as agents 
ortechni-
cal advi-
sers in 
India. 
Rerula-
tionof 
booking 
ofpa'S-
aaguout-
side India 
Amend-
mentof 
section 19. 
Insertion 
Of new 
'Sections 
19Ato 
19F. 
Power to 
seareb 
aU8'Pecled 
pertonl. 
4 
13. After section 18 of the prinCipal Act, the following section!! 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"18A. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 21 and 
notwithstanding anything contained in any other prOvision of 
this Act, a company (other than a banking company) which is 5 
not incorporated under any law in force in India or which is 
controlled directly or indiiectly by persons resident outside 
India, or any branch or office of any such company in India, or 
a firm consisting wholly or in part of persons resident outside 
India, shall not accept appointment as- 10 
(a) agent in India of any person, company or firm in 
the trading or commercial tranaactions thereof. or 
(b) technical or management adviser in India of any 
person, company or firm, 
except with the general or special permission of the Central Gov- 15 
ernment or the Reserve Bank; and where such appointment is aceep-
ted without such permission, it shall be void. 
18B. No airline, shipping company or travel agent shall, 
except with the general or special permission of the Reserve 
Bank and subject to such conditions, if any, ali may be specified 20 
therein, book for any person a passage for a journey the whole or 
any part of which is outside IncHa.". 
,I 
U. In section 19 of the principal Act, sub-sections (3) and (4) 
shall be omitted. -
15. Sections 1&1\ and 19B of the principal Act shall be re-num- 25 
bered as sections 190 and 19H respectively and-
(4) before section 19G as so re-numbered, the following 
HCtions ,.hall be inserted, namely:-
'19A. (1) If any officer of Enforcement authorised in 
this behalf by the Central Government, by general or spe- 30 
cial or~er,. has reason to believe that any person has sec-
I reted about his person any documen~s which will be useful 
: fRr or relevant to any pro~eeding under this Act, he may 
l .. search that. i penon. • 
" ' ... 
. ' (2) ~en any qice~ of Enforcement is about to search 35 
.any ,p+n under ,thlt provisions of this section, the officer 

5 
10 
20 
35 
5 o~ 1898. 40 
5 
of Enforceme~t shall, if such person so requires, take such 
person without unnecessary delay to the nearest gazetted 
officer of Enforcement superior in rank to him or a magis-
trate. 
(3) If such requisition is made, the officer of Enforce-
ment may detain the person making it until he can bring 
him before the gazetted officer of Enforcement or magis-
trate referred to in sulHection (2) . 
(4) The gazetted officer of Enforcement or the magis-
trate before whom any such person is brought shall, if he 
sees no reasonable ground for search, forthwith discharge the 
person but otherwise shall direct that search be made. 
(5) Bef~re making a search under the provisions of 
this section, the officer of Enforcement shall call upon two 
or more persons to attend and witness the search and may 
issue an order in writing to them or any of them so to do; 
and the search shall be made in the presence of such persons 
and a list of all documents seized in the course of such 
search shall be prepared by such ot1lcer or other person 
and signed by such witnesses. 
(6) No female shall be searched by anyone excepting 
a female. 
(7) In this section and in sections 19C to 19G, the ek-
pression "document" includes Indian currency, foreign ex-
change and books of account. 
19B. (1) If anyoftlcer of Enforcement authorised in this Power to 
behalf by the Central Government by general or special arrest. 
order, has reason to believe that any person in India or with-
in the Indian customs waters has been guilty of an offence 
punishable under this Act, he may arrest such person and 
shall, as soon as may be, inform him of the grounds for such 
arrest. 
(2) Every person arrested under sub-section (1) shall, 
without unnecessary delay, be taken to a magistrate. 
(3) Where any om~~r of Enfqrcement ·lUts arrested any 
person under sub-section (1), he shall, for the purpose of 
releasing such person on bail or otherWise, have the same 
powers and be subject to the same provisions as the officer-
in~harge of a police station ha~, and is subject to, under 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. 

Power to 
stop and 
search 
convey-
ances. 
Power to 
search 
premises. 
Power to 
examine 
persons. 
6 
19C. Where an officer of Enforcement authorised 10 this 
behalf by the Central Government by general or special 
order, has reason to believe that any aircraft. vehicle or 
animal in India or any vessel in India or within the Indian 
customs waters has been, is being, or is about to be, used in S 
the commission of an o1fen~ under this Act, or that any 
documents which will be useful for or relevant to any pro-
ceeding under this Act is secreted therein, he may at any 
tim~ stop any such vehicle or animal or vessel or, in the 
case of an aircraf~. compel it to land, and- 10 
(a) rummage and search 8lly part of the aircraft. 
vehicle or vessel; 
(b) exam!ne and search any goods in the aircraft, 
vehicle or vessel or on the animal; 
(c) seize any such document as is referred to above; IS 
(d) break open the lock of any door or package for 
exercising the pGwers conferred by clauses (a), (b) and 
(c) if the keys are withheld. 
19D. (1) If an officer of Enforcement. not below the 
rank of Assistant Director of Enforcement, has reason to 20 
believe that any documents which in his. opinion will be 
useful for or relevant to any proceeding under this Act, 
are secreted in any place, he may authorise any officer of 
Enforcement to search for and seize or may himself search 
for and seize such documents. 25 
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1898. relating to searches shall. so far as may be, apply to 5 of 18.8. 
searches under this section subject to the modification that 
sub-section (5) of section 165 of the said Code shall have 
ef!ect as if for the word "Magistrate", wherever it occurs, 30 
the words "Director of Enforcement or other officer exer-
cising his powers", were substituted. 
19E. The Director of Enforcement. may, during the 
, course of any inquiry in conllection with any offence under 
this Act.- ". . 35 
(a) require any person to produce or deliver any 
document relevant to the inquiry; 
(b) examine any person acquainted with the facts 
and circumstances of the case. 

5 of 1908. 
45 of 1860. 
1 
19F. (1) The Director of Enforcement shall have power Power to 
te summon any person whose attendance he considers ne- summon 
cessary either to give evidence or to produce a document ~sons. to 
in any inquiry which such officer is making in connection lId ve eVl-d . . ence an 
5 wIth any offence under this Act. produce 
(2) A summons to produce documen~s may be for the docu-
production of certain specified documents or for the pro- ments. 
ductlon of all documents of a certain description in the 
possession or under the control of the person summoned. 
10 (3) All persons so summoned shall be bound to attend 
either in person or by an authorised agent, as such officer 
may direct; and all persons so 8ummoned shall be bound to 
state the truth upon any subject respecting which they are 
examined or make statements and produce such documents 
IS as may be required: 
20 
30 
3S 
40 
Provided that the exemption under section 132 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure. 1908, shall be applicable to any 
requisition for attendance under this section. 
(4) Every such inquiry as aforesaid shall be deemed to 
be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 
and 228 of the Indian Penal Code.'; 
(b) in section 190 as so re-numbered, 
(i) for the words, brackets and figures, "Where, in pur-
suance of an order made under sub-section (2) of section 19 
or of 8 search warrant issued under sub-section (3) of the 
said section, any book OIl" other document is furnished or 
seized, and the Director of Enforcement has reasons to be-
lieve that the said document would be evidence of the con-
travention of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, 
direction or order made thereunder, and that it would be 
necessary to retain the document in his custody, he may so 
retain the said document for a period not exceeding four 
months or if, before the expiry of the said period of four 
months, any proceedings under section 23-", the following 
shall be substituted, namely: _ l 
"Where in pursuance of an order made under sub-
section (2) of section 19 or of the provisions of section 
I9A, 19C or 19D, OIl" of a :requisition or summons under 
section 19E or 19F, any document is furnished or seized 
and the Director of Enforcement or any other officer of 
Enforcement has reason to believe that the said document 
would be evidence of the contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order 

Prohibi-
tion of 
dl8cIOlure 
ofdocu-
menta or 
informa-
tionex-
cept in 
certain 
cases. 
Speeial 
provision 
regarding 
certain 
dealing. 
inforeilD 
exchange. 
8 
made thereunder, and that it would be necessary to re-
tain the document in hi.s custOdy, he may so retain the 
said document .for a period not exceeding ~ one 
year or if, before the expiry of the said period of one 
year, any proceedings under section 23-"; S 
(ii) in clause (a), for ,~he words "including the pro-
ceedings before the Appellate Board, if any", the words "in-
cluding the proceedings, if any, before the Appellate Board 
and the High Court" shan be substituted. 
(c) after section 19H as so re-numbered, Ute following sec- 10 
tions shall be inserted, namely:-
'191. (l) If in the course of an inquiry under this Act, 
the Director of Enforcement is of the opinion that the con-
tents of any document in his possession or control would be 
useful for, or relevant to, any proceeding which is in pro- IS 
gress or may ,be started under any other law for the time 
being in force, he may disclose such document or any in-
formation contained therein as he thinks fit to an ofticer 
duly authorised by or under such other law. 
(2) If any officer of Enforcement, except in the dis- 20 
charge in good faith of his duty as such ofticer in accordance 
with sub-section (1), or in compliance with any requisition 
made under any law for the time being in force, discloees 
any document or information oftAined by him in his ofticial 
capacity in the' course of any inquiry under this Act, he 2S 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand Il"Upees, or with both. 
19J. (1) If any pen;on is found or is proved to have been 
in possesSion of any foreign exchange exceeding in value,30 
two hundred and fifty rupees, the burden of proving that 
the foreign exchange came into his possesSion lawfully shall 
be on him. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898, any police officer not below the 3' 3 of 1898. 
rank of Inspector of Police or any other oftlcer of the Cen-
tral Government or a State Government authorised by the 
Central Government in this behalf may enter any public 
place and search and arrest without warrant any person 
found therein who is reasonably suspected of having com- 40 
mitted or of committing or of being about to commit a con- I 
travention of sub-section (1) of section 4. 
EzpIanatiDn.-For the purposes of this sub-section, the 
expression "public place" includes any public conveyance, 

• 
rJ o.f 1898. 
-10 
9 
any hotel, any shop or any other place intended for use by, 
or accessible to, the public. 
(3) Where any person is arrested under sub-section 
(2) by an officer other than a police ofticer, such oftlcer 
shall, without unnecessary delay, take or send the person 
arrested before a magistrate having jurisdiction in the case 
or before the officer-in-charge of a police station. 
(4)· The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1898, shall, subject to the provisions of this section, apply, 
so far as may be, in relation to any entry, search or arrest, 
made under this section. 
(5) The provisiOns of this section shall have effect not-
withstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in 
any other provision of this Act.'. 
IS 1&. In section 22 of the principal Act, for the word, figures and AmeDdl-
20 
3S 
letter "section 19B", the word, figure, and letter "section 19H" shall m~t of 
be substituted. section 22. 
17. In section 23 of the principal Act,- Amend-
(a) in sub-section (J), for the words, figures and brackets ment o.f 
"If any person contravenes the provisions of section of, section 5, sectio.n 21. 
section 9 or sub-section (2) of section 12", the following shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"If any person contravenes the provisions of section 4, 
section 5, section 9, section 10, sub-seclion (2) of aection 12, 
section 17, section l8A or section l8B"; 
(b) for sub-section (IA), the following sUb-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(1A) If any person contravenes any of the provisiOns of 
this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder, 
for the contravention of which no penalty is expressly pro-
vided, he shall, upon conviction by a Court, be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or with both."; 
(c) in sub-section (3) ,-
(i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be insert-
ed, namely:-
"(aa) of any offence punishable under lNb-6ectlon 
(2) of section 191,-
966 (B) LS-2. 

Amend-
menfot 
seCtion 231i. 
Amend-
onent of 
'n 
Speeial 
provision 
regarding 
certain 
deaUngs 
inforeicn 
exchange 
10 . ~ 
(i) where the offence Is alleged to have been 
committed by an oftlcer of Enforcement not lower 
in rank than an Assistant Direclor of Enforcement, 
except with the previous sanction of the Central 
Government; S 
(ti) where the offence m aUeged to have been 
committed by an officer of Enforcement lower in 
rank than an Assistant Director of Enforcement, ex-
cept with the previous sanction of the Director of 
Enforcement, or"; 10 
(ii) in clause (b), for the words &n'd figures "or under 
section 54 of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, as applied by 
section 19 of this Act", the words, figure! and letter "or sec-
tion 23F" shall be substituted. 
18. In section 23A of the principal Act, for the words and flgur~ IS 
• 
11 of 1922. 
'Under section 19 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878, and all the provi- 8 of 1878. 
sions of that Act shall have effect accordingly, except that section 
183 thereof shall have effect as if for the word "shall" therein, the 
word "may" were substituted', the following shall be substituted, 
namely:- 20 
,.. 
"under section 11 of the Customs Act, 1962, and aU the pro- 52 of 1_ 
visions of that Act shall have eftect accordinlly.". 
19. In section 23E of the principal Act,-
(i) in $ub-eection (1), for the words "and a~Iter member", 
the words "and two other membets" shall be substftated; 2S 
(it) f~ .rub-section (Z), the following sub-section shaH be 
substituted, namely:-
"(2) Any person aggrieved by 8ueh order may, alter 
depositing the stnn fm:poiIed 1Sy way of penalty under section 
23 and Within fotty-five days from the date on which the 30 
order is sent to the person committing the contravention, 
prefer an a~1 to the Appellate Board: 
Provided that the Appellate Board may entertain the 
appeal-
(a) after the expiry of the said pe:rfOd of forty-five 3S 
days, if it is satisfte~ that the appellant was prevented 
by suftlcient cause from filing the appeal in time; 

5 
10 
20 
25 
30 
35 
it 
~b> witbo\lt the d~posit beJ.ng D;lade, if it is satisfied 
that there is sufficient reason to do so, S\l~ect to the 
condition that the deposit shall be made within such 
time before the date of the hearing of the appeal as it 
may aNoW and that the, appeal shall stand dismi~d, if 
the deposit is not so made."; 
(iii) in sub-section (3), for the words "shall be final"', the 
WOl'ds, a,urea and letters "shall, sub.j.ect to the provJsiOlli of 
section 23EE, be final" shall be substituted; 
(iv) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall 
~ ~rt,ed. namely:-
.. (6) Th ~ powers anc;l functio~ of the AppeUafte ~oard 
may be exercised and discharged by Benche,$ co.o.f$istinS of 
two members and constituted by the Chairman of the Appel-
late Board: 
Provided that if the members of the Bench difter on 
any point or points, they shalll state the point or points on 
~ ijley, fiUU~ and refer the aame to the third member 
for hearing on such poipt Orr points and such point or points 
shall b.e decided according to the opillion of that member.". 
M~ After .~Uon 2M( of the principal Act, the fo1lo~ing sections Insertion 
slwr,U :be h;w.ert~, .,,~ely: - of new 
sections 
2SJ:Eand 
23JCEE. 
u23EE. An appeal shall lie to the High Court only on ques- Appe~l 
tW)lS of ~W !rOUl any decision or order of the Appellate Board to ~e 
\l!ld~ SuR.,s~ti~ (3) or sUb-section (4) of ,IIec:tiOll ~, ~~. 
23EEE. Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in any decision or Correction 
or4e.r passed by the .f\ppe'llate Board or the Director of Enforce- of clerical 
m.ent under tb,is Act, or errors arising therein frQQl aDy ace i- errors, etc. 
d~n~ sl,ip or oplission may, at any tim"be COITected by the 
~ppe:Uate ijo~c;i or the Director of E~orcement oru successor 
in office, as the case may be.". 
2~. In sec,tiQD 23F of the principal Act, after the words "Appel- Amendment 
late Board", the words "or the High Court" shall be inserted. of section 
2~. qt ~e,c~ 2~ of the priucipal Act,- 23F. 
(a) for the words, brackets and figures ".furnished by any Amend-
oIK\fJon uDder 8ub..section (2) of section IG, or has been seized ment of 
uu.~ sub-section (8) of that section from the custody or control ;ection 
of 8DY person,", ~he following shall be subatituted, namely: _ fA. 
"furnished by any person under sub-section (2) of sec-
tion 19, section 19E or section 19F, or has been seiied under 
section l~A or 

b.ertion or new 
aeetion 
2M; 
Certa1D 
oiftcento 
UaiJt of-
flcers of 
EnfOl'lCe-
ment. 
Amendi-
mentof 
aection 27. 
Ii 
Bection 19C or section 19D from the custody or controi of 
any person,"; 
. (b) after the words "the Court", in the two places where 
they occur, the words, brackets, letter and figures "or the officer 
adjudicating under clause (ci) of sub-section (1) of section 23" 5 
ahall be inserted. 
23. After section 25 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namel~:-
"25A. The following officers are hereby empowered and re.-
quired to assistofticers of Enfotcement in the enforcement ot 10 
this Act, namelY:-1 i 
(a) officers of the Customs !>epartment; 
(b) officers of the Central Excise Department: 
(c) officers of Police; ! 
(d) officers of the Central or State Governments em- 15 
ployed at any port or airport; 
(e) such other officers of the Central or State Govern-
ment or a local authority as are specified by the Central 
Government in this behWf by notification in the OtIicial 
Gazette.".. I 
24. In section 27 of the principal Act,-
(0) in su~tion (2), clause (c) shall be re-Iettered as 
claUJe (d) and before the clause as so re-lettered. the following 
clause shall be inserted, namely:-
20 
"(c) provide, subject to such conditions as may be 25 
prescribed, for the publication of the names and other par-
ticulars of persons who have been found guilty of any con-
travention of the provisions of this Act, or of any rule, 
order or direction made thereunderj"; 
(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 30 
substituted, namely:- . 
.. (3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as 
soon as may be after it is made before each House of Par-
liament while it is in session for a total period of thirty 
days which maybe comprised in one session or two suc- 3S 
cesaive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in 
which it is so laid or the session immediately following, 
both Houses agree in making any modiftcation in the rule, 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made the 

i3 
rule shall, thereafter, have effect only in such modified forM 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without pre-
judice to the validity of anything previously done under 
. that rule.'" S 

The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 (7 of 19&V), was ori-
ginally enacted as a temporary measure. It was placed permanently 
on the Statute Book by Act 39 of 1957, which, among others, pro-
vided for the appointment of the Director of Enforcement and the 
constitution of an Appellate Board to hear appeals against the orders 
of the Director. 
. 2. In the light of experience gained during the last seven years, 
I 
both the Directorate of Enforcement and the Reserve Bank of India 
have suggested certain further amendments to the Act. The working 
of the Appellate Board also has shown the need for certain changes 
in the Act. It is, therefore, considered necessary to amend the Act 
further for removing certain difficulties which have been experienced 
in the working of the Act. 
3. The principal amendments proposed are as follows:-
(a) to empower the Reserve Bank of India to control the 
transfer of shares of a foreign company from a register outside 
India to a register in India and to regulate the giving of guaran-
tees by persons resident in India in respect of ·debts or liabilities 
of persons resident outside India; 
(b) to control and regulate payments or remittances in 
favour of a non-resident in pursuance of any settlement of pro-
perty by will as well as by gifts; 
(c) to control and regulate the appointment of foreign com-
panies, firms or branches thereof as the agents or advisers of 
companies and firms in India; 
(d) to require airlines, shipping companies and travel agents 
to obtain the general or special permission of the Reserve Bank 
of India in respect of international travel bookings; 
(e) to include proviSions on the lines of Rule 132A of the 
Defence of India Rules, 1962, prohibiting unauthorised dealings 
in foreign elrehange brought in by tourists and tightening the 
control over such dealings; 
<I> to confer additional powers on officers of the Enforce-
ment Directorate similar to those conferred by the Customs Act, 
14 

IS 
1962, on officers of the Customs Department, in regard to search 
and arrest of persons, seaa-ch of conveyances and premises and 
summoning of persons to &ive evidence and produce documents, 
etc.; 
(9) to mtrease the strength of the Appellate ~oard from 
two to three memberr, and 
(h) to confer a right of appeal to the IBgh COurt 8ft ct\l'es-
tions ef law from deeisions or orders of the Appellate Beltd. 
4. Opportunity has been taken to undertake certain other amead- \ 1/ 
rtl-ents of a minor nature. 
5. The B1ll Sfl!ieki to achieve these objetts. 
NIIW DI:un; 
rile 8Td 8~te1nbet, 1964. 
P:REstbtm"S RECoMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[CofJY of lettet tfo .. 1(22)EC/M, dated the 7th September, 1964 f~om 
Shrl Bali Ram Bbagat, Mil'ltstet of Planning to the Secretary, Lok 
Sabha.]: I 
The Presideilt having been apprised of the sllbject metter of the 
toreign Exchange Regulation (Amendment) Bill has been pleased to 
recommend its consideration in the Lok Sabha under article 117 (3) 
of the Constitution. 

l"INANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
New Section 2A inserted by clause 4 of the Bill providl!fJ that the 
Central Government may appoint a Director of Enforcement and as 
many Deputy and Assistant Directors of Enforcement and such other 
officers as it thinks fit for the purpose Of enforcing the provisions of 
the Act. This is an enabling provision empowering the Central Gov-
ernment to appoint the various officers in the Directorate of Enforce-
. ment. Since the Directorate of Enforcement is already in existence, 
no additional expenditure is expected to be incurred immediately due 
to this provision of the Bill. However, as and when the aetivities of 
the Directorate expand, it may be necessary to increase the strength 
of the staff and the consequent increase in expenditure will be met 
by nonnal budgetary provision. A budget provision of Rs. 9,68,600 
has been made for the Directorate of Enforcement for the current 
year (1964-65). It is no~ possible to give any estimate of additional 
expenditure which may be incurred in future. 
2. Clause 19 (i) of the Bill provides for the appointment of a third 
member of the Appellate Board. At present, the Board consists of 
two members, and officers of the Central Government are appointed 
as members of the Board in addition to their nonnal duties. Conse-
quently, the addition of a third member, on the same basis, is not 
expected to involve any additional expenditure. 
16 

~ REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
aaase 24 of the Bill seeks to amend section 27 of the Act (relat-
ing to poWer of the Central Government to make rules) so as to pro-
vide for the making of rules for the publication of the names and other 
particulan of perIODS who have been found guilty of any contraven .. 
tian of the provisions of the Act or of any rule, order or direction 
made thereunder. This Is a matter of procedure. The delegation of 
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
r, 

SIbort 
title, ex-
tent and 
mence-
ment. 
EXTRACTS. FROM '11IE FOREIGN ExCHANGE RzGULATION A~, ·i947 
7 01' 1947 
• • • .. 
1. (1) • • • • • 
(2) It extends to the whole of- India; and it applies also to all 
citizens of India outside India. 
• • • I • j!l ' 
lnterpre- Z. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject 
tauon. or context,-1 I 
Beattie-
tiona on 
dealingr 
in foreign 
exchange. 
• • • • • 
(g) "Indian currency" means currency which is expressed 
or dnlwn in Indian rupees; 
• • • • • 
(k) "security" means shares, stocks, bonds, debentures, de-
benture stock and Government securities, as defined in the 
Public Debt Act, 1944, deposit receipts in respect of deposits of 18 of 1*. 
securities, and units or sub-units of unit trusts and includes 
certificates of title to securities but does not include bi1~ of 
exchange or promissory notes other than Government promis-
sory notes; I 
• • • • • 
4. (1) Except with the previous general or special permission 
of the Reserve Bank, no person other than an authorised dealer shall 
in India and no person resident in India other than an authorised 
dealer shall outside India, buy or borrow from, or sell or lend to, 
or exchange with, any person not being an authorised dealer, any 
foreign exchange . 
• • • • • 
Restric- 5. (1) Save as may be provided in and in aocordance with any 
tions on generv.l or special exemption from the prOvisions of this sub-section 
payments. which may be granted conditionally or unconditionally by the 
Reserve Bank, no person in, or resident in, India shall-
18 

19 
(a) make any payment to or for the credit of any person 
resident outside India; , : 
• • • • • 
8. (1) . ' 
• • • '" 
(2) No person shall, except with the general or special' permis-
sion of the Reserve Bank or the written permission of a person 
authorised in this behalf by the Reserve Bank, take or send out of 
India any gold, or precious stones or Indian currency or foreign 
exchange other than foreign exchange obtained from en authorised 
dealer . 
• '" '" '" '" 
Rettric-
tionson 
import 
and ex-
portot 
certain 
currency 
and 
bullion. 
10. (1) No person who has a right to receive any foreign ex- Dutyof 
change or to receive from a person resident outside India a pay- pex:'0ns 
ment in rupees shell, except with the general or special permission entitl~ 
of the Reserve Bank, do or refrain from doing any act with intent ~~r:~;ve 
to secure--{ I exchange, 
etc. 
(a) that the receipt by him of the whole or part of that 
foreign exchange or payment is delayed, or 
(b) thet the foreign exchange or payment ceases in whole 
or in part to be receivable by him . 
• • '" • • 
u. (1) '" '" '" '" '" '" 
(2) , Where any export of goods has been made to which a nati-
,ftcation under ,sub-section (1) applies, no person entitled' ,to sell, or 
procure the sale of, the said goods shall, except with the permission 
of the Reserve Benk. do or refrain from doing any act with intent 
to secure that- .. ... 
(a) the sale of the goods is delayed to an extent which is 
unreasonable having regard to the ordinary course of trade, or 
Payment 
for 
exported 
goods. 

Restric-
tion on 
settle-
ment. 
Rt:~ 
tions .. 
dealing. 
in foreigl. 
exchange, 
Restric-
tions on 
payments. 
(b) payment for the goods is made otherwise than in the 
prescribed manner or does not represent the full amount pay-
able by the foreign buyer in respect of the goods, subject to 
such deductions, if any, as may be allowed by the Reserve 
Bank, . or is de1a1ed to such extent as afore.ld: 
Provided that no proceedings in respect of any contravention of 
this sub-section shall be instituted unless the prescribed period haa 
ex.pired and payment for the goods representing the full amount 
as aforesaid has not been made in the prescribed manner • 
• • • • • 
17. (1) No person: resident in India shall, exeeptwtth the 
general 'or special permission of the Reserve Bank, settie any pr0-
perty, otherwise'than by will, 90 that a penon who at the time of 
the settlement is resident outside India, elsewhere than in territories 
notified in this behalf by the Reserve Bank, will' have an interest in 
the property, or exercise, other than by wlll, any power for pay-
ment in favour of a person who at the time of the exercise of the 
power is resident outside India elsewhere than in such notified 
territories. I ! 
(2) A settlement or eower as aforesaid shall not be invalid ex-
cept in so far as it confers any right or benefit on any person who 
at the time of the settlement or the exercise of the power is resi-
dent outside India, elsewhere than in territories notified by the 
Reserve Bank. I 
t, 
• • 
Power to call 19. (1) 
for information. 
• 
• 
• • 
• • • 
(3) If on a representation in writing, made by a penon author-
ised in this behalf by the Central ~vernment or the Relerve Bank, 
a District Magistrate, Sub-Divisiona1 Magistrate, Presidency Map 
trate or Magistrate af the first class, has re8lOn to believe that • con-
travention cf any of the provisions of this Act has been, or Is being 
or is about to be, committed in any place. 
or that a pe1'6On to whom an order under sub-section (2) of th!a 
ection has been or might be addressed, will not or weald DOt pro. 
'ce the information, book or other document, 
5, . 
genel r where such information, book or other document is not known 
which e Magis!rate to be in the possession of any penon, 
Reservt.where the Magistrate considers that the purpoHlof any in-
Uon or proceeding under this Aet will be served by a general 
t' inspection, 

:n 
he may issue a search warrant and the person to whom such warrant 
is directed may search or inspect in accordance therewith and seize 
any book or other document, and the provisions of the Code of Cri· 
S 011891. minal Procedure, 1898 relating to searches under that Code shall, 80 
far as the same are applicable, apply to searches under this sub. 
section: 'L ' ! . Ii:': fl!~i~!i;' 
Provided that such warrant shall not be luued to any pcdice 
oIDcer below the rank of sub.inspector. 
Expla.naUon.-Inl this sub.section, "place" Includes a house, build· 
lng, tent, vehicle, vessel or aircraft. 
(4) The provlsioll8 of Bub-sections (I), (2) and (3) of section 54 
11 of ltD. of the Indian Income.tax Act, 1922, shall apply in relation to inform· 
atton obtained under su~on (2) of this section as they apply to 
the partIculars referred to in that section, and for the purposes of 
such applicatlon-
(a) the said sub-section (3) shaH be construed as if in 
clause (a) thereof there was included reference to a prosecu· 
tton for an offence under section 23 of this Act, and 
(b) persons to whom any information is required to be fur· 
Dished under an order made under sub-section (2) of this section 
shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of 
that section. 
ItA. Where, In pursuance of an order made under sub·section (2) Cwrtody 
of !M'Ctton 19 or of a search warrant issued under sulHection (3) of of docu· 
the said eection, any book or other document is furnished or seized, menu. 
and the Director of Enforcement has reasons to believe that the said 
document would be evidence of the contravention of any of the pro-
visions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made there. 
under, and that it would be necessary to retain the document in hi8 
custody, he may so retain the said document for a period not exceed-
Ing four months or if, before the expiry of the said period of four 
months, any proceedings under section ~ 
(4) have been commenced before .him, until the diepoIal of 
those proceedings, including the proceeclings before the Appel-
late Board, if any, or 
(b) have been commenced before a Court, until the docu-
ment has been ftIed in that Court . 
• • • • • 
'12. No person shall, when complying with any order or direction FaIle 
aderseetion ·19 or with any requirement under section 19B or when .tate. 
making JlII1y application or declaration to any authority or penon for mant.. 

Penalty 
and pro-
cedu.re. 
Application 
of Sea 
Cu.torna 
Ac,187 8. 
22 
at\Y purpose J.Ulder this Act, give any information Q~ JIla.ke any state-
ment which he kRows or has reasonable cause to believe to be false, 
or not true, in any material particular. 
,23. (1) If any person contraven,es the provisions of section 4, sec-
tion 5, section 9 or sub-section (2) of section 12 0,1:' of any'ruJ,e, direc-
tion ,~r order made thereunder, he shall-
• • • •• 
(1 A) Whoever contravenes-
(a) any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, direc-
, tion or order made thereunder, other, than ~hose J;E!ferred to in 
sub-section (1) of this section and section 19 shall, upon convic-
tion by a Court, be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
: which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with botla; 
(b) any direction or order made under section 19 shall, upon 
conviction bya Court, be punishable with fine which may extend 
to two thousand rupees. 
• • • • • 
(3) No Court shall take cognizance-
• • • • • 
(b) of any offence punishable under sub-section (lA) of 
this section or under section 54 of the Indian Income·tax Act, 
1922, as applied by section 19 of this Act, except upon complaint 11 of 1922. 
in writing made by the Director of Enforcement or any officer 
authorised in this behalf by the'Central Government or the 
Reserve Bank by a genera'l or special order: 
Provided that where any such offence is the contravention <>f any 
of the provisions of this Act or any rule, direction or order made 
thereunder which prohibits the doing of an act without permission, 
no such complaint shall be made unless the person accused of the 
offence has been given an opportunity of' showing that he had ,such 
permission. 
• • • • • 
23A. Without prejudice to the provisions of. section 23. or to any 
other prOvision contained in this Act, the restrictions imp~ed by 
sub·sections (1) and (2) of sec'tion S. sub-section (1) of section 12 
and clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 13 shall be deemed to 
have been imposed under section 19 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878, 8 of 1878. 
aDd all the prOviSions Ctfthat Act shall have effect accordingly, ex-
cept that section 183 thereof shall have effect as if for the word 
'.'shall" theJ.1ein the w.ord "may" were substituted. 
• • • • • 
23E. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Appeals. 
Official Gazette, constitute an Appellate Board to be called the 
FOJ;'eign E~change Regulation ApwU~te Board'CQDsisting,of· a Chair-
:man and. another member to ,be appaint~ by the Central Govera· 
,ment for lleadng ~ppeals. against the Ol'ders .flt'the Director· of .. (In" 
torcement made under section 23. -

2~ 
(2) Any pereon aggrieved by such an order may, after depositin; 
the sum imposed by way of penalty under section 23, and within 
thirty days from the date of the order, prefer an appeal to the 
Appellate Board: 
Provided that the Appellate Board may entertain the appeal after 
the expiry of the said period of thirty' days, if it is satisfied that the 
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in 
time. 
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (2), the Appellate 
Board may, after calling for a report from the Director of Enforce-
ment and nfter making such further inquiry as it thinks .fit, confirm, 
modify or set aside the order appealed against, and the decision of 
the Appellate Board shall be final; and if the sum deposited by way 
of penalty under sub-section (2) exceeds the amount directed to be 
paid by the Appellate Board, the excess amount shall be refunded. 
• • • • • 
23F. If any person fails to pay the penalty imposed by the Director Penalty 
of Enforcement or the Appellate Board, or fails to comply with any of for con-
their directions or orders, he shall, on conviction before a Court, be travention 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two ~:d~~~ 
years, or with fine or with both. Director 
• • • • • of Enfor_ cement 
, , 
andAp-
pellate 
Board. 
24A. Where any document is furnished by any person under sub- l!esump-
section (2) of section 19, or has been seized under sub-section tdlon as to . ocuments (3) of that section from the custody or control of any person, and incertain 
such document is tendered by the prosecution in evidence against cases. 
him, the Court shaU, unles the contrary is proved by any such per-
son, presume--
(a) the truth of the contents of such document; 
(b) that the signature and every other part of such docu-
ment which purports to be in the handwriting of any particular 
person or which the Court may reasonably assume to have been 
signed by, or to be in the handwriting of, any particular person, 
is in that person's handwriting, and in the case of a document 
stamped, executed or attested, that it was duly stemped and 
executed or attested by the person by whom it purports to have 
been so executed or attested. 
27. (1)· • • • • Power to 
(3) All rules made under this Act shall be laid for not less than make 
thirty. days before ,both Houses of Parliament as soon as possible after rules. 
they are made and sha'll be subject to such modifications as Parlia-
ment r:IJUJi make du'riDg the session in which they are 60 laid or the 
session immediately following, 

) 
l6tt SABRA 
A 
BILL 
fUrther to amead the Foreign Bxchange Regulation 
Act, 1947. 
(Shri T. T. Kris1zrtamac}lQri, 
Minister of Finanu.) 