As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA.

1॥ JUL 1४४४

Bill No. 62 of 1998
_

| CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998
By
Suri K.C. Konbatan, M.P.
A

BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as

Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1998, Shorttitle.

article 150 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, Insertion of

new article

1508.

08. The Union shail charge such fees, as may be prescribed by the Com ptroller Union to
Auditor General of India, from a State in respect of auditing and via
fs a हे from States in

‘ation of the Audit Reports of the accounts of that State.”, ipectofainit
and accounts.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

At present, the accounts of the States are being audited by the Comptroller and |
Auditor General of India and the Audit Reports are submitted 10 the Governor of the
concerned State. The expenditure in respect of the establishment o! Comptroller and Auditor
General of India and it officers which are situated in all the States are wholly borne by the
Central Government. The Central Government does not charge any fee for the work done
bythe Comptroller and Auditor General of India in respect of audit and accounts of the
States. The Central Government has been incurring several crores of rupees every year on
the establishment of offices of the Accountant General situated in the States.

Since the financial transaction of the States have considerably increased, the
expenditure in relation to the establishment of the offices has also proportionately gone

up. It is proposed that the State Governments should also bear some expenditure in respect
of accounts and auditing

Therefore, it is proposed to amend the Constitution with a view to charging fee from
the State Governments in respect of audit and accounts of that State.

New Dear; K.C. KONDAIAH
May 7, 1998.


LOK SABHA

BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri K.C. Kondaiah, MP.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—867LS—16.6.1998.