BUI No. 63 of 1259 
THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS CERTIFICATES 
BILL, 195'9 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 27TH AUGUST, 1959) 

Bill No. 63 of 19$9 
THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS CERTIFICATES 
BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to make certain provisions in respect of Government Savings Certi-
ficates. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Government Savings Certifi- Short title. commence-cates Act, 1959. mel)[ and 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Gov- applicatioQ. 
10 
ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
(3) It applies to such class of savings certificates as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Officiel Gazette, specify in 
this behalf. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "minor" means a person who is not deemed to have 
attained his majority under the Indian Majority Act, 1875; 
(b) ''prescribed'' means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; . 
J 5 (c) "savings certificate" means a savings certificate to which 
this Act applies; 
(d) "transfer" means a transfer inter vivos, and does not in-
clude a transfer by operation of law. 
DcflDitioQl. 
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time Restrictions 
20 being in force, no transfer of a savings certificate, whether made ~ =r 
before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be valid unless c:ertitkales. 
it has been made with the previous consent in writing of the pres-
cribed authority. 

~h:~ 4. Notwiths1Bnding any provision in any law for the time beiDi orOD . f of miAon. In orce,-
(a) a minor may apply for and hold savings certificates and 
any other person may apply for and hold savings certificates on 
behalf of a minor; S 
(b) where any savings certificate is held by or on behalf 
of a minor, the minor shall, whether the savings certificate was 
applied for and issued before or after the commencement of this 
Act. be bound by the provisions of this Act and of any rules 
made thereunder applicable to such savings certificate and by J 0 
the terms of any declaration made by the applicant for the 
savings certificate in pursuance of' the said rules. 
~t • 5. Payment of the sum for the time being due on a savings certi-
WIICI'e celU-
ficate is held ftcate held by or on behalf of a minor may be made-
byaroD 
behalf of a 
minor. (a) to him personally, if he himself applied for the savings IS 
certificate, or 
(b) for the use of the minor, if the application for the sav-
ings certificate was made by any person other than the minor,-
(i) to any such person, being a parent of the minor or 
guardian of his property, as may be specified in that behalf 20 
in the form of application; 
.. (ii) if no such person has been specified, to any guar-
dian of the property of the minor appointed by a competent 
court, or where no such guardian has been so appointed, to 
either parent of the minor. or where neither parent is alive, 2S 
to any other guardian of the minor. 
G. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the 
time being in force, or in any disposition, testamentary or otherwise 
in respect of any savings certificate, where a nomination made in 
the prescribed manner purports to confer on any person the right 30 
to receive payment of the sum for the time being due on the savings 
certificate on the death of the holder thereof and before the maturity 
of the certificate, or before the certificate having reached maturity 
has been discharged, the nominee shall. on the death of the holder 
of the savings certificate, become entitled to the 9Bvings certificate 35 
and to be paid the sum due thereon to the exclusion of all other 
persons. unless the nomination is varied or cancelled in the pres-
cribed manner. 
(2) Any nomination referred to in sub-section (1) shall becomp 
void if the nominee predeceases, or where there are two or more 40 

3 
nominees all the nominees predecease, the holder of the savings cer-
ficate making the nomination. 
(3) Where the nominee is a minor, it shall be lawful for the 
holder of the savings certificate making the nomination to appoint 
, in the prescribed menner any person to receive the sum due thereon 
in the event of his death during the minority of the nominee. 
(4) A transfer of a savings certificate made in the prescribed. 
manner shall automatically cancel a nomination previously made: 
Provided toot where a savings certificate is held by or on behalf 
10 of any person as a pledgee or by way of security for any purpose, 
such holding shall not have the effect of cancelling a nomination but 
the right of the nominee shall be subject to the right of the person 
so holding it. , 
7. (1) If the holder of a savings certificate dies and there is in Ptymedt_ 
IS force at the time of his death a nomination in favour of any person, i!:S' of 
payment of the sum due thereon shall be made to the nominee. er. 
(2) Where the nominee is a minor, payment of the sum due there-
on shall be made--
(4) in any case where a person has been appointed to 
20 receive it under sUb-section (3) of section 6, to that person, and 
(b) where there is no such person, to any guardian of the 
property of the minor appointed by a competent court, or where 
no such guardian has been so appointed, to either parent of the 
minor or where neither parent is alive, to any other guardian of 
2, the minor. 
(3) Where the sum due on a savings certificate is payable to two 
or more nominees, and either or any of them dies, the sum shall be 
paid to the surviving nominee or nominees. 
(4) If a peraon dies and is at the time of his death the holder 
30 of a savings certificate and there is no nomination in force at the 
time of his deeth and probate of his will or letters of administration 
of his estate or a succession certificate granted under the Indian 
39 of 192" Succession Act, 1925, is not within three months of the death of the 
holder produced to the prescribed authority, then, if the sum due 
35 on the savings certificate does not exceed five thousand rupees, the 
prescribed authority may pay the same to any person appearing to 
it to be entitled to receive the sum or to administer the estate of 
the deceased. 
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to require 
40 any person to receive payment of the sum due on a savings certificate 

Payment to 
be. full 
dilcharae-
4 
before it has reached maturity or otherwise than in accordance with 
the terms of the savings certificate. 
8. (1) Any payment made in accordance with the foregoing pro-
visions of this Act to a minor or to his parent or guardian or to a 
nominee or to any other person shall be a full discharge from all 5 
further liability in respect of the sum so paid. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to preclude any 
executor or administmtor or other representative of a deceased holder 
of a savings certificate from recovering from the person receiving the 
same under section 7 the amount remaining in his hands after deduct- 10 
ing the amount of all debts or other demands lawfully paid or dis-
charged by him in due course of administration. 
(3) Any creditor or claimant against the estate of a holder of a 
savings certificate may recover his debt or claim out of the sum 
paid under this Act to any person and remaining in his hands un- IS 
administered, in the same manner and to the same extent 8S if the 
latter had obtained letters of administration to the estate of the 
deceased. 
Security .fo.r 9. The prescribed authority may take such security as it thinks 
~~~IJ- necessary from any person to whom any money is paid under sub- 20 
section (4) of section 7 for the due administration of the money so 
paid and may assign the said security to any person interested in 
such administration. 
Power to 
admiaisrcr 
oath. 
10. (1) For the purpose of ascertaining the right of a person 
claiming to be entitled to payment under sub-section (4) of section 25 
7, the prescribed authority may take evidence on oath or afBnnation 
according to the law for the time being in force relating to oaths 
and affirmations. : 
(2) Any person who upon such oath or affirmation makes any 
statement which is false and which he either knows or believes to be 30 
false or does not believe to be true shall be deemed . guilty of an 
offence under section 193 of the Indian Penal Code. 45 of 1a60. 
Protr'Ction of 11. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any officer 
actiOll taltCQ of the Government or any prescribed authority in respect of anything 
~r. which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 35 
Power to l%. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Offi-
make rules. cial Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 

5 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generelity of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for-
(a) the form of application for ~avings certificates and the 
issue and discharge of such certificates; 
5 (b) the maximum limits of holdings; 
(c) the conditions as to payment of interest or di-scount 
relating to any class of savings certificates and the recovery of 
any interest paid on any amount held in excess of the maximum 
limits in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue or in 
10 any other manner; 
(d) the transfer and conversion of savings certificates and 
the fees to be levied in respect thereof; 
(e) the replacement of savings certificates mutilated, lost 
or destroyed and the fees payable in respect thereof; 
IS (f) the form of nominations, the manner in which and the 
conditions subject to which nominations may be made and the 
registration of nominations; 
(g) the manner in which any person may be appointed for 
the purposes of sub-section (3) of section 6; 
20 (h) the variation or cancellation of nominations and the 
registration of such variations or cancellations; 
(i) the fees that may be levied for registration, variation 
or cancellation of nominations; 
(j) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed. 
25 (3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as 
may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is 
in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry 
of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately follow-
30 ing, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the case may be, so however that any such modification or annul-
ment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previous-
35 ly done under that rule. 
13. (1) The Post Office National Savings Certificates Ordinance, Repeal and 
1944, is hereby repealed. savings. 

6 
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the said Ordinance, any rules 
made or deemed to have been made or anything done or any action 
taken in exercise of any of the powers conferred by or under the 
said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been made, done or taken 
in exercise of the powers conferred by or under this Act, as if this 
Act were in force on the day on which such rules were made, surh 
thing was done or such action was taken. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Post Office National Savings Certificates Ordinance, 1944 
(XLII of 1944), issued under section 72 of the Ninth Schedule to the 
Government of India Act, 1935, as originally enacted and continued 
in force by virtue of the provisions of the India and Burma (Emer-
gency Provisions) Act, 1940 (3 & 4 Geo. 6. Ch. 33) regulates the sale 
and discharge of National Savings Certificates issued through the 
Post Office. Suggestions have been made from time to time that as 
the production of legal proof of succession involves considerable 
delay and expense, the holders of savings certificates may be allowed 
the right to nominate one or more persons to receive the amounts 
due in respect of such certificates in the event of their death without 
the produc~ion of succession certificate or other proof of title. In 
seeking to amend that Ordinance for the above purpose, opportunity 
is taken to rep]gce tt by an Act of Parliament. 
2. The certificates to which the Ordinance applies are at present 
being issued and discharged only through Post Office. It is, how-
ever, becoming increasingly necessary that faciliti~ should be 
provided for the sale of the certificates through agencies other than 
the Post Offices as well. The Bill as framed will now enable the 
Government to prescribe suitable authorities for the sale or dis-
charge of the certificates. i 
NEW Dl:I.HI; 
MORARJI DESAI. 
The 18th August, 1959. 
7 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to carry out the purposes of the Act. The particular matters 
in respect of which rules may be made are specified in sub-clause (2) 
of that clause. These are mainly matters of detail or of procedure, 
for example, the form of applications for savings certificates, the issue 
and discharge of savings certificates, their transfer and conversion, 
the form of nominations, the registration of nominations and their 
cancellation and variation and the like. The delegation of powers is 
of a normal character. 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
to make eertain provisions in respect of Government SavinI' 
Certif.cate5. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article II.., of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha, the 
introduction of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Morarji Desai, Minister of Finance.) 