L0K SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE INCOME-TAX (.AMEl~n. tID~T) BILL, 1981 
L-;Q bel As introdl'CIt' in 10k Sabha J 
1. Page 4, line 48,-
~ "buildng" ~ "building" 
2. Page 5,-
.. against line 30, insert the marginal citation -
"16 of 1908. tI 
NEW DELHI; 
April 22, 198j 
Vaisakha 2, 1903 ( Saka) 

~As Dn'IODl1CID IN LeE suaA' 
.j . ; 1':';2 !t }.? Ii JS 8' 
1 ..t C I ;.,. ( ~ f· ," 
' .. 
:C: 
~ . 
.. I Bill No. 62 of 1981 
THE INCOME-TAX (AMENDM~NT) BILL. 1981 
,A 
" ... 
'" 
BILL 
fu.rtlter to -camend the IftCOme-t4:r Act, 1961, 
BE ~t enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-second Year of 
the' Republic qf In~ia as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Income-tax (Amendment) Short 
~, 1981. ' title and 
commence_ 
S .' (2) It shall come .into force on such date, as the Central ment. 
GoverumenLmay, by notification in the Official Gazette. appoint. 
'I, 
ea of 1"1. ~ .z,.ID section~69A of, t~ Income-tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter Amend-
r,feTreci· to as theprincipal.Aet),- ' ment of 
section 
~~ ' .. ~'(4»)~ .cJause .~~).--~.': ", " 269A. 
~ •• "... 1 ... ., .... '. "" J... ", f ," • " • ~"I' i r , 
~~ (i) i~ the o~e~g,~~iiPQ~ f~t .. t~.'rords · "apparent 
consideration", In relation to any Immovable property 

'2 .:~~ ; 
transferred, means,-', thoe 
tuted, namely:-
following shall be substi-
• "apparent consideration",-
(1) in relation to any immovable property 
transferred, being immovable property of the , 
nature ref.erred to in sub-clause (i) of clause (e), 
means,-'; 
(ii) after sub-clause (ii), the following shall be 
inserted, namely:-
., (iii) if the transfer is by way of lease,- 10 
(A) in a case where the consideration for 
the transfer consists of premium only, the 
amount of premium as specified in the instru-
ment of transfer; 
(B) in a case where the consideration for I, 
the transfer consists of rent only, C,e aggre-
gate of the moneys (if any) payable by way of 
rent and the amounts for the service or things 
forming part of or constituting the rent, as 
specified in the instrument of transfer; iO 
(C) in a case where the consideration for 
the transfer consists of premium and rent, the 
aggregate of the amount of the premium, the 
moneys (if. any) payable by way of rent and 
the amounts for the service or things forming .5 
part of or constituting the rent, as specified in 
the instrument of transfer, 
and where the whole or any part of the considera-
tion for such transfer is payable on any date or 
dates falling after the date of such transfer the 30 
value of Ule consideration payable after such date 
shall be determined by adopting the rate of 
interest at eight per cent, per annum; 
(2) in relation to any immovable property 
transferred, being immovable property of the 35 
nature referred to in sub-clause (ii) of clause (e), 
means-
(i) in a case where the consideration for 
the transfer consists of a sum of money only, 
such sum; 40 
(ii) in a case where the consideration for 
the transfer consists of a thing or things only, 
the price tha~ such thing or things would 
orcUnarily fetch on sale in the open market on 
the date of the transfer; .. 5 
(iii) in a case where the consideration for 
the transfer consists of a thing or things and a 
sum of money, the aggregate of the price that 
such thing or things would ordinarily fetch on 
sale in the CQen market on the date of the 50 
transfer and such mm, 

• 
of 1908. 
5 
10 
!;!O 
~d where tile whole, or any part of the considera-
tion for _u,ch tfaJ,1~,fer i._pa~a~le o~ ~y. date or 
dates falline after the date of lucb'traDafer, the 
value ·of l1le ~oDatd.ratioD payable after such date 
shall be determined by adopting the rate of interest 
at eight per cent. per annum;"; 
(b) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substi-
tuted, namely: _. 
'(d) "fair market value",-
(i) in relation to any immovable property trans-
ferred by way of sale or exchange, being immov-
able property of the nature referred to in sub-
clause (i) of clause (e), means the price that the 
immovable property would ordinarily fetch on sale 
in the open market on the date of execution of the 
instrument of transfer of such property; 
(H) in relation to any immovable property 
transferred by way of lease, being immovable pro-
perty of the nature referred to in sub-clause (i) of 
clause (e), means the premium that such transfer 
would ordinarily fetch in the open market on thp 
date of execution of th~ instrument of transfer of 
such property, if the consideration for such trans-
fer had been by way of premium only; 
(iii.) in relation to any immovable property 
transferred, being immovable C?roperty of the 
nature referred to in sub-clause (ii) of clause (e), 
means the consideration in the form of money that 
such transfer would ordinarily fetch in the open 
market on the 'date of the transfer, if such transfer 
had been made only for consideration in money;'; 
(C) in clause (e),-
(i) in the opening portion, for the words' "immov-
able property" means any land or any building', the fol-
35 lowing shaH be substituted, namely:-
45 
"'immovable property" means,-
(i) any land or any building'; 
(ii) in the Explanation, for the words "this clause", 
the words "this sub-clause" shall be substituted; 
(iii) the following sub-clause shall be inserted 
after the Explanation, namely:-
"(ii.) any rights of the nature referred to in 
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 269AB;"; 
(d) for clause (f), the following clause shall be substi-
tuted, namely: ....... 
'(f) "instrument of transfer" means the instrument 
of transfer registered under the Registration Act, 1908 

Insertion of 
new section 
269AB. 
ReJi,stration 
q1~ 
transaetionl. 
" 
'01', 'as the case niJy' be, the statemen~ tei1ste:ed under 
-sertton '26tAB' With thecotnp-etlrtt anthc;t:1tYi ; 
(~) 11)r' clSUle (k), the followial olauae, ,hall be sub-
stituted, na_y;-
• (h) "transfer",- s 
(i). in relation to any immovable pr~perty 
referred to in sub-clause (i) of clause (e), meaDS 
transfer of such property by way of sale or ex-
change or lease for a term of not less than twelve 
years, and includes allowing the possession of such 10 
property to be takeD or retained in part perform .. 
ance of a contract of the nature referred to in sec-
tion 53A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882. 4 of 1882. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-
clauae, a lease which provides for the extension of r S 
the tel':m thereof by a further term or terms shall 
be deemed to be a lease for a term of not less than 
twelve years if the agrregate of the term f01" which 
such lellse has been granted aDd the further term 
ar terms for which it can be so extended is not 20 
less than twelve years; 
(ii) in relation to any immovable property 
of the nature referred to in suh-clause (ii) of 
clause (e), means the doing of anything (whether 
by way of transfer of shares in a co-operative!25 
. society or company 01' by way of any agreement 
or al'l'angement or in any other manner whatso-
ever) which has the eflect of trans{erring, or 
enabling the enjoyment of, ,such property:. 
3. Aftm section 269A of the principal Act, the followhg 3') 
section shaH be inserted, namely:-
"269AB. (1) The following transactions, that is to say,-
(a) every transllriion iavolving the allowing of 
the possession of any immovable property to be taken 
or retained in part performance of a contract of the 3S 
nature referred to in section S3A of the Transfer of 
Property Act, 1882, and 4 of 18f 
(Ib) every transaction (whether by way of be-
cominga member of, or acquiring shares in, a co-
operative society, company or other association of 40' 
persons or by way' of any agre·ement Or any arrange~ 
ment of whatever nature) whereby a person acquires 
any rights in or with respect to any building or pa"t 
of a building (whether or not including any machi-
nerY', plant, fumiture, fittings or other things the'ein) 45 
which has been constructed or which -is to De cons-
trueted (-DOt behtg·. transadlon by way of sale, ex-
clump or lease' of suth hunang or pa"t of a building 

~ 
18 of 1908. 
I 
5 
which is required to be registered under 
tration Act, 1988) J 
the Bells-
aIaall be reduced to writing in the form of a statement by 
eaeh of tbe parties to such transa,tion or by UY, of the 
S parties to such transaction acting on behalf of himseU and 
on bahaU of the other parties. 
(2) Every statement in respect of a transaction refer-
red to in sub-section (1) shall-
(a) be in the prescribed form; 
10 (b) set forth s'Uch particulars as may be prescribed; 
and 
(c) be verified in the prescribed manner, 
and registered with the competent a'Uthority, in such 
manner and within such time as may be prescribed, by each 
15 of the parties to such transaction or by any of the parties 
to such transaction acting on behalf of himself and on 
behalf of the other parties.". 
4. In section 269B of the principal Act, in sub-section (2) , 
the following Explanation shall be inserted at the end, name-
20 Iy:-
3S 
4S 
"EXl)tanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, 
immovable property, being rights of the nature referred 
to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 269AB in, 
or with respect to, any building or part of a building which 
has been constructed or which is to be constructed shall 
be deemed to be situate at the place where the building 
has been constructed or is to be constructed.". 
5. In section 269D of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), in the first proviso, after the 
words and figures "registered under the Registration Act, 
19,)8", the words, figures and letters "or, as the case may 
be, sedion 269AB" shall be inserted; 
(b) in sub-section (2). the following Explanation 
shall be inserted at the end. namely:-
"Explanation.- The provisions of the Explanation 
to ~ub-section (2) of section 269B shall apply for the 
purposes of this sub-section as they apply for the pur-
poses of that sub-section.". 
6. In s~ction 269F of the principal Act, in . sub-section (9),-
(a) for the words "date of the execution of the instru-
.. ment of transfer", the words, figures and 'letters "date of 
the execution of the instrument of iransfer' or -where such 
prope::ty .is of the nature referred to in sub-clause (ii) of 
clause (e) of ~ection 269A on the date of the transfer" shall 
be substituted; 
(b) for the words "on sale in the open market on the 
date of the conclusion of the agreement to sell the pro-
perty", the words "on such 
Amendment 
of section 
269B. 
Amendment 
of section 
2690. 
Amendment 
of lection 
269F. 

Amendment 
of MCtion 
2891. 
Amend-
ment of 
8fJCt1on 
2881. 
on the date of the conclusion of the agr~ement to transfer 
the property" shall be substituted. ' . 
7. In section 2691. of the principal Act, after sub1eetion (4), 
the,folloWing SU9-sections shall be inserted, namely:-
"(5) Notwithstanding.anything contained in sub-
section (4) or any other law or any instrument or any 
agreement for the time, b~ing in force, where an order for 
acquisition of any immovable property, being rights of the 
nature referred to in clause (b) of sub-.section (1) of sec-
tion1269AB, in or with respect to any building or part of a I 
building which has been constructed or which is to be con· 
stt"'llcted,has become final, then. such order shall, by its 
own force, have the effect of-
(a) vesting such rights in the Central Govern-
ment, and 
(b) placing the Central Government in the same 
position in relation to such rights as the person in whom 
such rights would have continued to vest if such.order 
. had not become final, 
and the competent authority may issue such directions as 20 
.he may, 4eem fit to .any person concerned for taking the 
,neceuary steps for compliance with the provisions of 
'illauses (a) and (b). 
(fi) In the case of any immovable property, being rights 25 
of the nature referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) 
of section 269AB, in or with respect to any building or 
part of a building, the provisions of rub-sections (1), (2) 
and (3) shall have effect as if the references to immov-
able property therein were a reference to such bunding or, 
as the case may be, part of such building.". 30 
8. In section 269J of thE' principal Act, in sub-section (1), 
the followinp, proviso shall be insC"rted at the end. namely:-
"Provided that in a case where, under the agreement 
. between the parties concerned, the whole or any part of the 
.. '(:QMic1erationfor the transfer of such immovable property 35 
.. , is ·payp.ble on any· date or dates falling .after the date on 
which such property is,acquired, thecompenaation payable 
by the Centra] Government shall be the aggregate .of the 
following amounts, namely:-
l(il"an,·.~n~ .. gual to ·~thper· ... c'l1t.::of the 40 
"· ..... ~t,~.~tion; 
(~i) the.~~],lnt, if ,.~y • .that, h8i/~9.p1e-r.payable 
in accordance with such agreem(imt .. pD Of. _be.~ore the 
date on which such property is acquired under thiS 
.,'..c.upter~ and 
(iii) the. amQunt., payable ,tlIter the~ date on which 
such property is acguired under this Chapter.'I. 45 

5 
10 
20 
7 
t. In section 269K of the principal Act, in sub-sectiOJl (1), Aa~ 
in the proviso, for the words "Provided that", the following ment: of 
shall be substituted, namely: - IIeCtion 
28llt. 
"Provided that in a casefalli~g under ~ pr0'Pso to 
sub-section (1) of section 269J,' the amountS i-eterreci'to in 
clause, (i) and clause (ii) of that provi$o shall be tendered 
to, 'the 'person or personS entitled thereto, ~ soOn' ,,'mY " 
be, after the prCQerty becomes ves~d in the Central Gov~ . 
ernment under section 2691, and'the amount referred to in' 
clause (iii) of the said proviso shall be tendered on the' 
date on which it WO'llld be payable in accordaJice with "the,' 
agt.eement between the parties concerned, and WheN such 
amount is payable in instalments on different dates, then 
in such instalments on those dates: 
Provided further that", 
10, After section 276A of the principal Act, the folloWin, . Inaertiun 
section shall be inserted, namely:- of new 
aeotion 
278M. 
"276AA. Whoever, without reasonable cause or excuse, 
fails to comply with the provisions of section 269AB 'or 
with any direction issued under sub-section (5) of section 
2691' shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a 
temiwhich may extend to two years and shall also be 
liable to fine: 
Provided' that in the ausence of special and adecauate 
reasons to the contrary to be recorded in the judgment' of' 
the court, such impriso.ament shall not be for less than tfx' 
months.". 
Failure 
to comply 
with the 
provlsiona 
of aectio:D 
289AB or 
sectiOn 
2891. 

ST A'rEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Chapter XXA of the Income-tax Act, 1961 empowers the 
Central Government to acquire any immovable property having 
a fair market. val'l1e exceeding Rs. 25,000 in cases where the 
consideration declared in the instrument of transfer is less 
than the fair market value of the property on the date of 
execution of such instrument. These provisions were made 
in 1972 with a view to countering evasion of tax through under-
statement of the vaiue of immovable property in sale deeds 
and to check the circulation of black money. The provisions 
are applicable only in cases of trans,fer of immovable property 
by way of sale or exchange and do not cover cases of other 
types of transfer. 
2. The Rill seeks to extend the provisions of Chapter XXA 
of the Income-tax Act to cover-
(i) transfer of flats or premises owned through the 
medium of co-operative societies and companies; 
(ii) agreements of sale followed by part performance 
as visualised in section E'3A of the Transfer of Property 
Act, 1882: and 
(iii) long-term leases (viz. leases for a period of not 
less than twelve years). 
Parties to a transfer of the type referred to at (i) and 
(ii) above will be required to register with the competent 
authority a statement in the prescribed form giving particulars 
of such transfer within the prescribed period. Failure to 
furnish the prescribed statement in time will render the 
defaulter liable to punishment with rigorous imprisonment 
which may extend to two years and also with fine. The other 
prOvisions are mainly of ancillary or incidental nature. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; R. VENKATARAMAN. 
The 21st April, 1981. 
8 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill seeks to extend the provisions of Chapter XXA of 
the Income-tax Act, 1961 relating to acquisition of immovable 
properties to counteract evasion of tax to cases of transfer of 
fiats or premises owned through the medium of co-operative 
societies or companies and also to cases of long-term leases, 
vide clause 2 (e) of the Bill which seeks to substitute for the 
definition of "transfer" contained in section 269A(h) of the 
Income-t&x Act, a new definition. New section 269AB, as pro-
posed to be inserted by clause 3 af the Bill in the Income-tax. 
Act provides for registration of such transactions. It will 
therefore be necessary to augment the existing administra-
tive organization of the Income-tax department to some extent. 
2. The additional expenditure that is likely to be incurred 
on this account is estimated to be of the fonowing order:-
A RecurTing E.rpendituTe per year 
1. Pay and allowances of officers 
n. Pay and allowances of staff 
III. Incidental expenses (including Class IV staff) 
IV. Accommodation for offices 
RB. lakhs 
4.25 
5.77 
1.21 
1.50 
TOTAL: 12.73 
B. Non-recnTring Expenditure 
V. Furn~ture, office eqUipment etc. 2.50 
TOTAL: Rs. 15.23 lakhs 

ME1roRANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEG1SLATION 
ClaUse' 3 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 269AB in 
the Incom!-ta,t'Act. Sub-seCtion "(1) of the new section pr0-
videS'that the transactions mentioned therein shall beredueed 
to' Wtit1'ng in' the form of a statement. Sub-section (2) of the 
neW-seCtion confers' powers for prescribing' by IWes' the form 
in 'wbichsuch statements shall be prepared, the particulars 
which such statements should contain, the manner in which 
such' sta~ni'~nts shaH be verified and the maIUler in which and 
the time within which such statements shall be registered'with 
the:'~omp~tent authority. 
The delegation of legislative power under the aforesaid sub-
section (2) pertains to matters of procedure or detail and the 
delet{ation of legislative power is. therefore, of a normal 
character. 
10 

• 
16 of 1908. 
AN~EXURE 
EXTRACTS FltOM THE IN~~ME-:!AX, ~CT, 1961 
(43 OF ~961) 
.. .. • .. .. 
fMPA. In this Chapter, unless the context othe,rwise requires,- Definitions. , ~ , . . : .~ .~: 
(a) "apparent cons'deration", in relation to any im-
movable property transferred, means,-
(i) .. • 
(d) "fair market value", in relation to any immovable 
property transferred, means the price that the immovable 
property would ardinarily fetch on sale in the open market 
on the date of execution of the instrument of transfer of 
such property; •• 
(e) "immovable property" means any land or any 
building or part of a building, and includes, where any 
land or any building or part of a building is transferred to-
.gether with any machinery, plant, furniture, fittings or 
other things, such mach1nery, plant, furniture" fittings or 
other th :n8s also, 
E~lanation.-For the purposes of this clause, land, 
building, part of a building, lllachinery, plant, ,furniture, 
fittings and other things include any rights therein; 
(f) "jnstrument of transfer" means the instrument of 
transfer 'registered under the Registration Act, 1908; 
.. .. • • .. 
(n) "tran~fer", in relation to any immovable property, 
means transfer of such property by way of sale or exchange . 
2698. (1) .. • • • 
(2) In respect of any function to be performed by a com-
, petent authority under any provhli9n ,of tJ;lis Cl;l~p~r in relation 
.~ apy iIXlDlov.able:Jll'.operty ret,~red to "in ,_~e~,t.ion ~9C, the 
.~c~ent, authority,rf;ferred to th.~rein s9~1l,,-. . ' 
... 
, " {t1~ _i~' ~,£~~, ~wper~ -~~h."pi-?pe~~y i~ ai,tude 'within the 
local limit. of tht! jUrisdlction '6f only' one c6mpetent au-
thority. be such competent 'aiithonty;' .',' " ~ .. , .~' 
(b) in a case where such property is situate within 
the locallimitg a1 the'jurisdiction of two or more competent 
authorities, be the competent authority empowered to per-
form such functions in relation to such property in accord~ 
11 
Competent 
Authority. 

Preliminary 
notice, 
12 
ance with rules made in this behalf by the Board under 
section 295, 
• • • • • 
28ID. (1) The competent authority shall initiate pro::eedings 
for the acquisition, under this Chapter, of any immovable pro-
perty referred to in section 269C by notice to that effect pub-
lished in the Official Gazette: 
Provided that no such proceedings shall be initiated in res-
pect of any immovable property after the expiration of a 
period of nine months from the end of the month in which the 
instrument of transfer in respect of such property is registered 
under the Registration Act, 1906: 
Provided further that-
(0.) in a case where it is determined under sub-section 
(4) of section 269B by the competent authority who has 
initiated proceedings for the acquisition of any immovable 
property 'under this Chapter or by the Board that such 
competent authority has no jurisdiction to initiate such 
proceedings, the competent authority having jurisdiction 
may initiate such proceedings within-
(i) the period of nine months specified in the fore-
going proviso; or 
(ii) n period of thirty days from the date of such 
determination, whichever period expires later; 
(b) in a case where proceedings for the acquisition of 
any immovable property under this Chapter could not be 
initiated during any period of time by reason of any injunc-
tion O'I' order of any court probibiting the initiation of su<::h 
proceedings or preventing the examination of documents 
or other materials required to be examined for the purpose 
I)f determining whether such proceedings should be initia-
ted, the time of the continuance of the injunction or order, 
the day on which it was issued or made and the day on 
which it was withdrawn shall be excluded in computing 
the period during which such proceedings may be initiated 
under this sub-section. 
(2) The competent authority shall-
(a) cause a notice under sub-section (1) in respect of 
any immovable property to be served on the transferor, 
the transferee, the person in OCC'upation of the property, 
. if the transferee is not in .oecupation thereof, and on every 
person whom the competent authority knows to. be in-
terested in the property; . 
(b) cause such notice to be published.-
(i) in his office by affixing a copy thereof to a 
conspicuous place; 
(ii) in the locality in which the immovable property 
to which it relates is situate, by affixing a copy thereof 
16 of 1908. 

16 of 1908, 
to a conspicuous part of the property and also by mak-
ing known in such manner as may be prescribed the 
substance of such notice at convenient places in the 
said locality, 
* '" • • • 
Z69F, (1) '" • • 
(9) In any proceedings under this Chapter in respect of any 
immovable property, no objection shall be entertained on the 
ground that although the apparent consideration for the pro-
perty is le8s than the fair market vahle of the property on the 
date of the execution of the instrument of transfer, the consi-
deration as agreed to betwQell. the parties has been truly stated 
in the instrument of transfer because such consideration was 
agreed to having regard to the price that such property would 
have ordinarily fetched on sale in the open market on the date 
of the conclusion of the agreement to sell the property, except 
where such agreement has been registered under the Registra-
tion Act, 1908, 
'" '" '" '" • 
Hearin, of 
objections, 
269J. (1) Where any immovable property is acquired under Compensation, 
this Chapter, the Central Government shall pay for such ac-
quisition compensation which shall be a sum eq'Ual to the aggre-
gate of the amount of the agparent consideration for its trans-
fer and fifteen pe-r cent, of the said amount. 
, ~:. TT'.) '" 
'" • 
269K,' ~ (1) The amo~rit ~f c~m~e~~~tio~:' p;ry~6TJ in accord-
ance with the provisions of section 269J for the acquisition of 
any immovable property shall be tendered to the person or 
persons f'l1titled thereto, as soon as may be, after the property 
becomes vested in the Central Government under sub-section 
(4) of section 2691: 
Provided that in any case where a reference is or has to 
be made under sub-setion (2) of section 269J to the court 
for the determination of the amount by which the compensation 
payable under sub-section (1) of that section shall be reduced 
or increased, the amO'un~ .of- such compensation as reduced or 
increased by the amount estimated in that behalf by the com-
petent authority for the purposes of such reference shall be 
tendered as aforesaid, 
• • • • • 
Payment or 
deposit of 
compensa. 
tion, 

:L()E SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
1 
(Shri ~ VenkatarGman, Minister of Finance) 