10K SABRA 
-
CORR IGEUDA 
to 
I 
THE ENEMY PR01:ERrY BILL, 1968 
(ka be/As iqtroduced in Lok Sabb8) 
1. Page 2, line 32,-
n:tter It areal! 
2. Page 4, line 1 9, -
" II J 
tor "to take" ~ "talCe" 
,. ?age 6, line 1,-
.n£ "requires" ~ "require" 
Page 7, line 2, !2l: K act" ~ " Aot" 
Page 7, line 6,-
fo; "person" .E2!S "persons" 
6 • Page 11, line 1,-
after "may bett 
NEW DELHI; 
JHl;[ 2', 1968 
insert "_" J 

CLAUSES 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA ON 
BUI No. 63 of IJ68 
THE ENEMY PROPERTY BILL, 1968 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
3. Appointment of Custodian of Enemy Property for India and 
Deputy Custodian, etc. 
4. Appointment of Inspectors of Enemy Property. 
5. Property vested in the Custodian of Enemy Property for 
India under the Defence of India Rules, 1962 to continue 
to vest in the Custodian. 
6. Transfer of property veste'd in Custodian by enemy or enemy 
subject or enemy· firm. 
7. Payment to Custodian of money otherwise payable to an 
enemy, enemy subject or enemy firm. 
B. Powers of Custodian in respect of enemy property vested in 
him. . 
9. Exemption from attachment, etc. 
10. Transfer of securities belonging to an enemy. 
11. Power of Custodian to summon persons and call for 
documents. 
12. Protection for complying with orders of Custodian. 
13. Validity of action taken in pursuance of ortiers of Custodian. 
14:. Proceedings against companies whose assets vest in Custodian. 
15. Returns as to enemy property. 
16. Registers of returns. 
17. Levy of fees. 
lB. Divesting of enemy property vested in the Custodian.. 
19. Protection of action taken under the Act. 

ii 
20. Penalty. 
21. Offences by companies. 
22. Effect of laws inconsistent with the Act. 
23. Power to make rules. 
24. Certain orders made under the Defence of Ih'dia Rules, 1982, 
to continue in force. 
25. Repeal and saving. 

8m No. 6z of 1968 
THE ENEMY PROPERTY BILL, 1968 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the continued vesting of enemy property vested in the 
Custodian of Ene-rny Property for IndJia under the Defence of 
India RuLes, 1962, cmd for matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the 
Republic of Intfia as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Enemy Property Act, 1968. Short 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu ~!~ e:-_ 
5 and Kashmir and it applies also to all citizens of India outside India Plicati! 
and to branches and agencies outsitfe India of companies or bodies and com-
corporate registered or incorporated in India. mence-
ment. 
(3) It shall be deemed to have; come into force on the 10th day 
of July, 1968. 

Defini-
tionl. 
2 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Custodian" means the Custodian of Enemy Property 
for India appointed or deemed to have been appointed under 
section 3 and includes a Deputy Custodian anti an Assistant 
Custodian of Enemy Property appointed or deemed to have been S 
appointed under that section; 
(b) "enemy" or "enemy subject" or "enemy firm" means a 
person or country who or which was an enemy, an enemy sub-
ject or an enemy finn, as the case may be, under the Def.ence of 
Intiia Act, 1962, and the Defence of India Rules, 1962, but does 10 51 of 1962. 
not include a citizen of India; 
(c) "enemy property" means any property for the time 
being belonging to or held or managed on behalf of an enemy, 
an enemy subject or an enemy firm: 
Provided that where an individual enemy subject dies in IS 
the territories to which this Act extends, any property which 
immetiiately before his death, belonged to or was held by him . 
or was managed on his behalf, may, notwithstanding his death, 
continue to be regarded as enemy property for the purposes of 
this Act; ao 
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act. 
Appoint- 3. 'The Central Government may, by notification in the Of1iclal 
ment of Gazette, appoint a Custodian or Enemy Property for India and one 
clL!todian or more Deputy Custodians and Assistant Custndians of Enemy Pro- 25 
of Enemy, perty for such local areas as mlay be specified in the notifieation: Property 
for 
India 
andDe-
putyCU!!-
todian, 
etc. 
Appoint-
mentof 
Inspec-
tors of 
Enemy 
Proper-
ty. 
. Provided that the Custodian of Enemy Property for India and 
any Deputy; Custodian or Assistant Custodian of Enemy Property 
appointed under the Defence of India Rules, 1962, shan be deemed 
to have been appointed under this sedion. 30 
4. The Central Governmen.t may, either generally or for any 
pa.rtieular area by notification in the OfIicial Gazette, appoint one 
or more Inspectors of Enemy Property for securing complia~e with 
the provisions of this Act aDd may,. by general or specl.al order, pro-
vide for the distribution and allocation of the work to be performed 35 
by them for securing sueh eOll.lpI~: 

51 of 1962. S 
3 
Provided that every iDspector of EDeJny Firms appointed under 
the Defea.ce of India Rules, 1962, shall be deemed to be an Inspector 
of Enemy Property appointed under this section. 
5. Notwithstanding the expiration of the Defence of India Act, Property 
1962 and the Defence of India Rules, 1962, all enemy property vested vested in 
before such expiration in the Custodian of Enemy Property for India the. Cus-
appointed under the said Rules and continuing to vest in him imme- =-of 
diately before the commencement of this Act, shall, as from such Property 
commencement, vest in the Custodian. for 
Inc:UaUJl-
derthe 
Defence 
of 
Indi'a 
Rules, 
19621..1 
continue 
toveet 
in the 
Custo-
dian. 
10 6. Where any property vested in the Custodian under this Act Tramfer 
has been transferred, whether before or after the commencement of of pro-
this Act, by an enemy or an enemy subject or an enemy firm and pe~. 
where it appears to the Central Government that such transfer is ~too:n 
injurious to the public interest or was made with a view to evatling by enemy 
15 or defeating the vesting of the property in the Custodian, then, the or enemy 
Central Government may, after giving a reasonable opportunity to subject 
the transferee to be heard in the matter, by order, declare such::emy 
transfer to be void and on the making of such order, the property 
shall continue to vest or be 'deemed to vest in the Custodian. 
20 7. (1) Any sum payable by way of dividend, interest, share Payment 
profits or otherwise to or for th~ benefit of an enemy or an enemy to ~­
subject or an enemy firm shall. unless otherwise ordered by the t~lRYJ. of . . money 
Central Government, be paId by the person by whom such sum would otherwise 
have been payable but for the prohibition under the Defence of India payable 
~5 Rules, 1962, to the Custodian or such person as may be authorised to an 
by him in this behalf and shall be held by the Custodian or such enemy, 
person subject to the provisions of this Act. enb~ectY au ~ or 
(2) In cases in which money WOUld. but for the prohibition under ~y 
the Defence of India Rules, 1962. be payable in a foreign currency 
30 to or for the benefit of an enemy or an enemy subject or an enemy 
firm (other than cases in which money is payable under a contract 
in which provision is made for a specified rate of QXchange), the 
payment shall be made to the Custodian in rupee currency at the 

Po!we., 
oteu. 
todi_ 
iarespeet 
oteDCl7 
p!'OP8'l'flJ' 
~1a 
hiJIL. 
4-
middle official rate of exchange fixed by the Reserve Bank of India 
on the date on which the payment became due to that enemy, enemy 
subject or enemy firm. 
(3) The Custodian shall, subject to the provisions of section 8, 
deal with any money paitl to him under the Defence of India ,Rules, , 
1962 or untler this Act and any property vested in him under this Act 
in such manner as the Central Government may direct. 
8. (1) With respect to the property vested in the Custodian under 
this Act, the Custotiian may take or authorise the taking of suc~ 
measur~ as he considers necessary or expedient for preserving such 10 
property and where such property belongs to an individual enemy 
subject, may incur such expenditure out of the property as he con-
siders necessary or expedient for the maintenance of that individual 
or of his family in India. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provi- IS 
sion, the Custodian or such person' as may be specifically authorised 
by him in this behalf, may, for the said purpose,-
(i) carry on the business of the enemy; 
(ii) to take action for recovering any money due to the 
eRemy; 
(iii) make any contract anti execute any document in the 
name and on behalf of the enemy; 
(i,11) institute, defend or continue any suit or other legal 
proceeding, refer any dispute to arbitration and compromise any 
20 
debts, claims or liabilhies; 2$ 
(v) raise on the security o! the property such loans as may 
be necessary; 
(vi) incur out of the property any expenditure including 
. the payment of any taxes, tluties, cesses and rates to Govern-" 
ment or to any local authority and of any wages, salaries, pen- 30 
sions, provident fund contributions to, or in respect of, any 
employee of the enemy and the repayment of any debts due 
by the enemy to persons other than enemies; 
(vii) transfer by way of sale, mortgage or lease or other-
wise dispose of any of the properties; 3S 
(viii) invest any moneys held by him on behalf of en!mies 
for the purchase of Treasury Bills or such other Government 

5 
lIeQurities as may be approved by the Central Government for 
the purpose; 
(ix) make payments to the enemy anti his dependents; 
(x) make payments on behalf of th-e enemy to persons othel' 
5 than those who are enemies, of dues outstanding on the ~ 
October, 1962; and 
(:ti) maIre such other payments out of the fun'ds of the 
enenty as may be directed by the Central Government. 
Ea:planation.-In this sub-section and in sections 10 and 17, 
[0 "enemy" includes an enemy subject anti an enemy firm. 
9. All enemy property vested in the Custodian under this Act kemp-
shall be exempt from attachment, seizure or sale in execution of tion 
decree of a civil court or orders of any otlrer authority. from at· tad1IMbt, 
etc. 
10. (1) Where, in exercise of the powers conferred by section Tr,uldtr 
IS 8, the Custodian proposes to sell any security issued by a company CIt HOU-
and belonging to an enemy, the company may, with the consent = 
of the Custodian, purchase the securities, notwithstanding anything an enemy. 
to the contrary in any law or in any regulations of the company 
and any securities so purchased may ·be re-issued by the company 
20 as and when it thinks fit so to do. 
(2) Where the Custodian executes and transfers any securities 
issued by a company, the company shall, on receipt of the transfer 
and an order in this behalf from the Custodian, register the secu-
rities in the name of th'e transferee, notwithstanding that the regu-
25 lations of the company do not permit such registration in the 
absence of the certificate, script or other evidence of title relating 
to th'e -securities transferred: 
Provided that any such registration shall be without prejudice 
to any lien or charge in favour of the company and to any other 
30 lien or cbarge of which the Custodian gives express notice to the 
company. 
EzpZanatiOrl..-In this section, "securities" includes shares, stocks, 
bonds, debentures and debenture stock but does not incl11de bill. 
of exchange. 

Poweroi . 
custodian 
to sum-
monper-
lIOhS_nd 
oallfor 
docu-
ments. 
Protec-
tionfor' 
comply-
ingwith 
ordel'8ot 
Custo-
dian. 
Validity 
otaction 
taken in 
pursu-
anceot 
ordersot 
Cust0-
dian. 
6 
11. (1) The Custodian may, by notice in writing, requires any 
person whom he ,believes to be capabl'e of giving information con-
cerning any enemy. property to attend before him at such time and 
place as may be specified in the notice and examine any such person 
concerning the same, reduce his statement to writing and require 5 
him to sign it. . 
(2) The Custodian may, by notice in writing, require any person 
whom he believes to have in his possession or control any account 
book, letter book, invoice, receipt or other document of whatever 
nature relating to any enemy property, to produce the same or cause 10 
the same to be produc'ed ,before the Custodian at such time and 
place as may be specified in the notice and to submit the same to 
his examination and to allow copies of any entry therein or any 
part thereof to be taken by him. 
12. Where any order with respect to any money or property is IS 
addressed to any person ,by the Custodian and accompanied by a 
certificate of the Custodian that the money or property is money or 
property vested in him under this Act, the certificate shall be 'eVi-
dence of the facts stated therein and if that person complies with 
the orders of the Custodian, he shall not be liabl'e to any suit or 20 
other legal proceeding by reason only of such compliance. 
13. Where under this Act,-
(a) any money is paid to the Custodian; or 
(b)· any property is vested in the Custodian or an order 
is given to any person by the Custodian in relation to any pro- 2S 
perty which appears to the Custodian to be enemy property 
vested in him under this Act, 
neither the payment, vesting nor order of the Custodian nor any 
proceedings in consequence thereof shall be invalidated or affected 
by reason only that at a material time,- 30 
(i) some person who was or might have been interested 
in the money or property, and who was an enemy or an en"e.my 
firm, had died or had ceased to be an enemy or an enemy firm; 
or 
(ii) some person who was so interested and who was be-
1ieV'ed by the Custodian to be an enemy or an enemy firm, was 3S 
not an enemy or an enemy firm. 

1 of 1956. 
7 
14. Where the enemy property vest'ed in the Custodian under Proceed-
this act consists of assets of a company, no proceeding, civil or cri- inp 
minaI, shall be instituted under the Companies Act, 1956, against .,atnat 
the company or any director, manager or other oftlcer thereof ex- companieIwh U o •• , cept with the consent in writing of the Custodian. leta ve8t 
inCuato-
dian. 
15. (1) The Custodian may call for from person who, in his Returns 
opinion, have any interest in, or control over, any 'enemy property .. ., 
vested in him under this Act, such returns as may ibe prescribed. eumy pro-
(2) Every person from whom a return is called for under sub- perty. 
10 section (1) shall be bound to submit such return within the pres-
crib'ed period. . 
16. (1) All returns relating to enemy property submitted to the Reals-
Custodian under this Act shall be recorded in such registers as may terti of re urns. be prescribed. 
J$ (2) All such registers shall be open to inspection subject to the 
payment of such fees as may be prescribed and to such reasonable 
restrictions as the Custodian may impose, to any person who, in 
the opinion of the Custodian, is interested in any particular e-nemy 
property as a creditor or otherwise and any such person may also 
20 obtain a copy of the relevant portion from the registers on payment 
of the prescribed fees. 
17. (1) There shall be levied by the Custodian fees equal to two Levyot 
per centum of- tees. 
(a) the amount of moneys paid to him; 
(b) the proceeds of the sale or transfer of any property 
which has ~ vested in him under this Act; and 
(c) the value of the residual property, if any, at the time of 
its transfer to the original owner or other person specified by 
the Central Government under section 18: 
30 Provided that in the case of an enemy whose property is allowed 
by the Custodian to be managed by some person specially authorired 
in that ,behalf, there shall be levied a fee of two per centum of the 
gross income of the enemy or such less fee as may be specifically 

Divesting 
of enemy 
property 
vested in 
the Cus-
tOOian, 
Protec-
tion of 
action 
taken 
under 
~be Act, 
8 
fixed by the Central Government after taking into consideration 
thec08t of direct management incurred by that Government, the 
c~ of 'superior supervision and any risks that may be incurred by 
-that 'Govemment in respect of the management: 
Provide'd further that the Central Government may, for reasons S 
.to be recorded in writing, reduce or remit the fees leviable under 
this sub-section in any special cage or class of cases, 
Explanation,-In this sub-section "gross income of the enemy" 
means income derived out of the properties of the enemy vested 
in the Custodian under this Act. 10 
(2) The value of any property for the purpose of assessing the 
fees shall be the prioe which, in the opinion of the Central Govern-
ment or of an authority empowered in this behalf by the Central 
Government, such property would fetch if sold in the open market. 
(3) The fees in respect of property may be levied out of any IS 
proceeds of the sale or transfer thereof or out of any income accru-
ed therefrom or out of any other property belonging to the same 
enemy and vested in the Custodian under this Act. 
(4) The fees levied under this section shall be credited to the 
Centr&1 'Governmp.nt, ao 
18. The Central Government mRy, by general or special order, 
direct that any enemy property vested in the Custodian under this 
Act and remaining with him shall be divested from him and be re-
turned, in ,such manner as may be prescribed, to the owner thereof 
or to such "other person as may be specifted' in the direction and 2S 
thereupon such property shall cease to vest in the Custodian and 
'shall reV'est in such owner or other person. 
19. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the Central Government or the Custodian or an Inspector of Ene-
my Property for anything which is in ~ood faith done or intended 'Q 
~o . be done under this Act. 

20. (1) if any ~rson makes any payment in contravention of ,Penalt)t. 
the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 7, he shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or 
with fine, or with both and the payment or dealing shall be void. 
5 (2) If any person contravenes the provisions of sub-section (2) 
of section 10, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may ex.tend to six months, or with fine, Qr with, both~: 
(3) If any person fails to comply with a requisition made by 
the Custodian under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 11, 
10 he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred ' 
rupees. 
(4) If any person fails to submit the return under sub-section 
(2) of section 15, or furnishes such return containing any particular 
which is false and which he knows to be false or does not believe 
15 to be true, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 
fiw hundred rupees. 
21. (l) Where an oftence under this Act has been committed Offences 
by a company, every person who, at the time the offen.oe wu com- 'bycom.. 
mitted, was in charge of, and was respons~ble to, the company for paniee. 
20 the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, 
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to 
be proceeded against and punishetl accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall rE'.nder 
any such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the 
25 offence was committed without his knowledge or that he eurC'ioreci 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained; in sub-t;ection (1), 
w here an oftence under this Act has been committed by ~ com-
pany and it is proved that the offence has been committ'ed '. with 
30 the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect 
on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other oftlcer of 
the company, such director, manager, secretary or other pfticer. shall 
also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shaU~:liaWeto 
be proc'eeded against and punished accordingly. 

Effect of 
laWlln-
consis-
tent 
WIth the 
Act. 
Power to 
make 
JIUlea. 
io 
,txpia.n.ation..-For the purposes of this sectioh, ...... 
(4) "'company" means any body corporate and includea 
a firm or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in 
the firm. 5 
22. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the 
time being in force. 
--
23. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act. 10 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
such rules may provide for-
(a) the returns that may be called for by the Custodian 
under sub-section (1) of section 15 and the period within which 
such returns shall be submitted under sub-section (2) of that IS 
sectiOD; 
(b) the registers in which the returns relating to enemy 
prop'erty shall be recorded under section 16; 
(c) the fees for the inspection of registers and for obtain-
ing copies of the relevant portions from the registers under 20 
sub-section (2) of section 16; 
(d) the manner in which enemy property vested in the 
Custodian may be returned under section 18; 
(e) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed. 
(3) Every rule macre by the Central Government under this sec .. 2S 
tiOl'l shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or iil two suc-
cessive sessions an'd if, before the expiry of the session in which it 
is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses ~gree So 
in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 

7 of 1968. 
it """'" 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be with-. 
o~t prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
ruJe. 
S 24. Every order which was made under the Defence of India Certain 
Rules, 1962, ,by the Central Government or by the Custodian of orden 
Enemy Property for Indi~ appoint~ under those Rules, relating to :d~,:. 
el!emy property and which was In force immediately before the defence 
expiration thereof shall, in so far as such order is not fneomlstent ofIndili 
10 with thp provisions of this Act, be deemed to continue in foree and Rulel, 
to havp. been made under this Act. 1~~0 
.(lOftuuue 
in force. 
%5. (1) The Enemy Property Ordinance, 1968, is hereby repealed.· Repeal 
and8M'-
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any 'action Ing. 
taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done 
I S or taken under the corresponding provisiOns of this Act. 

STATEM~NT OF OBJECTS ANt> REASONS 
Consequent on the Chinese aggression in 1962, immovable pro-
pe~es,casb. );,alance:; and 1lrms belonging to the Chinese' nationals 
in India v.alued:~ppro;x:imately at Rs. 28.85 lakhs were'veSted in the 
'tUI~dian of Eneiny .Property for India appointed under the De- . 
fe .. ~ of India Rules,. 1962. Similarly, consequent on the aSifession, 
by Ji»aki4~ in, 1965, i~vable and some specified movablePa,k-
. istani properties in India, the total value of which has been approxi:-
mately estimated at Rs. 27 crores, were vested in the said CuSto-
dian of Enemy Property. These vestments were made under the 
. PQwers derived from the Defence of India Rules, 1962. These J?ro-
: r, perties were being administered by the Custodian of Enemy Property 
for :ln4ia, ~acco.n:lance with the provisions of the Deflence of India 
&leJ, 1962 and the Orders made thereunder., 
The Proclamation of Emergency was revoked with effect from 
the 10th January, 1968 and consequently the powers under the De-
fence of India Act, 1962 and the rules made thereunder were to 
remain in force only for a period of six months thereafter, i.e. up to 
10th July, 1968. It was, therefore, thought necessary to have fresh 
legal authority with effect from that date (10th July, 1968) for the 
administration of the Chinese and Pakistani properties referred to 
above which are already vested in the Custodian of Enemy Property, 
for India. The management of the said properties by the Custodian 
of Enemy Property for India has to continue, as it has not been 
possible for the Government of India so far to arrive at a settlement 
with the Governments of those countries. 
As Parliament was not in session and as the situation called for 
immediate action, an Ordinance called 'The Enemy Property Ordi-
nance 1968 (7 of 1968)' was promulgated by the President on the 
6th July. 1968. 
The present Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance. ;;~,. 
Nor DELHI; DINESH SINGH. 
The 10th July, 1968. 
12 

PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 12(27) /67-E.Pty.,'Clated the 17th July, 1968 
from Shri Dill'esh Singh, Minister of Commerce to the Secretary, 
tok Sabha.]. -. 
The President having been informed of the subj~t matter ·ofthe 
-Enemy Pr()perty Bill, 1968, recommendS' under articles 117(1) and 
117 (3) of the Constitution of India, theintroductton and consftlera-
tion of the Bill in the Monsoon Session of the Lok Sabha. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the appolntm'ent of Custodian 
of Enemy Property for India, Deputy Custodians and Assistant Cus-
todians of Enemy Property. Clause 4 of the Bill provl~es for the 
appointment of Inspectors of Enemy Firms. The annual expendi-
ture on the already existing establishment of the office of the Cus-
todian of Enemy Property is about Ra. 67 ,BOO. This amount of 
Rs. 67,800 will continue to be incurred annually. There will be no 
non-recurring expenditure. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 23 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the proposed enactment.· The 
various matters in relation to which such rules may be made have 
been detailed in the various items of sub-clause (2) of that clause 
and relate mainly to the returns that may be called for by the Cus-
todian, the registers in which thf' returns relating to enemy pro-
perty shaH be recorded, the fees for the inspection of registers and 
(or obtaining copies of the relevant portions from the registers and 
the manner in which enemy property vested in the Custodian may be 
returned to the owner thereof. These are matters of administrative 
detail and it is di1fjcuJt to provide for aU these matters in the BiU 
itself. The delegation of legislat.ive power is, t.herefore, of a nor-
mal character. 
. . \ 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to prov ide 10r the ~onlinuc:d vesting of enemy property vested 
in the Custodian of Enemy Property for India under the 
Defence of India Rules, 1962, and for maners connected 
therewith. 
(Shri Dinesh Singh, 
Minister of Commerce.) 