·' As INTRODUC~ IN l..qK SABRA ON • t-', \ j ~ • ~ ~ . • • 
Bill No. 62 of 1976 
THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORIES (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1976 
h 
BILL 
fu.rthe'r to amend the Gwemment of Union TerritorieB Act, 1963. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-seventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Government of Union Territories Short 
(Amendment) Act, 1976. title and 
f com-
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government mence-
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. ment. 
20 of 1963. Z. In section 3 of the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 
(~reinafter referred to as the prinCipal Act) ,-
(i) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be sub-
10 stituted, namely:-
u (4) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes in 
the Legislative Assemblies of the Union territories of Goa, 
Daman and Diu and Pondicherry, and for the Scheduled Tribes 
in the Legislative A'Ssembly of the Union territory of Goa, 
IS Daman and Diu."; 
(ii) in sub-section (5), for the words "of the Union territory 
of Pondicherry", the words "of any Union territory" shall be sub-
'tituted; 
Amend-
ment 
of sec-
tion 3. 

!l'l6ertion 
of new 
section 
43D. 
Special 
provision 
for deter-
mination 
Of consti-
tuencies 
in the 
Legisla-
tive 
Assembly 
of Goa, 
Daman 
and Diu 
for 
Sche-
duled 
Castes 
and 
Sche-
duled 
Tribes. 
2 
(iii) in sub-section (6), for the words "in the Legislative Assem-
bly of the Union territory of Pondicherry", the words "in the Legis-
lative Assemblies of the Union territories of Goa, Daman anel Diu 
and Pondicherry" shall be substituted. 
3. After section 43C of the principal Act, the following section eheU , 
be inserted, namely:-
'43D. (1) The Election Commission shall determine on the basil 
of the latest census figures-
(i) the number of seats to be reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes and for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly 10 
of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu (hereafter in 
this section referred to as the Legislative Assembly) having 
regard to the provisions of sub-section (5) of section S: and 
(ii) the constituencies in which those seats shall be so 
reserved having regard to the provisions of clause (e), or, as I' 
the case may be, clause (d), of sub-section (1) of section 9 of 
the Delimitation Act and without altering the extent of any 
constituency as delimited by the Delimitation Commission. 
(2) The Election Commission shall-
.(0.) .publish its proposals for the determination of the con- 20 
stttueneies in which seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes or for the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, iJl \ ~& 
Gazette of India and in the OftlclJI Gazette of the Union territory 
of Goa, Daman and Diu and also in such other manner as the 
Election Commission may consider fit, together with a 'notice 2, 
inviting objections and suggestions in relation to the proposals 
and apeoifyinga date on or after which the proposal., wUl be 
further considered by it; 
(b) consider all objections and'Sl,lggestions which .~ llave 
been received by it before the date so specified; 30 
(e) after consideration of objectioas anti 5 .... gestionS .. Ideb 
may have been received by it before the date so specified, deter-
mine by one or more orden! the 1111111_ of aeatll to be M8erved 
for the Scheduled Castes or fot" the Scheduletl Tribes. 88 the cue 
maY'. be. in the Lell'islative Assembly and the ccmstituendes In 3S 
which those seats shall be &0 reserved and C8W!1e !I1Ich order or 
orders to be published in the Gazette of India and in tbe otIleial 
Gazette of tbe Uaion territory of Goa, Daotan .and Diu; I and 
upon such 'publication in the Ga".ette of India, tbeOl'der or 
ordersishaU hatre the full force of law and shall not be ealled 40 
in -.uestion in any court and the Seeond Metlwle to the Repre-
sentation of the People Act, 1858 and the orda- made bv the 43 of 1900. 
DeUmitation CoInnPssion 1DIder seetilon 9 oft_Delimitation 
Ad in relation to tlte Le.,tslattve Assembly ahallbe :deemed to 
have 'been amended accordingly. 45 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-~tton (4), the re-adjust-
ment of representation of any tenit~rial constituencies in the Le~s­
lative Assembly necessitated by any prd~r made by the Election 
1 

76 of 1972. 
Commission under this section, shall apply in relation to ever1} 
election to the Legislative Assembly held after the publication in 
the Gazette of India, under sub-section (2), of such order. 
(4) Nothing contained in the foregoing Bub·sections shall affect 
the representation in the Legislative Assembly existing on the date 
ofpulalication in the Gazette of India, under sub-section (2), of any 
orlier made by the Election Commission. 
(5) -Th~- Election Commission may, from tUne to time, by noti-
fication in the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazette of the 
to Union- 'territory of Goa, Daman and Diu-
(a) correct any printihg mistake in any order made under 
sub-section (2) or any error ariSing therein from inadVertent 
slip or omission; 
(b) Where the boundaries or name of any territorial division 
15 mentioned-in any such order are, or is, altered, make such 
amendMents as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
bringing' such ordet up-to-date. 
(6. Every order made under sub-section (2) and every notifica-
tion issued under sub-section (5) shall be laid, as soon as may be, 
20 after it is made or issued before the Legislative Assembly. 
E$natiOn.-In this section,-
(a) 'tDelimitation Act" means the Delimitation Act, 1972; 
(b) "Delimitation Commission'" means the Delimitation 
Commission constituted under section 3 of the Delimitation Act.'. 

STATEMENT OF OBJEcTS AND REASONS 
As Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes had not been notified irl. 
relation to the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu when the Govern-
ment of Union Territories Act, 1963, was enacted, no provision was made 
in that Act for reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of that Union territory. Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes in relation to that Union territory were 
notified in 1968 and the population figures of these castes and tribes 
bec:ame available after the 1971 census. The Bill, therefore, seeks to 
amend the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 to provide for the 
reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in 
the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu 
and to empower the Election CommiSSion to determine the number of 
seats to be so reserved and the constituencies in which those seats shall 
be reserved. Opportunity is also being availed of to delete the proVi-
sion for reservation for Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of 
the Union territory of Pondicherry since no such tribes have been notified 
in relation to that Union territory. 
NEW DELHI; K. BRAHMANANDA REnDI. 
The 21st May, 1976· 
,,' I' • 

FINANCIAL MfMOitANDtiM 
By: tirtu! of the amendment proposed in clause 3 of th~ sill, thtl 
klection Commission has to publish. its proposals for the detennina-
tion of constituencies in which seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes for inviting objections and suggestions 
in relation to those proposals. It may be necessary for the Election 
Commission to hold its sittings in the Union territory of Goa, Daman and 
Diu, to consider the objectiolUl and suggestions received from the public 
in regard to its proposals- A non-recurring expenditure of not more 
than Rs. 5,000 is likely to be incurred on the travelling allowance, daily 
allowance, etc\! of the officers of the Commission who visit the Union 
territory ~or the. purpose. 
2. The Bill will not involve any other expenditure either recuning or 
non-recurring. 

Legis-
lative 
Assem-
blies for 
Union 
terri-
tories 
and 
their 
composi-
tion. 
~" 
E~C:r,ftOM TIlE ,GoYl:lUOlllNl' OF UNlON ~.Act, 198.i 
(.OP'l_~ 
.~ • • • •• 
&\BT,n 
b,· 1't! n4aIAssrttm".· 
~(i)! (I 
• " • • 
(4) Seats shall be reserved lot the Scheduled 'castes anel :tht 
scheduled tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of' 
PODQiQUa,~ \, 
(5) The number of seats reserved for the scheduled casteS Or the 
scheduled tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of 
Pondicherry under sub-section (4) shall bear, as nearly as may be, the 
same proportion to the total number of seats in the Assembly as the 
population of the scheduled castes in the Union territory or of the sche-
duled tribes in the Union territory, as the case mal' be, in respect of 
which seats are so reserved, bears to the total population of the Union 
territory., 
(6) Notwithstanding ~ything in the foregoing provisions of this 
section the provi-sions relating to the res.ervation of seats for the sche-
duled castes and the scheduled tribes in the Legislative Assembly of 
the Union \territory of Pondicherry shall cease ·to have effect on the 
same date on which the reservation of seats for the saheduled castes 
and the scheduled tribes in the House of the People shall cease to have 
effect under article 334: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-se:cti0n shall affect any represen-
tation in the Legislative Assembly of a Union territory until the dis-
solution of the then existing Assembly. 
• • • • • 
6 

A 
BILL 
further to amend the Gove~ment o{ 1]njoll 'rertitorietJ Act, 1963. 
(Shri K. B7'4hman4nda Reddi, 
Minister 01/ Home Affa.ir •• ) 