IDK ~.' ABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE IIIDIAN EXPLOSIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1978 
(To be/as introduced in 10k Sabha) 
proposed 
1. Page 4, in the marginal heading tobection; 6A,-
2. 
for "possesion" ~. rtpossession" 
Page 6, Line 17, -
be fore ''unsound'' insert "0 fll 
3. Page 7, against line 30,-
in. the marginal citation _ 
for ''96'' ~ "36" 
4. Page 8, line 16,-
afte r "wo rds " ins e rt "and fi gure s " 
5. Fc.-.ge 10, line 13,-
after "against" insert "and punished" 
6. Page 15, :: ine 9,-
"remi an " re ad "remain" -7. Page 16, line 1,-
"de story" read - "de s tro y " 
8. Page 1 7, line 20,-
.fQ£ "au thoi sed" re ad "au thori sed" -
NEW DELHI; I 
AE~l14' 1278 , - ;) o ai tru 24, 1900 ( Saka) 

" , 
Bill No. 82 of 1978 
... ---
THE Il'iDIAN EXPLOSIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1978 
A 
.. I • 
BILL 
fu.rther to amend the Indian Explosives Act, 1884 .. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-runth Year of the RepubUc 
of India as follows:-
I. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Explosives (Amendment) I Short 
Act, 1978. title 
S (2) It shall come iDtoforce on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notiftcation in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
I. In the long title of, and the preamble to, the Indian ExplosiVei Act, 
4 at 1884. l~ ,(hereinafter: referred to as the principal Act), for the words "trans-
port and importation," the words "transport, import and export" shall be 
10 substituted. 
15 
.. In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub-eaetion (1), the word 
"Indian" .hall be omitted. 
4.. For section 4 of the principal Act, the fallowing aection Jhall be 
substttuted, nameIy:-
'4. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- ... -. 
(0) "aircraft" means any machine which can -derive .up-
port in the atmosphere from the reactions of the air, other than 
and 
com-
mence_ 
ment. 
Amend-
ment at 
JOD, 
title and 
pream-
ble. 
Amend-
mefttof 
section 1-
Substitu-
tion ot 
neW 8e(!-
lion tor 
IeCtion 4. 
Deftnition,. 

'. , 2 
the reactions of the air against the eart~'s surface, and includes 
'balloons whether fixed or free, airships, kites, gliders and flying , 
machines; 
(b) "carriage" includes any carriage, wagon, cart, truck, 
vehicle or other means of conveying goods or passengers by S 
land., in whatever manner the same may be propelled; 
(c) "District Mag!strate", in relation to any area for which a 
Commissioner of Police has been appointed, means the Commis-
sioner of Police thereof and includes-
(a) any such Deputy Commissioner of Police, exercis- 10 
ing jU!l'isdiction over the whale or any part of such area, as 
may be specified by the State Government in this behalf 
in relation to such area or part; and 
(b) an Additional District Magistrate; 
(d) "explosive" means gunpowder, nitroglycerine, nitro- IS 
glycol, gun-cotton, di-nitro-toluene. tri-nitro-toluene, picric acid, 
di-nitro-phenol, tri-nitro-resorcinol (styphnic acid), cyclo-trime-
thy lene-'l:riJniira.tr¥ne, penta-erythritol-tetranttrate. tetry 1, nitro-
guanidine, lead azide, lead styphynate, fulminate of mercury or 
any other metal, diazo-di-nitro-phenol, coloured fires or any other 20 
" substanae whether a single chemical compound or a mixture of 
substances, whether solid or liquid or gaseous used or manufac-
tured with a view to produce a practical effect by explOSion or 
pyrotechnic effect; and includes fog-signals, ftreworks, fuses, 
rockets, percussion-caps, detonators, cartridges, ammunition of 25 
aU descriptions and every adaptaUon or preparation of an ex-
plosive as defined in this clause; 
(e) "export" means taking out of India to a place o~~side 
India by land, sea or air; , , 
(1) "import" means to bring into 'India ftom a pl.a.eE! butmde 
India by land, sea or air; ,30 
(g) "master",-
(a) in relation to any vessel or aircraft means any 
person, other than a pilot, harbour master, assistant 1iarbour 
master or berthing master, having for the time being the 35 
charge or control of such vessel or aircraft, as the case may 
be; and 
(b) in relation to any boat belonging to a ship, means 
, , ~. 
the rrtQst~rdl. t.hat ship; <, ) .....' 
'J' . ; ,n 
(h) "manufacture" in relation to an explosive inclu~ < the 40 
proeess of-.. ': <, : 'I 'j ,: 
, i' • >, I " l' ~ . ~ 
(1) dividing the explosive into its compcment parts or 
otherwise breaking up or unmaking the explosive, or making 
flt for use any damaged explosive; and 
(2) re-maldng, altering or repairing the exploSive; 4S 
(i) "prescribed"JWt8nB prescrililed by rules lI18de under this 
. ,Act; 

·i: 
s . 
3 
(;) "vessel" includes any ship, boat, sailing vesael, or ~ther 
del!lCription of vessel used. in navigation whether propelled by oars 
or othel'Wise and anything made for the conveyance, mainly by 
water, of human beings or of goods and a caiS'Son.'. 
I' 
I. In section 5 of the principal Act,-
(a) in su1>section (1), for the words "transport and importation", 
. ; the words "transport, import and export" shall be lloWstituted; 
(b)' in su~section(2) ,-
(i) in clause (e) J tPe word "and" shall be om,itted; 
10 (ii) after clause (e), the following clauses shall be In-
serted, namely~-
"(ee) the authority to which appeals may be :t>referred 
under section 6F, the procedure to be followed by such autho-
rity and the period within which appeals shall be pre-
IS ferred, the fees to be paid in respect' of such appeals and 
the circumstances under which such fees may be refundedj 
20 
(eea) the total quantity of explosives that a licensee can 
purchase in a given period of timej 
(eeb) the fees to be charged byille Chief Controller of 
Explosives or any (mcer authorised by him in this behalf, 
for services rendered in connection 'With the manufacture, 
transport, import or' export of explosives;"; 
(iii) in clause (f), after the words "any explosives". the 
words "or any person or class of persons" shall be inserted; 
25 (c) su~section (3) shall be omitted. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 5. 
6. After section 5 of the principal Act, the follOWing section shall be, Inser-
two ot 
35 
inserted, namely:-
. fC5A. Notwithst8llding anytlUng in section 5 or in the rules made 
thereunder . wher~ immediately before the commencement of the 
1adian Explosives (Amendment) Act, 1978, any person was carrying 
on the business of manufacture, sale, transport, import or export of 
any explosive (for which no licence was required under, tbis Act be-
tore tis amendment by the Indian Explosives (Amendment) Act. 
19'18), then, such person shall be entitled to continue to carry on such 
business without licence in respect of such explosive-
(a) for a period of three months from the date of such com-
mencement; or 
(b) if before the expiry of the said period of three months, 
such person has made an application for grant of licence under 
this Act for such business in such explosive, until the flnal dis-
posal of his application, 
'W'fdhbever is 'later.". 
new aec-
tion 5A . 
Penons 
already 
in bUli-
ness in 
respect of 
certain 
explosives 
to carry 
on such 
business 
without 
licence for 
a certain 
period. 

Ammd-
ment of 
nctlon 8. 
Insertion 
of new 
sections 
8A, SB, 
8C,8D, 
SE and 
SF. 
Prohibi-
tion of 
manufac-
ture, pol-
selion, aale 
or trans-
port of 
explosives 
by YOUD' 
perlOna 
and 
certain 
other 
perlOns. 
4 
.,. In .action 6 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (2), the following sub-aection shall be substi-
tuted namely:-
"(2) The Customs Act, 1962 shall have effect in relation to 
any explosive with regard to the importation of which a notifica-
tion has been issued under this section and the vessel, carriage or 
aircraft containing such explosive as that Act has in relation to 
any article the importation of which is prohibited or regUlated 
thereunder and the vessel, carriage or aircraft containing such 
article,"; 
(b) sub-section (3) shall be omitted. 
8. After section 6 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"6A. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of 
S 
10 
this Act,- IS 
(a) no person,-
(i) who has not completed 'the age of eighteen years, or 
(ii) who has been sentenced on convIction of any oftence 
involving violence or moral turpitude I for a term t>f not less 
than six months, at any time during a period of five years 20 
after the expiration of the sentence, or 
(iii) who has been ordered to execute under Chapter VIII 
52 Of 1M2. 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, a bond for keeping 2 of 1974. 
the peace or for good behaviour, at any ·time during the term 
of the bond, or' 2S 
(iv) whose licence under this Act has been cancelled, 
whether before or after the commencement of the Indian 
Explosives (Amendment) Act, 1978, for contravention of the 
provisions of this Act or of the rules made thereunder, at 
any time during a period of five years from the date of can- 30 
cellation of such licence, 
IhBll,-
(1) manufacture, sell, trapsport, import or export any 
explosive, or 
(2) possess any such explosive as the Central Govern- 3S 
ment may, having regard to the nature thereof, by notifi-
cation in the Official Gazette, specify; 
(b) no person shall sell, deliver or despatch any explosive 
to a person whom he knows or has reason to believe at the time 
of such sale, delivery or despatch,-
(i) to be prohibited under clause (4) to manldacture, 
sell, transport, import, export or possess 8uch explouve, or 

\") to be of unsound mind. 
6B. (1) Where a person makes an application for licen-ce under Grant of 
section 5, the authority prescribed in the rules made under that licence •. 
section for grant of licences (hereinafter referred to in this Act 
as the licensing authority), after making such inquiry, if any, as 
it may consider necessary, shall, subject to the other provisions of 
this Act, by order in writing either grant the licence or refuse to 
grant the same. 
(2) The licensing authority shall grant a licence-
10 (a) where it is required for the purpose of manufacture of 
15 
20 
explosives if the licensing authority Is satisfted that the person 
by whom licence is required-
(i) possesses technical know-how and experience in the 
manufacture of explosives; or 
(ii) has in his employment or undertakes to employ a 
person or persons possessing such technical know-how and 
experience; or 
(b) where it is required for any other purpose, if the licen-
sing authority is satisfted that the person by whom licence is 
required has a good reason for obtaining the same. 
6C. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 6B, the RetulNll 
licensing authority shall refuse to grant a licence-- ot 
licencel. 
(a) where such licence is required in respect of any prohi-
bited explosive; or 
2' (b) where such licence is required by a person whom the 
30 
3' 
licensing authority has reason to believe-
(i) to be prohibited by this Act or by any other law 
for the time being in force to manufacture, possess, sell, 
transport, import or export any explosive, or 
(ii) to be of unsound mind, or 
(iii) to be for any reason unftt for a licence under this 
Act; or 
(c) where the licensing authority deems it necessary for 
the seCurity of the public peace or for public safety to refuse 
to grant such licence. 
(2) Where the licensing authority refuses to grant a licence to 
any person it shall record in writing' the reasons for such refusal 
and furnish to that person on demand a brief statement of the same 
unlesa in any case the licensing authority is of opinion that it will 
not be In the public interest to furnish such statement. 

Licensing 
authorl.ty 
co~n~ 
to imPQae., 
conditionl 
in addi-
tion to 
prMCrib-
eel condL 
tions. 
Variation, 
sU8J)en-
lion and 
revoca-
tion of 
licencel. 
6 
60. A licence granted under aecticm 16B may contain in addition 
to prescribed conditions such other conditions as may be considered 
necessary by the licensing authority in any particular c"se, 
6E. (1) The licensing authority may vary the conditions subject 
to which a licenc~ h8$ been granted except such of them as have 5 
been prescribed and may for that purpose require the holder of 
licence by notice in writing to deliver-up the licence to it within 
, su~ ~eas may be specified in the notice. 
(2) The licensing authority may, on the application of the holder 
of a licenc~, also vary the conditions of the licen~e except such of 10 
them as have been prescribed. 
(3) The licensing authority may, by order in writing, suspend 
a licence for such period as it thinks fit or revoke a licence,-
(a) if the licensing authority is satisfied that the holder of 
the licence is prohibited by this Act or by any other law for the IS 
time being in force to manufacture, possess, sell, transport, im-
port or export any explosive, or is unsound mind or is for any 
reason unfit for a licence under this Act; or 
(b) if the licensing authority deems it necessary for the 
security of the public peace or for public safety to suspend or 20 
revoke the licence; or 
(c) if the licence was obtained by the suppression of mate-
rial information or on the basis of wrong information provided 
by the holder of the licence or any other person on his behalf 
at the time of applying for the licence: or zs 
(d) if any of the conditions of the licence has been contra-
"vened; or 
(e)' if the holder of the licence has failed to comply with a 
notice under sub-section (1) requiring him to deliver-up the 
licence. 3~ 
. ' (4) The licensing authority may also revoke a licence on the 
application of the holder thereof. 
(5) Where the licensing authority makes an order varying the 
conditions of a licence under sub-section (1) or an orde,r suspending 
'or revoking a licence under sub-section (3), it shall record in writ· 3S 
ing the reasons therefor and furnish totbe holder of the licence on 
demand a brief statement of the same unless in any case the licens-
ing autht>rlty is of the opinion that it will not lle in, the pp.,plic inte-
rest to furniah such statement. 
(6) A court convicting the holder of a licence of any offence 40 
under this Act or the ruleS made thereunder .may· also SUBpeDd or 
revoke a liCence: ' , ' , ·1 ' 

" , 
Provided that if the conviction is set astde on 'appeal 'Or other-
wise, the suspension or revocation s~l1, become void. 
(7) An order of suspension or revocation \lnder sub-section (6) 
may also be made by an appellate court or by th,e High Court when 
s: exercising its powers' of revision. ' 
10 
(8) The Central Government may, by order in tlj1e Oftlcial 
Gazette, &uspend or revoke, or direct any licensing authority to 
,suspend or revoJte, all or any licences gr~ted t,mder this Act 
, throughout India or any part thereof. 
(9) On the suspeIl$ion or revocation of a licence under this 
section the holder thereof shall without delay surrender the licence 
to the authority by whom it has been suspenc;led or revoked or t::l 
such other authority as may be specified in thi,& behalf in the order 
of suspension or revocation. " 
IS 6F. (1) Any person aggrieved by an ord~ of the licensing autho- Al»peell. 
rity refusing to grant a licence or varying the conditions of, 4 licence 
or by an order of the licensing authority suspending or, revoking 
a licence may prefer an appeal against that order to such authority 
(hereinafter referred to as the appellate authority) and wit~ such 
20 period as may be prescribed:' 
Provided that no appeal shall lie against an order made by, or 
under the direction of, the Central Government. 
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the 
expiry of the period prescribed therefor: 
2S Provided that an appeal may be admitted after .the expiry of 
the period prescribed therefor if the appellant satisfies the appellate 
auth:>rity that he had sufficIent cause for not preferring the appeal 
within that period. 
(3) The period prescribed for an appeal shaD be compdted in 
16 of 1963. 30 accordance with the provisions of t4e Lin;U~~n Act ,1963, with 
respect to the computation of periods of limitation thereunder. 
e!' ~ i i ! j .• ,' "1 ~ • " • . 
35 
, 
« tf) Ewry'appeal under this section' shall be' matle by a petition 
.in wp1:iDg~d shall be "acQOmpanied by a brief statement of the 
'1, re~ns for' the /Qrdm; appealed ~&~inat where such sta~ment has 
been furnished to the"appeUant and by such fee as may be pres-
~ri~ . 
(5) In disposing of an appeal the appellate authority shall follow 
'sueh -procedure as may be prescribed: 
Provided that no appeal shall be disposed of unleu the appellant 
40 has been given a reaso?able opportunity of beiDS heard. 
(6) The order appealed against shall, unless the appellate autho-
rity conditionally or unconditionally directs otherwise, be' in force 
pending the disposal of the appeal against such order • • 
I. 
, 
(7) Every order of 'the appellate authority ooJl1irmine, modi- r \ ,! 
4S fying or reversing the order appealed against shall 'be ftnal.". 

Amend_ 
mentOf 
eection 7. 
,8 
•. In HCtion 7 of, the principal Act,-
(4) in sub-section (1),-
(i) in clause (a) ,-
(1) for the words "any place, carriage or vessel", the 
words "any place, aircraft, carriage or vessel" shall be S 
substituted; 
(2) for the words "transported or imported", wherever 
they occur, the words "transported, imported or exported" 
shall be substituted; 
(ii) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, 10 
namely:-
"(d) to seize, detain and remove any explosive or ingre-
dient thereof found therein and, if necessary, also destroy 
such explosive or ingredient."; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "Code of Criminal Proce- IS 
dure", the words "Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973", shall be 2 of 1974. 
Amend-
ment of 
aection 8. 
Amend-
ment of 
lection 9. 
substituted. 
10. In section 8 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1) ,-
.... 1 
(i) for the words "any carriage or vessel", the words "any 20 
aircraft, carriage or vessel" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "the master of the vessel", tbe words "tbe 
master of the aircraft or vessel" shall be substituted; 
(iii) for the words "Chief Inspector of Explosives in India", 
the words "Chief Controller of Explosives" shall be substituted; 25 
(b) sub-section (2) shall be omitted. 
11. In section 9 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) for the words "any place, curriage or vessel", the words 
"any place, aircraft. carriage or vessel" shall be substituted; 30 
(ii) for the words "the Indian Forces", the words "Armed 
Forc2S of the Union" shall be substituted; 
(iii) the brackets and words "(or in a preSidency-town, the 
Commissioner of Police) It shall be omitted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for tbe words and figures "Code of Crimi- 35 
nal Procedure, 1898", the words and figures "Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1973" shall be substituted; 
(c) in sub-section (4), in clauses (b), (c) and (d), for the words 
"Cl,lief Inspector of Explosives in India", the words "Chief Con-
troll~r of Explosives" shall be substituted. 
Amend_ 12. In section 9A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1). for tbe 
ment of words "Chief Inspector Of Explosives in India", the words "Chief Con-
Hetlon tA. ' troller of' Explosives" shall be substituted. 
15 of 1898. 
2 of 1974. 

i 
~. idter section 9A of the principal Act, the following sections shall Insertion 
be inserted, namely: '- of new 
aectioDa 
9B and 
DC. 
"9B. (1) Whoever, in contravention of rules made under section Punish-
5 or of the conditions o~ a licence granted under the said rules- ment for 
certain 
(a) manufactures, imports or exports any explosive shall offences. . : 
s be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to three years or with fine which may extend to five thousand 
rupees, or with both; 
(b) possesses, uses, sells or transports, 'any explosive shall be 
10 punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years or with fine which may extend to tha'ee thousand 
ru~ or with both; and 
(c) in any other case, with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees. 
IS (2) Whoever in contravention of a notification issued under 
section 6 manufactures, possesses or imports any explosive shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
years Or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with 
both; and in the case of importation by water the owner and master 
20 of the vessel or in the case of importation by air, the owner and the 
master of the aircraft, in which the explosive is im.ported shall, in 
the absence of reasonable excuse, each be punishable with fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees. 
30 
(3) Whoever,-
(a) manufactures, sells, transports, imports, eXports or pos-
sesses any explosive in contravention of the provisions of clause 
(a) of section 6A; or 
(b) selils, delivers or despatches any explosive in contraven-
tion of the provisions of clause (b) of that section, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years or with fine or with both; or 
(c) in contravention of the provisions' of section 8 fails to 
give notice of any accident shall be punishable,-
(i) with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, 
or 
(ii) if the accident is attended by loss of human life, 
with imprisonment for a . term which may extend to three 
months or with fine or with both . 
.9C. (1) Whenever an offence under this Act ha,s been comm1t-
·ted by ,a company, every person who at the time the otlence was 
committed was in charge of, or was responsible to the company for 
the cCilllduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, 
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be 
'. proceeded apinSt and punished accordingly: 
Offences 
by com-
pani.es. 

Substitu-
tion 
of new 
section 
for 8ec_ 
tion 11. 
-
Distress 
of air-
craft or 
vessel. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 13. 
Amend-
ment of 
IeCtion 
14. 
Provided that notllina <:ontainec1 in this Su.b.-section shall r4ti\der 
any such person liable to any punishment under this Act if he prov-
es that the offence was committed without his knowledge and that 
he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such 
offence. S 
(Z) Notwithatanding anything contained in sub-eection (1), 
where an ofI~ under this Act has been committed by a company 
and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the con-
sent or connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, 
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, 10 
such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deem-
ed. to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
agatnsi accordtngly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate, and includes a IS 
firm or other assoc;ation of individuals; and 
(f» "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm.". 
14. For section 11 of the principal Act, the follOWing section shall be 
substituted, namely: - 20 
"11. Where the owner or master of any aircraft or vessel is ad-
judged under this Act to pay a fine for any offence committed with, 
or in rEdation to, that aircraft or vessel, the Court may, in addition 
to any power it may hav.e for the purpose of compelling payment of 
the fine, dilfect it to be levied by distress and sale of,- 2S 
(a) the aircraft and its fUrnitUre or so much of the furni-
ture, or 
(b) the vessel and the tackle, apparel and furniture of such 
vessel or so much of the tackle, apparel and furniture thereof, 
as is necessary for the payment of the fine.". 
1:;. In section 13 of the principal Act,-
30 
(a) for the words "ship or boat", the words "aircraft or vessel" -
shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words "conservator of the port", the words "conser-
vator of the port Or officer in charge of the air part" shall be sub- 3S 
stituted. 
16. In section 14 of the principal Act,-
(a) in clause (a) of sub-saction (1), for the words «locUan 
Forces", the wOll'ds "Armed Forces of the Union, and Ordnance fac-
tories or other establishments of such Forces" shall be substituted; 40 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the worda "any explosive from all or 
any of the proviSions of this Act", the words "any explOSive aDd any 

11 of 1878. 
1J4 of 191J9. S ' 
of;> 
~.~"Ii.'.'.'.' .. : 
rr: 
~. 
10 
15 
11 
person or class of persons from all or any of the provisions of th1. 
Act or the rules made thereunder" shall be substituted. 
17. In section 15 of the Principal Act.-
(a) for the words and figures "Indian Arms Act, 1878", the words 
and flgul'es "Alrms Act, 1959" shall be substituted, 
(b) in the proviso, the word "Indian" shaU be omitted. 
18. After section 17 of the principal Act, the follOwing section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"17A. The Central (;()vemment may, by notification in the om-
cial Gazette, direct that any power or function which may be ,:xer-
cised or performed by it under this Act other than the power under 
sections 5, 6, 6A, 14 and 17 may, in relation to such matters and sub-
ject to such conditions, if any, as it may specify in the notification, 
be exercised or performed also by-
(a) such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Gov-
ernment, or 
(b) such State Government or such ofticer or authority 
subordinate to the State GCNernment.". 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
15. 
Inaerti.on 
olnew 
section 
17A. 
Power to 
delegate. 
19. In section 18 o,f the principal Act, after sUb-section (1), the fol- Amend-
20 lowing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- ment of 
section 
18. 
25 
30 
"(8) Every tole made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, whtle it is 
in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, bef()lI'e 
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid', both Houses a'gTee in making any modi-
ficatiOn in the rule OT both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modjfied 
form or be Oil no effect, as the case rDIlV be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity 
of anything previously done under that rule.", 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Indian Explosives Act, 1884 was enacted nearly a century ago 
when there were no indigenous manufacturers of high explosives in this 
country and only a few simpler type of explosives were manufactured. 
2. After Independence many large and small companies began to manu-
facture high explosives. There was a general complaint from the indus-
try that the Explosives Act, which was based on the old British pattern, 
was not adequate to meet the country's growing requirements and result-
·ed indifticalties for the industry. With a view to removing the short-
comings in the Indian Explosives Act and to obviate the difficulties ex-
perienced by the industry, the Government appointed in 1966 a Com-
mittee on Explosives to suggest ways and means for removal of the diffi-
culties experienced in the working of· the Act. This Committee sub-
mitted its Report suggesting a number of amendments to the Indian Ex-
plo~ives Act. These recommendations have been accepted by the Gov-
ernment. The more impo'rtant amongst these recommendations are--
(a) enlargement of the definition of "explosive" to include therein 
some modern explosives; 
(b) providing for variations of conditions of licences granted 
under the Act or for suspension and revocation of the licence, for 
appeals against the orders of the licensing authority; and 
(c) empowering the Central Government to exempt any person 
or class of persons from the provisions of the Act or the rules made 
thereunder. 
The main object of the Bill is to give effect to the recommendations 
of the Committee on Explosives . 
. 3. Opportunity is also being taken to insert a provision in the Act for 
the laying of rules made under the Act before the Parliament in ac-
cordance with the recommendations of the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation. 
GEORGE FERNANDES. 
NEW Dzun; 
The 28th March, 1978. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-section (~) o£ section 5 of the Indian Explosives Act, 1884 (4 of 
1884) enumerates the matters with respect to which the Central Govern-
ment may make rules. Clause 5 of the Bill which seeks to amend that 
sub-section, provides for the following matters also with respect to which 
the Central Government may make rules, namely:-
(<1) the authority to which appeals may be preferred under sec-
tion 6F, the procedure to be followed by such authority and the period 
within which appeals shall be preferred, the fees to be paid in respect 
of such appeals and the circumstances under which such fees may be 
refunded; 
(b) the total quantity of explosives that a licensee can purchase 
in a given period of time; 
(c) the fees to be charged by the Chief Controller of Explosives 
or any officer authorised by him in this behalf, for services rendered 
in connection with 'the manufacture, transport, import or export of 
explosives. 
2. Clause 8 o~ the Bill seeks to insert a new section 6F in the Act. This 
section which provides for an appeal against the orders of the licensing 
authority empowers the Central Government to prescribe by !I1lles, inter 
alia, the period within which the appeal may be filed ilnd the procedure 
that may be followed by the appellate authority in disposing of an appeal. 
3. The aforesaid matters with respect to which rules may be made, are 
matters of detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill. 
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, o~ a normal character. 
13 

:, ~ ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM nm INDIAN EXPLOSIVES At:.T, 1884 
(4 OF 1884) 
• • • • • 
An Act to regulate the manufacture, possession, use, sale, transport and 
impolI'tation of explosives. 
WHEREAS it is expedient to regulate the manufacture, possession, use, 
sale, transport and importation of explosives; It is hereby enacted as 
follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Explosives Act, 1884; and Short 
title . 
• • • • • 
4. In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or DefinL 
eontext,- tions. 
(1) "explosive"-
(a) means gunpowder, nitro-glyceritle, dynamite, guncotton, 
blasting powders, fulminate of mercury or of other metals, 
coloured fires and every other substance, whether similar to 
those above--mentioned or not, used or manufactured with a vieW-
to produce a practical effect by explosion,. or a pyrotechnic,eft'ect; 
and . . 
(b) includes fog-sigJIf.lls, fireworks, fuses, roekets, percussion-
caps, detonators, cartridges, ammunition of. all descriptions, and 
every adaptation or preparation of an explosive as above defined; 
(2) "manufacture" includes the process of cUvloin'g into its com-
ponent parts. or otherwise breaking up or unmakin~. any explosive, 
or making fit for use any damaged explosive, and the process of re-
making, altering or repairing any explosive; 
(3) "vessel" includes every ship, boat and other vessel used in 
navigation, whether propelled by oars or otherwise; 
(4) "carnage" includes any carriage, wagon, cart, truck, vehicle 
or other means of conveyin,;( goods or passengers by land, in what-
ever manner the same may be propelled; 
(5) "master" includes every person (except a pilot or harbour-
master) havinjl for the time being command or charge of a vessel: 
provided that, in reference to any boat belonging to a ship, "master" 
shall mean the master of the ship; 
. (6) "import" means to bring into India, by sea or land. 
14 

Power to 
make 
rules as 
to licens-
ing of the 
manufac-
ture, pos_ 
session, 
use, sale, 
transport 
and im-
portation 
of ex-
plosives. 
Power for 
Central 
Govern_ 
ment to 
prohibit 
the ma-
nufacture, 
posses-
sion or 
importa_ 
tion of 
specially 
danger-
ous ex-
plosives. 
Power 
to make 
rules 
conferr_ 
ing 
powers 
of inspec-
tion, 
search, 
seizure, 
detention 
and re-
moval. 
t, 
S. (1). The CentJ'el Gov~lUllent may, for any part. of India mak~ 
ruies consistent with this Act to regulate or prohibit, ,except under and 
in accordince with the conditions of a licence granted as provided by 
those rules, the manufacture, possession, use, sale, transport and impor-
tation of fil,xplosives, or My speCified class of explosives. 
(2) Rules ·under this section may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing, among other matters, that is to say:-
!. ' '. • • • .. 
(e) the period for which licenses iU'e to remian in force; and 
, ' • i ' 
(J) the exemption , absolutely or subject to conditions of any ex-
plosive from the operation of .the rules. 
(8) Any person contravening the rules made under this section shaLl. 
be 'punishabie,-
(a) if 'he imports or manufactures any explosive in such contta-
vention, with imprisonment' for a term which may extend to three 
years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or 
with both; " . 
(b) if he possesses, uses, sells or transports any explosive in such 
contravention, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine which may extend to three thousand rupees, 
or with both; and 
(c) in 'any other case, with fine which may exte~d to one thousand 
rupees. 
6. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The officers of sea customs at every port shall have the same power 
in respect of any explosive with regard to the i~p~tation of which a 
notification has been issued unqer this section and. the vessel containing 
the explosive as they have for the ti~ being in fEl$peCt of any article 
the importation of which is prohibited or regulated by the law relating 
to sea customs and the vessel containing the same; and the enactments 
for the time being in force relating to sea customs or any such article or 
vessel shall apply accordingly. 
(3) Any person manufacturing, possessing Of importing an explosive 
in contravention of a notification issued under this section shall be punish-
able with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or 
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both and, in 
the ~ase :of itnportation by water, the owner and master of th.e vessel in 
which the exploslve is imported shall, in the· absence of reasonable ex-
cuse, eaehbepunishable with flne: which may exte~d to five thousanq 
rupees. 
7. (1) The Central Government may make rules consistent with this 
Act authorising any officer, either by name or in virtue of his office-
(a) to enter, inspect and examine any place, carriage or vessel in 
which an explosive is being manufactured, possessed, used, sold, 
transported or imported under a Ucense granted under this Act, or 
in which he has reason to believe that an explosive has been or is 
being ~anufactured, possessed, used,' sold, transported or imported in 
contravention of this Act or of the rules made under this Act; 
• • 
.• co' 
• • 

Notice 
of accL 
dents. 
Inquiry 
into aeci-
d-ents. 
is 
ttl) to seize, detain, remove and, if necessary, destClry any expid,; 
BW found therein. 
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, relating to 10 of 1882. 
searches under that Code shall, so far as the same are applicable, apply 
to searches by officers authorised by rules under this section. 
8. (1) Whenever there occurs in or about, or in connection with, any 
place in which an explosive is manufactured, possessed or used, or any 
carriage or vessel either conveying an explosive or on or from which an 
explosive is being loaded or unlpadted ,any accldent by explosion or by 
fire attended with loss of human life or serious injury to person or pro-
perty, or Off a description usually attended with such loss or injury, the 
occupier of the place, or the master of the vessel, or the person in charge 
of the carriage, as the case may be, shall within such time and in such 
manner as may be by rule prescribed give notice thereof and of the atten-
dant loss of human life or personal injury, if any, to the Chief Inspector 
of Explosives in India and to the officer in charge of the nearest police-
station. 
(2) Whoever in contravention of sub-section (1) fails to give notice 
of any accident shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees or if the accident is attended by loss of human life, with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with 
fine, or with both. 
9. (1) Where any accident such as is referred to in section 8 occurs in 
or about or in connection with any place, carriage or vessel under the con-
trol of. any of the Indian Forces, an inquiry into the causes of the ac-
cident shall be held by the naval, military. or air force authority con-
cerned, and where any such accident occurs in any other circumstances, 
the District Magistrate (or in a B1'esidency-town, the Commissioner of 
Police) shall, in cases attended by loss of human life, or may, in any 
other case, hold or direct a Magistrate subordinate to him to hold, such 
an inquiry. 
(2) Any person holding an inquiry under this section shall have all 
the powers. of a Magistrate in holding an inquiry into an offence under 
the ~ode of Criminal Procedure, 1898, and may exercise such of the 5 of 1898. 
powers conferred on any officer by rules under section 7 as he may think 
it necessary Or expedient t(l exercise for the purposes of the inquiry . 
• • • • • 
(4) The Central Government may make rules-
• • • • • 
(b) to enable the Chief Inspector of Explosives in India to be 
present or represented at any S'tlch inquiry; 
~ 

11 of 1878. 
, .. 17'· j, ... -, ' 
(C) to permit the Chief Inspector of Explosives in India or his 
representative to examine any witnesses at the inquiry; 
(d) to provide that where the Chief Inspector of Explosives in 
India is not present or represented at any such inquiry, a report of 
the proceedings thereof shall be sent to him; 
• • • • • 
11. Where the owner or master of a vessel is adjudged under this Act 
to pay a fine for ,an offence committed with, or in relation to, that vessel, 
the Court may, in addition to any other power it may have for the pur-
pose of compelling payment of the fine, direct it to be levied by distress 
and sale of the vassel, and the tackle, apparel and furniture thereof, or so 
much thereof as is necessary. 
• • • • • 
13. Whoever is found committing any act for which he is punishable 
under this Act or the rules under this Act, and which tends to ca~se ex-
plOSion or fire in or about any place where an explosive is manufactured 
or stored, or any railway or port, or any carriage, ship or boat, may be 
apprehended without a warrant by a Police-officer, or by the occupier of, 
or the agent or servant of, or other person authorised by the occupier of, 
that place, or by any agent or servant of, or other person authoised by, 
the railway administration or conservator of the port, and be removed 
ff"om the place where he is arrested and conveyed as soon as conveniently 
may be before a Magistrate. 
14. (1) Nothing in this Act, except sections 8, 9 and 9A shall apply to 
the manufacture, posses~ion, use, transport or importatio~ of any ex-
plosive- . , '.." . 
(4) by any of the Indian Forces in accordance with rules or re-
gulations made by the Central Government; 
• • • • • 
(2) The Central Government may by notification in the Official 
Gazette exempt. absolutely or subject to any such conditions as it may 
think fit to impose, any explosive from all or any of the provisions of this 
Act. 
IS. Nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions of the Indian Arms 
Act, 1878: 
PrOvided that an authority.gr..~tjpg a license under this Act fOIl' the 
manulecture, possession, sale, transport or importation of an explosive 
may, if empowered in this behalf by the rules under which the licenSe is 
granted, direct by an order written on the license that it shall have the 
effect of a like license granted under the said Indian Arms Act. 
• • • • • 
18. (1) An authority making rules under this Act shall, before making 
the rules, publish a draft of the proposed rules for the information of per· 
IOns likely to be affected thereby. 
• • • • • 
Distress 
ot vessel 
Power 
to arrest 
without 
warrant 
persons 
commit-
ting. 
danger-
oua 
offence8. 
Sav1n& 
and 
power to 
exempt. 
Saving Of 
Indian: 
.Arm8 
Act, 
1878. 
Procedure 
for 
making, 
pubUca-
tlon and 
coD!!'. 
matton 
of ru.leI. 

LOksABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the IndIan Explosives Act, 1884. 
(Shri George Fernandes, Minister of Industry.) 