1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL,  2015
By
SHRI OM PRAKASH YADAV, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth  Year of the Republic of  India  as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
2. After article 279 of the Constitution, the following new article shall be inserted,
namely:—
"279A. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, for all schemes announced by the
Union Government for delivery of public services to the poor and for improvement of
infrastructure, the State Governments shall formulate provisions for meeting the specified
objectives of such schemes and the Union Government shall guarantee to the States access
to adequate funds required for the implementation of the schemes.".
Short title.
Bill No. 62 of  2015
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Adequate
funds to States
for carrying
out Central
schemes.
Insertion of
new article
279A.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present most financial powers and planning responsibility covering all States of the
country is that of the Central Government. The erstwhile Planning Commission was responsible
for approving State plans and deciding on actual flow of central plan assistance to different
States from year to year. The present system, with multiple party coalitions in power in
different States, has become totally outdated. There is urgent need to transfer more financial
powers and higher responsibility to States in the conception as well as implementation of
developmental  programmes. At present, all schemes for delivery of public services and for
improvement in infrastructure are announced by the Centre, but their implementation is the
responsibility of States. The Centre decides who will get what, and when, and under what
conditions, but implementation is the responsibility of the States. For example, the Sarva
Shiksha Abhiyan, Rajiv Gandhi Drinking Water Mission, National Rural Health Mission,
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, etc. are all centrally
sponsored schemes, but the responsibility for their implementation is that of the State
Governments. The Central Government blames the States for all failure and takes credit for all
successes. On the other hand, the States blame the Centre for impractical rules and inadequate
allocation of funds.
Therefore, it is essential to devolve powers on the States, to formulate provisions of
the schemes to meet the specified objectives with guaranteed access to adequate funds.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; OM  PRAKASH  YADA V
February 9, 2015
2

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for provision of adequate funds to State Governments for
implementation of schemes announced by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India for ongoing schemes
of the Central Government. The expenditure involved in the future schemes will be determined
as per the parameters set for those schemes and the plans made by the respective State
Governments for meeting the objectives of the particular schemes. It is estimated that at
present a recurring expenditure of rupees ten thousand crore  per annum will be involved.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
3

LOK  SABHA
————————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Om Prakash Yadav, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4767LS(S3)—03-03-2015.