THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
A
BILL
further to amend the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Y ear of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Amendment)
Act, 2009.
2. In section 15N of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992, in the second
proviso, for the word ‘‘sixty-two’’, the word ‘‘sixty-five’’ shall be substituted.
Short title.
15 of 1992. Amendment
of section
15N.
Bill No. 62 of 2009
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Securities Appellate Tribunal was set up under section 15K of the Securities and
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 to adjudicate upon appeals against decisions of the
Securities and Exchange Board. The Presiding Officer and Members of the Tribunal hold
office for a term of five years and are eligible for re-appointment . The upper age limit for the
Presiding Officer and Members is sixty-eight years and sixty-two years respectively.
2. Normally, retiring or retired officers of the level of Additional Secretary or Secretary
to the Government of India are the applicants for the post of Members to the Tribunal and
they are on the verge of completing or have completed sixty years of age at the time of
selection. Thus with the stipulated sixty-two years of age for Tribunal Members, a maximum
of two years of service is available for such officers. In addition, the selection process too is
time consuming and as a consequence on an average Tribunal Member holds office for
about twelve to eighteen months only. As a result the work of Tribunal is suffering. It is
therefore proposed to increase the upper age limit of the Members of  Tribunal from sixty-two
years to sixty-five years by amending section 15N of the Act.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
PRANAB MUKHERJEE.
N
EW DELHI;
The 21st July, 2009.
2

ANNEXURE
THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA ACT, 1992
(15 OF 1992)
*****
15N. The Presiding Officer and every other Member of a Securities Appellate Tribunal
shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office and
shall be eligible for re-appointment:
Provided that no person shall hold office as the Presiding Officer of the Securities
Appellate Tribunal after he has attained the age of sixty-eight years:
Provided further that no person shall hold office as a Member of the Securities Appellate
Tribunal after he has attained the age of sixty-two years.
*****
3
Tenure of
office of
Presiding
Officer and
other Members
of Securities
Appellate
Tribunal.

LOKLOK SABHA   SA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992.
————
(Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister of Finance)
GMGIPMRND—3441LS-(S5)—29.07.2009.