Bill No. 62  of  2019
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE ANGANWADI WORKERS (REGULARISATION OF SERVICE AND
WELFARE) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI N.K. PREMACHANDRAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for regularisation of the ser vices of Anganwadi Workers and conferring the
status of not less than those of Group 'C' employees of the Central Government on
such Anganwadi Workers
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Anganwadi Workers (Regularisation of Service and
Welfare) Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
5
10
15
20
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "anganwadi" means an anganwadi centre set up by the Central Government
or State Government or Union Territory Administrator to implement the Integrated
Child Development Scheme;
(b) "anganwadi worker" means any person working in an anganwadi on regular
or contract or daily wages basis; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, take all
such steps as may be necessary to regularize the services of anganwadi workers and confer
the status of not less than those of Group 'C' employees of the Central Government on all
such anganwadi workers.
(2) The Central Government shall also provide such wages and welfare facilities as
are available to, or not less than, Group 'C' employees of the Central Government.
4. The provision of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out all purposes of this Act ensuring the service status and welfare of the
Anganwadi workers.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions aforesaid both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity or anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Regularisation
of services of
anganwadi
workers.
Savings.
Power to
make rules.
25

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Anganwadi Centres were started in this country by the Central Government and State
Governments for implementation of the Integrated Child Development Services Scheme. It
includes the comprehensive development of health awareness among women and child
welfare. The Contribution of Anganwadi Centres is remarkable and has become an integral
and essential part of life in rural areas. The Anganwadi workers are good promoters of
various schemes of the Central Government and State Government and ensuring the health
and welfare of child and women. The duties and services  rendered by the Anganwadi
workers are very important for the protection of the health and welfare of women and children.
The Anganwadi workers do not have job security and the honorarium given to them are not
sufficient to meet their immediate basic requirements. This may adversely affect the working
of the Integrated Child Development Scheme.
The Anganwadi workers are one of the main links between the Government and general
public. They are helping the Government for the effective implementation of women and
children health and welfare scheme. Considering the importance of their duties and services
it is highly necessary to protect their service and welfare.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; N.K. PREMACHANDRAN
June 3, 2019.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for regularisation of the services of anganwadi workers
and confer the status not less than those of Group 'C' employees of the Central Government
on all such anganwadi workers. It also provides for such wages and welfare measures as are
available to or not less than Group 'C' employees of the Central Government to anganwadi
workers. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of about rupees three thousand crore is likely to be
involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees three thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for regularisation of the services of Anganwadi Workers and conferring the
status of not less than those of Group 'C' employees of the Central Government on
such Anganwadi Workers
————
(Shri N.K. Premachandran, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—355LS(S3)—13-06-2019.