THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND SENIOR
CITIZENS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
DR. BOORA NARSAIAH GOUD, M.P .
A
BILL
to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior
Citizens (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Bill No. 62 of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. After Chapter II of the Maintenance and Welfare of Senior Citizens Act, 2007, the
following Chapter and sections thereunder shall be inserted, namely:—
"CHAPTER  IIA
THE  NATIONAL  COMMISSION  FOR  SENIOR  CITIZENS
18 A. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a National Commission for Senior Citizens, hereinafter referred to as the Commission, for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three
other members to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
18B. (1) The Commission shall—
(a) investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided for
the senior citizens under this Act or the Constitution or under any other law for the
time being in force or under any order of the Central Government;
(b) evaluate the working of safeguards provided under this Act;
(c) inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of rights and
safeguards of the senior citizens;
(d) participate and advise on the planning process of socio-economic development
of the senior citizens and evaluate the progress of their development under the Central
Government and State Governments;
(e) present to the Central Government annually and at such other times as the
Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of safeguards provided under this
Act;
(f) make recommendations as to the measures that should be taken by the Central
Government or the State Governments for effective implementation of those safeguards
and other measures for the protection, welfare and socio-economic development of
the senior citizens; and
(g) discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and
development and advancement of the senior citizens as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall cause all such reports, as are presented to it under
clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1), to be laid before each House of Parliament along with a
memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations
relating to the Union and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such
recommendations.
(3) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with which any
State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the State
Government concerned and the State Government shall cause such report to be laid before
the Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed
to be taken on the recommendations relating to that State and the reasons for the non-
acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
18C. The Commission shall, while performing its functions under section 18B,
have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in respect of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of
India and examining him on oath;
Establishment
of National
Commission
for Senior
Citizens.
Function of
the
Commission.
Powers of
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Insertion of
new Chapter
IIA.
56 of 2007.

3
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
18D. The Central Government and every State Government shall consult the
Commission on all major policy matters affecting senior citizens.".
Central and
State
Governments
to consult the
Commission.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There has been a steady rise in the population of elder persons in India. The number
of elder persons has increased from 19.8 million in 1951 to 103.8 millions in 2011. The
projection indicates that the number of persons above sixty years of age in India will
increase to 116.10 millions in 2016, 143.20 millions in 2021 and 173.2 millions in 2026. Further,
as per the United Nations Projections on old age population in India, the overall population
in India by the year 2050 will grow by 55% but more alarmingly, the population of people of
the age of sixty years and above will increase by 326% and those in the age group of eighty
and above by 700% which is the fastest growing group. Continuous increase in life
expectancy means that more people are now living longer ensuring that they not merely live
longer, but lead a secure, dignified and productive life, which is a major challenge.
The traditional norms and values of the Indian society laid stress on showing respect
and providing care for the aged. However, in recent times, society is witnessing a gradual
but definite withering of the joint family system, as a result of which a large number of
parents are being neglected by their families thereby exposing them to lack of emotional,
physical and financial support. These older persons are facing a lot of problems in the
absence of adequate social security.
The situation of older persons was highlighted for the first time at the World Assembly
on Ageing in 1982 in Vienna wherein International Plan of Action on Ageing was adopted.
It served as an international blue print for development of policies and programmes on
ageing. Later, the United Nations Principles for Older persons were adopted by General
Assembly Resolution 46-91 on 16th December, 1991. The following are the five principles
which the Central and State Governments are encouraged to incorporate into national
programmes wherever possible:—
(i) Independence: Older persons should have access to food, water, shelter, clothing,
health care, work and other income-generating opportunities, education, training and a life
in safe environment.
(ii) Participation: Older persons should remain integrated into community life and
participate actively in the formulation of policies affecting their well-being.
(iii) Care: Older persons should have access to social and legal services and to health
care so that they can maintain an optimum level of physical, mental and emotional well-
being. This should include full respect, dignity, beliefs, needs and privacy.
(iv) Self-fulfillment: Older persons should have access to educational, cultural, spiritual
and recreational resources and be able to develop their full potential.
(v) Dignity: Older persons should be able to live in dignity and security, be free of
exploitation, physical or mental, and be treated fairly regardless of age, gender and racial or
ethnic background.
The National Policy on Older Persons was announced by the Government of India in
January, 1999. Though the Policy had several features like State support to ensure financial
and food security, health care, shelter and other needs of older persons to improve the
quality of their lives, the implementation has been rather tardy and there is no coordination
mechanism to effectively implement the policy.
The second World Assembly on Ageing was held in Madrid in 2002 where Madrid
International Plan of Action on Ageing (MIPAA), 2002 was adopted and endorsed by the
General Assembly. The Plan has inspired the development of National and Regional plans
and provided an international framework for dialogue on ageing. The Government set up a
Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. (Smt.) V . Mohini Giri to draft a new National Policy
on Senior Citizens, which submitted its report on 30th March, 2011, but the policy is yet to
be finalized and implemented.
4

5
With a view to ensure the well-being of senior citizens, by strengthening their legitimate
place in society and extending support for financial and food security, healthcare, shelter,
equitable share in development, protection against abuse and exploitation and fulfillment of
other needs, there is a necessity for setting up a National Commission for the Senior Citizens.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and
Senior Citizens Act, 2007 with a view to establish a National Commission for Senior Citizens
for the protection and welfare of senior citizens.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BOORA NARSAIAH GOUD
February 8, 2016.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to provide for constitution of the National Commission for
Senior Citizens. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to give the exact amount to be
incurred. However, it is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred
crore will be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees  fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 2 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to appoint the Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson and three members of the National Commission for Senior Citizens in such
manner as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act. As the rules will relate to matters
of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK  SABHAL
————
A
BILL
to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007
————
(Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4409LS(S3)—03-03-2016.