1
THE CHILD PROTECTION BILL, 2017
By
SHRI VISHNU DAYAL RAM, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of children and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Child Protection  Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, 'child' means a person who has
not completed the age of fifteen years.
Bill No. 62 of  2017
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definition.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
child shall be employed by any person for any work in any manner.
4. (1) The Central Government shall establish adequate number of children homes
with all basic amenities for the welfare of children in every district of the country.
(2) Any child who is abandoned, orphan, destitute, neglected or engaged in any job,
occupation or begging shall be admitted to  the children homes set up under sub-section (1).
5. (1) Every child who is admitted into the children home shall be entitled to the
following facilities free of cost,—
(a) accommodation, food and clothing;
(b) education including higher and technical education; and
(c) medical assistance.
(2) Every child shall also be entitled to such other facilities as are necessary for his
all-round development.
6.  The Central Government shall make provisions of reservation in posts and services
under its control for children admitted to children homes on attaining the age of eighteen
years.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Prohibition of
child
employment.
Establishment
of children
homes.
Facilities to
be provided to
the children
in children
homes.
Reservation
in posts and
services under
Central
Government.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
A large number of children are forced by their parents to do menial labour, in order to
sustain their livelihood. Due to lack of proper diet and healthcare, these children become
victims of a number of diseases. Some of them even succumb to premature death. Many of
these children are highly talented. But due to lack of proper education and other opportunities,
their talent goes waste.
Children are the future of a country. It is, therefore, the responsibility of the Government
to provide opportunities of all-round development to every child and also to provide protection
against exploitation. Thus, it is proposed to bring in a legislation for the welfare and protection
of children against exploitation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VISHNU DAYAL RAM
February 27, 2017.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for establishment of children homes with all basic facilities
for the welfare of children. Clause 5 provides for facilities like accommodation, food, clothing,
education and medical assistance to be given to children admitted into children homes, free
of cost. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is likely to involve the recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crores per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crores is also likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will related to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

GMGIPMRND—5095LS(S3)—27.03.2017.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of children and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram, M.P .)