As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA

Bill No. 62_of 2000

THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2000
By
‘SHRIMATI KRISHNA Bose, M.P.
A
BILL.

further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called the Representation of People Act, 2000.

(2)It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
! Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred
as the principal Act), after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
con

(GA). Every application under sub-section (1) shall contain a specific provision that
the association or body shall ensure that there shall be not Jess than forty percent, of
the candidates belonging to either gender out of the total number of candidates
contesting elections to the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State
in the name of that association or body.”.

Short title and
commencement.

Amendment of
section 29A.


Insertion of new
section 298.

3. After section 29A of the Principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
pamely:— -

“298. If any association or body which has been registered as a political Party does
not comply with provision of sub-section (5A) of section 294, the registration of such
Political party shall be cancelled by the Election Commission forthwith.”,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Women constitute fifty percent. of the population of India, But they are grossly under
Tepresented in legislative bodies and have no say in the affairs of the nation. It is, therefore,
Recessary to involve women in decision making process and also to give them fair
representation in legislatures, It is, therefore, Proposed to amend the Representation of the
People Act, 1951 with a view to make it obligatory on the part of political Parties to give fair
fepresentation to both gender to qualify it for registration. It is also Proposed to cancel the
tegistration of a political party if that party does not field candidates at elections to
Lok Sabha/Assemblies from both the genders proportionately.

New Detar,

KRISHNA BOSE
February 28, 2000.


Registration with
the Election
‘Commission of
associations and
bodies as political
Parties.

ANNEXURE

Extract from the Representation of the People Act, 1951,
*

* * * * *

29A. (1) Any association ot body of individual citizéns of India calling itself a politi-
cal party and intending to aval itself ofthe provisions of this Part shall make an application
10 the Election Commission for its registration as a Political party for the purposes of this
Act, .

* * * * * *

) The application under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by a copy of the
memorandum or rules and regulations of the association or body, by whatever name called,
and such memorandum or rules and regulations shall contain a specific provision that the

or body shall bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law
established, and to the Principles of socialism, secularism and democracy, and would up-
hold the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India.

* * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.

(Shrimati Krishna Bose, MP)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—45431.S—24.03. 2000.