     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 62 of 2021
THE OVER-THE-TOP PLATFORMS REGULATORY AUTHORITY
BILL, 2021
By
SHRI MANOJ KOTAK, M.P.
A
BILL
to establish an Over-the -Top (OTT) Platforms Regulatory Authority to
ensurecomplete ban on showing violent, abusive and vulgar web
series, films or such other similar content on Over-the-Top
Platforms in the country and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Over-the-Top Platforms Regulatory Authority
Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
 (a) “Authority” means the Over-the-Top Platforms Regulatory Authority
established under section 4;
5
Short title
and
commencement.
Definitions.

5
2
10
15
20
25
30
Ban on violent,abusive and vulgarweb series, filmsor such othercontents on theOver-the-Topplatforms in thecountry.
Estabilshment of
Over-the-Top
Platforms
Regulatory
Authority.
35
(b)  “Over-the-Top” means a media service that offer access to the film and
television content provided over the internet connection at the request and to suit the
requirement of individual consumer;
(c) “Over-the-Top platform” means such online platform, other than a cable
or satellite, where the Over-the-Top contents are made available to the intended
consumers; and
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, there shall be ban on violent, abusive and vulgar web series, films or such other
contents on Over-the-Top platforms in the country.
4.   (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
establish an Authority to be known as the Over-the-Top Platforms Regulatory Authority
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall consist of :—
(a) the Union Minister of Information and Broadcasting– ex-officio
Chairperson;
(b) two Members of Parliament one each from the House of the People and
the Council of States to be nominated by the respective Presiding Officer of each
House – member;
(c) two persons representing the web series and the film sector to be
appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed–
member;
(d) two officials from amongst the Indian Administrative Service or its
equivalent thereto – member:
Provided that an officer from the Indian Administrative Service or its equivalent
shall be the Secretary of the Authority.
(3) The meetings of the Authority shall be held twice a month:
      Provided that the Chairperson may, in consultation with the Secretary, call the
meeting of the Committee as and when required.
(4) The Union Ministry of Information and Broadcasting shall provide secretarial
and financial assistance to the Authority.
(5) The Salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
services of members appointed under clause (c) of sub-section (2) shall be such as
may be prescribed.
5. The Authority shall—
(a) ban any content including web series or films shown on Over-the-Top platform,
if such content, web series or film—
(i) is obscene;
(ii) contains abusive language;
(iii) shows disrespect to sanatan symbols;
(iv) contains anti-woman content or insults woman or outrage their modesty;
(v) promotes superstitions; and
(vi) contains such other contents which it deems necessary to ban for carrying
out the purposes of this Act; and
(b) grant certificate to the Over-the-Top platforms for telecasting any web series,
film or such other contents.
Functions of
Authority.
40
45

6. It shall be the responsibility of every Over-the-Top  platform to–
(a) undertake research and authenticate the contents of web-series or films
being telecast on Over-the-Top platform; and
(b) obtain requisite certificate prior to the telecast any web series or film
on the Over-the-Top platform from the Authority.
7. (1) Any person dissatisfied with the contents being shown in web series or
films being telecast on Over-the-Top platform may file a complaint with the Authority
in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Authority shall, on receipt of a complaint under sub-section (1),
consider and examine such complaint in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Where on examination of a complaint under sub-section (2), the Authority
is of the opinion that the content being shown in web series or films being telecasted
on Over-the-Top platform is violent, abusive or vulgar, it shall order stopping the
telecast of such content with immediate effect:
Provided that the Authority shall, prior to stopping the telecast of such content,
give reasonable opportunity of being heard to such Over-the-Top  platform.
8.  If any Over-the-Top platform telecast any web series, film or such other
content in contravention to the provisions of this Act such Over-the-Top  platform
shall be punished with an imprisonment for a term which may extend upto seven
years and with fine which may extend upto rupees ten lakh.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds for the implementation
of the provisions of the Act.
10. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after expiry of the period of three
years from the date of commencement of this Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making
any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Responsibility
of Over-the-
Top Platform.
Right of
person to
Complaint to
the Authority.
Penalty.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Central
Government
to provide
Fund.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
3

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Over-the-Top (OTT) facilitates  viewing of television and film contents at
high speed internet without cable or satellite provider. There are a lot of OTT platforms
in India that are broadcasting a variety of programmes. According to a survey, the
Hot’Star on the  OTT platform is the most watched in India right now.
 Over-the-Top (OTT) media are flourishing in this COVID-19 pandemic
era. A large section of audience has been attracted to them due to closure of cinemas.
OTT is continuously bringing new material in order to cash in on the inclination of
viewers towards it. There has been a rapid increase in such web series and films. It is
glaring that there is glorification of socio-economic aberrations and ideological agenda
in them instead of healthy entertainment. Web series are devoid of spirit of Indianness
and are disconnected with ground reality. As one takes a comprehensive view of
Indian web series, one finds that these producers of web series do not seem to have
come out of the influence of sacred games on web series of the year 2018. This is the
reason why most of the Indian web series are based on crime stories because they
contain abusive language and violent scenes regarding sanatan symbols has become
part of such crime stories.
Nowadays, OTT platforms in India are crossing the limit of obscenity with
abusive language which is becoming a challenge to the civilization and culture of
Indian society. The producers and directors of the web series over OTT platform
argue that they are showing reality with abusive speech. For once, even if we consider
it to be true, it is worth-underlining the fact that Indian society, which is known for its
civilization and culture, has an artistic medium of film or television. Its success lies
in the fact of presenting harsh and cruel reality in such an artistic manner that the
scene is presented with its full sense and the person who watches the same does not
feel anything uncomfortable in presence of their family members.
Old films are an example of restraint which used to show intimate scenes of
heroes and heroines under the cover of symbolic gestures closing of doors, lantern
getting dimmed, showing rivers, running fans, open door, etc. Scenes of murder, etc.
were also filmed in such a way that they did not appear gory. With advances in
technology, some symbolic methods can be created for such uncomfortable scenes
but the producers of these web series are unbridled what can one expect from them
now. These web series lack variety as no creative work has been done so far in these
web series.
Therefore, there is an urgent need for working in the direction of bringing web
series after carrying out complete research and authentication and without any
prejudice to the matters of science, history, religion, philosophy, literature, etc. of the
country. Web series on the story of a scientist or a literature figure or untold and
forgotten history can be produced. Such possibilities are not much but they require
well power and good intention.
According to a survey conducted by App Distribution Platform Mo-Magic across
the country, 55% of people in India are watching TV shows, movies, sports and other
content on OTT platforms. OTT platforms are becoming increasingly popular due to
the easy access of internet, net speed, increasing number of smart phones. The
convenience of watching video contents on a journey through mobile or anywhere
outside the house has greatly increased its use. The OTT market in India will reach
rupees 3.60 lakh crore by the year 2023.
According to the Boston Consulting Group Report, this market was of rupees
thirty-five thousand  crore till 2018. With the increasing internet speed and smart
phone user growth, the OTT market in India is growing at a faster pace of 15% by the
4

year 2025, its global market will grow at a speed of 17% to reach at rupees 240 lakh
crore.  Most Indian web series are based on crime stories, as such stories have the full
possibility to create scenes of obscenity, abusive speech and violence. At the same
time, the humiliation of Sanatan symbols has also become a part of such crime stories.
Free from the curbs of regulation, web series producers who have assumed that the
chaos of expression is the only art, it is meaningless to expect from them to produce
a web series or film in line with Indian civilization and tradition.
OTT service providers do not fall under system of strict regulatory or license
system like Telecom companies. OTT services provide applications and services that
are used through the Internet and use the operator’s network. Therefore, it is an
appropriate time to set up Over-the-Top (OTT) Platform Regulatory Authority to
maintain a comprehensive regulatory regime for various aspects related to the OTT
(Over-the-Top) services outside the purview of law and rules to ensure telecast of
web series, etc. in accordance with Indian culture and society.
Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;                                 MANOJ  KOTAK
February 11, 2021.
5

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
     Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to provide for establishment of Over-the-Top (OTT)
Platform Regulatory Authority. It also provides for appointment of representatives of
web series and film sector to the Authority. Clause 9 provides for the Central
Government to provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore
per annum would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees Two thousand crore is also
likely to involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.   As the rules will relate to matters of detail only,
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to establish an Over-the-Top (OTT) Platforms Regulatory Authority to ensure
complete ban on showing violent, abusive and vulgar web series, films
or such other similar content on Over-the-Top Platforms in
the country and for matters connected therewith
————
(Shri  Manoj Kotak, M.P.)