38
Bill No.  62 of  2012
THE MICRO FINANCE INSTITUTIONS (DEVELOPMENT AND
REGULATION) BILL, 2012
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
MICRO FINANCE DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL
3. Constitution of Micro Finance Development Council.
4. Composition of Council.
5. Terms of office and allowances of members of Council.
6. Meetings of Council.
7. Functions of Council.
CHAPTER III
S
TATE MICRO FINANCE COUNCILS
8. Establishment and functions of State Micro Finance Council.
9. Term of office and allowances of State Micro Finance Council.
CHAPTER IV
DISTRICT MICRO FINANCE COMMITTEES
10. Constitution of District Micro Finance Committee.
11. Functions of District Micro Finance Committee.
12. Report of District Micro Finance Committees.
CHAPTER V
REGISTRATION OF MICRO FINANCE INSTITUTIONS
13. No micro financé services without registration.
14. Application for registration.
15.  Grant of certificate.
16. Power of Reserve Bank to cancel certificate of registration.
17. Appeal against certain cases.
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

CHAPTER VI
RESERVE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND RETURNS
CLAUSES
18. Obligation to create reserve fund.
19. Accounts and balance sheet.
20. Audit.
21. Special audit.
22. Powers of auditors.
23. Returns to be filed by micro finance institutions.
CHAPTER VII
F
UNCTIONS AND POWERS OF RESERVE BANK
24. Functions and powers of Reserve Bank.
25. Power of Reserve Bank to issue directions to micro finance institutions.
26. Margin not to be in excess of  maximum limit.
27. Inspection.
28. Cease and Desist order.
29. Closing or restructuring of business.
30. Winding up petition or other application for closure of micro finance activity.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ICRO FINANCE DEVELOPMENT FUND
31. Grants by Central Government.
32. Fund.
CHAPTER IX
REDRESSAL MECHANISM
33. Redressal of grievances against micro finance institutions.
CHAPTER X
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
34. Contravention of provisions of Act, orders and directions.
35. Giving false information.
36. Offences by micro finance institutions.
37. Powers of Reserve Bank to impose penalty.
38. Bar of civil court jurisdiction.
39. Certain offences to be cognizable.
40. Cognizance of offences.
41. Application of fine.
(ii)

CHAPTER XI
DELEGATION OF POWERS
CLAUSES
42. Delegation of certain powers of Reserve Bank to National Bank.
 CHAPTER XII
MISCELLANEOUS
43. Preference to members or clients of micro finance institution in repayment.
44. Powers of Central Government to issue directions.
45. Power of Central Government to call for information, statements, etc.
46. Power to exempt class or classes of micro finance institutions from provisions of this
Act.
47. Act to have over-riding effect.
48. Protection of action taken under the Act.
49. Power to make rules.
50. Power to make regulations.
51. Rules, regulations and orders to be laid before Parliament.
52. Power to remove difficulties.
(iii)

Short title
and
commencement.
THE MICRO FINANCE INSTITUTIONS (DEVELOPMENT AND
REGULATION) BILL, 2012
A
BILL
to provide for development and regulation of the micro finance institutions for the purpose
of facilitating access to credit, thrift and other micro finance services to the rural and
urban poor and certain disadvantaged sections of the people and promoting financial
inclusion through such institutions and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows: —
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Micro Finance Institutions (Development and
Regulation) Act, 2012.
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act and any reference in such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be
construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "annual percentage rate" means aggregate rate per annum in percentage
consisting of interest, processing fees, service charges and any other charges or fees
Definitions.
Bill No.  62  of  2012
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
realised by the micro finance institution on any micro finance services provided to any
client;
(b) "client" means any member of the micro finance institution or self-help group
or any other group availing the micro finance services from such institution or group;
(c) "co-operative society" means a co-operative society registered as such under
any law relating to co-operative societies for the time being in force;
(d) "Council" means the Micro Finance Development Council constituted under
section 3;
(e) "District Micro Finance Committee" means a Committee constituted by the
Reserve Bank under section 10;
(f) "margin" means the difference between the annual percentage rate charged
by the micro finance institution and the cost of funds raised in percentage by the micro
finance institution for providing any micro credit facilities;
(g) "Member" means a Member of the Micro Finance Development Council
constituted under section 3;
(h) "micro credit facilities" means any loan, advance, grant or any guarantee
given or any other credit extended in cash or kind with or without security or guarantee;
(i) "micro finance institution" means,—
(A) a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860; or
(B) a company registered under section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956; or
(C) a trust established under any law for the time being in force; or
(D) a body corporate; or
(E) any other organisation, as may be specified by the Reserve Bank,
the object of which is to provide micro finance services in such manner as may be
specified by regulations but does not include—
(i) a banking company, the State Bank of India including its subsidiary
banks, a scheduled bank, a co-operative bank, Export and Import Bank,
Reconstruction Bank, National Housing Bank, National Bank, a Regional Rural
Bank and Small Industries Development Bank;
(ii) a co-operative society engaged primarily in agricultural operations or
industrial activity or purchase or sale of any goods;
(iii) any individual carrying on the activity of money-lending and registered
as a moneylender under the provision of any State law which regulates such
activities;
(j) "micro finance services" means any one or more of the following financial
services provided by any micro finance institution, namely:
(A) micro credit facilities involving such amount, not exceeding in aggregate
five lakh rupees for each individual and for such special purposes, as may be
specified by the Reserve Bank from time to time, such higher amount, not
exceeding ten lakh rupees, as may be prescribed;
(B) collection of thrift;
(C) pension or insurance services;
(D) remittance of funds to individuals within India subject to prior approval
of the Reserve Bank and such other terms and conditions, as may be specified
by regulations;
21 of 1860.
1 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(E) any other such services, as may be specified,
in such manner, as may be prescribed;
 ( k) "National Bank" means the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural
Development established under section 3 of the National Bank for Agriculture and
Rural Development Act, 1981;
(l) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(m) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(n) "Regional Rural Bank" means a Regional Rural Bank established under
sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976;
 (o) "regulations" means regulations made by the Reserve Bank;
(p) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under section
3 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934;
(q) "State Micro Finance Council" means the State Micro Finance Council
established by the Central Government under section 8;
 (r) "thrift" means money collected in any form other than in the form of current
account or demand deposits, by a micro finance institution from members of self-help
groups or any other group of individuals, by whatever name called, who are availing
micro finance services provided by such micro finance institution in accordance with
the regulations made by the Reserve Bank in this behalf.
(2) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Reserve
Bank of India Act, 1934, the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the Companies Act, 1956, the
Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976, the Export-Import Bank of India Act, 1981, the National
Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development Act, 1981, the Industrial Reconstruction Bank
of India Act, 1984, the National Housing Bank Act, 1987 and the Small Industries Development
Bank of India Act, 1989, shall have the same meanings respectively assigned to them in
those Acts.
CHAPTER II
M
ICRO FINANCE DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL
3. The Central Government may, by notification, constitute a Council to be known as
the Micro Finance Development Council to discharge the functions assigned to it under
this Act.
4. The Council shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) a person of eminence, with experience in the field of banking, rural credit and
micro finance, to be nominated by the Central Government—Chairperson;
(b) four officers, one each from the Ministry or the Department of the Central
Government having the administrative control of Finance, Rural Development, Women
and Child Development and Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, not below the
rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India, to be nominated by the Central
Government—ex officio Members;
(c) an officer of the Reserve Bank, not below the rank of an Executive Director, to
be nominated by the Reserve Bank—ex-officio Member;
(d) an officer of the Small Industries Development Bank of India, not below the
rank of an Executive Director, to be nominated by the Small Industries Development
Bank of India—ex officio Member;
61 of 1981.
21 of 1976.
2 of 1934.
2 of 1934.
10 of 1949.
1 of 1956.
21 of 1976.
28 of 1981.
61 of 1981.
62 of 1984.
53 of 1987.
39 of 1989.
Constitution
of Micro
Finance
Development
Council.
Composition
of Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(e) an officer of the National Bank dealing with micro finance, not below the rank
of an Executive Director, to be nominated by the National Bank—ex officio Member;
(f) an officer of the National Housing Bank, not below the rank of an Executive
Director, to be nominated by the National Housing Bank—ex officio Member;
(g) not more than four persons, of whom at least two shall be women, to be
nominated by the Central Government, in consultation with the Reserve Bank from
amongst persons with experience in the field of banking, rural credit or micro finance or
the representatives of micro finance institutions or scheduled banks or any other
institution providing micro finance services—Members.
 5. (1) A member of the Council shall hold office for a period of three years and shall be
eligible for reappointment.
(2) Members of the Council shall receive such fees and allowances as may be
prescribed.
6. The Council shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, as may be prescribed.
7. (1) The Council shall advise the Central Government on formulation of policies and
measures to be undertaken for orderly growth and development of micro finance institutions
and schemes to be framed therefor.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the Council may
advise the Central Government on formulation of policies, measures to be taken and schemes
to be framed for —
(a) the adoption of any innovations and use of technology in providing micro
finance services;
(b) establishing credit information bureaus for creation of data-base of clients
availing micro finance services from various micro finance institutions;
(c) the working of grievance redressal mechanisms to protect the interest of
clients of micro finance services; or
(d) any other matter which may be referred to the Council by the Central
Government for protecting the interest of clients availing micro finance services and in
the interest of promotion of financial inclusion.
CHAPTER III
S
TATE MICRO FINANCE COUNCILS
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, establish a State Micro Finance
Council for micro finance services in each State and considering the extent of micro finance
activities in the States, establish such a Micro Finance Council for two or more States.
(2) Each State Micro Finance Council shall consist of the following members,
namely :—
(a) two nominees of the concerned State or States, one of whom to be designated
by the Central Government as Chairperson;
(b) a representative of the Convener Bank of the State Level Bankers' Committee
for any State or States;
(c) one person representing the micro finance institutions operating in the State
nominated by the Central Government; and
(d) one person having experience in the field of micro finance, nominated by the
Reserve Bank.
Terms of
office and
allowances of
members of
Council.
Meetings of
Council.
Functions of
Council.
Establishment
and functions
of State
Micro
Finance
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(3) Every State Micro Finance Council shall be responsible to—
(a) coordinate the activities of the District Micro Finance Committees in the
State;
(b) review growth and development of micro finance activities in the State;
(c) monitor over-indebtedness, if any, caused by micro finance institutions in
the State; and
(d) monitor whether methods of recovery used by micro finance institutions are
in accordance with the guidelines made by the Reserve Bank and to report to the
Reserve Bank in respect of the violations, if any.
(4)The Central Government may, by notification, entrust such other functions of the
Council under section 7 to any State Micro Finance Council subject to such terms and
conditions as it deems fit.
(5) Each State Micro Finance Council shall submit a quarterly report to the Central
Government on the implementation of the measures undertaken for the promotion and
development of the micro finance institutions in the State including the following matters,
namely:—
(a) micro credit activities undertaken by micro finance institutions, over-
indebtedness of clients, if any, and consequent large scale defaults;
(b) recovery practices adopted by micro finance institutions whether fair and
reasonable;
(c) working of the grievance redressal mechanism;
(d) overall assessment of the impact of measures undertaken and schemes framed;
(e) any other matter which the State Micro Finance Council deems necessary to
bring to the notice of Central Government.
9. A member of the State Micro Finance Council shall hold office for such term not
exceeding three years and receive such fees and allowances as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER IV
D
ISTRICT MICRO FINANCE COMMITTEES
10. (1) The Reserve Bank may, constitute a District Micro Finance Committee in each
district, to be headed by the Collector or an officer not below the rank of Additional Collector
in that district in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The District Micro Finance Committee shall meet at such time and place, as the
Collector may direct, at least once in three months and shall observe such rules of procedure
in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, as may be specified by regulations:
Provided that the representatives of the Lead Bank of the District, representative of
the National Bank in the district, a representative of micro finance institutions operating in
the district and beneficiaries of micro finance services shall be invited to the meetings of the
District Micro Finance Committees.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "Lead Bank" of the District means a
bank to which a district is assigned as per the Lead Bank Scheme of the Reserve Bank of
India.
11. The District Micro Finance Committee shall discharge the following functions,
namely:—
(a) to review growth and development of micro finance activities in the district;
Term of
office and
allowances of
State Micro
Finance
Council.
Constitution
of District
Micro
Finance
Committee.
Functions of
District
Micro
Finance
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
(b) to monitor over-indebtedness, if any, caused by micro finance institutions in
the district; and
(c) to monitor whether methods of recovery used by micro finance institutions
are in accordance with the guidelines made by the Reserve Bank and to report to the
Reserve Bank in respect of the violations, if any.
12. Every District Micro Finance Committee shall submit a quarterly report to the
Reserve Bank in such form and manner as may be specified and forward its copy to the State
Micro Finance Council.
CHAPTER V
R
EGISTRATION OF MICRO FINANCE INSTITUTIONS
13. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
and save as otherwise provided in this Act, no micro finance institution after the
commencement of this Act, shall commence or carry on the activity of providing micro
finance services without obtaining a certificate of registration under this Act.
14. (1) A micro finance institution, which intends to carry on the activity of providing
micro finance services, shall make an application for registration to the Reserve Bank in
such form and manner along with such fee as may be specified by regulations:
 Provided that any micro finance institution, in existence at the commencement of this
Act, engaged in providing micro finance services before such commencement, shall within
three months from the date of such commencement, make an application to the Reserve
Bank for registration in the form and manner as specified under sub-section (1):
Provided further that any micro finance institution, in existence at the commencement
of this Act, engaged in providing micro finance services before such commencement, may
continue to carry on its activity of providing micro finance services till the disposal of such
application.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), any company registered
as a non-banking finance company with the Reserve Bank of India under the provisions of
Chapter III-B of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, and engaged in extending micro
finance services shall continue to do so and comply with the terms and conditions of its
registration and any rules, regulations, directives and guidelines issued by the Reserve
Bank to the non-banking finance companies, from time to time and also such other rules,
regulations, directives and guidelines of the Reserve Bank as may be made or issued by the
Reserve Bank for or to the micro finance institutions, under this Act.
15. (1) The Reserve Bank may, for the purpose of grant of certificate of registration,
satisfy itself that—
(a) the general character or management of the micro finance institution is not or
is not likely to be prejudicial to the interest of the present or future clients availing
micro finance services;
(b) the micro finance institution is engaged in or intends to engage in providing
micro finance services;
(c) the applicant has a net owned fund, created out of contributions to capital,
reserves or grants or donations received by it, of at least five lakh rupees or such
other higher amounts as may be specified by regulations.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this sub-section, "net owned fund" shall have,
mutatis mutandis, the same meaning as assigned to it in the Explanation to sub-section (7)
of section 45-IA of the Reserve Bank of India Act,1934.
Report of
District Micro
Finance
Committee.
No micro
finance
services
without
registration.
Application
for
registration.
2 of 1934.
Grant of
certificate.
2 of 1934.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(2) The Reserve Bank may, after being satisfied that the  conditions referred to in sub-
section (1) are fulfilled, grant a  certificate of registration to the micro finance institution to
commence or continue to carry on the business of providing micro finance services subject
to such conditions as it may consider necessary to impose:
Provided that no application for registration shall be rejected  unless the applicant
has been given an opportunity of being heard.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, every micro finance institution registered
under this Act shall provide micro finance services to its clients in accordance with provisions
of this Act and rules and regulations made thereunder.
(4) Every micro finance institution shall give preference for providing micro credit
facility to the rural and urban poor and other disadvantaged sections of the people.
16. (1) The Reserve Bank may, by order, cancel the certificate of registration granted
to a micro finance institution under section 15, if such micro finance institution—
(i) ceases to carry on the activity of providing micro finance services; or
(ii) has failed to comply with any of the conditions subject to which the certificate
of registration has been granted under sub-section (2) of section 15; or
(iii) fails to comply with any direction issued by the Reserve Bank under the
provisions of this Act; or
(iv) fails to submit or offer for inspection of its books of account and other
relevant documents under sub-section (4) of section 27; or
(v) fails to comply with directives stipulated in the Cease and Desist order passed
under section 28.
(2) Before cancelling the certificate of registration of any micro finance institution
under sub-section ( 1), the Reserve Bank shall provide a reasonable opportunity of being
heard to such micro finance institution.
17. (1) A micro finance institution aggrieved by an order of rejection of an application
for grant of certificate of registration under section 15, or cancellation of certificate of
registration under section 16, or any action taken by the Reserve Bank under sub-section
(6) of section 27, may prefer an appeal to the Central Government or such other authority, as
may be prescribed, within a period of sixty days from the date on which such order is
communicated to the micro finance institution.
(2) The appeal shall be filed in such form and in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(3) The decision of the Central Government or the authority, where an appeal has
been preferred under sub-section (1), shall be final:
Provided that before making any order of rejection of appeal, such micro finance
institution shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
CHAPTER VI
RESERVE,  ACCOUNTS,  AUDIT AND RETURNS
18. (1) Every micro finance institution registered with the Reserve Bank under this
Act shall create a reserve fund and transfer therein a sum, representing such percentage, as
may be specified by the Reserve Bank, of its net profit or surplus realised by providing
micro finance services every year as disclosed in the profit and loss account or income and
expenditure account and before surplus is utilised for any other purpose:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to a non-banking
finance company registered with the Reserve Bank which is maintaining such reserve fund
pursuant to any provisions of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 or any directions or
regulations issued thereunder.
Power of
Reserve Bank
to cancel
certificate of
registration.
Appeal against
certain cases.
Obligation to
create reserve
fund.
2 of 1934.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(2) No appropriation of any sum from the reserve fund shall be made by the micro
finance institution, except for the purpose, as may be specified by the Reserve Bank from
time to time, and every such appropriation shall be reported to the Reserve Bank within
twenty-one days from the date of such appropriation.
(3) The Reserve Bank may, in the public interest or in the interest of clients of any
micro finance institution, direct any micro finance institution or any class of micro finance
institutions to invest the whole or part of such reserve fund in such unencumbered securities,
as it may, by regulations specify.
19. At the close of each financial year, every micro finance institution shall prepare,
with reference to that year, in respect of all services transacted by it, a balance sheet, profit
and loss account or an income and expenditure account as on the last working day of the
financial year, in such form as may be specified by regulations.
20. The balance sheet, profit and loss account or an income and expenditure account
of the micro finance institution prepared in accordance with section 19 shall be audited by
a person duly qualified under law for the time being in force to be an auditor of companies
formed and registered under the Companies Act, 1956, or an auditor from the list of Chartered
Accountants or other qualified persons approved by the Reserve Bank.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section "person duly qualified" means a
person having qualification and experience, as may be specified by regulations.
21.  (1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 20, where the Reserve
Bank is of the opinion that it is necessary in the public interest or in the interest of clients or
for the purpose of proper assessment of the records and books of account of the micro
finance institutions, so to do, it may at any time, by order, direct a special audit of the
accounts of such micro finance institution, for such transaction or class of transactions
conducted by it or for such period or periods, as may be specified in the order and may by
the same or a different order either appoint a person duly qualified under any law for the
time being in force to be an auditor of companies and direct that the auditor shall comply
with such directions as it may specify in that order and make a report of such audit to the
Reserve Bank and forward a copy thereof to the micro finance institutions.
(2) The expenses of, or incidental to the special audit, specified in the order made by
the Reserve Bank, shall be borne by the micro finance institutions.
22. (1) The auditor appointed for audit under section 20 or for special audit under
section 21 shall have the powers of, exercise the functions vested in, discharge the duties
and be subject to the liabilities and penalties imposed on, the auditors of companies under
section 227 of the Companies Act, 1956 and the auditors, if any, appointed under any law
establishing, constituting or forming the micro finance institution concerned.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the auditor shall
report —
(a) whether or not, the information and explanations required have been found
to be satisfactory;
(b) whether the profit and loss account or income and expenditure account, as
the case may be, shows the true balance of profit or income or loss for the period
covered by such account;
(c) any other matter including defaults in repayment of thrift or interest thereon
which the auditor considers necessary to be  brought to the notice of eligible clients
and the Reserve Bank  to ensure good governance and transparency in the business
of  the micro finance institution concerned.
(3) Where any of the matters referred to in clauses ( a) and (b) of sub-section ( 2) is
answered in negative or with qualification, the auditor's report shall state the reasons for
the same.
Accounts and
balance sheet.
1 of 1956.
Audit.
Special audit.
1 of 1956.
Powers of
auditors.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

9
23. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, every micro finance institution, at the
commencement of this Act, shall, within ninety days from the date of such commencement,
file with the Reserve Bank a return containing particulars of its activities in such form and
manner and thereafter at such intervals as may be specified by regulations.
CHAPTER VII
F
UNCTIONS AND POWERS OF RESERVE BANK
24. (1) The Reserve Bank shall regulate, promote and ensure orderly growth of the
micro finance institutions and take measures as it deems fit, for the purpose of promoting
financial inclusion through such institutions.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions contained in
sub-section (1), the powers and functions shall include—
(a) grant of certificate of registration to the applicant micro finance institution
under section 15 or cancellation of such certificate under section 16;
(b) making of schemes for the orderly growth of the micro finance services
provided by micro finance institutions so as to ensure greater transparency, effective
management and good governance in an efficient manner;
(c) specifying the maximum limit of the margin and the annual percentage rate to
be charged by the micro finance institution for providing micro credit facilities to its
clients;
(d) specifying the sector related benchmarks and performance standards
pertaining to methods of operation, fair and reasonable methods of recovery,
management and governance including model codes for conduct of activities of micro
finance institutions;
(e) facilitating the development of credit rating norms or rating norms for other
purposes for micro finance institutions;
(f) specifying the form and manner of books of account to be maintained by
micro finance institutions;
(g) specifying the form and manner of accounting of business operations of
micro finance institutions and auditing standards relating thereto;
(h) calling for information and data from micro finance institutions for maintaining
an appropriate database in the public domain relating to micro finance services and
disseminating the same through a national dissemination network;
(i) constituting a Micro Finance Development Fund and to apply it for the
purposes as provided in section 32;
(j) promoting development of micro finance institutions, engaged in micro finance
services through training and capacity building measures;
(k) promoting customer education of all institutions engaged in micro finance
services for greater awareness and for economic empowerment of micro finance clients;
(l) supporting research, field research, documentation and dissemination thereof
relating to micro finance sector;
(m) coordinating with other agencies for orderly growth and development of
institutions engaged in the micro finance services;
(n) documenting and disseminating information relating to best practices with a
view to ensuring provision of micro finance services at an affordable cost to eligible
clients; and
Returns to be
filed by micro
finance
institutions.
Functions and
powers of
Reserve Bank.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
(o) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
25. (1) If the Reserve Bank is satisfied that, in the public interest or to prevent the
affairs of any micro finance institution being conducted in a manner detrimental to the
interest of the clients availing micro finance services or in a manner prejudicial to the
interest of the micro finance institution, it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may give
directions to a class or classes or all micro finance institutions generally, as the case may be,
and such micro finance institution shall be bound to follow the policy so determined and
the directions so issued.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such
directions may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: —
(a) extent of deployment of assets for providing micro finance services and
proportion of clients availing such services, necessary to classify any institution as
micro finance institution;
(b) ceiling on amount of micro credit facilities and the number of individual
clients to whom such micro credit facilities may be provided by any micro finance
institution;
(c) tenure of micro credit facilities given to clients and other terms and conditions
for which micro credit facilities, can be given, margin caps and periodicity of repayment
schedules;
(d) levy of processing fees, interest, life insurance premium and other terms
relating to micro credit facilities including the ceiling on the percentage of margin to be
maintained by a micro finance institution;
(e) the maximum annual percentage rate which may be charged by a micro finance
institution on the micro credit facilities granted to any client;
(f) the locations where micro credit facilities may be sanctioned and disbursed
by micro finance institutions;
(g) micro finance institutions to become members of Credit Information Bureaus
that may be set up for the micro finance sector;
(h) observing code of conduct formulated by any organisation of micro finance
institution recognised by the Reserve Bank and setting up of grievance redressal
mechanism for their clients as required by such organisation;
(i) a Client Protection Code and its acceptance and observance by micro finance
institutions;
(j) micro finance institutions to achieve better control , simplification of procedures
and reduction of costs by use of information technology;
(k) the minimum net worth of micro finance institutions considering their size of
operations and other relevant parameters;
(l) norms for corporate governance to be observed by micro finance institutions;
(m) prudential norms relating to income recognition, accounting standards,
provisioning for bad and doubtful debts, capital adequacy based on risk weights for
assets and deployment of funds;
(n) disclosure of assignments or securitisation of assets as also assets assigned
with recourse or with arrangement as agent for collection of loan instalments;
(o) raising of preference share capital or other capital by micro finance institution;
(p) grant of recognition to any self Regulatory Organisation of micro finance
institutions for efficient conduct of the business of micro finance institution; and
Power of
Reserve Bank
to issue
directions to
micro finance
institutions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
(q) such other directions as may be specified by regulations.
26. (1) A micro finance institution engaged in the activity of providing micro credit
facilities shall not collect a margin which is in excess of the maximum limit thereof, as may be
specified from time to time by the Reserve Bank, for a micro finance institution or a class of
micro finance institutions.
(2) The Reserve Bank may specify, by regulations, margin under sub-section (1) for
micro finance institutions generally or for a class of micro finance institutions or for any
micro finance institution in particular, considering the size of their operations, risk associated
with such operations and such other parameters, as it deems fit.
(3) A micro finance institution engaged in the activity referred in sub-section (1) shall
convey to every client or borrower the annual percentage rate comprising of the annual
interest rate, processing fees or any other charge or fee levied by the micro finance institution
and incorporate the same distinctly and prominently in the loan document of the client or
the borrower, in the sanction letter given to the client or borrower, as the case may be.
(4) A micro finance institution shall obtain from the Statutory Auditors a certificate
that the margin available to, and realised by, the micro finance institution does not exceed
the maximum limit specified by the Reserve Bank and that the micro finance institution has
complied with the requirements of sub-sections (1) and (2).
27.  (1) The Reserve Bank shall, at any time or on being directed so to do by the
Central Government cause an inspection of any micro finance institution and its books and
accounts and the Reserve Bank shall supply to the micro finance institution a copy of the
report of such inspection.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the Reserve Bank may
cause a scrutiny of the affairs of any micro finance institution and its books and accounts.
(3) A copy of the report of the scrutiny shall be furnished to the micro finance institution,
if the micro finance institution makes a request for the same or if any adverse action is
contemplated against the micro finance institution on the basis of the scrutiny.
(4) It shall be the duty of every person who is a director, trustee or a member of
managing committee, manager, secretary or other officer or employee of the micro finance
institution to produce before any officer authorised to make an inspection, all such books
of account, records and other documents in custody or power of such person to furnish
any statement or information relating to affairs of the micro finance institution, as the
inspecting authority may require within such time, as may be specified.
(5) Any officer making an inspection under sub-section ( 1) or a scrutiny under
sub-section ( 2) may examine on oath any director, trustee or a member of Managing
Committee, manager, secretary or other officer or employee of the micro finance institution
in relation to its business, and may administer an oath accordingly.
(6) If the Reserve Bank, after considering the report of inspection under sub-section
(1) or scrutiny under sub-section ( 2), is of the view that the affairs of any micro finance
institution are being conducted to the detriment of its clients, it may after giving such
opportunity to the micro finance institution to make representation in connection with the
report, take such action as it deems fit including removal of any officer, office bearer or
managing committee of the micro finance institution or prohibiting the micro finance
institution from providing micro finance services for such period as the Reserve Bank may
deem fit, in the manner as may be specified by regulations.
28. (1) If on inspection or perusal of annual accounts or any returns submitted by any
micro finance institution, the Reserve Bank is satisfied that activities of that micro finance
institution are being conducted in a manner prejudicial to the interest of its clients or
members of the self-help group (thrift group) or the micro finance institution itself, the
Reserve Bank may pass a Cease and Desist order within sixty days of such inspection
Margin not to
be in excess
of maximum
limit.
Inspection.
Cease and
Desist order.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

12
directing such micro finance institution to cease and desist from providing the micro finance
services, subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified in such order.
(2) In the Cease and Desist order, the Reserve Bank may, direct the micro finance
institution not to sell, transfer, create any charge or mortgage or deal in any manner with its
property and assets without prior written permission of the Reserve Bank during the
subsistence of the Cease and Desist order.
(3) The Reserve Bank may, grant time to such micro finance institution for taking
necessary steps to comply with the directions of the order passed under sub-section ( 1).
(4) The Reserve Bank may withdraw the Cease and Desist order issued under
sub-section (1), if the Reserve Bank is satisfied that micro finance institution has complied
with the directions issued under such order.
29. (1) No micro finance institution registered under this Act providing micro finance
services or other services shall close its activity or amalgamate with other institutions, or
take over any other business or its shareholding or demerge or divide, or restructure, or
otherwise transfer the ownership or control of its activity of providing micro finance services
unless a scheme thereof is approved by the Reserve Bank under this section.
(2) The micro finance institution shall formulate a scheme for any of the purposes
specified in sub-section (1) and submit it to the Reserve Bank for approval.
(3) The Reserve Bank shall not approve any scheme submitted to it under
sub-section (2), unless it is in public interest and has been sanctioned by the appropriate
authority under the provisions of the law applicable to such micro finance institutions for
the time being in force.
(4) The Reserve Bank may, by an order, approve the scheme under sub-section ( 2)
subject to such terms and conditions as it may specify in the order.
(5) Where a scheme is approved by the Reserve Bank under sub-section ( 4), the
Reserve Bank may, in the order under that sub-section or by another order, direct that on
such date the micro finance institution shall stand restructured or cease to function and
stand dissolved.
30. (1) Without prejudice to anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force applicable to winding up of any micro finance institution, the Reserve Bank, on being
satisfied that a micro finance institution—
(a) is unable to pay its debt; or
(b) has by virtue of provisions of this Act become disqualified to carry on the
activity of micro finance institution; or
(c) has failed to comply with any directives or orders issued by the Reserve Bank
including the Cease and Desist order or otherwise; or
(d) the continuance of the micro finance institution is detrimental to public
interest or to the interest of the clients of the institution,
may file an application for winding up or any other application by whatever name called for
closure of its activity, before the appropriate authority or Court empowered to wind up the
business or activity of the micro finance institution under the law applicable to such micro
finance institution:
Provided that where the micro finance institution against whom application for winding
up is filed is also engaged in any other activity, the concerned micro finance institution may
be permitted to continue such activity and restrict the winding up or closure of the business
only to the activity of providing micro finance services with the approval of the concerned
authority or Court.
Closing or
restructuring
of business.
Winding up
petition or
other
application
for closure of
micro finance
activity.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
(2) Any authority or Court, empowered to wind up the business of the micro finance
institution, may pass such orders as it deems fit.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, a micro finance institution shall be
deemed to be unable to pay its debts, if it has refused or has failed to meet within five
working days any lawful demand made at any of its officers or branches and the Reserve
Bank certifies in writing that such institution is unable to pay its debt.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ICRO FINANCE DEVELOPMENT FUND
31. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, grant such sum of money as that Government may think fit, to the Reserve
Bank for being utilised for the purposes specified under sub-section (3) of section 32.
32. (1) The Reserve Bank shall constitute a fund to be called the Micro Finance
Development Fund (hereafter called “the Fund”) and there shall be credited thereto —
(a) all Government grants received and fees payable under this Act;
(b) all sums that may be raised by the Reserve Bank from donors, institutions,
other entities and public for the purpose of this Act;
(c) any interest or other income received out of investments made from the
Fund under clause (c) of sub-section (3);
(d) the balance outstanding in the Micro Finance Development and Equity Fund
maintained by the Reserve Bank, before the commencement of this Act.
(2) The Fund shall be managed by the Reserve Bank in such manner as may be
specified by regulations duly approved by the Central Board of Directors of the Reserve
Bank.
(3) The Fund shall be applied—
(a) to provide loans, refinance, grant, seed capital or any other micro credit
facilities to any micro finance institution or any other agency which the Reserve
Bank may by regulations specify;
(b) to give grants or loans for training and capacity building of institutions
engaged in micro finance services and personnel engaged in promoting and
providing micro finance services and meeting other expenditure related to such
training and capacity building on such terms and conditions as may be specified
by regulations;
(c) to invest in equity or any other form of capital or quasi-equity of a micro
finance institution or any other agency on such terms and conditions as may be
specified by regulations;
(d) to meet the necessary expenses in relation to collection, analysis,
dissemination of information relating to micro finance, conduct of such research,
experiments or studies as may be specified, and to design, promote, and propagate
such practices as may be considered conducive to the growth of micro finance
services;
(e) to meet any other expenses as may be required for the promotion of micro
finance services as the Reserve Bank by regulations specify;
(f) to meet any other expenses (except salaries, allowances and other
remuneration of officers and other employees) of the Reserve Bank in connection
with discharge of its functions as may be specified by the regulations.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
CHAPTER IX
REDRESSAL MECHANISM
33. (1) The Reserve Bank shall formulate a scheme for redressal of grievances of
beneficiaries of micro finance services against micro finance institutions and may entrust
the functions of redressal of such grievance redressal to any Ombudsman established
under any other scheme framed by the Reserve Bank for clients of banks, with powers to
issue directions to micro finance institutions.
(2) Any scheme to be formulated under sub-section (1) shall provide for —
(a) nature of grievance and complaints that may be entertained;
(b) procedure for redressal of grievances and complaints;
(c) any other matter that may be necessary for effective redressal of grievances.
CHAPTER X
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
34. If any provision of this Act is contravened or any default is made in complying
with any other requirement of this Act or of any rules, regulations or orders or directions
given or notification issued or condition imposed thereunder, any person guilty of such
contravention or default shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding
two years or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees and where, a contravention or
default is a continuing one, with further fine, which may extend to ten thousand rupees for
everyday after the first, during which the contravention or default continues.
35. Whoever, in any application, declaration, return, statement, information or
particulars made, required or furnished by or under or for the purposes of any provision of
this Act, or any rule, regulation or order or direction made or given thereunder, willfully
makes a statement which is false in any material particulars knowing it to be false or willfully
omits to make a material statement, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to five lakh rupees.
36. (1) Where an offence under this Act is committed, the person who was in charge
of, and was responsible to, the micro finance institution for the conduct of business of the
micro finance institution, as well as the micro finance institution itself, shall be deemed to be
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to punishment if he proves that the contravention or default was committed without
his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a micro finance institution and it is proved that the same
was committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the
part of, any person who is or was a director, trustee, member of the managing committee,
manager, secretary or other officer or employee of the micro finance institution when the
offence is or was committed, such person shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, any offence punishable under this
Act shall be deemed to have been committed at the place where the registered office or
principal office of the micro finance institution, is situated.
 37. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in section 34, the Reserve
Bank may impose monetary penalty, which may extend up to five lakh rupees where the
contravention is of the nature referred to in section 34.
Redressal of
Grievances
against micro
finance
institutions.
Contravention
of provisions
of Act, orders
and directions.
Giving false
information.
Offences by
micro finance
institutions.
Powers of
Reserve Bank
to impose
Penalty.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
(2) For the purpose of imposing penalty under this section, the Reserve Bank shall
serve notice on the micro finance institution requiring it to show cause why the amount
specified in the notice should not be imposed as a penalty and a reasonable opportunity of
being heard shall also be given to such micro finance institution.
(3) Any penalty imposed by the Reserve Bank under sub-section (1) shall be payable
within a period of thirty days from the date on which the notice by the Reserve Bank
demanding payment of the amount is served on the micro finance institution and the orders
of the Reserve Bank shall be enforceable in the same manner as if it were a decree made by
the civil court in a civil suit.
 (4) All sums realised by imposition of penalties under this section shall be credited to
the Consolidated Fund of India.
38. No civil court shall have jurisdiction against any micro finance institution in
respect of any contravention or default for which any penalty has been imposed by the
Reserve Bank.
39. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
every offence connected with or arising out of acceptance of thrift or repayment thereof,
shall be a cognizable offence.
40. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act or
rules or regulations made thereunder except upon a complaint made in writing by an officer
or other person authorised, by general or special order, by the Reserve Bank:
Provided that no such officer or other person shall be competent to file the complaint
unless he is generally or specially authorised in writing by the Reserve Bank.
(2) No court inferior to that of Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the
first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
 (3) Notwithstanding anything to contrary contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, a court, if it considers fit to do so, may dispense with the attendance of the officer of
the Reserve Bank or other person filing the complaint on its behalf, but the court in its
discretion at any stage of the proceeding, may direct personal attendance of such officer or
the person.
41. The court imposing any fine under this Act may direct that the whole or any part
thereof shall be applied for, or towards payment of, the cost of the proceeding.
CHAPTER XI
D
ELEGATION OF POWERS
42. (1) The Central Government, in consultation with the Reserve Bank may, by
notification, delegate any of the powers of the Reserve Bank conferred under this Act,
except under sections 30, 37 and 49, to the National Bank or any agency under the control
of the Central Government in respect of any micro finance institution or a class of micro
finance institutions or micro finance institutions generally, subject to such conditions as it
deems fit.
(2) Any notification issued under sub-section ( 1) shall specify the specific powers
under various provisions of this Act which are delegated to the National Bank or any
agency under the control of the Central Government.
(3) The National Bank or agency under the Control of the Central Government shall
exercise the powers delegated by the Central Government subject to such conditions as
may be specified in the notification under sub-section (1) and such directives and guidelines
which may be issued by the Reserve Bank from time to time.
(4) Any action taken by the National Bank or agency under the Control of the Central
Government pursuant to the delegation of powers under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to
Bar of civil
court
jurisdiction.
2 of 1974.
Cognizance of
offences.
2 of 1974.
Application of
fine.
Delegation of
certain
powers of
Reserve Bank
to National
Bank.
Certain
offences to
be cognizable.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
be the action of the Reserve Bank and provisions contained in section 17 for appeal shall be
applicable.
CHAPTER XII
MISCELLANEOUS
43. In the event of any micro finance institution making default in repayment of thrift
to its members or clients who had made a contribution to thrift, all the workmen shall be paid
their dues in priority to all others and thereafter all such members or clients of such micro
finance institution shall have a preference in repayment, and shall have the first charge over
the assets of the micro finance institution and specified unencumbered securities, if any,
referred to in sub-section (3) of section 18.
44. (1) The Central Government may issue directions to the Reserve Bank, the Micro
Finance Development Council or any State Micro Finance Council on matters of policy and
implementation of schemes and other measures as may be necessary for orderly growth and
development of micro finance institutions for promoting financial inclusion.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the Reserve Bank, the
Micro Finance Development Council or any State Micro Finance Council shall, in exercise
of the powers or the performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions
on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time:
Provided that the Reserve Bank, the Micro Finance Development Council or any
State Micro Finance Council shall as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express
its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.
(3) The decision of the Central Government, whether a question is of policy or not,
shall be final.
45. The Central Government may, in consultation with the Reserve Bank from time to
time, require the furnishing of information, returns, statements and such other particulars in
regard to micro finance institutions in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed,
and the micro finance institution shall furnish to the Central Government such information,
returns, statements and particulars.
46. (1) The Central Government may, in the public interest, by notification, direct that
all or any of the provisions of this Act,—
(a) shall not apply to such class or classes of micro finance institutions;
(b) shall apply to the class or classes of micro finance institutions with such
exceptions, modifications and adaptations, as may be specified in the notification.
(2) A copy of every notification issued under sub-section ( 1), shall be laid in draft
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses agree in
making any modification in the notification, the notification shall not be issued or, as the
case may be, shall be issued only in such modified form as may be agreed upon by both
Houses.
47. The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or any instrument having
effect by virtue of any such law.
Preference to
members or
clients of
micro finance
institution in
repayment.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Power of
Central
Government
to call for
information,
statements,
etc.
Power to
exempt class
or classes of
micro finance
institutions
from
provisions of
this Act.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

17
48. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Reserve Bank, or any
director, or any officer, or other employee of the Reserve Bank, or any other person or
agency authorised by the Reserve Bank, to discharge any functions under this Act for any
loss or damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any other law or provision having the
force of law.
49. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: —
(a) the higher amount for such special purposes under sub-clause (A) of clause
(j) of sub-section (1) of section 2;
(b) the manner of providing micro finance services under clause (j) of section 2;
(c) the fees and allowances receivable by members of the Council under sub-
section (2) of section 5;
(d) the time and place and the rules of procedure for transaction of business at
the meetings of the Council under section 6;
(e) the term of office and allowances of Members of the State Micro Finance
Council under section 9;
(f) authority before whom appeal may be preferred under sub-section ( 1), the
form and the manner of filing of appeal under sub-section (2), of section 17;
(g) such other functions to be performed by the Reserve Bank under clause (n)
of sub-section (2) of section 24;
(h) the form and manner of furnishing of returns, statements and other particulars
under section 45;
(i) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.
50. (1) The Reserve Bank, with the previous approval of the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with this Act and
the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the other terms and conditions of remittance of funds under sub-clause (d) of
clause (j) of section 2;
(b) the rules of procedure to be observed by the District Micro Finance Committee
under sub-section (2) of section 10;
(c) the form and manner of submitting quarterly report by the District Micro
Finance Committee to the Reserve Bank under section 12;
(d) the form and manner and fee payable for making an application for registration
by the micro finance institution to the Reserve Bank under sub-section (1) of section
14;
(e) other higher amount of net owned fund under clause (c
) of sub-section (1) of
section 15;
(f) the unencumbered securities for the purpose of investment under sub-section
(3) of section 18;
(g) the form in which the balance sheet, profit and loss account or an income and
expenditure account shall be prepared under section 19;
Protection of
action taken
under the Act.
Power to
make rules.
Power to
make
regulations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

18
(h) qualifications and experience of a person duly qualified under section 20;
(i) the form and the manner of filing return under section 23;
(j) the maximum limit of the margin and the annual percentage rate to be charged
by the micro finance institution for providing micro credit facilities to its clients under
clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 24;
(k) the procedure for removal of any officer, office bearer or managing committee
of the micro finance institution or for prohibiting the micro finance institution from
providing micro finance services for such period as the Reserve Bank may deem fit
under sub-section (6) of section 27;
(l) the manner of management of  the Fund by the Reserve Bank under sub-
section (2) of section 32;
(m) providing loans, refinance, grants, seed capital or any other financial
assistance to any micro finance institution or any other agency under clause ( a) of
sub-section (3) of section 32;
(n) the terms and conditions subject to which grants or loans shall be given by
the Reserve Bank under clause (b) of sub-section (3) of section 32;
(o) the terms and conditions subject to which the investment in equity or any
other form of capital or quasi-equity of a micro finance institution shall be made under
clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 32;
(p) any other expenses as may be required for the promotion of micro finance
services under clause (e) of sub-section (3) of section 32;
(q) the other expenses (except salaries, allowances and other remuneration of
officers and other employees) of the Reserve Bank under clause (f) of sub-section (3)
of section 32;
 (r) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations.
51. Every rule or order made by the Central Government and every regulation made by
the Reserve Bank and any order of exemption made under section 44 shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule,
regulation or order or both Houses agree that the rule, regulation or order should not be
made, the rule, regulation or order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule,
regulation or order.
52. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient, for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be
laid before each House of Parliament.
Rules,
regulations
and orders to
be laid before
Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

19
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The banking system has achieved significant growth in terms of average population
covered per bank office and has also been able to reduce the levels of credit gaps in the
economy. In spite of such growth, many of the poor households still do not have access to
basic financial services such as savings, credit and remittances and such financial exclusion
faced by such people results in discrimination and denial of equal opportunities to them.
Financial inclusion is an important priority of the Central Government.
2. There are many societies, companies, trusts and bodies corporate and such other
institutions which are engaged in providing micro finance services to the poor households
as a complementary to the banking system. Since these institutions lack a formal statutory
framework for providing such micro finance services, it is expedient to provide a statutory
framework for the promotion, development, regulation and orderly growth of such micro
finance institutions and thereby facilitate financial inclusion. It is, therefore, considered
necessary to enact a law for the said purpose.
3. In pursuance of the Budget speech for the year 2006-07, the Central Government
introduced the Micro Financial Sector (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2007 in the Lok
Sabha on 20th March, 2007. The Bill was referred to the Departmental Related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on the Ministry of Finance. However, on account of the dissolution of
the Lok Sabha, the Bill lapsed.
4. It has now been decided to introduce the Micro Finance Institutions (Development
and Regulation) Bill, 2012, with certain modifications. The Micro Finance Institutions
(Development and Regulation) Bill, 2012, inter alia, provides for the following, namely:—
(a) regulation of micro finance institutions providing micro finance services,
such as micro credit facilities, thrift, pension or insurance services and  remittance of
funds and prohibit micro finance institutions from carrying on the activities of micro
finance services without registration with the Reserve Bank but allows the existing
non-banking finance companies registered under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934
to continue such services without registration;
(b) constitution of the Micro Finance Development Council to advise the Central
Government on formulation of policies, schemes and other measures required to be
taken in the interest of orderly growth and development of micro finance institutions
and advice on such other matters as specified in sub-clause (2) of clause 7 of the Bill;
(c) establishment of  State Micro Finance Council in each State or for two or more
States, considering the extent of micro finance activities in such States and such
Council shall report to the Central Government on the implementation of the measures
undertaken for the promotion and development of micro finance institutions and shall
be responsible for the matters specified in items (a) to (d) of sub-clause (3) of clause 8
and discharge such other functions as may be entrusted by the Central Government;
(d) establishment of a District Micro Finance Committee in each District, to be
headed by the Collector of the District or any officer not below the rank of Additional
Collector, to review the growth and development of micro finance activities in the
district, monitor over-indebtedness and methods of recovery used by the micro finance
institutions and discharge the functions specified in clause 11;
(e) make provision for cancellation of registration for failure to carry on business
of providing micro finance services, contravention of the conditions of registration or

20
directions issued by the Reserve Bank or failure to comply with the directives stipulated
in Cease and Desist Order;
(f) confer power upon the Reserve Bank to,-—
(i) specify the maximum limit of the margin and annual percentage rate
which can be charged by any micro finance institution, sector related benchmarks
and performance standards pertaining to  methods of operation, fair and
reasonable methods of recovery of loan advanced by the micro finance
institutions;
(ii) cause inspection of the accounts of the micro finance institutions and
take necessary action including passing of the Cease and Desist order and to
impose monetary penalty for contravention or non-compliance of the provisions
of the proposed legislation;
(g) prohibit micro finance institutions to close or restructure their activities
without the approval of the Reserve Bank;
(h) enable the Reserve Bank to file winding up petition or application for the
closure of the activities of the micro finance institution if such institution is unable to
pay its debt or fails  to comply with the directives of the Reserve Bank or the conditions
of the registration or continuance of such institution is detrimental to the public interest
or interests of its clients;
(i) make provisions for constitution of the Micro Finance Development Fund to
be applied for the purpose of providing loans, grants or seed capital as also for training
of personnel engaged in micro finance institution services;
(j) make provisions for formulation of schemes for redressal of grievances of the
beneficiaries of the micro finance services;
(k) provide for levy of penalties for contravention of the provisions of the
proposed legislation or default made in complying with any other requirement of the
proposed legislation or giving false information.
4. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the Bill.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
PRANAB  MUKHERJEE
N
EW DELHI;
The 16th May, 2012
————
PRESIDENT'S  RECOMMENDATION  UNDER  ARTICLE  117  OF
THE  CONSTITUTTION  OF  INDIA
————
[Copy of letter No. 13/01/2006-AC, dated 17 May, 2012 from Shri Pranab Mukherjee,
Minister of Finance to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Micro Finance
Institutions (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2012 has recommended the introduction and
consideration of the said Bill in Lok Sabha under article 117(1) and (3) of the Constitution of
India.

21
Notes on clauses
Clause 2.-—This clause defines certain terms and expressions used in the Bill, namely,
"annual percentage rate", "co-operative society", "District Micro Finance Committee",
"micro credit facilities", "micro finance institution", "micro finance services", "State Micro
Finance Council" and "thrift".
Clause 3.-—This clause relates to constitution of Micro Finance Development Council.
It provides that the Central Government may, by notification, constitute a Council to be
known as the Micro Finance Development Council to discharge the functions assigned to
it under this Act.
Clause 4.—This clause relates to composition of council. It provides that the council
shall consist of—(a) a person of eminence, with experience in the field of banking, rural
credit and micro finance, to be nominated by the Central Government —Chairperson; (b) four
officers, one each from the Ministry or the Department of the Central Government having
the administrative control of Finance, Rural Development, Women and Child Development
and Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the
Government of India, to be nominated by the Central Government —ex officio Members;
(c) an officer of the Reserve Bank, not below the rank of an Executive Director, to be nominated
by the Reserve Bank —ex officio Member; (d) an officer of the Small Industries Development
Bank of India, not below the rank of an Executive Director, to be nominated by the Small
Industries Development Bank of India —ex officio Member; (e) an officer of the National
Bank dealing with micro finance, not below the rank of an Executive Director, to be nominated
by the National Bank —ex officio Member; (f) an officer of the National Housing Bank, not
below the rank of an Executive Director, to be nominated by the National Housing Bank—
ex officio Member; (g) not more than four persons, of whom at least two shall be women, to
be nominated by the Central Government, in consultation with the Reserve Bank from
amongst persons with experience in the field of banking, rural credit or micro finance or the
representatives of micro finance institutions or scheduled banks or any other institution
providing micro finance services—Members.
Clause 5.—This clause provides terms of office and allowances of members of Council.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that a member of the council shall hold office for a
period of three years and shall be eligible for reappointment. Sub-clause (2) of this clause
provides that members of the council shall receive such fees and allowances as may be
prescribed.
Clause 6.—This clause relates to the meetings of council. It provides that the council
shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to
the transaction of business at its meetings, as may be prescribed.
Clause 7.—This clause deals with the functions of council. Sub-clause (1) of this
clause provides that the Council shall advise the Central Government on formulation of
policies and measures to be undertaken for orderly growth and development of micro
finance institutions and schemes to be framed therefor. Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides
that without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the Council may
advise the Central Government on formulation of policies, measures to be taken and schemes
to be framed for —(a) the adoption of any innovations and use of technology in providing
micro finance services; (b) establishing credit information bureaus for creation of data base
of clients availing micro finance services from various micro finance institutions; ( c) the
working of grievance redressal mechanisms to protect the interest of clients of micro finance
services; or ( d) any other matter which may be referred to the Council by the Central
Government for protecting the interest of clients availing micro finance services and in the
interest of promotion of financial inclusion.

22
Clause 8. —This clause relates to the establishment and functions of State Micro
Finance Council. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Central Government may,
by notification, establish a State Micro Finance Council for Micro Finance Services in each
State and considering the extent of micro finance activities in the States, establish such a
Micro Finance Council for two or more States. Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that
each State Micro Finance Council shall consist of —(a) two nominees of the concerned
State or States, one of whom to be designated by the Central Government as Chairperson;
(b) a representative of the Convener Bank of the State Level Bankers' Committee for any
State or States; (c) one person representing the micro finance institutions operating in the
State nominated by the Central Government; and ( d) one person having experience in the
field of micro finance, nominated by the Reserve Bank.
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that every State Micro Finance Council
shall be responsible to—(a) coordinate the activities of the District Micro Finance Committees
in the State; ( b) review growth and development of micro finance activities in the State;
(c) monitor over-indebtedness, if any, caused by micro finance institutions in the State; and
(d) monitor whether methods of recovery used by micro finance institutions are in accordance
with the guidelines made by the Reserve Bank and to report to the Reserve Bank in respect
of the violations, if any.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the Central Government may, by notification,
entrust such other functions of the Council under section 7 to any State Micro Finance
Council subject to such terms and conditions as it deems fit. Sub-clause (5) of this clause
provides that each State Micro Finance Council shall submit a quarterly report to the
Central Government on the implementation of the measures undertaken for the promotion
and development of the micro finance institutions in the State including the matters of —
(a) micro credit activities undertaken by micro finance institutions, over-indebtedness of
clients, if any, and consequent large scale defaults; (b) recovery practices adopted by micro
finance institutions whether fair and reasonable; ( c) working of the grievance redressal
mechanism; ( d) overall assessment of the impact of measures undertaken and schemes
framed; (e) any other matter which the State Micro Finance Council deems necessary to
bring to the notice of  the Central Government.
Clause 9.—This clause deals with the term of office and allowances of State Micro
Finance Council. A member of the State Micro Finance Council shall hold office for such
term not exceeding three years and receive such fees and allowances as may be prescribed.
Clause  10. —This clause provides for constitution of District Micro Finance
Committees. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Reserve Bank may, constitute a
District Micro Finance Committee in each district, to be headed by the Collector or an officer
not below the rank of Additional Collector in that district in such manner as may be specified
by regulations. Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the District Micro Finance
Committee shall meet at such time and place, as the Collector may direct, at least once in
three months and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of
business at its meetings, as may be specified by regulations. However, the representatives
of the Lead Bank of the District, representative of the National Bank in the district, a
representative of micro finance institutions operating in the district and beneficiaries of
micro finance services shall be invited to the meetings of the District Micro Finance
Committees. This clause clarifies that the "Lead Bank" of the District, for the purposes of
this section, means a bank to which a district — is assigned as per the Lead Bank Scheme
of the Reserve Bank of India.
Clause 11. —This clause relates to the functions of the District Micro Finance
Committee. It provides that the District Micro Finance Committee shall discharge the
functions, namely:—(a) to review growth and development of micro finance activities in the
district; (b) to monitor over-indebtedness, if any, caused by micro finance institutions in the
district; and (c) to monitor whether methods of recovery used by micro finance institutions
are in accordance with the guidelines made by the Reserve Bank and to report to the
Reserve Bank in respect of the violations, if any.

23
Clause 12.—This clause deals with the report of District Micro Finance Committees.
It provides that each District Micro Finance Committees shall submit a quarterly report to
the Reserve Bank in such form and manner as may be specified and forward its copy to the
State Micro Finance Council.
Clause13.—This clause provides that no micro finance services to be provided without
registration. It provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force and save as otherwise provided in this Act, no micro finance institution
after the commencement of this Act, shall commence or carry on the activity of providing
micro finance services without obtaining a certificate of registration under this Act.
Clause 14.—This clause relates to application for registration. Sub-clause (1) of this
clause provides that a micro finance institution, which intends to carry on the activity of
providing micro finance services, shall make an application for registration to the Reserve
Bank in such form and manner along with such fee as may be specified by regulations.
However, any micro finance institution, in existence at the commencement of this Act,
engaged in providing micro finance services before such commencement, shall within three
months from the date of such commencement, make an application to the Reserve Bank for
registration in the form and manner as specified under sub-section (1). It further provides
that any micro finance institution, in existence at the commencement of this Act, engaged in
providing micro finance services before such commencement, may continue to carry on its
activity of providing micro finance services till the disposal of such application. Sub-
clause (2) of this clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), any company registered as a non-banking finance company with the Reserve Bank of
India under the provisions of Chapter III-B of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, and
engaged in extending micro finance services shall continue to do so and comply with the
terms and conditions of its registration and any rules, regulations, directives and guidelines
issued by the Reserve Bank to the non-banking finance companies, from time to time and
also such other rules, regulations, directives and guidelines of the Reserve Bank as may be
made or issued by the Reserve Bank for or to the micro finance institutions, under this Act.
Clause 15.—This clause relates to the grant of certificate of registration. Sub-clause
(1) of this clause provides that the Reserve Bank may, for the purpose of grant of certificate
of registration, satisfy itself that —(a) the general character or management of the micro
finance institution is not or is not likely to be prejudicial to the interest of the present or
future clients availing micro finance services; (b) the micro finance institution is engaged in
or intends to engage in providing micro finance services; (c) the applicant has a net owned
fund, created out of contributions to capital, reserves or grants or donations received by it,
of at least five lakh rupees or such other higher amounts as may be specified by regulations.
This clause also clarifies that "net owned fund" shall have, mutatis mutandis, the same
meaning as assigned to it in the “ Explanation” to sub-section (7) of section 45-IA of the
Reserve Bank of India Act,1934. Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Reserve
Bank may, after being satisfied that the conditions referred to in sub-section (1) are fulfilled,
grant a certificate of registration to the micro finance institution to commence or continue to
carry on the business of providing micro finance services subject to such conditions as it
may consider necessary to impose. However, no application for registration shall be rejected
unless the applicant has been given an opportunity of being heard. Sub-clause (3) of this
clause provides that save as otherwise provided in this Act, every micro finance institution
registered under this Act shall provide micro finance services to its clients in accordance
with provisions of this Act and rules and regulations made thereunder. Sub-clause (4) of
this clause provides that every micro finance institution shall give preference for providing
micro credit facility to the rural and urban poor and other disadvantaged sections of the
people.
Clause 16.—This clause relates to power of the Reserve Bank to cancel the certificate
of registration. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Reserve Bank may, by order,
cancel the certificate of registration granted to a micro finance institution under section 15,

24
if such micro finance institution —(i) ceases to carry on the activity of providing micro
finance services; or (ii) has failed to comply with any of the conditions subject to which the
certificate of registration has been granted under sub-section (2) of section 15; or (iii) fails
to comply with any direction issued by the Reserve Bank under the provisions of this Act;
or (iv) fails to submit or offer for inspection of its books of account and other relevant
documents under sub-section (4) of section 27; or (v) fails to comply with directives
stipulated in the Cease and Desist order passed under section 28. Sub-clause (2) of this
clause provides that before cancelling the certificate of registration of any micro finance
institution under sub-section (1), the Reserve Bank shall provide a reasonable opportunity
of being heard to such micro finance institution.
Clause 17.—This clause relates to appeals by micro finance institution in certain
cases. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that a micro finance institution aggrieved by
an order of rejection of an application for grant of certificate of registration under section 15,
or cancellation of certificate of registration under section 16, or any action taken by the
Reserve Bank under sub-section (6) of section 27, may prefer an appeal to the Central
Government or such other authority, as may be prescribed, within a period of sixty days
from the date on which such order is communicated to the micro finance institution. Sub-
clause (2) of this clause provides that the appeal shall be filed in such form and in such
manner, as may be prescribed. Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the decision of the
Central Government or the authority, where an appeal has been preferred under sub-section
(1), shall be final. However, before making any order of rejection of appeal, such micro
finance institution shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Clause 18.—This clause provides for the obligation of the micro finance institution to
create reserve fund. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that every micro finance institution
registered with the Reserve Bank under this Act shall create a reserve fund and transfer
therein a sum, representing such percentage, as may be specified by the Reserve Bank, of
its net profit or surplus realised by providing micro finance services every year as disclosed
in the profit and loss account or income and expenditure account and before surplus is
utilised for any other purpose. However, nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply
to a non-banking finance company registered with the Reserve Bank which is maintaining
such reserve fund pursuant to any provisions of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 or any
directions or regulations issued thereunder. Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that no
appropriation of any sum from the reserve fund shall be made by the micro finance institution,
except for the purpose, as may be specified by the Reserve Bank from time to time, and
every such appropriation shall be reported to the Reserve Bank within twenty-one days
from the date of such appropriation. Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Reserve
Bank may, in the public interest or in the interest of clients of any micro finance institution,
direct any micro finance institution or any class of micro finance institutions to invest the
whole or part of such reserve fund in such unencumbered securities, as it may, by regulations
specify.
Clause 19. —This clause relates to accounts and balance sheet of micro finance
institution. It provides that at the close of each financial year, every micro finance institution
shall prepare, with reference to that year, in respect of all services transacted by it, a balance
sheet, profit and loss account or an income and expenditure account as on the last working
day of the financial year, in such form as may be specified by regulations.
Clause 20.—This clause provides for audit of the accounts of micro finance institution.
It provides that the balance sheet, profit and loss account or an income and expenditure
account of the micro finance institution prepared in accordance with section 19 shall be
audited by a person duly qualified under law for the time being in force to be an auditor of
companies formed and registered under the Companies Act, 1956, or an auditor from the list
of Chartered Accountants or other qualified persons approved by the Reserve Bank. This
clause clarifies "person duly qualified", for the purpose of this section, means a person
having qualification and experience, as may be specified by regulations.

25
Clause 21. —This clause relates to special audit of the micro finance institution.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that without prejudice to the provisions contained in
section 20, where the Reserve Bank is of the opinion that it is necessary in the public
interest or in the interest of its clients or for the purpose of proper assessment of the records
and books of account of the micro finance institutions, so to do, it may at any time, by order,
direct a special audit of the accounts of such micro finance institution, for such transaction
or class of transactions conducted by it or for such period or periods, as may be specified
in the order and may be the same or a different order either appoint a person duly qualified
under any law for the time being in force to be an auditor of companies and direct that the
auditor shall comply with such directions as it may specify in that order and make a report
of such audit to the Reserve Bank and forward a copy thereof to the micro finance institutions.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the expenses of, or incidental to the special audit,
specified in the order made by the Reserve Bank, shall be borne by the micro finance
institutions.
Clause 22. —This clause relates to powers of the auditors. Sub-clause (1) of this
clause provides that the auditor appointed for audit under section 20 or for special audit
under section 21 shall have the powers of, exercise the functions vested in, discharge the
duties and be subject to the liabilities and penalties imposed on, the auditors of companies
under section 227 of the Companies Act, 1956 and the auditors, if any, appointed under any
law establishing, constituting or forming the micro finance institution concerned.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that without prejudice to the provisions contained in
sub-section (1), the auditor shall report —(a) whether or not, the information and explanations
required have been found to be satisfactory; ( b) whether the profit and loss account or
income and expenditure account, as the case may be, shows the true balance of profit or
income or loss for the period covered by such account; ( c) any other matter including
defaults in re-payment of thrift or interest thereon which the auditor considers necessary to
be brought to the notice of eligible clients and the Reserve Bank to ensure good governance
and transparency in the business of the micro finance institution concerned. Sub-clause (3)
of this clause provides that where any of the matters referred to in clauses ( a) and (b) of
sub-section (2) is answered in negative or with qualification, the auditor's report shall state
the reasons for the same.
Clause 23.—This clause relates to returns to be filed by micro finance institutions.
This clause provides that save as otherwise provided in this Act, every micro finance
institution, at the commencement of this Act, shall, within ninety days from the date of such
commencement, file with the Reserve Bank a return containing particulars of its activities in
such form and manner and thereafter at such intervals as may be specified by regulations.
Clause 24. —This clause relates to functions and powers of the Reserve Bank.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Reserve Bank shall regulate, promote and
ensure orderly growth of the micro finance institutions and take measures as it deems fit, for
the purpose of promoting financial inclusion through such institutions. Sub-clause (2) of
this clause provides that without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions
contained in sub-section (1), the powers and functions shall include—(a) grant of certificate
of registration to the applicant-micro finance institution under section 15 or cancellation of
such certificate under section 16; (b) making of schemes for the orderly growth of the micro
finance services provided by micro finance institutions so as to ensure greater transparency,
effective management, good governance in an efficient manner; (c) specifying the maximum
limit of the margin and the annual percentage rate to be charged by the micro finance
institution for providing micro credit facilities to its clients; (d) specifying the sector related
benchmarks and performance standards pertaining to methods of operation, fair and
reasonable methods of recovery, management and governance including model codes for
conduct of activities of micro finance institutions; (e) facilitating the development of credit
rating norms or rating norms for other purposes for micro finance institutions; (f) specifying
the form and manner of books of account to be maintained by micro finance institutions; (g)
specifying the form and manner of accounting of business operations of micro finance

26
institutions and auditing standards relating thereto; ( h) calling for information and data
from micro finance institutions for maintaining an appropriate database in the public domain
relating to micro finance services and disseminating the same through a national
dissemination network; (i) constituting a Micro Finance Development Fund and to apply it
for the purposes as provided in section 32; ( j) promoting development of micro finance
institutions, engaged in micro finance services through training and capacity building
measures; (k) promoting customer education of all institutions engaged in micro finance
services for greater awareness and for economic empowerment of micro finance clients; (l)
supporting research, field research, documentation and dissemination thereof relating to
micro finance sector; ( m) coordinating with other agencies for orderly growth and
development of institutions engaged in the micro finance services; ( n) documenting and
disseminating information relating to best practices with a view to ensuring provision of
micro finance services at an affordable cost to eligible clients; and ( o) perform such other
functions as may be prescribed.
Clause 25.—This clause relates to power of  the Reserve Bank to issue directions to
micro finance institutions. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that if the Reserve Bank is
satisfied that, in the public interest or to prevent the affairs of any micro finance institution
being conducted in a manner detrimental to the interest of the clients availing micro finance
services or in a manner prejudicial to the interest of the micro finance institution, it is
necessary or expedient so to do, it may give directions to a class or classes or all micro
finance institutions generally, as the case may be, and such micro finance institution shall
be bound to follow the policy so determined and the directions so issued. Sub-clause (2) of
this clause provides that in particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
powers, such directions may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) extent of deployment of assets for providing micro finance services and
proportion of clients availing such services, necessary to classify any institution as
micro finance institution;
(b) ceiling on amount of micro credit facilities and the number of individual
clients to whom such micro credit facilities may be provided by any micro finance
institution;
(c) tenure of micro credit facilities given to clients and other terms and conditions
for which micro credit facilities, can be given, margin caps and periodicity of repayment
schedules;
(d) levy of processing fees, interest, life insurance premium and other terms
relating to micro credit facilities including the ceiling on the percentage of margin to
be maintained by a micro finance institution;
(e) the maximum annual percentage rate which may be charged by a micro
finance institution on the micro credit facilities granted to any client;
(f) the locations where micro credit facilities may be sanctioned and disbursed
by micro finance institutions;
(g) micro finance institutions to become members of Credit Information Bureaus
that may be set up for the micro finance sector;
(h) observing code of conduct formulated by any organisation of micro finance
institution recognised by the Reserve Bank and setting up of grievance redressal
mechanism for their clients as required by such organisation;
(i) a Client Protection Code and its acceptance and observance by micro finance
institutions;
(j) micro finance institutions to achieve better control, simplification of
procedures and reduction of costs by use of information technology;
(k) the minimum net worth of micro finance institutions considering their size of
operations and other relevant parameters;

27
(l) norms for corporate governance to be observed by micro finance institutions;
(m) prudential norms relating to income recognition, accounting standards,
provisioning for bad and doubtful debts, capital adequacy based on risk weights for
assets and deployment of funds;
(n) disclosure of assignments or securitisation of assets as also assets assigned
with recourse or with arrangement as agent for collection of loan instalments;
(o) raising of preference share capital or other capital by micro finance institution;
(p) grant of recognition to any self Regulatory Organisation of micro finance
institutions for efficient conduct of the business of micro finance institution; and
(q) such other directions as may be specified by regulations.
Clause 26.—This clause relates to the ceiling of margin of micro finance institution.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that a micro finance institution engaged in the activity
of providing micro credit facilities shall not collect a margin which is in excess of the
maximum limit thereof, as may be specified from time to time by the Reserve Bank, for a micro
finance institution or a class of micro finance institutions. Sub-clause (2) of this clause
provides that the Reserve Bank may specify, by regulations, margin under sub-section (1)
for micro finance institutions generally or for a class of micro finance institutions or for any
micro finance institution in particular, considering the size of their operations, risk associated
with such operations and such other parameters, as it deems fit. Sub-clause (3) of this
clause provides that a micro finance institution engaged in the activity referred in sub-
section (1) shall convey to every client or borrower the annual percentage rate comprising
of the annual interest rate, processing fees or any other charge or fee levied by the micro
finance institution and incorporate the same distinctly and prominently in the loan document
of the client or the borrower, in the sanction letter given to the client or borrower, as the case
may be. Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that a micro finance institution shall obtain
from the Statutory Auditors a certificate that the margin available to, and realised by, the
micro finance institution does not exceed the maximum limit specified by the Reserve Bank
and that the micro finance institution has complied with the requirements of sub-sections
(1) and (2).
Clause 27.—This clause relates to inspection of micro finance institution. Sub-clause
(1) of this clause provides that the Reserve Bank shall, at any time or on being directed so
to do by the Central Government cause an inspection of any micro finance institution and
its books and accounts and the Reserve Bank shall supply to the micro finance institution
a copy of the report of such inspection. Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that without
prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Reserve Bank may cause a scrutiny of the
affairs of any micro finance institution and its books and accounts. Sub-clause (3) of this
clause provides that a copy of the report of the scrutiny shall be furnished to the micro
finance institution, if the micro finance institution makes a request for the same or if any
adverse action is contemplated against the micro finance institution on the basis of the
scrutiny. Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that it shall be the duty of every person who
is a director, trustee or a member of managing committee, manager, secretary or other officer
or employee of the micro finance institution to produce before any officer authorised to
make an inspection, all such books of account, records and other documents in custody or
power of such person to furnish any statement or information relating to affairs of the micro
finance institution, as the inspecting authority may require within such time, as may be
specified.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that any officer making an inspection under
sub-section (1) or a scrutiny under sub-section (2) may examine on an oath any director,
trustee or a member of managing committee, manager, secretary or other officer or employee
of the micro finance institution in relation to its business, and may administer an oath
accordingly. Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that if the Reserve Bank, after considering

28
the report of inspection under sub-section (1) or scrutiny under sub-section (2), is of the
view that the affairs of any micro finance institution are being conducted to the detriment of
its clients, it may after giving such opportunity to the micro finance institution to make
representation in connection with the report, take such action as it deems fit including
removal of any officer, office bearer or managing committee of the micro finance institution
or prohibiting the micro finance institution from providing micro finance services for such
period as the Reserve Bank may deem fit, in the manner as may be specified by regulations.
Clause 28.—This clause relates to Cease and Desist order to be issued by the Reserve
Bank. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that if on inspection or perusal of annual
accounts or any returns submitted by any micro finance institution, the Reserve Bank is
satisfied that activities of that micro finance institution are being conducted in a manner
prejudicial to the interest of its clients or members of the self-help group (thrift group) or the
micro finance institution itself, the Reserve Bank may pass a Cease and Desist order within
sixty days of such inspection directing such micro finance institution to Cease and Desist
from providing the micro finance services, subject to such terms and conditions as may be
specified in such order. Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that in the Cease and Desist
order, the Reserve Bank may, direct the micro finance institution not to sell, transfer, create
any charge or mortgage or deal in any manner with its property and assets without prior
written permission of the Reserve Bank during the subsistence of the Cease and Desist
order. Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Reserve Bank may, grant time to such
micro finance institution for taking necessary steps to comply with the directions of the
order passed under sub-section (1). Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the Reserve
Bank may withdraw the Cease and Desist order issued under sub-section (1), if the Reserve
Bank is satisfied that Micro Finance Institution has complied with the directions issued
under such order.
Clause 29.—This clause deals with the closing or restructuring of business of micro
finance institution. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that no micro finance institution
registered under this Act providing micro finance services or other services shall close its
activity or amalgamate with other institutions, or take over any other business or its
shareholding or demerge or divide, or restructure, or otherwise transfer the ownership or
control of its activity of providing micro finance services unless a scheme thereof is approved
by the Reserve Bank under this section. Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the
micro finance institution shall formulate a scheme for any of the purposes specified in
sub-section (1) and submit it to the Reserve Bank for approval. Sub-clause (3) of this clause
provides that the Reserve Bank shall not approve any Scheme submitted to it under
sub-section (2), unless it is in public interest and has been sanctioned by the appropriate
authority under the provisions of the law applicable to such micro finance institutions for
the time being in force. Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the Reserve Bank may, by
an order, approve the scheme under sub-section (2) subject to such terms and conditions as
it may specify in the order. Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that where a scheme is
approved by the Reserve Bank under sub-section (4), the Reserve Bank may, in the order
under that sub-section or by another order, direct that on such date the micro finance
institution shall stand restructured or Cease to function and stand dissolved.
Clause 30.—This clause relates to filing winding up petitions or other applications for
closure of micro finance activity. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that without prejudice
to anything contained in any other law for the time being in force applicable to winding up
of any micro finance institution, the Reserve Bank, on being satisfied that a micro finance
institution—(a) is unable to pay its debt; or ( b) has by virtue of provisions of this Act
become disqualified to carry on the activity of micro finance institution; or (c) has failed to
comply with any directives or orders issued by the Reserve Bank including the Cease and
Desist order or otherwise; or (d) he continuance of the micro finance institution is detrimental
to public interest or to the interest of the clients of the institution, may file an application for
winding up or any other application by whatever name called for closure of its activity,
before the appropriate authority or Court empowered to wind up the business or activity of

29
the micro finance institution under the law applicable to such micro finance institution.
However, it provides that where the micro finance institution against whom application for
winding up is filed is also engaged in any other activity, the concerned micro finance
institution may be permitted to continue such activity and restrict the winding up or closure
of the business only to the activity of providing micro finance services with the approval of
the concerned authority or Court. Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that any authority
or Court, empowered to wind up the business of the micro finance institution, may pass
such orders as it deems fit. It also explains that for the purpose of this section, a micro
finance institution shall be deemed to be unable to pay its debts, if it has refused or has
failed to meet within five working days any lawful demand made at any of its officers or
branches and the Reserve Bank certifies in writing that such institution is unable to pay its
debt.
Clause 31.—This clause relates to grants by the Central Government. This clause
provides that the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, grant such sum of money as that Government may think fit, to the Reserve
Bank for being utilised for the purposes specified under sub-section (3) of section 32.
Clause 32.—This clause relates to constitution of Micro Finance Development Fund.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Reserve Bank shall constitute a fund to be
called the Micro Finance Development Fund (hereafter called “the Fund”) and there shall
be credited thereto —(a) all Government grants received and fees payable under this Act;
(b) all sums that may be raised by the Reserve Bank from donors, institutions, other entities
and public for the purpose of this Act; ( c) any interest or other income received out of
investments made from the Fund under clause ( c) of sub-section (3); ( d) the balance
outstanding in the Micro Finance Development and Equity Fund maintained by the Reserve
Bank, before the commencement of this Act. Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the
Fund shall be managed by the Reserve Bank in such manner as may be specified by
regulations duly approved by the Central Board of Directors of the Reserve Bank.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Fund shall be applied—(a) to provide
loans, refinance, grant, seed capital or any other micro credit facilities to any micro finance
institution or any other agency which the Reserve Bank may by regulations specify; (b) to
give grants or loans for training and capacity building of institutions engaged in micro
finance services and personnel engaged in promoting and providing micro finance services
and meeting other expenditure related to such training and capacity building on such terms
and conditions as may be specified by regulations; (c) to invest in equity or any other form
of capital or quasi-equity of a micro finance institution or any other agency on such terms
and conditions as may be specified by regulations; ( d) to meet the necessary expenses in
relation to collection, analysis, dissemination of information relating to micro finance, conduct
of such research, experiments or studies as may be specified, and to design, promote, and
propagate such practices as may be considered conducive to the growth of micro finance
services; (e) to meet any other expenses as may be required for the promotion of micro
finance services as the Reserve Bank by regulations specify; (f) to meet any other expenses
(except salaries, allowances and other remuneration of officers and other employees) of the
Reserve Bank in connection with discharge of its functions as may be specified by
regulations.
Clause 33. —This clause relates to redressal of grievances against micro finance
institutions. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Reserve Bank shall formulate a
scheme for redressal of grievances of beneficiaries of micro finance services against micro
finance institutions and may entrust the functions of redressal of such grievance redressal
to any Ombudsman established under any other scheme framed by the Reserve Bank for
clients of banks, with powers to issue directions to micro finance institutions. Sub-clause (2)
of this clause provides that any scheme to be formulated under sub-section (1) shall provide
for— (a) nature of grievance and complaints that may be entertained; ( b) procedure for
redressal of grievances and complaints; ( c) any other matter that may be necessary for
effective redressal of grievances.

30
Clause 34.—This clause relates to contravention of provisions of the Act, orders and
directions. It provides that if any provision of this Act is contravened or any default is made
in complying with any other requirement of this Act or of any rules, regulations or orders or
directions given or notification issued or condition imposed thereunder, any person guilty
of such contravention or default shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term not
exceeding two years or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees and where, a
contravention or default is a continuing one, with further fine, which may extend to ten
thousand rupees for everyday after the first, during which the contravention or default
continues.
Clause 35.—This clause relates to giving false information. It provides that whoever,
in any application, declaration, return, statement, information or particulars made, required
or furnished by or under or for the purposes of any provision of this Act, or any rule,
regulation or order or direction made or given thereunder, wilfully makes a statement which
is false in any material particulars knowing it to be false or wilfully omits to make a material
statement, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years
and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to five lakh rupees.
Clause 36.—This clause relates to offences by micro finance institutions. Sub-clause (1)
of this clause provides that where an offence under this Act is committed, the person who
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the micro finance institution for the conduct of
business of the micro finance institution, as well as the micro finance institution itself, shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly. However, it provides that nothing contained in this sub-section
shall render any such person liable to punishment if he proves that the contravention or
default was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to
prevent the commission of such offence. Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that
notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under this Act
has been committed by a micro finance institution and it is proved that the same was
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of,
any person who is or was a director, trustee, member of the managing committee, manager,
secretary or other officer or employee of the micro finance institution when the offence is or
was committed, such person shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. This clause also explains that, for
the purposes of this section, any offence punishable under this Act shall be deemed to
have been committed at the place where the registered office or principal office of the micro
finance institution, is situated.
Clause 37.—This clause relates to powers of the Reserve Bank to impose penalty.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in section 34, the Reserve Bank may impose monetary penalty, which may extend
up to five lakh rupees where the contravention is of the nature referred to in section 34.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that for the purpose of imposing penalty under this
section, the Reserve Bank shall serve notice on the micro finance institution requiring it to
show cause why the amount specified in the notice should not be imposed as a penalty and
a reasonable opportunity of being heard shall also be given to such micro finance institution.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that any penalty imposed by the Reserve Bank under
sub-section (1) shall be payable within a period of thirty days from the date on which the
notice by the Reserve Bank demanding payment of the amount is served on the micro
finance institution and the orders of the Reserve Bank shall be enforceable in the same
manner as if it were a decree made by the civil court in a civil suit. Sub-clause (4) of this
clause provides that all sums realised by imposition of penalties under this section shall be
credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.
Clause 38.—This clause relates to bar of civil court jurisdiction. This clause provides
that no civil court shall have jurisdiction against any micro finance institution in respect of
any contravention or default for which any penalty has been imposed by the Reserve Bank.

31
Clause 39.—This clause provides for certain offences to be cognizable. It provides
that notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, every
offence connected with or arising out of acceptance of thrift or repayment thereof, shall be
a cognizable offence.
Clause 40. —This clause relates to cognizance of offences. Sub-clause (1) of this
clause provides that no court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this
Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder except upon a complaint made in writing by
an officer or other person authorised, by general or special order, by the Reserve Bank.
However, no such officer or other person shall be competent to file the complaint unless he
is generally or specially authorised in writing by the Reserve Bank. Sub-clause (2) of this
clause provides that no court inferior to that of Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial
Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act. Sub-clause (3)
of this clause provides that notwithstanding anything to contrary contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, a court, if it considers fit to do so, may dispense with the attendance
of the officer of the Reserve Bank or other person filing the complaint on its behalf, but the
court in its discretion at any stage of the proceeding, may direct personal attendance of
such officer or the person.
Clause 41.—This clause relates to application of fine. It provides that the court imposing
any fine under this Act may direct that the whole or any part thereof shall be applied for, or
towards payment of, the cost of the proceeding.
Clause 42.—This clause relates to delegation of certain powers of the Reserve Bank.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Central Government, in consultation with the
Reserve Bank may, by notification, delegate any of the powers of the Reserve Bank conferred
under this Act, except under sections 30, 37 and 49, to the National Bank or any agency
under the control of the Central Government in respect of any micro finance institution or a
class of micro finance institutions or micro finance institutions generally, subject to such
conditions as, it deems fit. Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that any notification
issued under sub-section (1) shall specify the specific powers under various provisions of
this Act which are delegated to the National Bank or any agency under the control of the
Central Government. Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the National Bank or agency
under the Control of the Central Government shall exercise the powers delegated by the
Central Government subject to such conditions as may be specified in the notification
under sub-section (1) and such directives and guidelines which may be issued by the
Reserve Bank from time to time. Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that any action taken
by the National Bank or agency under the Control of the Central Government pursuant to
the delegation of powers under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be the action of the
Reserve Bank and provisions contained in section 17 for appeal shall be applicable.
Clause 43.—This clause relates to preference to members or clients of micro finance
institution in repayment. It provides that in the event of any micro finance institution
making default in repayment of thrift to its members or clients who had made a contribution
to thrift, all the workmen shall be paid their dues in priority to all others and thereafter all
such members or clients of such micro finance institution shall have a preference in repayment,
and shall have the first charge over the assets of the micro finance institution and specified
unencumbered securities, if any, referred to in sub-section (3) of section 18.
Clause 44.—This clause relates to power of  the Central Government to issue directions.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Central Government may issue directions to
the Reserve Bank, the Micro Finance Development Council or any State Micro Finance
Council on matters of policy and implementation of schemes and other measures as may be
necessary for orderly growth and development of micro finance institutions for promoting
financial inclusion. Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that without prejudice to the
provisions of sub-section (1), the Reserve Bank, the Micro Finance Development Council
or any State Micro Finance Council shall, in exercise of the powers or the performance of its
functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central

32
Government may give in writing to it from time to time. However, the Reserve Bank, the
Micro Finance Development Council or any State Micro Finance Council shall as for as
practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views before any direction is given
under this sub-section. Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the decision of the
Central Government, whether a question is of policy or not, shall be final.
Clause 45. —This clause relates to power of the Central Government to call for
information, statements, etc. This clause provides that the Central Government may, in
consultation with the Reserve Bank from time to time, require the furnishing of information,
returns, statements and such other particulars in regard to micro finance institutions in
such form and in such manner as may be prescribed, and the micro finance institution shall
furnish to the Central Government such information, returns, statements and particulars.
Clause 46.—This clause relates to power to exempt class or classes of micro finance
institutions from the provisions of this Act. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the
Central Government may, in the public interest, by notification, direct that all or any of the
provisions of this Act, —(a) shall not apply to such class or classes of micro finance
institutions; (b) shall apply to the class or classes of micro finance institutions with such
exceptions, modifications and adaptations, as may be specified in the notification. Sub-
clause (2) of this clause provides that a copy of every notification issued under sub-section
(1), shall be laid in draft before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in disapproving the issue of the notification
or both Houses agree in making any modification in the notification, the notification shall
not be issued or, as the case may be, shall be issued only in such modified form as may be
agreed upon by both Houses.
Clause 47.—This clause relates to act having an overriding effect. It provides that the
provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith
contained in any other law for the time being in force or any instrument having effect by
virtue of any such law.
Clause 48.—This clause relates to protection of action taken under the Act. It provides
that no suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Reserve Bank, or any director, or
any officer, or other employee of the Reserve Bank, or any other person or agency authorised
by the Reserve Bank, to discharge any functions under this Act for any loss or damage
caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be
done in pursuance of this Act or of any other law or provision having the force of law.
Clause 49.—This clause relates to power of the Central Government to make rules.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. Sub-clause (2) of
this clause enumerates the matters in respect of which such rules may be made are specified
therein.
Clause 50.—This clause relates to power of the Reserve Bank to make regulations.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Reserve Bank, with the previous approval of
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not
inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this
Act. Sub-clause (2) of this clause enumerates the matters in respect of which such regulations
may be made are specified therein.
Clause 51. —This clause relates to rules, regulations and orders to be laid before
Parliament. It provides that every rule or order made by the Central Government and every
regulation made by the Reserve Bank and any order of exemption made under section 44
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is
in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two
or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following

33
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule, regulation or order or both Houses agree that the rule, regulation or
order should not be made, the rule, regulation or order shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule, regulation or order.
Clause 52.—This clause relates to power to remove difficulties. Sub-clause (1) of this
clause provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient,
for removing the difficulty. However, it provides that no such order shall be made after the
expiry of a period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. Sub-clause (2) of
this clause provides that every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after
it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.

34
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Council to be known as the Micro
Finance Development Council to advise the Central Government on formulation of policies
and measures to be undertaken for orderly growth and development of micro finance
institutions and schemes to be framed therefor.  Members of the Council shall receive such
fees and allowances as may be determined by rules.
2. Clause 31 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, grant such sums of money as the
Government may think fit, to the Reserve Bank for being utilised for the purposes of providing
loans, refinance, grant, seed capital.
3. Clause 32 of the Bill provides that the Reserve Bank shall constitute a fund to be
called the Micro Finance Development Fund and there shall be credited, inter alia, all
Government grants received and fees payable; all sums that may be raised by the Reserve
Bank from donors, institutions, other entities and public; any interest or other income received
out of investments made from the Fund and the balance outstanding in the Micro Finance
Development and Equity Fund.
4. Any grant, from the Consolidated Fund of India, to be made to the Reserve Bank
pursuant to the provisions of the Bill will be with the due approval of the Parliament to be
obtained separately.  The amount of grant to be made to the Reserve Bank from the
Consolidated Fund of India cannot be estimated at present as it would depend upon the
circumstances at the point of time of making such grant.

35
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 46 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, in
the public interest, by notification, direct that all or any of the provisions of this Act, —
(a) shall not apply to such class or classes of micro finance institutions; ( b) shall apply to
the class or classes of micro finance institutions with such exceptions, modifications and
adaptations, as may be specified in the notification. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
provides that a copy of every notification issued under sub-section (1), shall be laid in draft
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses agree in
making any modification in the notification, the notification shall not be issued or, as the
case may be, shall be issued only in such modified form as may be agreed upon by both
Houses.
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 49 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules, by notification in the Official Gazette for carrying out the provisions of the proposed
legislation. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause enumerates the matters in respect of which
such rules may be made under the proposed legislation. These matters, inter alia, relate
to—(a) as the higher amount for such special purposes under sub-clause (A) of clause (j) of
sub-section (1) of section 2; (b) the form and manner of providing micro finance services
under clause ( j) of section 2; ( c) the fees and allowances receivable by members of the
Council under sub-section (2) of section 5; (d) the time and place and the rules of procedure
for transaction of business at the meetings of the Council under section 6; ( e) the term of
office and allowances of Members of the State Micro Finance Council under section 9; (f)
the authority before whom appeal may be preferred under sub-section (1); (f) the form and
the manner of filing of appeal under sub-section (2) of section 17; (g) such other functions
to be performed by the Reserve Bank under clause (n) of sub-section (2) section 24; (h) of
the form and manner of furnishing of returns, statements and other particulars under section
45; (i) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.
3. Sub-clause (1) of clause 50 of the Bill empowers the Reserve Bank, with the previous
approval of the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, to make regulations
not inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation and the rules made
thereunder to carry out the purposes of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of the said
clause enumerates the matters in respect of which such regulations may be made under the
proposed legislation. These matters, inter alia, relate to—(a) the other terms and conditions
of remittance of funds under sub-clause (iv) of clause ( j) of section 2; ( c) the rules of
procedure to be observed by the District Micro Finance Committee under sub-section (2) of
section 10; (d) the form and manner of submitting quarterly report by the District Micro
Finance Committee to the Reserve Bank under section 12; (d) the form and manner and fee
payable for making an application for registration by the micro finance institution to the
Reserve Bank under sub-section (1) of section 14; ( e) other higher amount of net owned
fund under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 15; ( f) the unencumbered securities for
the purpose of investment under sub-section (3) of section 18; ( g) the form in which the
balance sheet, profit and loss account or an income and expenditure account shall be
prepared under section 19; ( h) qualifications and experience of a person duly qualified
under section 20; ( i) the form and the manner of filing return under section 23; ( j) the
maximum limit of the margin and the annual percentage rate to be charged by the micro
finance institution for providing micro credit facilities to its clients under clause ( d) of
sub-section (2) of section 24; (k) the procedure for removal of any officer, office bearer or
managing committee of the micro finance institution or for prohibiting the micro finance
institution from providing micro finance services for such period as the Reserve Bank may

36
deem fit under sub-section (6) of section 27; (l) the manner of management of Fund by the
Reserve Bank under sub-section (2) of section 32; ( m) providing loans, refinance, grants,
seed capital or any other financial assistance to any micro finance institution or any other
agency under clause ( a) of sub-section (3) of section 32; ( n) the terms and conditions
subject to which grants or loans shall be given by the Reserve Bank under clause ( b) of
sub-section (3) of section 32; (o) the terms and conditions subject to which the investment
in equity or any other form of capital or quasi-equity of a micro finance institution shall be
made under clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 32; ( p) any other expenses as may be
required for the promotion of micro finance services under clause (e) of sub-section (3) of
section 32; (q) the other expenses (except salaries, allowances and other remuneration of
officers and other employees) of the Reserve Bank under clause ( f) of sub-section (3) of
section 32; and (r) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations.
4. Clause 51 of the Bill provides that every rule made by the Central Government and
every regulation made by the Reserve Bank under the proposed legislation are required to
be laid before each House of  Parliament.
5. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made are matters of
procedure or administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill
itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for development and regulation of the micro finance institutions for the purpose
of facilitating access to credit, thrift and other micro finance services to the rural and
urban poor and certain disadvantaged sections of the people and promoting financial
inclusion through such institutions and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
————
(Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister of  Finance)
GMGIPMRND—1241LS(S3)—17.05.2012.