THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
BY
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2014.
2.  After article 16 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"16A. Nothing in this Constitution shall prevent the State from taking any step
to encourage private sector to provide reservation in the matter of employment in
private enterprises in favour of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes in such manner as the State may, by law, determine."
 Short title.
Employment
opportunity for
persons
belonging to
the Scheduled
Castes and the
Scheduled
Tribes in
Private Sector.
Bill No. 62 of 2014
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Insertion of
new article
16A.
5

2
Amendment of
article 335.
Explanation.—In this article, "private enterprise" means any private enterprise or
organization whose annual turnover is not less than rupees twenty crore.
3. In article 335 of the Constitution, the words "consistently with the maintenance of
efficiency of administration" shall be omitted.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The framers of the Constitution felt that unless special provisions were made for the
protection of the rights of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to secure fair representation
in public employment in proportion to their population, they would never be in a  position  to
catch up and compete successfully for securing public employment. Therefore, to secure fair
representation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in services and posts under the
State, special provisions of reservation and other welfare measures under articles 15(4),
16(4), 16 (4A), 16(4B), 46 and article 335 of the Constitution were made.
It has been observed that even after sixty-five years of independence and with the
facilities of aforesaid provisions, the representation of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes in various Departments and Public Sector Undertakings of Government of India has
not reached the prescribed level of reservation i.e., 15 per cent. for Scheduled Castes and
7.5 per cent. for Scheduled Tribes. A substantial shortfall of Scheduled Castes in Group A
and B category and Scheduled Tribes in almost all categories of posts can be  noticed; the
post-wise analysis has indicated that percentage of representation of these communities in
higher posts is far below the requirement. The reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes in services, though constitutionally guaranteed, has become a farce due to the frequent
and unwarranted interference on the part of Administrators and  Judiciary.
One of the main reasons for non-implementation of reservation policy effectively has
been invented, by the persons in authority, in the provisions of article 335 wherein the words
"consistently with the maintenance of efficiency of administration" have been read
emphatically and eloquently than the article as a whole with a view to find a leeway for denial
of reservation to the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in
services and posts under the State. Such dubious interpretation of this lucidly worded article
has obliterated and stolen the plain meaning of article 335 of the Constitution. Moreover,
these words are no longer relevant at the time when suitable, efficient, eligible candidates
with sound educational background are available from the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes categories. Now, these people want their full representation not only reservation in
posts and services under the States. Therefore, these words should be omitted from the
article 335 of the Constitution so that there is no scope of denying benefits to the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes on this ground.
At present, job opportunities in Government sector are very limited due to increasing
privatisation of services in each sector. Today, most of the job opportunities are available in
private sector but there is no reservation policy in existence even though they are supposed
to share and contribute in discharging their social responsibility. It may be seen that there is
nothing private in the private sector because most of the players in private sector have
availed loan up to ninety-five percentage of the cost of their establishment from the
nationalised banks and financial institutions to carry out their business. Loan raised by them
is public money which is being utilised for promoting private vested interests without
performing any social responsibility. Therefore, it becomes imperative for the State to encourage
private sector to provide reservation in favour of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes in order to fulfil their social obligation.
The Bill seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to:—
(i) enable the State to take steps to encourage private sector to provide reservation
in favour of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
in their establishments; and
(ii) omit the words 'consistently with the maintenance of efficiency of
administration' from article 335 to remove any hindrance in the way for
implementation of reservation policy effectively;
3

4
in order to safeguard the interests of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes ensured in the various provisions of the Constitution and to secure them
social justice and providing  opportunities to have a reasonable share in the governance and
administration of the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT  PREMJIBHAI  SOLANKI
June 27, 2014.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
335. The claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
shall be taken into consideration, consistently with the maintenance of efficiency of
administration, in the making of appointments to services and posts in connection with the
affairs to the Union or of a State:
Provided that nothing in this article shall prevent in making of any provision in
favour of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes for relaxation
in qualifying marks in any examination or lowering the standards of evaluation, for
reservation in matters of promotion to any class or classes of services or posts in
connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State.
* * * * *
Claims of
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes to
services and
posts.
5

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
—————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—942LS(S3)—23-07-2014.