10

AS INTRODUCED IN Lok 54888

23 NOV 2001

Bill No. 62 of 2001

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001
By
Dr. V. Sarora, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2001.
2. After article 22, the following heading and article shall be inserted, namely,—
Rights of Children
“224. Every child shall have—
(@) the right to post-natal care up to two years of birth;
(8) access to children parks, games, etc.

(©) the right to quality education from nursery up to higher
secondary level;

@ comprehensive health care;

Shorttitle.

Insertion of new
article 2A.

Rights of


Parliament to
make law for
implementation
for provision in
article 22.

2

(e) the right not to work in any factory or establishment;
(f) creche facilities, if both the parents are employed;
(g) the right to learn arts, fine arts, literature, etc.; and

(A) nutritious meals and diet during school hours
free of cost.

Explanation:— For the purposes of this article, a child means a child
who is below eighteen years of age and born of parents atleast one of whom is
an Indian citizen.”

22B. Parliament shall, within one year from the date of commencement
of the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2001 by law make provisions necessary
for implementation of the proposals contained in article 22A.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Children are the future of the country. But they are exploited in all possible ways,
They are harassed. They do not have access to schools, They are made to work for hours
together. They do not get nutritious diet. As such, majority of them often fall sick. When
they have to play and learn they are either rolling cigarettes or involved in manufacture of
crackers,

They should be given every opportunity to learn, grow and come up as responsible
and useful citizens of the country. With this in view, itis proposed to insert a new Chapter
“Rights of Children” in the Constitution which would be enforceable.

New ऐश; V. SAROJA
July 24, 2001.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

The Bill seeks to provide for certain facilities free of cost to children. Of course, a
law will be enacted to determine the beneficiaries. Yet, some expenditure will be involved
from the Consolidated Fund of India when the provisions come into force. It is likely that
an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees two thousand crore will be involved.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore will also be
involved.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(06 V. Saroja, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1367LS—31-07-2007,