: 2 4 NOV १0६ .

sj As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

Bill No. 62 of 2006
THE DISASTER MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006 °
By
Suet C.K. CHANDRAPPAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Disaster Management Act, 2005.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2006. Short title,
(2) It extends to the whole of India. eee
5 (3) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official gazette, appoint.
53 of 2005 2. In section 2 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005. in clause (d), after the word Amendment

‘calamity’, the words “such as tsunami, earthquake, sea erosion and landslide” shall be of section 2.
inserted.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The occurrerice of calamities—both natural and manmade, in the recent times have
shown that the bureaucratic interpretations rather than the spirit of legislation is being
applied to decide as to what can be considered a “disaster”. This has assumed such
proportions that genuine victims of disaster are being denied their legitimate due. While
Tsunami and earthquakes are considered “disaster”, landslide in the hills and mountains and
sea erosion in the coastal areas are not considered as “disaster”. The interpretation appears
to be strange as well as arbitrary and it affects the life of thousands of people, who are denied
the benefits of this Act.

Recently in Kerala, there were cases of sea erosion in many areas in coastal belt
particularly in the districts of Trissur, Ernakulam, Alleppey, Quilon, Thiruvananthapuram,
Kozhikode, Kannur and Kasargod, Landslide took place’in the hills of Trissur, Wynad and
Idukky. The disaster affected the lives of thousands. They lost their valuable lands, cultivated -
fields and habitats. The sea walls meant for the protection of land was destroyed or badly
damaged. The same has happened in many places in the coastal and hilly areas all over the
country. But the victims of such calamities are denied the benefits of this Act.

It is this experience which necessitates these amendments. In the definition of disaster,
if the main types of disasters are clearly mentioned, the ambiguity will be removed and then
there will be no scope for arbitrariness in interpretations.

This amendment has been moved to plug that loophole.

New Deut; C.K. CHANDRAPPAN.
July 19,2006



ANNEXURE *

EXTRACT FROM THE DisasTER MaNacement ACT, 2005 (Act No. 53 oF 2005)

: . मे : * +
2.7 टट < . ५ :
() : * * * ‘
©) : . : न :

(d) “disaster” means a catastrophe, mishap, calamity or grave occurrence in any
area, arising from natural or man made causes, or by accident or negligence which results in
substantial loss of life or human suffering or damage to, and destruction of, property, or
damage to, or degradation of, environment, and is of such a nature or magnitude as to be
beyond the coping capacity of the community of the affected area;

* * * * * *


a LOK SABHA

A
BILL
to amend the Disaster Management Act, 2005.

(Shri C.K. Chandrappan, 4472)

MGIPMRND—1622LS(S3)—7.08.2006.