1
Bill No. 62 of  2020
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE HORTICULTURE CROPS, FRESH WATER CROPS AND SALINE
WATER CROPS IN COASTAL AREAS (MINIMUM SUPPORT PRICE)
BILL, 2020
By
SHRI VINAY AK RAUT, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of  a Horticulture Crops, Fresh Water Crops and Saline
Water Crops in Coastal Areas (Minimum Support Price) Commission to determine the
minimum support price of horticulture crops, fresh water crops and saline
water crops in coastal areas and for  matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy first Y ear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Horticulture Crops, Fresh Water Crops and Saline
Water Crops in Coastal Areas (Minimum Support Price) Act, 2020.
(2) It  extends to the whole of India.
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by a notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "coastal area" means sea and coastal area under the sovereignty of India;
(b) "Commissioner" means Horticulture Crops, Fresh Water Crops and Saline
Water Crops in Coastal Areas (Minimum Support Price) Commission established under
section 3;
(c) "comprehensive cost price" includes comprehensive cost incurred on seeds,
fertilizers, pesticides, wages, rent of machines, family labour, rental value of agriculture
land, capital and cost on cultivation of horticulture crops, fresh water crops and saline
water crops in coastal areas;
(d) "fresh water crops" means crops grown in fresh water in the coastal areas;
(e) " Geographical Index (GI)" in relation to goods, means an indication which
identifies such goods as agricultural goods, natural goods or manufactured goods as
originating, or manufactured in the territory of a country, or a region of locality in that
territory, where a given quality, reputation or other characteristic of such goods is
essentially attributable to its geographical origin and in case where such goods are
manufactured goods one of the activities of either the production or of processing or
preparation of  the goods concerned takes place in such territory, region or locality, as
the case may be;
(f) "horticulture crops" includes crops like mango, cashew and bnanas regarding
which schemes are being implemented by the Government of India for their growth and
protection;
(g) "minimum support price" means the price that ensures a minimum fifty per
cent. profit margin over and above the comprehensive cost price of horticulture and
for crops grown on fresh and saline water in coastal areas as determined under
section 4;
(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(i) "saline water crops" means crops grown in sea saline water including shrimp.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Commission to be known as the Horticulture Crops, Fresh Water Crops and Saline
Water Crops in Coastal Areas (Minimum Support Price) Commission to determine the
minimum support price of horticulture crops, fresh water crops and saline water crops in
coastal areas.
(2) The Commission shall consist of minimum twenty-five members to be appointed
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the number of members may be increased by the Central Government,
as and when it deems necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act:
Provided further that at least five Members of Parliament from the coastal districts
shall be the members of the Commission to be nominated by the Central Government in
such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided also that at least one member having at least twenty years of experience in
horticulture development or in agriculture in saline water of the Commission shall be from
the Coastal State to be appointed   by the Central Government in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) The Commision shall have its headquarter at Mumbai in the State of Maharashtra:
Definitions.
Commission
for
determination
of feasible
minimum
support price.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

Provided that the Commission may establish such number of  offices in the States as
it deems necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(4) The Central Government shall provide to the Commission such number of officers
and other employees, as it thinks fit for the purposes of this Act.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
members of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(6) The Commission shall meet at least once in every month and at such place and
shall observe such rules of procedure with regard to transaction of its business at the
meetings as may be prescribed.
4. The Commission shall,—
(a) determine the minimum support price at minimum fifty per cent profit margin
over and above the comprehensive cost price of horticulture crops, fresh water crops
and saline water crops in coastal areas every year in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) review and assess  the cost incurred on cultivation of horticulture crops,
fresh water crops and saline water crops in coastal areas on practical and real time
basis;
(c) establish Special Committee to recommend to the Commission at fixed time
interval measures for the welfare of farmers cultivating horticulture crops, fresh
water crops and saline water crops in coastal areas;
(d) set up such number of procurement centres and storage centres of
international standards equipped with state of the art facilities not only for the
procurement but also for preservation of perishable horticulture crops, fresh water
crops and saline water crops in coastal areas;
(e) Work in coordination with the Government of India for promoting export of
horticulture crops, fresh water crops and saline water crops at minimum support price;
(f) undertake special efforts with the concerned State Government to provide
Geographical Index (GI) to special crops of specific region such as Hapus mangoes of
Ratnagiri district of the State of Maharashtra and make Geographical Index (GI)
available to the farmers cultivating horticulture crops, fresh water crops and saline
water crops in coastal areas by creating a database of specific crops of specific region
of coastal States of the country; and
(g) undertake such other functions as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
as Expert Committee consisting of five members for monitoring of minimum support price
of horticulture crops, fresh water crops and saline water crops in coastal areas.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
members of the Expert Committee shall be such as may be prescibed by the Central
Government.
6. The Central Government shall, in addition to minimum support price of horticulture
crops, fresh water crops and saline water crops in coastal areas as determined under
section 4, provide rupees eight thousand per month for two years as financial incentive to
farmers cultivating horticulture crops, fresh water crops and saline water crops in coastal
areas.
3
Functions of
the
Commissions.
Monitoring of
Minimum
Support Price.
Financial
incentive to
farmers
cultivating
horticulture
crops, fresh
water crops
and saline
water crops in
coastal areas.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide from time to time necessary funds to the Commission to carry out the
purposes of this Act.
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order and give such directions, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of such
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of three years of
commencement of this Act.
9. The Provisions of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
4
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to give
directions.
Overriding
effect of Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
All cultures of the world, including Indian culture could achieve stability only when
cultures developed their agricultural knowledge. After getting over their long period of journey
from one place to another, Indian culture was transformed into a civilization like other cultures
and exists as one of the best civilizations in the world even today in "Sanatan' form. Agriculture
and its related knowledge and science have contributed significantly in this transformation.
Therefore, the farmers have been the savior of the world's best culture and not just the food
providers. In relation to devotion in Indian society with all kinds of knowledge, there is also
a famous proverb that "without having food, nobody even think of God", which evinces the
very important contribution of the food provider farmers. In addition to this, at present,
about seventy per cent. of the country's population also gets employment in the agricultural
sector. In this way, it is very important to make every possible effort for the welfare of
agriculture and farmers who are the savior of the Indian culture.
Although the minimum support prices of around twenty four crops in the country are
determined by the Government of India with the help of a large administrative system, it does
not include all the crops grown especially in the Indian coastal States and it also does not
include any horticultural crops at all. Moreover, they are handed over to risky uncertain
fluctuations in market hands. The rationale behind not including all crops in the minimum
support pricing process is that other crops are in small quantities and are easily perishable but
according to one figure, the year 2016-17 registered a production of horticultural crops with
28.47 crore tons, while food production was 27.33 crore tons. Therefore, keeping them out of
the minimum support price process is not logical keeping in view their quick perishable nature
and also that the Government has resolved to double the income of farmers. It is commonly
seen that the farmers do not even get the fixed minimum support price of these crops and they
get caught in severe economic crisis and are then forced to take suicidal measures.
The Central Government has declared the Minimum Support Price one and a half times
of the cost but actually it is not so. It needs to be made practicable and realistic. At present,
price is done by the Government based on the sum of A-2 (input cost) and FL (family labour)
but it is widely used as C-2 system (including land and capital rents with A-2 and Fl, and other
costs). With this, it is necessary to provide financial support of rupees eight thousand per
family per month for the next two years to the farmers in order to bring about quick improvement
in their economic condition.
The Government's data on doubling farmers' income cannot work and will have serious
long term consequences. The Government will not only have to broaden the scope for
fixation of minimum support prices of crops, but also broaden the selection of crops for this
and it includes horticultural crops as well as fresh and brackish water crops of coastal areas.
Moreover, it is very important to include the popular crops of the coastal regions by providing
Geographical Index (GI) status. This will not only protect the interests of the farmers genuinely,
but also enable us indirectly to pay respect to our mother land and repay the land loan
according to our values "Janani Janma Bhomishch Swargadapi Gariyasi" which means
'Mother and motherland are superior even to heaven'.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to constitute a Horticulture Crops, Water Crops and Saline
Water Crops in Coastal Areas (Minimum Support Price) Commission to determine the minimum
support price of horticulture crops, fresh water crops and saline water crops in coastal areas.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VINAYAK RAUT
February 2, 2020
5

FINANCIAL   MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for consti tution of a Horticultu re Crops, Fresh Water
Crops and Saline Water Crops in Coastal Areas (Minimum Support Price) Commission. It
also provides for appointment of members and staff to the Commission. Clause 4 provides
for establishment of a Special Committee to recommend to the Commission at fixed time
interval measures for the welfare of farmers cultivating horticulture crops, fresh water crops
and saline water crops in coastal areas. It also provides for setting up of such number of
procurement centres and storage centres of international standards equipped with state of
the art facilities not only for the procurement but also for preservation of perishable
horticulture crops, fresh water crops and saline water crops in coastal areas. Clause 5 provides
for constitution of an Expert Committee consisting of five members for monitoring of minimum
support price of horticulture crops, fresh water crops and saline water crops in coastal areas.
Clause 6 provides for rupees eight thousand per month for two years as financial incentive
to farmers cultivating horticulture crops, fresh water crops and saline water crops in coastal
areas in addition to minimum support price. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government
shall provide necessary funds for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. As the moneys to
be provided will be determined after identifying the proposals to be implemented by the
State Governments on the recommendation of Government, it is not possible at this stage to
estimate the recurring expenditure that would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of
India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees eight lakh crore would be involved from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of  a Horticulture Crops, Fresh Water Crops and Saline Water
Crops, in Coastal Areas (Minimum Support Price) Commission to determine the minimum
support price of horticulture crops, fresh water crops and saline water crops in coastal
areas and for  matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Vinayak Raut, M.P . )
MGIPMRND—5396LS(S3)—27-02-2020.