I or 1894. 5 
10 
A$ INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
;. 
'8111 No. 63 01 198. 
.:, " THE ,l..AND ACQUlSI'I'ION ,(AMENDMENr) BlJ,.L, 1984 
BILL 
further to amend the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. 
BE it enactei by Parliament in the Thirty·ftfth Year of the Republic 
of India ~. follows:-
'1. This Act may be caned the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 
1984.' 
2, In su~sectiQJl(2) of section 1 of the Land AC4iQ~c;ition Act, 1894 
.(her~inafterreferr.cd to as the prill.~ipal Act), for the words, figures and 
letters "the territories which, i.n1meciiately before,;the 1st November, 1956, 
were comprised in Part B Stat~,; and", the words lithe State of Jammu 
and Kashmir." shall be substituted. 
Short 
title. 
Amend-
mentof 
aeetion 1 
3. In section 3 of the principal Act,-
(a) after clause (a), the following claUse 
namely:-
Amend-
mentof 
shall be inserted, section 3. 
'~Q(1), ~he expression ~'iocal authority" includes a town plan-
ning .autbodty(by whatever name called~ aet up under any law 
for the time being in force;'; 
(b) after clause (C'), the following clBUse shall be iaserted, 
namelY:I_ 
'(cc) the express.iQn "cprporCltiQn OWp.ed'(8 ~11ed by the 
'State" rn~ .. r.s Jily body corPQl'a~ e~tabubeti ~ or under a 

t 
Central, Provincial or State Act, and includes a Government 
company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956,. a 
society regi~tered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, 
or under any corresponding law for the time being in force in 
a State, being a society established or administered by Govern- 5 
ment and a co-operative society within the meaning of any law 
relating to co-operative societies for the time being in force in 
any State, being a co-operative society in which not less than 
fifty-one per centum of the paid-up share capital is held by the 
Central Government, or by any State Government Of, Govern- 10 
ments, or partly by the Central Government and partly by one 
or more State Governments;'; 
(c) for clause (e), the following clause shall be' substituted, 
namely:-
• (e) the expression "Company" means- 15 
1 of 1956. /. 
210t1860. 
(i) a company as defined in section 3 of the Companies 1 of 1956. 
Act, 1956, other than a Government company referred to in 
clause (cc); 
(iii) a society registered under the Societies Registration 21 of 1860. 
Act, 1860, or under any corresponding law for the time being 20 
in force in a State, other than a society referred to in clause 
(ex) ; 
(iii) a co-operative society within the meaning of any 
'1aw relating to co-operative societies for the time being in 
force in any State, other than a co-operative Society referred 25 
to in clause (cc) j'j 
Cd) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-. 
• (f) the expression ··public purpose" includes-
(i) the provision of village-sites, or the extension; plan- 30 
ned development or impr~vement of existing village-si~es; 
Cii) the provision of land for town or rural planningj 
(iii) the provision of land for planned development of 
l~nd from public funds in pursuance of any scheme or policy 
of Government and subsequent disposal thereof in Whole or 35 
, in part by lease, assignment Or Qutright sale with the' object 
, ;)f securing further developtrient as phmnt!d; . 
(iv) the provision of land for a corporation owned or 
controlled by the State; 
(v) the provision ,of land for residential purposes to the 40 
poor or landless or to persons residing in areas affected by 
natUral calamities, or to persons displaced or affected by 
reason of the implementation of any scheme undertaken by 
Government, any local authority or a corporation owned or 
controlled by the State; 45 
(vi) the provision of land for carrying out any educa-
tional, housing, health or slum clearance scheme sponsored 
by Government or by any authority established by Govern-
meat ,for earryin~ out aDy s~ch scheme, or, w,iththe prior 
approval of the appropriate Government. by a l~al authority, 50 

IDK SABRA 
mRR I GEN D\. 
to 
THE lAND AC~ISITION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1984 
(To be/As introduced in !ok Sabha) 
1. Page 3, line 24,-
121:. "a s to" ~ "a s th e " 
2. Page 3, in the marginal heading to clause 6,_ 
.f.bl: "Amendment 0 " ~ "Amendment of" 
3. page 10, line 22,-
after "dq.t e 0 f" .in sert "the" 
~. Page 11, line 4,-
!Ql:. "inffstitutions" ~ "institutions" 
5. page 11, line 11 i from bottom,-
.tal: ''herceforth'' ~ ''henceforth n 
,. Page 12, line 1,-
for "a cqui si toin" ~ "acquisition" 
7. page 12, line 4 from bottom,-
!tu:. liB 11" t.eM "Bill" 
NEW DELHI; 
July l1.-~1,"""9.M.8"",,,,4~~-!-..... 
Sravana 9, 190' (saka) 

21 of 1860. 
.. 
14 of 1882. 
5 of 1908, 
.,. 
1 of 1967. 
5 
10 
. g 
or a society registered under. the Societies Registration Act, 
1860, or Wlder any corresponding ~aw for the time being in 
force in a State, or a. ,co-operative society within the meaning 
of any law relating to co-operative societies for the time 
being in force in any State; 
(vii) the provision of land for any other scheme of de.;. 
velopment sponsored by Government, or, with the prior 
approval of the appropriate Government, by a local authority; 
(viii) the provision of any premises or building for loca-
ting a public office, 
but does not include acquisition of land for Companies;'j 
(e) in clause (g), in the proviso,' in clause (iii.), for the words 
and figures "Chapter XXXI of the Code of Civil Procedure", the words 
. and figures "Order XXXII of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908" shall be substituted . 
.t. In sub-section (1) of section 4 of the principal Act,- Amend. 
mentol 
(4) after the words "any public purpose", the words "or for a section 4. 
Company" shall be inserted; 
. (b) after the words "Official 'Gazette", the words "and in two 
20 I daily newspapers circulating in that locality of which at least one 
shall be ih the regional language" shall be inserted; 
(c) after the words "in the said locality", the brackets and words 
., (the last of th(> dates of such publication and the giving of such 
public notice, being hereinafter referred to as to date of the publica-
25 tion of the notification)" shat! be ipserted. 
30 
35 
5, In section 5A of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "within thirty days after 
the issue of the notification", the words "within thirty days from 
the date of the pUblication of the notification" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "either in person", the words 
"in person or by any person authorised by him in this behalf" shall 
be substituted. 
6. In section 6 of the principal Act.-
(a) in sub-section' (1) ,-' 
(1) for the first proviso, the following proviso shall be sub-
stituted, namely: - . 
"Provided that no declaration in respect of any particu-
lar land covered by a notification under section 4, sub-
settion (1 ) ,--
(i) published after the commencement of the Land 
Acquisition (Amendm~nt and Validation) Ordinance. 
1967, but· ~efore the commencement of the Land Acqui-
sition (Amendment) 'Act, 1984, 'shallbe made after the 
!!xpiry of tRr~eyears from the date of" the Publication 
of the notification; or i ...... ---
Amend-
mentot 
section 
5A. 
Amend-
ment 0: 
section 8. 

Amend-
mentof 
lection 9. 
Amend.~. 
mem ot 
uctlon 
11. 
4-
(ii) pub-iished after the commencement of the Land 
Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1984, shaH-be made after 
the expiry of one year from the date of the publication 
of the notification: "j 
(2) the following Expla.nations shall be inserted at the end, 5 
hame!y:-
"Ea.-planationl.-ln corop~ting any of the periods refer-
red to in the 'first proviso, the period during which any action 
Or proceeding to be taken in 'pW'suance of the notification 
issued tinder section 4, sub-section (1), is Iltayed by an order to 
of a Court shall be excluded. 
Explanation 2.-Where the compensation to be awarded 
for such property is to be paid out of the funda of a corpora-
tion owned or contr.oUe<i by the State, such compensation 
shall be deemed to be compensation paid out of public 15 
revenues."; 
(b) i~ sup-8ecti~~ (2), for the WOJ;ds ", an4 s~ll state", the 
words and brackets "and in two daily newspapers circulating in the 
lo~Jity in which the hand is si,tuate of which at least one shall be in 
the regional language, and the Collector shall cause public notice of 20 
the substance of such declarati,on to be give~ at convepient places in 
the: said locality (the last of the dates 'of IUCA pubUc!ltion and the 
giving of sueh public notice, being hereinafter ~ferred to as the date 
of the publication of the declaration) ,and' such declaration shall 
state" shall DC substituted. 
\ 
7. ,In. sectiQn 9 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the words 
Wld figures ";registereo under Part~ III ot the Indian Post Oftlce Act, 1866", 
the words and figures ''registered under sections 28 and 29 of the Indian 
Post Office Act, 1 fl98" shall be substit,uted. 
25 
8. Section 11 CJI. t~ principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub- 30 
section (1) ~ that section, and,-
(a) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the ~UQWing pro-
vIsos shall be inserted at the E'nd, namely:-
"Provided that no awa~d shall be made by the Collector 
under this Sub-section without the previous approval of, the 35 
appropriate Government or of such o1ftcer as the appropriate 
Government may authorise in this be~f: 
Provided further that it shall he c0t:npetent W the appro-
priate Govemment to direct that the CoUector m~y qlllke such 
award without such approval in such class of cases as the 
appropriate Government may specify in this behalf."; 40 
, (b)a.f.ter sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following su}>. 
sections shall be inserted, namely:-
, "(2) No,tw:i-tJlstanliing anything contained in sub-section 
(1), if at ,a~ stage of the proceedings, the Collector ia satisfied 45 
that aij. t~ ~ ~nterested in the land whO appeared before 
hi~ ha,ve a~~ ~, writing on the matters to be included in 
th~ aw~~ o~ :!;he, Collector in the form ,p~escribed by rules 
14'of 1866. 
6 of 1898. 

lit of 1908. 
made by the appropriate Government, he may, without making 
further enquiry, make an award according to the terms of such 
agreement. 
,(3) The dete~mination of coplpel}.satiOXl; for a.ny land under 
5 sub-~tion (2) shaUnot in any w~ aifect thedeterminlition of 
compensation in respect of other land,s in the ~me locality or 
elsewhere in accordance with the other provisions of ,tlilis Act. 
10 
~o 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Registra-
tion Act, 190&, no agreement made under su~sectlon (2) shall 
be liable to registration under that Act.". 
9. After section 11 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"llA. (1) The Collector shall make an award under section 11 
within a period of two years from th~ date of the pUblic~tion of the 
declaration and if no award is made within that period, the entire 
pr/?ceedings for the acquisition of the la.nd shall lapse; 
Provided that in a case where the said declaration has been 
published before the commencement of the r...nd. : Acqulsition 
(Amendment) Act, 1984, the award shall be made within a period 
of two years from such cqmmencement.". 
10. After section 13 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"13A. (1) The Collector may, at any time but not later than six 
months from the date of the award, or where. he has been 
required under section 18 to make a reference to the Court, before 
the making of such reference, by order, correct any clerical or 
arithmetical mistakes in the award or errors arising therein either 
on his own motion 9r on the application of any person interested or 
a local authority: 
30 Provided that no correction which is likely to affect prejudiciany 
jilny person shall be made unless such person has been given a 
reasonable opport.unity of making a representation ~n the matter. 
(2) The Collector shall give immediate notice of any correction 
JV.~e in the awar.d to all the .persons interested. 
35 (.~) Where any ex~ess aJ;IlQunt is proved.to ~ve ~n paid to 
any person as jil result of the correction macle UDcler sub-section (1), 
the excess amount So p~d shall be l,il;lhle to be refun~d .-nd in the 
c~e of 4U1Y default or refuslU to pay, the ~am.e may be rec;overed as 
ari arrear of land revenue:'.' 
14 of 188240 11. In sectiQn 14 of the princlpal Act, for the words "~of Civil 
• of 1908 Procedure", the wgrds and figures "Code of Civil Prqcedwe, 1908". shall 
. be substituted. ,/' 
Iqsel#Qu 
of~ 
section 
llA. 
Period 
within 
which an 
award 
shall be 
made. 
InrertJon 
of new 
section 
13A. 
Correction 
of clerical 
errors, etc. 
Amend-
ment of 
section a. 

lnlertloft 
ot new 
sec$ion 
1M. 
Power to 
call for 
recorda, 
etc. 
Amend-
ment 'of 
.eetlon 
17. 
ii After section 15 of th~ priricipal Act, the following section shall 
be inserteci, namei y:-
"l&A. The appropriate Government .may at any time before the 
award is made by the Collector under section 11 call for any record 
of any proceedings (whether by way of enquiry or otherwise) for 5 
the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality or propriety of any 
findin. or order passed or as to the regularity of such proceedings 
and 'may pass such order or issue such direction in relation thereto 
as it may think fit: 
Provided th8t the appropriate Government shall not pass or 10 
issue any order or direction prejudicial to any person without afford-
ing such person a reasonable opportunity of befug heard.". 
13. In section 17 of the principal Act,-
(0) in sub-section (1), for the words "take possession of any 
waste or arable land needed for public purposes or for a Company", 15 
the words "take possession of any land needed for a public purpose" 
shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), after the words "access to any such 
station,", the words "or the appropriate Government considers it 
necessary to acquire the immediate possession of any l~nd for the 20 
purpose of maintaining any structure or system pertaining to irri-
gation, water supply, drainage, road communication or electricity," 
shall be inserted; 
(c) after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be 
inserted, namely:- 25 
., (3A) Before taking possession of any land under sub-
section (1) or sub-section (2), the Collector shall, without pre-
judice to the provisions of sub-section (3) ,-
(a) tender payment of eighty per centum of the com-
pensation for such land as estimated by him to the persons 30 
interested entitled thereto, and 
(b) pay it to them, unless prevented by some one or 
more of the contingencies mentioned in section 31, sub-, 
section (2), 
and where the Collector is so prevented, the provisions of 35 
section 31, sub-section (2), (except the second proviso thereto), 
shall apply as they apply to the payment of· compensation 
under that section. 
(3B) The amount paid or deposited under sub-section (3A), 
shall be taken into account for determining the amount of 40 
compensation required to be tendered under section 31, and where 
the amount so paid or deposited exceeds' the compensati-on award-
ed by the Collector under section 11, the ex('ess may, unleHs re-
funded \\1thin three months from the date of the Collector's 
award, be recovered as an arrear of land revenue."'; 
(d) in SUb-section (4), for the words "after the publication 
of the notification", the words "after the date of the PllbUcatiQn of 
the notification" shall be substituted. 
45 

5 
10 
15 
20 
35 
7 
.,; 
14. hi section 19 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) ,- Amend-
ment of (a) in' clause (c), the word "and" occurring at the end shall be IIeCtion 19. 
omitted; 
(b) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted 
namely:-
"(ee) the amount paid or deposited under sub-section (.1A) 
of section 17; and". 
15. Ia sulHedioa (2) of section %3 01 die principal Ad, for llie ".... Amend-
"fifteen per centum", the words "tbirty per centum"sbaU be ....... Ituted. =:t~!nO~3:. 
16. In section 24 of the principal Act,- Amend-
ment of 
(a) in clause sixthly, the word "or" occurring at the end shall IeCtlon 24. 
be omitted; 
(b) in clause scventhly, the word "or" shall be inserted at the 
end, and after the clause as so amended, the following clause shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"eigltthly, any increase to the value of the land on account 
of its being put to any use which is forbidden by law or opposed 
to public policy.". 
17. For section 25 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Substi-
substituted, namely:- tutlon of 
"25. The amount of compensation awarded by the Court shalJ 
not be less than the amount awarded by the Collector under section 
11.". 
18. In section 28 of the principal Act,-
new sec-
tion for 
section 25. 
Amount of 
compen-
sation 
awarded 
by Court 
not to be 
lower 
than the 
amount 
aWllrded 
by the 
Collecto.r. 
Amend-
ment of 
(a) for the words "six per centum", the words "Dine p'r ceatum" section 
shaD be substituted; 28. 
(b) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:-
, 
··Provj(J.'!ti that the award of the Court may al'iO direct that 
where soC!h ucess or any part thereof is paid into CC)urt after the 
date of expiry of a period cpf one year from the date on which 
possession til taken, interest at the rate of fifteen per eentum 
per annom shaH be payable from the date of expiry of tbe said 
period of one year on the amount of such, excess or part thereof. 1 
which bas not been paid into Court before d1.'! dMe of, sueh es;-
. " PII'Y· • 

Illftrtiall 
of new 
section 
28A. 
Re-deter-
mination 
of the 
amount of 
compen-
sation on 
the baaia 
of the 
award df' 
the CoUrt. 
.;' 
Amencl-
mentCsf 
sectiOn 
34. " 
Omission 
of section 
38. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
3M. 
8 
19. In Part II.I of the principal Act, after section 28, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:-
"28A. (1) Where in an award under this Part, the Court. allows 
to the applicant any amount of compensation in excess of the amount 
awarded by the Collector under section 11, the persons interested !j 
'in all the other land covered by the same notification under section 
4, sub-section (1) and who are also aggrieved by the award of the 
Collector may, notwithstanding that they had not made an appli-
, ~8'fioh to the Collector under 8ectlon" 18, by written application to 
the 'Coll.eetor within three months from the date of the award of· IO 
the Court require that the amount of compensation payable to them 
may be re-determined_ on the 'basis of the amount of 'compensaticm 
awarded by the Court: 
Provided that in computing the period of three months within 
which an application to the Collector shall be made under this sub- 15 
section, the day on which th~ award was pronounced and the time 
'·~uisite ·for obtaining a copy of the award shall be excluded. 
" (2) 'The Collector shall, Oft receipt of an application WIder 
...... (1),'(:.-t 8ft iaqulry 1If1er givilll lIOdce to aU tbe 
...... t.R~ a'ld gin.. diem • reasonable eppoftullity Or 20 
.... IIeerd aid make au award dete ... mbaiIIM the .".... ef fOlD-
peDIIItioa payable to the applicants. 
(3) Ariy Person who has not accepted the 'award under sub-
section (2) may, by written application to the Collector, require 
that the matter be re-ferred by the Collector for the determination 25 
of the Court and the provisions. of sections 18 to 28 shall, 50 far as 
may be, apply to such reference as they ~pply to a reference under 
section 18 .... 
20. In section 34 of the principal Act,-
(a) for . the words "six per centum", the words "nine per centum" 30 
sIudI be substituted; 
(b) the following proviso shaH be inserted at the end, 
namely:-
"Provided that if such compensation or any part thereOf is 
not paid or deposited widlin a-periOd of one year from the date 35 
on whidl ~ is taken, ,interest 'at the mte affitteen per 
ceo" per 8l1lil1li1 shall be payable from the date .. of expky 01 
the said period of one year on the amount of compensMion. or 
part dIeftofwhkb ... not been paid or d«!posltNi befofle the date 
of sucb expiry." . 
. t: " ' ~ ~ , 
.. ~t:' -sedtton ~8 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
1·'22.r~ secti(~n· 38A of the principal Act, for thre 'vords~ figures and 
leiter '~sectiOlis--5A,. 6,7, 17 and50"J the words, flgur~ and lettE1J," 
"secti~ns 4; ~A:6, 7 and5()" shall be substituted. I 

5 
D 
'13. In section 39 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words, figures and brackets "sectioa. 6 to 37 (both 
inclusive) ", the words, figures and brackets "'SectiOns 6 to 16 (both 
inclusive) and sections 18 to 37 (both inclusive)" shall be 
sUb:;titutedj , 
(b) after the words "for any Company", the words "under this 
Part" !hal1 be inserted. 
Amend.-
mentof 
section 
39; 
Amend-
24. In section 40 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the ment of 
14 of 1882. wOJ;ds "Code of Civil Proced~e", the words ~d figureli "I.,odeof Civil section 
5 of 1908. 10 Procedure, 1908" shall be substituted. 40. 
14 of 1866. 
6 of 1898. 
%5. In sub-';;ection (3) of section 45' of the principal Act, in the proviso, 
lor the words and figures "registered under Part 111 of the Indian ,.Post 
Office Act, 1866", the words arid figu,res "registered under sections 28 
and 29 of the Indian Post Office Act, 1898" shall be substituted.. 
15 26. In section 46 of the principal Act, for the words "fifty rupees", 
the words "five hundred rupeeli" shall be substituted.. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
45. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
46. 
Insertion o! 
27. After section 51 of the principal Act, the follOWing section shall ftew see-
be inserted, namely: - tion lilA. 
16 of 1908 .. 20 
"51A. In any proceeding under this Act, a certified COPy of a 
document registered under the Registration Act, 1908, including a 
copy given under section 57 of that Act" may be accepted as evidence 
of the transaction recorded in such document.". 
28. In section 53 of the principal Act, for the words "Code of Civil 
Procedure", the words and figures "Code of Civil Procedure, 1908" liball 
l' of 1882. be substituted. ' 
5 of 1008. 25 
30 
35 
29. In sub-section (1) of section 55 of the principal Act,-
(a) in the second proViso, for the words "before the expiry of 
the session in which it is so laid or the successive sessions aforesaid", 
the words "before the expiry of the session immediately following 
the session or the successive 'Sessions aforesaid" shall be substituted; 
(b) after the second proviso, the following proviso shall be in-
serted, namely:- ' 
"Provided also that every such rule made by the State 
Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before the State Legislature.". 
, 30. (1) The provisions of sub-section (2) of section 23 and !>ection 28 
of the principal Act, as amended by sections 15 and 18 of this Act 
respectively, shall apply, and shall be deemed to have applied, also to, 
and in relation to, any award made by the Collector or Court or to any 
40 order passed by the High Court or Supreme Court in appeal against any 
such award under the provisions of the principal Act after the 30th day 
of April, 1982 [the date of introduction of the Land Acquisition (Amend-
ment) Bill, 1982, in the House of the People] and before the commence-
ment of this Act. , • 
Acceptance 
of certified 
copy as 
evidence. 
Amend-
ment ot 
section 
58. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
55. 
Transi-
tional 
provisions. 

Payment 
of interest 
On acqui-
sition 
of certain 
land. 
10 
(2) The provisions of section 34, of the principal Act, as amended by 
leCt10n 20 of this Act, shall apply, and s!J.alJ. be deemed to have appUea, 
aJSo to, and in relation to,-
• I 
(a) every case in which po'ssession, of any land acquired under 
the prUlcipal Al:t had been taken before the aOthday of April, 1\Hj;.:! 5 
[the date ot ini.!·oducl.ioll of the Land Acquisition (Amendmem) Bill, 
19~, in the House of the People], and the amount of cl)mpeasstlon 
for such ~CqW~iitloll had not been paid or deposited under section 31 
of the principal Act ~ntil such date, with effect on and from that 
. date; and 
(b) every case III which such possession has been taken on or 
after that date but before the commencement of this Act with-
out the aOlowlt of compensation having been paid or deposited under 
the said section 31, with effect on anti from the date of taking such 
possession. 
;'1. There _IJ be paid, in every proceeding for the acquisition of any 
.Iaad UDder the priocipaU Act pending on the 30th day of April, 1982 (tile 
date 0( introduction uf the Land Acquisition (Amendmem) Hill, 1982,iD 
the House ul the People], in which no award has been made by the CollK-
tor belore that date, simple interest calcuiated at the rate of ten per ceotum 
per annnm on the market value of such land as determined under sec- 20 
tioa 23 of the principal Act from the date of publication of the notification 
under section 4, sub-sedion (1), of Ole principal Act in a;espect of such 
laad to tile date of 1eDCier 01 paymeDt or; _ the c:ase may be deposb O'JI co ..... 
peasation awarded by the Colledor 10.' the acquisitiOlD of such land: 
Provided that no interest shall be paid for any period during which 
the proceedings lor the acquisition of any land were held up on account 
of stay or injunction by ordel of a Court; 
Provided further that nothing in this section shall apply to the 
acquisition of any land where the amount of compensation has been paid 30 
to the persons interested before the first mentioned date. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND RE·ASONS 
Witl, the enormous expansion of the State's role in promoting public 
welfare and economic development since independence, acquisition of 
land for public purposes, industrialisation, building of inffstitutions, etc., 
has become far more numerous than ever before. While this is inevitable, 
promotion of public purpose has to be balanced with the rights of the 
Individual whose land is acquired, thereby often depriving him 'of his 
means of livelihood. Again, acquisition of land for private enterprises 
ought not to be placed on the same footing as acquisition for the State or 
for &n enterprise under it. The individual and institutions who are 
unavoidably to be deprived of their property rights in land need to be 
adequately compensated for the loss keeping in view the sacrifice tn.ey 
have to make for the larger interests of the community. The pendency 
of a(;quisition proceedings for long periods often causes hardship to the 
affected parties snd renders unrealistic the scale of compensation offered 
to them. 
2. It is necessary, therefore, to restructure the legislative framework 
for acquisition of land so that it is more adequately informed by this 
objective of serving the interests of the community in harmony with the 
rights of the individual. Keeping the above objects in view and consider-
ing the recommendations of the Law COmmission, the Land Acquisition 
Review Committee as well as the State Governments, institutions and 
individuals, proposaJs for amendment to the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, 
were formulated and a Bill for this purpose was introduced in the Lok 
Sabha on the 30th April, 1982. The same has not been passed by either 
House of Parliament. Since tq.e introduction of the Bill, various other 
proposals for amendment of the Act have been received and they have also 
been considered In consultation with State. Governments and other 
agencies. It is now proposed to include all these proposals in a fresh 
Bill after withdrawing the pending Bill. The main proposals for amend-
ment are as follows.:-,. 
(i) The definition of "public purpose" :l'l contained In the Act fs 
proposed to be so amended as to include [l longer illustrative list 
retaining, at the same time, the inclusive character of the definition. 
(i~) Acquisition of land for non-Government companies under 
the Act will herceforth be made in pursuance of Part VII of the Act 
in~ll cases. 
(iii) A time-limit of one year is proposed to be provided for 
completion of a11 formalities between the issue of the preliminary 
notification under' section 4(1) of the Act and the declaration 
for acquisition of specified land under section 6(1) of the Act. 
(tv) It is proposed to provide that the Collector shall. before 
making his award, obtain the previous approval of the appropriate 
Government or any officer of that Government authorised in this 
behalf. Provi/;ion has also been included to empower the Collector 
to make the award without any enquiry if the persons Interested in 
11 

J!2 
the acquisitoin agree in writing on the matters to be included in 
the award of the Collector in the form prescribed by rules made 
under the Act. 
(v) It is proposed to provide for a period of two years from 
the date of publication of the declaration under section ·6 of the 
Act within which the Collector should make his award under the 
Act; If no award is made within that period, the entire proceed-
ings for the &cquisition of the land would lapse. He has also been 
empowered to correct clerical or arithmetical mistakes in the award 
within a certain period from the date of the award. 
(vi) The circumstances under which the Collector should take 
possession of the land before the award is made in urgent cases are 
being enlarged to include a larger variety of public purposes. 
(vii) The appropriate Government is being empowered to call 
for the record of any order passed by the Collector at any time 
before he makes an award for the purpose of satisfying itsp.lf as to 
the legality or propriety of such order passed. 
(viii) Solatium now payable at the rate of fifteen per centum 
of ~he market value of the land ncquired in consideration of the 
compulsory nature of the acquisition, is proposed to be increased 
to thirty per centum. Similarly; the rate of interest payable on 
the. excess co~ensation awarded by the Court· and on the compen-
sation in cases where possession of land is taken before payment 
of compensation, are also proposed to be increased SUbstantially. 
(ix) Considering that the right of referenCe to the civil court 
under section 1& of the Act is not usually taken advantage of by 
inarticulate and poor people and is usually exercised only· by the 
comparatively affluent landowners and that this causes consider-
abl~ inequality in the payment of compensation for the same or 
similar: quality of land to different interested parties, it is proposed 
to previde an opportunity to all aggrieved parties whose land is 
covered under the same notification to seek . re-determination of 
compensation, once anyone of them has obtained orders for pay-
ment of higher compensation from the reference court under section 
18 of the Act. 
(:r) As d large number of cases. for the acquisition of land are 
pending before various authorities for a very long time and pay_ 
ment of the market value of the land obtaining on the date of the 
preliminary notification under section 4 of the Act in respect of 
sucl! land is likely to be unrealistic and iniquitous, it is proposed 
to provide for payment of simple interest at ten per centum per 
annum on the nmount of compensation for the period commencing 
from the date of i!fsl.te of the notification under section 4 of the Act 
to the date of tender of payment or deposit 'It compensation awarded 
by the Collector in respect of all pending proceedings on the 30th 
April, Hl82, the date when the earlier Bill for the amendment of the 
Act was introduced in the House of the People. 
S: The I~lI seeks to achieve the above objects and to make some 
other consequential and clarifieatory amendments in the Act. 
NEW DELw; 
The 21st July, 1984. HARINAntA l\4ISRi\. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 15 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 23 
of the Land AcqLlisition Act, 189'~, so as to increase "the rate of solatium 
to be given in consideration of the compulsory nature of the acquisition 
from ·15 per centum of the market value of the land acquired to 30 per 
centum. 
2. Clause 18 of the Blll proposes to amend section 28 of the Act to 
increase the rate of interest specified in that section for payment on 
the excess of the amount of compensation which should have been 
awat'6ed..by the Collector from (j per centum to 9 per centum per 
nnnum.· It is further proposed that where the delay in making payment 
of the balance amount exceeds one year, interest for the period fit 
excess of one year will be paid at the rate of 15 per centum per annum. 
3. Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 28A in the Act. 
which provides that if a party in a land acquisition proceeding obtains' 
the orders of th~ Court under section 18 of the Act for higher compen-
sation, the other persons whose lands Rre covered under the. same notifi-
cation under section 4(1) of the Act and who may have reasol'S to be 
similarly aggrieved by the award of the Collector, may apply to the 
Collector for redetermination of the amount of compensation payable, 
to them on the basis of the amount of compensation awarded by the 
Court. . ~ If":. 
4. Clause 20 of the Bill, which seeks to amend section 34 of the Act, 
proposes to increase the rate of interest which is p~able on the com-
pensation in cases where possession of land is taken before pay-
ment of ~he compen<;ation Or its deposit in court from 6 per centum to 
9 per ..:entum per mmum. It is also proposed that where such compen-
sation is not paid within ~ne year of the taking of possession of the land, 
the rate of interest will increase to 15 per centum per annum for the 
periorl in excess of one year .. 
5. Clause '31 of the Bill proposes to provide for payment of interest 
at the rate of 10 per centum per annum on the market value of land 
determined under section 23 of the Act in respect of every proceeding 
for acquisition of land pending on the 30th April, 1982 in which no 
award was made before that date. 
fl. The above increase in the rates of payment of solatium and 
interest as well as payment ~t higher compC'nsation on the basis of the 
award of. the Court and interest on the amount of compensation for 
land for the acquisition of which proceedings were pending on the 30th 
April, 1982 will involve additional expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India in cases where land is acquired for the' purposes of the 
Union. Since such acquisition is made as and when necessary and the 
additional liability on account of ~he increase in ·the above rates will 
vnry from case to case, it is not possible to estimate precisely the addi-
tiona] expenditure that is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. 
7. 'fhe Bil1. if enacted. is not . likely to involve any other recurring 
or non-recurr~g expenditure. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (2) in section 
'~1 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, to provide that if at any stage of 
the proceedings for the acquisition of land, the 'Collector is satisfied 
that all the persons interested in the land who appeared before him 
h~we agreed in writing on the matters to be included in the award of 
the Collector in the form prescribed by rules made by the appropriate 
Government, the Collector may, without making further inquiry, make 
an award according to the terms of such agreement. The prescribing 
of a form is a matter of procedure or detail and the delegation of legis-
lative power under this clause is therefore normal in character. 

6 of 1882. 
21 of 1860. 
2 of 19J'Z. 
... 
• 
1. (1) 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE LAND ACQUISITION ACT, 1894 
(1 01' 1894) 
... • • 
... ... ... • 
• 
• 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the territories which. 
hnmediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B 
States; and 
... ... ... • • 
Short 
title, 
extent 
and com~ 
menee-
ment . 
a. In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or Deflni-
context,- tions . 
... ... ... ... • 
(e) the expression "Company" means a Company registered 
under the Indian Companies Act, 1882, or under the (English) Com-
panies Acts, 1862 to 1890, or incorporated by an Act of Parliament 
of the United Kingdom Or by an Indian law, or by Royal Charter 
or Letters Patent and includes a society I'egistered under the 
SocIeties Registration Act, 1860, and a registered society within the 
meaning of the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 or any other law 
relating to co-operative societies for the time being in force in any 
State; .~' .... ,~ 
... ... ... ... ... 
(j) the expression "public purpose" includes the provision of 
village-sites in dist.cicts in which the appropriate Government shall 
have declares! by notification in the Official Gazette that it is custo-
mary for the Govemment to make such provision; and 
«(1) the following persons shall be deemed persons "entitled to 
act" as and to the extent hereinafter provided (that is to 8ay)-
'-
trustees for otherpe.rsons beneficially interested shall be 
deemed the persons entitled to act with reference to any 8uch 
ca'Se, and that to the same extent as the persons beneficially 
interested, could have acted if free from disability; 
a married woman, in cases to which the English law is appli-
cable, shall be deemed the person so entitled to act, and whether 
of full age or not, to the same extent as if she were unmarried 
and of full age; and 
the guardians of minors and the committees or managers of 
lunatics or idiots 'Shall be deemed respectively the persons 10 
entitled to act, to the same, extent as the minors, lunatics or 
idiots themselves, if' free from disability, could ha"~ ,acted;, 
15 " 

Publica-
tion of 
prelimi-
nary noti-
fication 
and 
power, 
of oJIlcera 
thereupon. 
Rearm, 
of objeo-
tiOl1l. 
( 
16· 
Provided that-
• 
. \ . 
(i) no person shall be deemed "entitled to act" whose 
interest in the subject-matter shall be shown to the sati't;faction 
of the Collector or Court to . be adverse to the jnterest of the 
person interested for whom he would otherwise beerltitled to 
art; 
. (ii) in every such case the person interested may appear by 
a next friend, or, in default of his appearance by a next friend, 
the Collector or Court, as the case may be, shall appoint a 
guardian for the case to act on his behalf in the conduct thereof; 
(i,i;) the provisions of Chapter XXXI of the Code of Civil 
Procedure shall, mutatis mut"nd'is, apply in the case of persons' 14 of 1882. 
interested appearing before a Colle.ctor or Court 'by a next 
tripnd, or by a guardian for the case, in' proceedings unde.r this 
Act; and 
, 
(iv) no person "entitled to act" shall be competent to 
receive the compensation-money payable to the -person for 
whom he is entitled to act unless he would have been . competent 
to alienate the land and receive and give a good dischar.ge for 
the purchase-money on a voluntary sale. 
• • • 
4. (1) Wht>never it appears to the appropriate G,'we1'llment that ianu 
in any localIty is needed or is likely to be needed for any public pur-
pose, a notifIcation to that effect shall be published in the OtlicialGazette, 
. and the Collector shall. cause public notice of the substance of such 
notification to be given at convenient places in the said locality. 
• • • • • 
5A. (1) Any person interested in any land which has been notified 
-under sel.1ion <i, sub-section (1), as being needed o.r Hkely to be needed 
for a public purpose or for a Company reay, within thirty days after 
the issue of the notification, object. to the acqu}~;itioll of the land or of 
any land in the locality, as the case may be. 
(2) Every objection under sub-section (1) shall be made to the Col-
lector in writing, and the CollectOr" shall give the objector an opportunity 
of, being heard either in person or by pleader and shall, after hearing 
all such Objt.lctioos and after making such furtherinquil'Y, if any, as h~ 
thinks necessary, either make a report in respect of .the land which has 
been notified under section 4, sub-section (1), or make .different reports 
in .respect of different parcels of such land, to the appropriate Govern-
ment, coataining his recmnmendations on the objections, together with 
the recoM.;Ofthe proceedings held by him,for the decision of that Gov-
ernment~The decision of the appropriate Government on the objections 
.holl be i1rui;, 
• • • • • 

1 of 1967. 
Hot 1866. 
8. (1) Subject to the provisions of Part VII uf this Act, when the 
appropriate Government is. satisfied, after considering the report, if any, 
made under section 5A, sub-section (2), that any particular land is 
~ded for a public purpose, or for a Company, a declaration shall be 
made to that effect under the signature of a Secretary to such Govern-
ment or of some officer duly authorized to certify its orders, and difterent 
declarations may be made from time to time in respect of different 
parcels of any land covered by the same notification under section 4, 
sub-section (1), irrespective of whether one repo~t or different reports 
has or have been made (wherever required) under section 5A, sub-
section (2): 
Provided that no declaration in respect of any 'particular land 
covered by" a notification under section 4, sub-section (1) , published 
after the comr.umcement of the Land Acquisition (Amendment and 
Validation) Ordinance, 1967,' shall be made after the expiry of three 
years from the date of such publication: 
Provided further that no such declaration shall be made unless the 
compensation to be awarded for such property is to be paid by a Com-
pany, or wholly or partly out of public revenues or some fund controlled 
or managed by a local authority. 
(2) Every declaration shall be published in the Official Gazette, and 
shall state tbe district or other territorial division in which the land is 
situate, the purpose for which it is needed, its approximate area, and,. 
where a plan shall have been made of the land, the place where such 
plan may be inspected. 
.. .. • .. • 
9. (1) .. .. .. .. • 
(4) In case any person so interested resides elsewhere, and has DO 
such agent, the notice shall be sent to him by post ina letter addressed 
to him at his last known residence, address or place of business and 
registered under Part In of the Indian Post Office Act, 1886. 
• • • .. • 
11. On the day so ftxed, or on any other day to which the enquiry 
has been adjourned, the Collector shall proceed to enquire into the objec-
tions (if any) which any person interested has stated pursuant to a 
notice given under section 9 to the measurements made under section 8, 
and into the value of the land at the date of the publication of the noti-
flcation under section 4, sub-section (1), and into the respective interests 
of the persons claiming the compensation and shall make an award under 
his hand of-
(i) the true area of the land; 
(ii) the compensation which in his oPinion should be allowed for 
the land; and 
(iii) the apportionment of the said compensation among all the 
persons mown or believed to be interested in the land, of whom, or 
of whose claims, he has hlformation, whether or not they have 
respectively appeared before him. 
Declara-
tion that 
land is 
required 
for a pub-
lic pur-
pose. 
Notice to 
persona 
interested. 
Enquiry 
and 
award by 
Collector. 

Power to 
IIolUlDmon 
and 
enforce 
atten-
dance of 
witnesSCs 
and pro-
d\retion of 
documents. 
Special 
powers 
in cases 
of ur-
gency. 
Collector':; 
statement 
totbe ) 
Court. 
18 
14. For the purpose of enquiries under this Act the Collector shall 
have power to summon and enforce the attendance of witnesses, includ-
ing the parties interested or any of them, and to compel the production 
of documents by the same means, and (so far as may be) in the same 
manner, as is provided in the case of a Civil Court under the Code of 
Civil Procedure. 
• • • • • 
17. (1) In cases of urgency, whenever the appropriate Government 
so directs, the Collector, though no such award has been made, may, on 
the expiration of fifteen days from the publication of the notice men-
tioned in section 9, sub-section (1), take possession of any waste or 
arable land needed for public purposes or for a Company. Such land shall 
thereupon vest absolutely in the Govemmf!nt, free from all encumbrances. 
(2) Whenever, owing to any sudden change in the channel of any 
navigable river Or other unforeseen emergency, it becomes necessary 
for any Railway Administration to acquire the immediate possession of 
any land for the maintenance of their traffic Or for the purpose of making 
thereon a river-side or ghat station, or of providing convenient con-
nection with or access to any such station, the Collector may, imme-
diately after the pUblication of the notice mentioned in sub-section (1) 
and with the previous sanction of the appropriate Government, enter 
upon and take possession of such land, which shall thereupon vest abso-
lutely in the Government free from aD encumbrances: 
Provided that the Collector slUuI not take possession of any building 
or part of a building under this sub.section without giving to the occupier 
thereof at least forty-eight hours' notice of his intention so to do, or such 
longer notice as may be reasonably su1B.cient to enable such occupier 
to remove his movable property from such building Without unnecessary 
inconvenience. 
• • • • • 
(4) In the case of any land to which, in the opinion of the appropriate 
Government, the proVjsions of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) are 
applicable, the appropriate Government may direct that the provisions of 
section 5A shall not apply, and, if it does so direct, a declaration may be 
made under section 6 in respect of the land at any time after the publi-
cation of the notification under section 4, su])..section (1). 
• • • • • 
19. (1) In making the reference, the Collector shall state for the 
'oformation of the Court, in writing under his hand.-
• • • • • 
(e) the amount awarded for damages and paid or tendered 
under sectionS 5 and 17, or either of them, and the amount of com-
pensation awarded under section 11; and 
• • • • • 
14 of 1882. 

23. (1) * • • • • 
(2) In addition to the market-value of the land, as above provided, 
the Court shall in every case award a sum of fifteen per centum on such 
market-value, in consider&.tion of the compulsory nature of the 
acquisition. 
24. But the Court shall not take into consideration-
* • • • • 
Sixthly, any increase to the value of the other land of the 
person interested likely to accrue from the use to which ~he land 
acquired will be put; or, 
Seventhly, any outlay or improvements on, or. disposal of, the 
land acquired, commenced, made or effected without the sanction of 
the Collector after the date of the publication of the notification 
under section 4, SUb-section (1). 
25. (1) When the applicant has made a claim to compensatior., pur-
suant to any notice given under section 9, the amount awarded to 
him by the Court shall not exceed the amount so claimed. or be less than 
the amowlt awarded by the Collector under section 11. 
(2) When the applicant has refused to make such claim or has omit-
ted without sufficient reason (to be allowed by the Judge) to make 
such claim, the amount awarded by the Court shall in no case exceed 
the amount awarded by the Collector. 
(3) When the applicant has omitted for a suftlcient reason (to be 
allowed by the Judge) to make such claim, the amount awarded to 
him by the Court shall not be less than, and may exceed, the amount 
awarded by the Collector. 
• • • • • 
28. If the sum which, in the opinion of the Court, the Collector ought 
to have awarded ·as compensation is in excess of the sum which the 
Collector did award as compensation, the award of the Court may direct 
that the Collector shall pay interest on such excess at the rate of six 
per centum per annum from the date on which he took possession of 
the land to the date of payment of such excess into Court. 
• • • • • 
34. When the amount of such compensation is not paid or deposited 
on or before taking possession of the land, the Collector shall pay the 
amount awarded with interest thereon at the rate of six per centum per 
annum from the time of so taking possession until it shall have been 
so paid or deposited. 
• • • • • 
Matters 
to be 
consider_ 
ed in 
deteImin-
ing com-
pensation. 
4 
MatLets to 
be neslccted 
in det~min­
ing campeD·· 
sation. 
Rules 
as to 
amount 
of com-
pent'Btion. 
Collector 
maybe 
directed 
to pay 
interst 
on exces:; 
compen-
sation. 
Payment 
of interel~. 

Company 
may be 
authorlaed 
to enter 
'und 
survey. 
Indus-
trial 
concern 
to be 
deemed 
Company 
for . 
• certain 
purposes. 
Previ<lus 
consent 
of appro_ 
priate 
Govern-
ment and 
execution 
of agree-
ment 
necessary. 
PreviOUs 
enquiry. 
Service 
of 
notices. 
20 
38. (1) The appropriate Government may authorise any officer of 
. any Company desiring to acquire land for its purposes to exercise the 
power:s conferred by section 4. 
(2) In every such case section 4 shall be construed as if for the words 
"for such purpose" the words "for the purposes of the Company" were 
substituted; and section 5 shall be construed as if after the words "the 
officer" the words "of the Company" were inserted. 
38A. An industrial concern, ordinarily employing not less than one 
hundred workmen owned by an individual or by an association of indivi-
duals and not .being a Company, desiring to acquire land for the erection 
of dwelling houses for workmen employed by the concern or for the 
provision of amenities directly. connected therewith shall, so far as 
concerns the a"quisition of suchlland, be deemed t.o be a Company for 
the purposes of. this Part, and the references to Company in sections- 5A, 
6, 7, 17 and 50 shall be interpreted as references also to such concern. 
39. The provisions of sections 6 to 37 (both inclusive) shall not be 
put in force in order to acquire land for any Company, unless with the 
previous consent of the appropriate Government, nor unless the Company 
shall have executed 1he B;greement hereinafter mentioned. 
40. (1) • • • • • 
(3) Such officer may summon and enforce the attendance of.witnesses 
and compel the production of documents by the same means and, as far 
as possible, in the same manner as is pro~ded by the Code of Civil Pro-
cedure in the case of a Civil Court. 
• • • • • 
45. (1) • • • • • 
(3) When such person cannot be found, the, service may be made on 
any adult male member of his family reSiding with him; and, if no such 
adult male member can be found, the 1).otice may be served by fixing 
the copy on the outer door of the house in which the person therein 
named ordinarily dwells or carries on business, or by fixing a copy 
thereof in some conspicuous place in the office of the officer aforesaid 
or of the Collector or in the court-house, and also in some conspicuous 
part of the land to be acquired: 
Provided that, if the Collector or Judge shall so direct, a notice may 
be sent by post, in a letter addressed to the person named therein at 
his last known residence, address or place of business and registered 
unde. Part III of the Indian Post Office Act, 1866, and service of it may be 
proved by the production of the addressee's receipt. 
14 of 1882 
. 
J' ,,. 
14 of 1866. 

14011882. 
.. 
~I 
46. Whoever wilfully obstructs any person in dome any of the acts 
authorised by section 4 or section 8, or wilfully fills up, destroys, 
damages or displaces any trench or mark made under section 4, shall, on 
conviction before a Magistrate, be liable to imprisonment for any term 
not exceeding one month, Or to fine not exceeding fifty rupees, or to 
~th. 
• • • • 
53. Save in so {tlr as they may be inconsistent with anything con-
tained in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure shall 
apply to all proceedings before the Court under this Act. 
• • • • • 
55. (1) The appropriate Government shall have power to make rules 
coasistent with this Act for the guidance of ofticers in all matters con-
nected with its enforcement, and may 'from time to time alter and add 
~ the rules so made: 
Provided that the power to make rules for carrying out the purposes 
of Part VII of this Act shall be exerCisable by the Central Government 
and such rules may be made for the guidance of the State Governments 
and the officers of thE' Central Government and of the State Governments: 
Provided further that every such rule made by the Central Govern-
ment shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, befol"e each House 
of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it 
is so laid or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
onlv in fiuch modified f()rm Or be of no effect, as the case may be; so 
however that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
* 
Penalty 
fOr obs-
tructing 
acquisi-
tion of 
land. 
Code of 
Civil Pro-
c:edure to 
apply to 
prllceed-
ings be-
fore Court 
Power to 
make 
ruleli. 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. . 
(Shri Hari Nath Mithra, Minister of State of the MiniBtry of Rural 
. Development.) 