Bill No. " of 1"1 
THE IRON ORE MINES LABOUR 
WELFARE CESS BILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA 
ON 28TH NOVEMBER, 1961) 

8m No. 63 of 1"1 
THE IRON ORE MINES LABOUR WELFARE 
CESS BILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the levy and collection of a cess on iron ore for the 
financing of activities to promote the welfare of labour empZOJIed 
in the iron are mining industry. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Iron Ore Mines Labour Welt.lre Short title 
Cess Act, 1961. ateDt Ui4 
0DIDIII0DCe-
S (2) It extends to the whole of India except the S~te of Jammu mont. 
and Kashmir. ~':rir'~ 
. (3) It shaH come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. With effect from such date as the Central Government may, IAYJ and 
10 by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be levied :~.e:.0!or: 
and collected, as a cess for the purposes of this Act on all iron ore oro. 
produced in any mine, a duty of excise a·t such rate not exceeding 
fifty naye paiSe per metric tonne of iron ore as the Central Gov-
ernment may, from time to time, fix by notification in the Official 
IS Gazette. . 
3. An amount equivalent to the proceeds of the duty levied under ~IiI:adOD 
this Act, reduced by the cost of collection as determined' by the Central ~f t:::"" 
Government, together with any income from investment of the said 
amount and any other moneys received by the Central Government 
20 for the purposes of this Act, shall, after due appropriation made by • 

Parliament by law, be utilised by the Central Government to meet the 
expenditure incurred in connection with measures which, in the 
opinion of that Government, are necessary or expedient to promote 
the welfare of labour employed in the iron ore mining industry; and 
in particular ,- S 
(a) to defray the cost of measures for the benefit of labour 
employed in the iron ore mining industry directed towards-
(i) the improvement of public health and sanimtion, 
the prevention of disease and the provision and improve-
ment -of "medical facilities, 10 
(ii) the provision and improvement of water supplies 
lind fae1Uties'fOr washing, 
(iii) the pro'visibn 1fnd itnpr"ovement of educational faci-
lities, 
(iv) the improvement of standards of living including IS 
housing and nutrition, the' amelioration of social conditions 
and the provision of recreational facilities, and 
(v) the provision of transport to and from work; 
(b) to make grants to a State Government, a local authority, 
the own.er of "an iron ore mine or any other persan, of mc)ney in 20 
aid of any scheme approved by the Central" Goverl\Ment for any 
purpose connected with the welfare of labour employed in the 
"iron dte'mlning ft'l'dustry; 
(c) to pay annually grants-in-aid to such of the owners of 
iron ore mines as provide to the satisfaction of the Central Gov- 25 
ernment welfare facilities of the prescribed standard for the 
~ ben'eifit" of laboUr employed in their mines, so, however, that the 
amount }:Jayeble as grant-tn-aid to the owner Of an iron ore m1ne 
shall not ex-ceed-
(i) the "amount spent by the owner of the mine in the 30 
""prmsion of welfare facilities, as determined by the Central 
Government or any person specified by it in this behalf, Of 
(ii) such "amOunt as may be prescribed-by -mesmade 
under this Act; 
whichever is less: 
'ProVided tttat "1\0 "gtant .. in-aid "!rhall be payable in"respeet of" any 
Welfare 'fae1litlesprovided" by the OWner of an iron ore mine ",here 
the-amount "spentttiereon 'determined as aforesaid is less than 'fl'lo 
amount" prescribed' by "rules made "in this behalf; 
35 

3 
(d) to meet the allowances, if any, of members of the Ad-
visory Committees constituted under section 4, and the salaries 
and alloW'lnces, if any. of persons appointed under section 5 .. 
4. (1) The Ce»tral Government may con~;titute as many Advisory Adviluy. 
5 (lommittees as it thinks fit, but not exceediag one for each of tlt8 ColI\JDiUiItLj 
pl"iJICipal iron ore producing States, to advise the Central Govem-
ment on' such matters arising out of the administratien of- this Ad 
a,s II\.Y be. referr., to ,it by that Gov~rnme~J ~d~ ~""rI 
relating _ tq the. appli.cation. of. the aw.o~t of CellS. or of, aQ)' ~, 
10 moneys referred to in, section 3, 
(2) EacJt Advisory Committee shall, con~l!~ of S\,lc,h n1,ll'Jl~e~. of 
persons as may be appointed to it by t~e Central, Govern:qle~t ~, 
the members shall be chosen in such manner as may be prescribed 
by rules made under this Act: 
IS Provided that each Advisory Committee shall include an equal 
ll,wnhel' of members representing Government, the owners of iron 
ore mines and worlqnen employed in th,e iron, ore mlrUng, industry 
and thrJt at least one member of each su~h COqtIW,ttee sh,~t b~ a 
woman. 
20 (3) The Chairman of each Ad,visory Committee sh,U be appoint-
ed by the Central Government. 
(4) The Central Government shall publish in the Official Gazette 
the names of all members of the Advisory Committ~. 
5. (1) The Central Government.may appoin~ In~~qn, Welfart'! !~:i:!d 
25 Administrators and such other officers and staff as it: ~ ~ry powon of 
for the purposes of this Act. Itaft'. 
(2) Every person so aRPQinted shall be deemed to be D, p\.lplic 
45 er 1160. servant within the meaning of section 21 of the, Indi/ltl Pen.~, Code. 
(3) Any Inspector or Welfare Administrator rnay,-
30 (a) with such assistance, if any. as he thbaks fit, enter at 
any reason,ble tiqle, any pla~e, which, he ,coI;ls~4.e~~, it n~cessary 
to enter for carrying out the pUfPO$el!i of th,ilJ Act, an,d. 
(b) do within such place anytQing necessary for the 
proper discharge of his. duties. 
3S 6. Notwithstanding anything hereinbefQfe contained in t~s, A,ct, Power "r 
if th~ Central Government is satisfied that there is in, fOl'ce, in any ~~nt 
State or part thereof a law making adequate provision for the finan- to exempt. 
cing of activities to promote the welfare of labour employed in the 
iron ore mining industry, it may, by ,notification in the Official 
40 Gazette, direct that all or any of the provisions of this Act shall not 

ARnuaI 
report of 
activitiel 
fiDaDCed 
under the 
Act. 
Power to 
make IUlel. 
.4 
apply, or shall apply to such State or part subject to such excep-
tions and modifications as may be specified in the notification. 
7. The Central Government shall, as soon as. may be, after the 
end! of each financial year cause to be published in the Official 
Gazette a report giving an account of its activiUes financed under S 
this Act during the previous financial year,. together with a state-
ment of accounts. . , 
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette and subject to the condition of previous pubUcation, make 
rules for carrying into effect the purposes of this Act. 10 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide :for-
(a) the assessment and collection of a cess levied under 
this Act; 
(b) rthe determination of the cost of . collection of the cess; IS 
(c) the manner in which the amount of the cess and other 
moneys, if any, may be applied on the measures specified in sec-
tion 3; 
(d) the conditions governing the grant of money under 
clause (b) of section 3; 20 
(e) the standard of welfare facilities to be provided by 
owners of iron ore mines for the purposes of clause (c) of sec-
tion 3 and the amounts referred to in sub-clause (ii) and proviso 
of that clause; 
(f) the composition of the Advisory Committees constituted 2S 
under section 4, the manner in which the members thereof shall 
be chosen, the term of office of such members, the allowances, 
if any, payable to them, and the manner in which the Advisory 
Committees thaIl conduct their business; 
(g) the recruitment, conditions of service and the duties of 30 
all persons appointed under section 5; 
(h) the furnishing by owners, agents or managers of . iron 
ore mines, of statistical and other information. 
(3) In making any rule under this section, the Central Govern-
ment may direct that a breach thereof shall be punishable with fine. 35 
(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as 
may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is 
in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 

in one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry 
of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately follow-
ing, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall there-
after have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 
• 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Tile Hv~g condi~ions of labour employed in the iron, ore, minina" 
itWr~~y are- nQt sati~~wry. A Wor~ng Group set up in 1956, 
which, included representatives of employers and w:orkers, while 
commenting on the unsatisfactory labour conditions, in, tnil:la sur .. 
veyed by them, recommended that a welfare fund financed by a 
special cess should be set up on the pattern of the Coal Mines Labour 
Welfare Fund or the Mica ,Mines Labour Welfare Fund. This recom-
mendation has also been supported by the tripartite Industrial Com-
mittee on mines other than coal, which included representatives of 
State Governments. It is not- the intention to take over completely 
the responsibility of the employers in the matter of provision of wel-
fare facilities, but it is proposed to levy a cess on all iron ore pro-
duced and to u~ilize the proceeds of the cess for providing labour 
employed in the iron ore mines with welfare facilities comparable 
to those now being provided in the coal and mica mines. The Bill 
seeks to give effect to these proposals. 
G. L. NANDA. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 21st November, 1961. 
6 

FINANCIAL: MEMORANDUM 
-Clause 2 of ,the BilI 'provides for the levy of 'a cess at such· rate-not 
er~eding '50naye 'paise' per metric tonne of iron ore J)I'bcIiOOed,1as the 
eentral Government may 1be front time to time. ]tis expeeted tftat 
the' cess at the maximum rate of 50 naye paise per metric t(lithe' VillI 
yield about rupees forty lakhs per 8nr.um. After meeting the expenses 
ineurred on Advisory Committees, etc., the balance will be utilIZed 
subject·to ,'appropriatien by Parliament, on the objects' sptdfted in 
ciause 13 6f the Bill. 
7 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying into effect the purpQses of the Act. Matters in res-
pect of which such rules may be made are specified in that clause. 
They inter alia relate to the collection of the cess and the determi-
nation of the cost of such collection, the manner in which the 
amount of the cess is to be applied, the conditions governing the 
grant of moneys to State Governments, etc., in aid of any approved 
schemes, the standard of welfare facilities to be maintained by mine 
managements for purposes of obtaining grants and the limits to be 
imposed on such grants, and the composition of the Advisory Com-
mittees. Rules made under this clause may also provide that a 
breach of any such rule shall be punishable with fine. 
The scope of clause 8 is thus limited to matters of procedure or 
detail and the delegation is of a normal character. 
8 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the levy and collection of a cess on iron ore for 
the financing of activities to promote the welfare of 
labour employed in the iron ore mining industry. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of 
article 117 and clause (I) of article 274 of the Constitu-
tion of India, recommended· to Lok Sabha the introduc-
tion and cOD$ideration of the BilL 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Gulzarilal NanJa, 
Minister of Labour 
and Employment.) 