As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
,'AU£:' '9at. 
Bill No. 63 of 1989 
THE NATIONAL WATERWAY (QUILON-KOTTAPURAM STRETCH 
OF WEST COAST CANAL AND CHAMPAKARA AND UDYOGMANDAL 
CANALS) BILL, 1989 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the declaration of the Qu.Uon.Kottapuram stretch of West 
Coast Canal and Champakara and Udyogmandal Canals to be a 
nationaZ waterway and also to provide for the regulation and develop-
mJe:nt of the said stretch and the CAnals for purposes of Bhipping and 
navigation. on the said waterway and for matters comt<ected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
BB it enacted by Parliament in the Fortieth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the NatiOD8l Waterway (Quilon-
Kottapuram Stretch of West Coast Canal and Champakara and Udyog-
5 mandaI Canals) Act, 1989. 
(2) It shall come into force en such date u the Central Govemment 
may, by notiftcadon in the Oftldal Gazette, appoint. 
Short title 
alld com-
mencement. 

Declara-
tion of 
Quilon-
Kottapu-
118m 
stretch of 
West 
Coast 
Canal and 
Champa-
leara and 
Udyog-
mandal 
Cana1s 
to be a 
national 
waterway. 
Declara-
tion as 
to expedi-
encyof 
control by 
the Union 
of Quilon-
ltottapu-
ram 
stretch of 
West 
Coast 
Canal ancJ. 
Champa-
kara and 
Udyogman' 
dal ' 
Canals for 
certain 
purposes. 
2 
2. The Quilon-Kottapuram stretch of West Coast Canal. and Cham-
pakara and Udyogmandal Canals, the limits of which are specifted. in the 
Schedule is hereby declared to be a national waterway. 
3. It is hereby declared tbat it is expedient ill the public interest that 
the Union should take under its control the regulation ad development 5 
of Quilon-Kottapuram streteh of West Coast Caaal aDd Champabra aDd 
Udyopumdal Canals for purposes of shippiDg and. navipUon on the na-
tional waterway to the extent provided in the Inland Waterways Autho-
rity of India Act, 1985. I 82 of 1985. 
THE SCHEDULE 10 
(See section 2) 
LIMITS OF THE NATIONAL WATGWAy (QUILON'-KO'n'AP'UJlA.M STRE1'Cl1 OF 
WEEr CQAST CANAL AND CIIAMPAKABA AND UDYOOMANDAL CANALS) 
The northern limit of the West Coast Canal shall be a line drawn 
across the riwr Periyar at a distance of 1.0 kilometer upsteream of Kat- 15 
tapuram road btid~e (NH-17) connecting Maliankara 4Uld Valiapauikan 
'Ib.uNthu, and the southern limttshall be a line drawn across the Ashta-
mudy Kayal at a distance of 100 meters south of Quilon jetty. 
The Champakara Canal starting frem the CODfiuence with the West 
Cout Canal and ending at the l'ailway bridge (railway widing for Coehtn 20 
Oil Refinery) near Fertilizers and Chemicals Tranvancore Ltd., boat bRain. 
The UdyctpWldal·C~llW'Unl from the ooa4uence With· West· Coast 
Canal and ending at the Pldalam·,oad I~ (Doer-byar). 

STATEMENt' OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In view of lack of suitable organisation and the paucity of resources 
with the State Governments. the development of inland water transport 
has not made much headway. There are certain advantages in this mode 
of transport. such as, low cost of transport, eneray emciency, generation 
of employment among weaker sections of the community and less of 
ponution. The various committees set up by the Government for the 
purpose of looking into this matter recommended that the Central Gov-
ernment shauld declare certain waterways as national waterways and 
assume responsibility for their development. 
2. The Central Government have already constituted the Inland 
Waterways Authority of India under the Inland Waterways Authority of 
India Act, 1985 (82 of 1985) for the regulation and development of inland 
waterways for purposes of shipping and navigation. 
3. Allahabad-Haldia stretch of the Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hoogbly ri-'9t!lr 
and the Sadiya-Dhubri stretch of the Brahmaputra riff!' ha'le already 
been declared as national waterways and tke Inland Waterways Authmity 
of India has taken up the development, maintellance and man-agem.ent of 
these waterways. 
4. It is DOW plOpesed to deelue the' QatloDMItMtapUIIIm stNtab ." 
"Nest Coast Canal and Champaltara and Udyogmandal Canall .. the tkW 
national waterway. Infomnation ClJIII'eDtly a.vailable 1ncItcates that the-
infrastractural faeilitSes el8entiaUy required for safe aa.d: eon98llleDt 
&hipping and na~gaticm are not adequate for IlI8f:a.fm.e4 operatiOb ., lIIrp 
mechanised crafts. Regulation and developmerrt ot Quilon-Kottapuram 
stretch of West Coast Canal and Champakara and Udyogmandal Canals 
for purposes of shipping and navigation on the proposed national water-
way under the control of the Union ts in the public interest and· declara-
tion to that effect has also been made in the !rill. 
5. The BiU seeks to acbiev:e the above objects. 
N1!!W 0I:lm; 
The 7th August. 1989. RAJ1!SH PIIDr. 
3" 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The effect of clause 3 of the Bill will be to entrust the responsibility 
to regulate and develop the proposed national waterway for the purposes 
of shipping and navigation to tne Union. The regulation and deVelOpment 
of the proposed national waterway will be carried out by the InlancJ 
Waterways Authority of India constituted under the Inland Waterways 
Authority of India Act, 1985 (82 of 1985). Consequently, three distinct 
functions namely, development, maintenance and management will de-
volve on the Inland Waterways Authority of India. The financial im-
plications are indicated in the succeeding paragraphs. 
2. It has been visualised that the total originating trafti.c in the region 
is 10.904 million tonnes and the total terminating traffic in the region 
would be 9.98 million tonnes. Out of this, the estimated share of Inland 
Water Transport would be 1.73 million tonnes. After full development of 
the proposed national waterway by 1992-93, the anticipated Inland Water 
Transport traffic may be 3.08 million tonnes. This traftic is expected to 
be handled at 14 terminals, namely, Kottapuram, Ernakulam, Cochin, 
Vaikom, Shartallai, Veehoor, Ambalapuzha, Trikkummapuzha, Arattu-
puma, Kayamkulam, Chavara, Asthamudi, Arookutty and Quilon. 
3. The development of the canals and the infrastructural facilities so 
as to eater to the requirements of shipping and navigation to handle the 
above men.tioned tramc include development of the waterway for navi-
gation, channel marking, construction of jetties, transit sheds, installation 
of handling equipment, etc. It is estimated that the expenditure with 
respect to the said infrastructural facilities will be of the order of Rs. 42.84 
crores. This expenditure will be of a non-recurring nature. 
4. In addition to the said expenditure of non-recurring expenditure, 
it is estimated that an expenditure of recurring nature of the order of 
Rs. 1.20 crores annually will be incurred for maintenance of infrastruc-
tural facilities. 
5. The declaration of the proposed stretch of the West Coast Canal 
and Champakara and Udyogmandal Canals as National Waterway and to 
provide for ~he regulation and development of the said canal for purposes 
of ~ping and navigation is not expected to involve any other. expendi-
ture of recurring or non-recurring nature. 
4, 

LOJt SABRA 
• BILL 
;1 
'''''''\ 
! 
1 • 
to provide for the declaration of the Quilon-Kottapuram stretch of West 
Coast Canal and Champakara and Udyogmandal Canals to be a 
national waterway and also to provide for the regulation and devel0p-
ment of the said stretch and the Canals for purposes of shipping and 
navigation on the said waterway and for the matters connected there-
with or incidental thereto. 
, " 
(Shri RAj •• h Pilot, Miniet.,. of ~ Tt1tnIpOrt.) 