68 olllft. 
As Dn'RODUCED IN LOR: SABRA bit 
2 2 SfP 19~~ 
,.. " " ........ 1 ' ~" •. "" ., .... ,.; 
THE WAREHOUSING CORPORATIONS (SUPPLE"; 
MElUMty) :~l-LL, 1964 
A 
BILL 
to rupplement the provisions of the W4rehouling C01'pOniti<m.f 'Act, 
1962. 
WHEREAS, in pursuance of clause (1) of article 252 of the CGnsti-
tution, resolutions have been passed by the Legislatures of; certain 
States to the effect that storage of commodities otla:e~ ~ ~0Ie CQver-
ed by the Warehousing Corporations Act, 196'2; 'in \varehoUseS' run 
'by the corporations established under that Act, shall be regulated 
in those States by Parliament by law; 
AND WHJ!'.REAS, in consequence thereof it is necessary to supple-
ment the provisions of the said Warehousing Corporations Act for 
the purposes hereinafter appearing; 
10 BE it enacted ,by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) 'nUs Act may be called the Warehousing Corporations Short 
(Supplementary) Act, 1964. ~:ilcatlon 
(2) It shall apply ~ the States specified in the Schedule: 
I S Provided that the Central Government may, by noti1ication in 
the OtBcial Gazette, add the names of any other States to the .Sche-
dule in respect whereof resolutions have been. passed by the Legis-
latures of those States adopting this Act under clause (1) of article 
252 of the Constitution in respect of the storage of commodities 
20 other than those covered by the WarehOUSing Corporations Act, 
and com-
mene8-
manl 
58 of 1962. 1962, and OIl the issue of any such notification the States so added 

shall be deemed to be States specified in the Schedule within the 
meaning of this sub-section. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Appli- Z. The Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962, shall, in its applica- 5 II 01 1963. 
cation tion to the States for the time being specified in the Schedule, 
~ettb!itb ~avE; e~ect as .if in clause (e) of section 2 of that Act the words 
reJP8Ct to.a4·:flgures "being a commodity with respect to which Parliament 
notified has power to make laws by virtue of entry3~ in Ust III m the 
commo- Seventh Schedule to the Constitution" had' been" om, itted. 10 
dives. 
1. Andhra Pradesh. 
2. Gujarat. 
3. Kerala. 
4. Madras., 
5. Punjab. 
6. Uttar Pradesh. 
THE SCHEDULE, 
[See section 1 (2) ] 
IS 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Sections 11 and 24 of the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962 
(58 of 1962), enable the Central Warehousing Corporation and the 
State Warehousing Corporations to run their warehouses for the 
storage of agricultural produce, seeds, manures, fertilizers, agricul-
tural implements Gnd notified commodities, i.e., any commodity 
(other than agricultural produce) which the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be a notified 
commodity for the purposes of the Act, being a commodity with 
respect to which Parliament has power to make laws by virtue of 
entry 33 in list III in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. There 
has been a constant demand for the storage of other commodities 
also like tobacco, lac and wool which cannot be stored in the ware-
houses under the existing provisions of the Act. Legislation en-
abling the Central Warehousing Corporation and the State Ware-
housing Corporations to store in their warehouses commodities like 
tobacco, lac and wool is relatable to matters enumerated in entry 
26 and entry 27 of list II in the Seventh Schedule to the Constftu .. 
tion and Parliament has no power to make a law for the States 
(apart from the provisions of articles 249 and 250 of the Constitu. 
tion) unless the Legislatures of two or more States pass a resolution 
in pursuance of article 252 of the Constitution, empowering Parlia-
ment to pass the necessary legislation on the subject. The Legisla .. 
tures of the States of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Kerala, Madras, 
Punjab and Uttar Pradesh have passed such resolutions. The Bill 
is intended to give effect to the resolutions passed by the Legisla .. 
tures of the aforesaid States. 
C. SUBRAMANIAM. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 6th September I 1964,. 

'" Lot{ SABlIA . / ,/ 
~
' " " . \ 
A 
aI~ 
.... ,..~ ,. . '. ! t ~. ',/ I ( .. '" !' .'" 
to supplQnent the proVisions of the War@o~s~gCo1J'9~tiq~ 
Act, 1962. 
(Shri C. Subramaniam, 
Minister of Food and 
Agriculture. ) 