Blll No. 63 of 1"0 
THE BILASPUR COMMERCIAL COR-
PORATION (REPEAL) BILL, 1960 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN u. SABHA) 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bilaspur Commercial Corporation was established in 1948 for 
arranging the distribution of essential commodities at fair prices to 
the people of the erstwhile State of Bilaspur. After the integration 
of Bilaspur with Himachal Pradesh in 1954, it was decided that, as 
in the other areas of the Union territory, the distribution of essential 
commodities in the Bilaspur area should also be channel~ed pqmarily 
through co-operative institutions. The District Co-operative Federa-
tion, Bilaspur, is now discharging this function and the activities of 
the Bilaspur Commercial Corporation have ceased for all practical 
purposes. It is, therefore, necessary to formally dissolve the Corpo-
ration and dispose of its asset~ aJ),d liabilities. The Bilaspur Com-
mercial eorporation Act, 2005 Bikrami, under which this Corporation 
was established, does not, however, contain any provision for such 
dissolution. The Bill, therefor~, seeks to grovide for the repeal of 
the Act and the dissolution of·the Corporation. It also provides that 
its assets and liabilities shall pass to the Government on such 
dissolution. 
NEW DELHI; G. B. PANT. 
The 22nd August, 1960. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill inter alia provides for the dissolution of the 
Corporation and clause 4 makes the appropriate consequenti',11 provi-
sions. On the dissolution of the Corporation, all its properties and 
assets will vest in the Central Government and all liabilities enforce-
~bl~ agalnm: the Corporation will be enfQrCalble against the Central 
Government. On the 31st July, 1960; the realisable assets. of the 
Corporation were Rs. 10,554, out of which Rs. 5,829 had already been 
withdrawn by Government and Rs. 5,225 remained to be recovered. 
The liabilities of the Corporation on the same date were Rs. 8,669 
payable to various Government Departments. and Rs. 1,885 to other 
parties i.e., Rs. 10,554 in all. Liabilities to the extent of Rs. 1,388 
may not materialise as the claimants are not traceable. To meet the 
remaining liabilities a sum of Rs. 9,166 will be required out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India during the current financio,11 year. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to repeal the BilaspurCommercial Corporation Act, 2005 Bikrami 
and to provide for certain matters incidental thereto. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (~) of article 
117 of the Constitution of India, recommenaed to Lok 
Sabha the introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri GO'Vind Ballabh Pant, Minister of Home Affairs.) 