Bill No. '3 of 125 
THE CONSTITUTION (SEVENTH 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1955 
(As IN'I'kODUCEI> IN LoK SABaA) 

Bm No. 63 of 1255 
THE CONSTITUTION (SEVENTH AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1955. 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Short title. 
Act, 1955. 
S . 2. In article 3 of the Constitution, for the proviso, ·the following Amendment 
proviso shall be substituted, namely: - of article 3 
10 
"Provided that no Bill for the purpose shall be introduced 
in either House of Parliament except on the recommendation 
of the President and unless, where the proposal contained in 
the Bill affects the area, boundaries or name of any of the 
States specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule. the 
Bill has been referred by the President to the Legislature of 
that State for expressing its views thereon within such period 
as may be specified in the reference.". 

2 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the proviso to article 3 of the Constitution, no Bill for 
the purpose of forming a new State, increasing or diminishing the 
area of any State or altering the boundaries or name of any State 
can be introduced in Parliament. unless the views of the State 
Legislatures concerned with respect to the provisions of the Bill 
have been ascertained by the President. The intention of this pro-
viso is only to ensure that all the States affected by the Reorganisa-
tion proposals have reasonable opportunity of expressing their 
views. It is desirable that when the States concerned are consult-
ed, the President should be able to prescribe the time within which 
the States should convey to the President their views in the matter. 
It is proposed to amend the proviso to article 3 of the Constitution 
for this purpose. 
NEW DELHI; C. C. BISWAS. 
The 26th November, 1955. 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA. 
• * • • 
3. Parliament may by law-
* 
Formation of 
new States 
(a) form a new State by separation of territory from any ~d alfu:ra-8 tlono area. State or by uniting two or more States or parts of States boundaries 
or by uniting any territory to a part of any State; ~=8 of 
(b) increase the area of any State; 
(c) diminish the area of any State; 
(d) alter the boundaries of any State; 
(e) alter the name of any State: 
Provided that no Bill for the purpose shall be introduced in 
either House of Parli,ment except on the recommendation of the 
President and unless, where the proposal contained in the Bill 
affects the boundaries of any State or States specified in Part A or 
Part B of the First Schedule or the name or names of any such 
State or States, the views of the Legislature of the State or, as the 
case may be, of each of the States both with respect to the proposal 
to introduce the Bill and with respect to the provisions thereof have 
been ascertained by the President . 
• * • 
States. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of 'India 
(Shr C. C. BiSfOas, Minister of lAw) 