As I~TRODUCF.D IN LoK SABH:\ 11:;'; 
2 , iU\~ -tlrJt'l\ BUI No. 630(1966 
THE DELHI WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
BILl.. 1966 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPI'ER I 
PRELIMIN ARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title. extent and commencement.. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
THE DELHI WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL BoARD 
3. Constitution and incorporation of Board. 
4. Composition of BO:l1·d. 
5. Term of office and salaries and allowanl:es of members, etc 
8. Resignation of office by Ch linn 1'1 or ~ny other member. 
7. Disqualification for being chosen as. or for being. member 
of Board. 
8. Removal of Chairman and other members from office. 
9. Vacancies, etc.. not to invalidRte acts and proceedings of 
Board. 
Meerir1g!' l,r BC':'rd. 
Temporary association of' persons with Board for particular 
purposes. 
Power to appoint committees and to dele~ate functions 
to Chlirm~tn, etc. 
Authentication of orders and other instruments of Board. 
Powers of Ch·tirm.m, Member (Engineering). etc. 
Oftlears and employee!' of Board. 
OeJaeral cUaquaUftcation of RJ1 officer. and other employees. 

II 
CHAPTER III 
POWERS. DUTIES AND Ft:NCTIONS OF THE BOARD 
General 
17. General 'duties of Board. 
18. Power to require Board to carry out ~urvc~' ol1d formulate 
proposals. 
19. Power to construct add;tional works. 
20. Board to secure wholesomeness of water. 
21. Power to lay mains. 
Water Supply 
22. Board to make bulk supply of water to receiving bodies. 
23. Receiving bodies to pay actual cost of supply of water. 
24. Provisional collecting rate. 
25. Final settlement of aCC0unts. 
26. Supply of meters. 
27. Testing of meters. 
Sewage Disposa7 
28. Board to specify places for deP\'ery of sewage. 
29. Restriction regarding discharge of sewage. 
30. Board to receive sewage. 
31. Payment of cost of disposal of sewage. 
32. Manner of payment by the Municipal Corporation of 
Delhi and New Delhi Municipal Committee of prof'\ortion 
of cost of disposal of sewage. 
CHAPTER IV 
REVF.NUF.. FTNA;\TF. Arrot·xTs. At:DlT AXD Br'DGF.T 
~~ Fund of Board. 
34. Sources of fund. 
35. Borrowing powers. 
:\tIi. Grrmts hy C."ntritl G(l\ .. ~rnm?nt to th~ BO:lrd. ._ 
37. Prnv;sion for depreciation and for de\'elopment. reserve and othI!T 
fund~. 
38. Power of Board to spend. 
39. Budget. 
~. Accounts and audit. 
; 
:.'j 

iii 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
4l. Power to require railway level, etc., to be raised or 
lowered. 
42. Buildings, railways and private streets not to be erected 
or constructed over water worko; without permission. 
43. Rights of user of property for aqueducts, lines, etc. 
44. Disputes as to liability for payment to or by Board. 
45. Summary recovery of sums due from receiving bodies. 
46. Board not to give up certain works, etc., without permis-
sion. 
47. Employment of Government agencies for repairs, etc. 
48. Power of entry. 
49. Supply of water by Board to hodies:outside~c1hi. 
50. Penalty. 
51. Members, officers and other employees of Board to be 
public servants. 
52. Power of Administrator to give instructions (0 Buard. 
53. Power to make rules. 
54. Power to make regulations. 
55. Power of Administrator to determine stores, articles, etc. 
56. Vesting of certain properties in the Board and provis;'JI1 
regarding debts. obligations. employees. etc. 
57. Payment of value of assets and liabilities. 
SR. Power to supersede B'.>ard. 
59· Power to remove d:fficlilties. 
THE FIRST SCHEDuLE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDl:LE. 

.'f' 
~; 
" Bill No. 63 of 1966 
DELHI WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
BILL, 1966 
A 
BILL 
f)'I'OVide fOT the constitution of a Board for the main.tenance, 
, development and Tegulation oJ wlLte'r :mpply and sewel'ag e 
aerviCes in the Union teTTitOTy of Delhi and fOT matteTs con-
Meted theTewith. 
~
"": ". BE ~t enacte~ by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the 
:, ubhc of India as follows:-
~~l'~~; ~ . 
CHAPTER 1 
PRFJ,WINABY 
. I. (I) This Act may be called the Delhi Water Supply and Shon 
DJaposal Act, 1966. title, extent ud 
• (I) It eztenda to the whole of the Union territory of Delhi, commence-mellt, 
It &ball come into force on such date as the Central Gov-
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 

Defini-
tiOni. 
Constitu-
tion and 
incorpo-
ratilD of 
Board. 
Composi_ 
tion Of 
Board. 
2 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Board" means the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage 
Disposal Board constituted under section 3; 
(b) "Delhi" means the Union territory of Delhi; 
(c) "main" means a pipe laid for the purpose of gIVIng a 
general supply of water as distinct from a supply tu individw ... 
consumers and includes any apparatus used in connection with 
such pipe; 
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under 
this Act; 
(e) "receiving body" means-
(i) the MWlicipal Corporation of Delhi; or 
(ii) the New Delhi MWlicipal Committee; or 
(iii) the Military Engineer Services, Delhi Cantonment; 
(f) words and expressions used but not defined in this 
Act and defined in the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 195~. 
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that 
Act. 
CHAPTER II 
THE DELlU WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL BOARD 
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Administrator may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there 
shail be constituted a Board to be called the Delhi Water Supply 
and Sewage Disposal Board. 
ll) The Board shall oe a body corpor.lte having perpetual 
successwn and a commun sedl with power to acquire, hold and dis· 
pose of property and shall, by the said name, sue and be sued. 
4. (1) The Board shall consist of a Chairman to be appointed by 
the Administrator and five other members of whom-
(a) two shall be elected by the members of the Metro~ 
titan Council of Delhi from among themselves; 
(b) one shall be elected by the members of the Municipal 
Corporation of Delhi from among themselves; .~ 

(e) two shall be appointed by the Administrator. 
(2) Of the two members referred to in clause (c) of sub-section 
(1).-
(a) one shall be an engineer with experience in 
health engineerin~ and shall be designated as Member 
neering); and 
public 
(Enp,i-
(b) the other shall be a person with exper'enre in fin;mc;~ll 
administration and shall be designated as Member (Finance). 
The Ch1irin'm, the Member (Engineerin~) and the Member 
) shall be appointf'd with the previous approval of the 
Government. 
The appointment of the Cfu.;rmrf' under sub-section (1) 
of the Member (Engineering) and the Member (Finance) 
clause (c) of that sub-section shal1 be made. and the elec-
of the member~ under clauses (a) and (b) of that sub-section 
!be completed, hefore the issue of the notification constituting 
under sub-section (1) of section 3. 
The term of office of. and the manner of filJ=ne- casual Term of 
_~es among, member~ of the Board shal1 be sueh as may be r;ffi~e and 
salaries 
and al~ow­
anr.es or 
salaries and allowances and other conditions of ~~rvice members, 
the Member (Engineering) and the lfember etc. 
and the al10wanees payable to the elected members, of 
.all be such as may be prescribed rJ'ld ",'ch .. -Jaril"C ... nd 
_.ItJJ~11 be paid one of the' fund of the Bo~rd. 
Ch:1irmren and any other member of the Board ~~an he 
re-appointment or. as the case may be, re-elect:::-!1. 
,Chairm~n or any other member of the Board may ~esign Resigna-tion of by ~ving notice in writing ~o the Administra~o~ <i~d. on (ffice bv 
. resignation being 3ccepted by the Administrator. ~~al1 be chairm~;l 
to have vacated his offic~. 
shall be disqualified f0r being chosen a~.""" for 
I(IWInb4!r of the Board-
mind and stand~ so dec!2::-E'd bv a 
lae is an undischarged insolvent: or 
or any 
other 
member. 
Disqua:i-
ficat:on 
for being 
chosen as, 
or for 
being, 
member 
of Board. 

Removal 
of Chair. 
man and 
other 
members 
from 
ofRce. 
4 
(c) if he has been convicted of an offence involving moral 
turpitude; or 
(d) if he has, direc·ly or indirectly, any interest in any 
subsisting contract made with. or in any work being done for. 
the Boa~d except as a shareholder (other than a D'rector) in .5 
an incorporated company. provided that where he is a share-
holder he shall disclose to the Administrator the nature and 
extent of shares held by him in such comp:tny. 
8. The Administrator may remove from office the Chairmnn or 
any other member of the Board who-
(a) is or becomes subject to an~· of the disqualifications 
mentioned in section 7: or 
(b) without excuse. sufficient in the opinion of the Admi-
n;strator, is absent from more than four consecutive meetings 
of the Board: 
10 
IS 
Provided that the Ch ,;rmn or the Member (Engineering) or 
the Member (Finance) shall not be remOCled from office except ~ 
'yith the previous approval of the Central Government. 
Vacancies, 
t t t 9. No act or proceeding of th~ Bnard shall be invalid by reason J ~ c., no 0 ~ 
invalidate only of the existence of an~' ,·acancy among its members or any 30; 
acts and rlefect in the constitution thereof. 
pro:'eed-
ings of 
Board. 
Meet n;s 
o~Board. 
Tempo-
l'ary asso-
ciation Of 
perSODI 
10, (1) The Board shall meet at such t~mes and places and shan. 
sub,ieet to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), observe such 
rules of procedure in regard to trans~ction of business at its meet-
ings (including the quorum at meetings) rt~ may bp. provided by 
regulations made under this Act. 
(2) The Ch1:rm 1n or in his absence an'\" member chosen by the 
members present from among themse]ve!;, ~hall preside at R meet-
ing of thp Board. 
(3) All questions at a meeting of the Board shall be decided by 
a majority of votes of the members present rind voting and in 
the case of an equality of \"otes. the Chn:·mrn or, in his absence. 
the person presiding. shall have and exerc'se a casting vote. 
11, (1) The Board may associate with itself, for any 
purpose in such manner as may be pro":d~d by regulations 
under this Act~ any person whose assistance or advice It 

~ f' 
r \ 
t. 
f 
5 
desire in exercIsmg or discharging any of i lS powers or functions with 
under this Act. Board 1'1 
(2) A person associated with it by the Board under sub-section 
(1), for any purpose shall have a right to take part in the discus-
S sions of the Board relevant to that purpose, but shall not have a 
particul 
purpose 
10 
IS 
right to vote at a meeting of the Board. 
12. The Board may, from time t) t;llie. b~· I"l'.::iolution passed at Power t. 
a meeting, - appoint 
commit-(a) appoint committees consisting of its members and, whenever tees and 
necessary, of other p;!rsons having knowledge and experience in public delegate' 
health or public health engineering, for discharging such of its func- function 
lions as may be specified in the resolution; to Chair 
(b) delegate to the Chairman, or the Member (Engineering). man, etC 
or the Member (Finance), subject to such conditions and limitations, 
if any, as may be specified in .the re-
solution, such of its powers and duties as it may think fit; 
•
• 
; ...... - (c) authorise any officer of the Board~ subject to such con-
ditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the re-
solution, to exercise such powers and perform such duties as It 
may deem necessary for the efficient day to day administra-
tion of its business. 
,-
20 
13. All orders and decisions of the Board shall be authenticated Authenl: 
by the signature of the Chairman or any other member authorised cation 0 
I by the Board in this behalf and all other instruments issued by the order~ ar 
'~ard shall be authenticated by the signature of an officer of the o:her In~ 
Board authorised in like manner in this behalf. ~fr~:~~ . 
. 14. (1) The chairman shall be the executive head of the Board Powers u 
and all officers and other tmployecs ofthe Board shall be subordinate Chairman 
of him Member , (Engi-
(2) The Member (Engineering) shall be the Chief Engineer of neering). 
Board. ctc. 
";;;:~~'.' . (3) The Member (Finance) shall be the Chief Accounts Officer 
""'~'"'' . 
-,_,..,..r, 
of the Board and shall ha\'e the right to record his views on every 
proposal involving expendIture from the fund of the Board prior 
to the consideration of the proposal by the Board. 
! 15. (1) The Board may appoint such number of officers and Officers 
employees as it may consider necessary for the efficient dis- and em-
of its functions. ployee~ 
of Board The conditions of appointment and service and the scales 
of the officers and other employees of the Board shall be 
.... L.WI.may be provided by regulations made under this Act. 

General 
c1isquali. 
fication 
CJi all 
officers 
and other 
emplo-
yees. 
General 
duties of 
Board. 
Power to 
require 
Board to 
carry out 
survey 
and for· 
mulate 
prC'poc;a \.;. 
b~."'1.1* __ 
16. No person who has, directly or indirectly .. by himseH or as 
a paL-tner or any share or interest in any contract, by or on 
behalf of the Board shall become. or remain as. an officer or other 
emp] oyee of the Board. 
CHAPTER III 
POWERS, DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE BOARD 
General 
1'1. (1) The Board shall be charged with the general duty of 
providing bulk supply of water to the receiving bodies and of 
making adequate provision for disposal of the sewage delivered 10 
to it by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi and the New Delhi 
Municipal Committee and for the efficient performance of such duty, 
the Board shall e~ercise such powers and discharge such functions 
•• .:i are conferred or imposed on it by or under this Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), It J 5 
shaH I>e the duty ~of lhe _ BOdrd to take steps, from time to time, -_. 
(a) for ascertaining the sufficiency and wholesomeness of 
water supplied to the receiving bodies at the place or places 
specified in the Fu'st Schedule; 
(b) for preparing and carrying out schemes for the supply 20 
nf wholesome water within Delhi. 
(C) fllr ,dlscharging .such other functions as th.: Administrator 
may, frl>m Um! ,to tlm!,.by .. order,.dir.!ct the_R1ard..,to .discharge . .,4 
.... ~, ... ----~ .. 
lR. The Administrator may reqUire the Board t(}-
(a) carry out a survey of the existing consumption of and 25 
demand for water supplies in Delhi and of the water resources 
ill or available for Delhi; 
{b) prepare an e~timate of the future water supply n'-
(tuirements of Delhi; 
(c) carry out a survey of the existing quantity of sewage ~o 
(lisposed of and the manner in which it is disposed of; 
(d) formulate proposals as to-
(i) the existing or future water supply reqUirements 
of Delhi; 
--.- ... (ii) the existing or future sewage disposal require- 3' 
ments of Delhi (except Delh~ Cantonment) including pro-

7 
posals for the manner in which and the place or places at 
which such sewage should be carried, treated and disposed 
of. 
19. If the Board is of opinion that the works and other proper-
:'5 ties for the time being vested in the Board are inadequate for the 
purpose of efficient supply of water or for the purpose of efficient 
disposal of sewage under this Act, it may take steps in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act for the construction of additional 
works, whether within or without Delhi, and for the acquisition 
"}) of additional properties for such works. 
Power tu 
construct 
additional 
works. 
20. The Board shall secure that the water in any water works Board to 
belonging to it from which water is supplied to the receiving hodies secure whole-is wholesome. 
21. (1) The Board may lay a main-
(a) in any street, and 
(b) with the C'O'1sent of every owner and occupier or any 
land not forming part of a street, in, over or on, that land. 
. and m~y, frnm time to tim':, inspect. repair, alter or renew or may 
. (, 
. at any time remove any main so laid whether by virtue of this 
Rction or otherwise: , 
Provided that where a consent required for the purpose oJ this 
is withheld, 'the Board may, after giving the owner or 
of the land a written notice of its intention so to do, lay 
main in, oVer oT on, that land even without such consent. 
(2) Where the Board. in exercise of the powers under this 
--'-v'''. lays a main in. over or on ,any land not forming part of a 
or inspects, repairs. alters. renews or removes a main Sl) laid 
Over nr n,. any such land. the Board shall pay compensation to 
. ,ev.ery pl'rson interested in th;1t land for any damage done to or 
uriolls affection of that lann by reason of the inspection, laying. 
r, alteration, renewal or removal of the main. 
Water Supply 
someness 
of water. 
Power to 
lay main" 
The Board shall be bound to supply to each r~ceJVmg body Board to 
place "r plac:s c:p~cified in resr~ct of meh bJdy. :n th<.' First make 
or at such other place or places as may be agreed bet- bulk SIJP-
Board and such body. water in bulk up to the amount ~:t~: to 
. by such body or. if the total demand of the receiving receiving 
in excess of the available supply, up to such proportion bodip~ 
of each receiving body as the Board may determjnp~ 

Rt!ceiving 
bodies to 
pay actual 
cost of 
supply of 
water. 
Provision-
al collect-
ing rate. 
8 
Provided that the quantity of water supplied per capita to the 
New Delhi Municipal Committee by the Municipal Corporation of 
Delhi immediately before the commencement of this Act gball not 
be reduced after such commencement except with the previous 
permission of the Administrator. 5 
23. (1) Each receiving body shall pay for the water supplied to 
it the actual cost of supplying such water at a rate in respect of 
each thousand gallons of water supplied (hereinafter referred to 
as "the final issue rate") calculated in the manner prescribed in 
this section. 
(2) The final issue rate shall be calculated for each year after 
the accounts of the year have been closed by dividing the amount 
of expenditure incurred by the Board in relation to water supply 
during the year by the number of thousand gallons of water sup-
plied by the Board during that year to the receiving bodies. 
(3) For the purpose of sub-section (2). there shall be taken 
into account any sum carried in the year to the credit of the development 
fund referred to in sub-section (1) of section 37 and such items of 
expenditure incurred by the Board as may be determined by rule.~ 
made by the Administrator in this behalf. 
24. (1) Pending the calculation of the final issue rate for any 
year, payments of water supplied during that year to any of the 
receiving bodies shall be made provisionally at an estimated rate 
(hereinafter referred to as "the coUecting rate"). 
10 
15 
20 
(2) The collecting rate shall be calculated at the time of fram-
ing the budget estimate of the Board for the year by dividing the 25 
sum of the amount of the estim lted)expen::liturelof the Board;in' relation tll 
waterfsupply in that year and of an additiOOof fi \·ehlerlcent. of that amount 
'IV the number of thousand gallons of water estimated as likely 
. ) be supplied during that year. 
~ll 
(3) If any difference of opinion arises as to the supply of water -
to be estimated for the purpose (If ascertainment of the collecting 
rate, the decision of the .\dministrator thereon shall be final. 
(4) Every receiving body shall pay on demand after the close 
of each quarter of each year. the cost of the water supplied to it 5 
in that quarter calculated at the collecting rate. 3 
(5) Nothing in this section shall preclude the Board from arran-
ging. with the consent of any receiving body and in accordance with 
any order issued by the Administrator. for advance payments by , 
such body of the cost (calculated at the collecting rate) of such ~oj 

9 
quantmes of water as are likely to be supplied to each of the re-
ceiving bodies in each quarter or for such other period as may 
be determined by the Administrator. 
25. (1) If the final issue rate for any year exceeds the collecting Final set-
~. 5 rate determined for that year, the balance due shall be recovered tlement of 
from the receiving body concerned. accounts. 
(2) If the final issue rate is less than the collecting rate, the 
excess collection shall be refunded to the receiving body concerned. 
26. (1) For the purpose of' measuring and recording the amount 
of water supplied to each receiving body, the Board shall cause to 
be- affixed meters at the points of junction between the communi-
cation pipes of the receiving body concerned and the mains or 
belonging to the Board and the cost of such meters shall be 
borne by the Board. 
(2) It shall be presumed. until the contrary is proved, that the 
of water supplied through any connection is the quantity 
lIIldii"D'tOI'l by the meter fixed to that connection. 
Supply of 
meters. 
r . 27. (1) If any receiving body desires to have any meter tested, Testing of 
make an application in this behalf accompanied by a fee of meters . 
. hundred and fifty rupees to the Board and on receipt of such 
and fee, the Boara shall forthwith cause the meter to 
t~sted at a time and place of which due notice shall have been 
. to such receiving body. 
If the meter is found, on being tested, to be incorrect, the 
sball be bound to replace or repair the same and to. refund 
fee paid under sub-section (1) together with such sum, if any, 
proved to the satisfaction ~)f the Board to have been paid in 
by reason of the incorrectness of the meter. 
SewClge Dis-posal 
Board may specify the place or places at which all 
to be disposed of by the !\Iunicipal Corporation of Delhi or 
Delhi Municipal Committee shall be delivered to it: 
.. ylln ... , .... that any place which. before the commencement of this 
used for the delivery of sewage by the New Delhi Munici-
ttee to the MuniCipal Corporation of Delhi shall be deem-
• place specified for the purpose aforesaid under this sec-
Board to 
specify 
places for 
delivery 
ofsew8ge . 

10 
Restric-
tion re-
garding 
discharge 
of sewage. 
29. On and from such date as may be appointed by the Ad. 
ministrator in this behalf. no sewage shall be discharged into any 
water course until it has been so treated as not to affect prejudi-
cially the purity and quality of the water into which it is dis-
charged. 
Board to 
receive 
sewage. 
Payment 
of cost of 
disposal 
of sewage. 
Manner of 
payment 
by the 
Municipal 
Corpora-
tion of 
Delhi and 
New Delhi 
Municipal 
Commit-
tee of 
30. '(1) The Board shall be bound to receive in bulk from the 
Municipal Corporation of Delhi and the New Delhi Municipal Com-
mittee all sewage delh'ered to it by the said Corporation or Com-
mittee and dispose of such sewage: 
Provided that neither the Municipal Corporation of Delhi nor Ie 
the New Delhi Municipal Committee shall execute any major work 
calculated to increase the normal discharge of sewage without the 
concurrence of the Board. 
(2) Sewage received in pursuance of the provisions of sub-section 
(r) shall be the property of the Board and any income derived H 
from the sale of affluent or sludge shall be credited to the fund . 
of the Board. 
If any disa~eement arises between the Board and the 
Municipal Corporation of Delhi or the Board and the New Delhi 
Municipal Committee as to the effect of the execution of any work 20 
or the doing of anything. the matter shan be referred to the Ad-
ministrator whose decision thereon shall be final. 
:U. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 43, the total D(~t 
cost of the disposal of all sewage shall be borne by the Municipal 
Corporation of Delhi and the New Delhi Municipal Committee in 25 
such proportion as the Administrator may from time to time deter-
mine. ~ .. ~ -. . .:. r 
(2) In determining the total net cost of disposal of all sewage. 
;'1curred by the Board as may be determined by rules made by 
the Administrator shall take into account such items of expenditure 30 
:he Administrator in thi!o'= hehalf 
32. (1) The estimated net cost of the disposal of sewage increas-
ed by five per cent. shan be payable on demand bv the Municipal 
Corporation of Delhi and the New Delhi Municipal Committee after 
the close of each quarter of each year in accordance with the pro- 35 
portion determined under sub-section (1) of section 31. 
(2) If the sum su paid by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi 
',r the New Delhi MuniCipal Committee in any year exceeds or 
is less than the sum payable bv it on the basis of the actual cost 
as determined under section 31 ~ the payments to be made by the 40 

u 
h ' propor-Municipal Corporation of Delhi or t e New Delhi Municipal Com- tion of 
mittee, as the case may be, in the following year shall he adjusted cost of 
accordingly. disposal of 
(3) Nothing in this section shall prcc 1 ude the Board from arrang- sewage. 
5 ing, with the consent of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi or 
the New Delhi Municipal Committee and in accordance with any 
llrders issued by the Administrator. for advance payment by the 
Municipal Corporation of Delhi or the New Delhi Municipal Com-
~ mittee, as the case may be, of such portion of the cost of the dis-
10 posal of sewage as is likely to be borne by it in such quarter or 
such other period as may be determined. by the Administrator. 
CHAPTER IV 
REVENUE, FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND BUDGET 
33. (1) The Board shall have its own fund and all receipts of Fund of 
IS the Board shall be credited thf'reto and all payments by the Board Board. 
shall be made therefrom. 
(2) Except as otherwise directed by the Administrator, all 
moneys belonging to the lund shall be deposited either in th(; 
Reserve Bank of India or with the agents of the Reserve Bank of 
India or invested. in such securities as may be approved by the Ad-
ministrator. 
it. 34 The fund reqUired by the Board may be raised from the f01- Sources 
, :"lowing sources, namely: - of fund. 
(a) grants from the Central Government or any other 
source; 
(b) loans from the Central Government or any other 
sourcei 
(c) charges levied and collected under this Act. 
35. The Board may, with the preyious approval of the Central B . orrowmg 
"~'velt'rune.nt, borrow money in the Ilpen market or otherwise fur powers, 
the purpose of raiSing its wurkmg capital or for the purpose of 
meeting any expenditure of a capital nature. 
)6. For the purpose of enabling the Board to discharge its functions . 
thi A '1 ,~. (Jlants by set, the Ct:1ltl'<l ~o\'ernm\!l1t may, attt!I' due appropnation made Central 
Parliament by Inw in this behalf, pay to the Board in each year such Governmenl 
f .. 'd 10 the Board. o money as th.tt uovernmeDl ~1li1SI ers necessary by way of grant, 
or otherwise . 
• (1) The Board shall make such provisions .for depreciation Provision 
for development, reserve and other funds as the Central Gov- f.or. depre-
may from time to time direct cilltion aDd 
, I' for develop-
, The management of the said funds, the sums to be carried =' .:; 
time to time to the credit thereof and the application of the other 
, comprised therein shall be determined by the Board: funds. 

Provided that no fund shall be utilised for any purpose othel' 
than that for which it was created without the previous approval 
of the Central Government. 
-Power of 38. The Board shall h<l\'c POWer to spend such sums as it thinks 
Board to lit on objects authorised under this Act and such sums shall be 5 
spend. treated as expenditure payable out of the fund of the Board. 
Budget. 
Accounts 
and audit. 
39. (1) The Board shall, by such date in each year as. ma"}':be 
prescribed, prepare and submit to the Administrator for approval 
a budget for the next year showing the estimated receipts and ~x-
penditure during that year in such form as may be prescribed. 10 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4), no 
sum shall be exp:nded by or on b.!h.:lf of the Board unless the expen-
l.l1~ure of the sum is covered by a current budget grant appruved 
by the Administrator. 
(3) Subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be spe-
cified in this behalf by the Administrator, the Board may sanctiOn 
.Iny reappropriation within the grant from one head of the expeu-
Ul:ure to another subject to the condition that the aggregate budget 
..:rant is not exceeded. 
(4) The Board may, within such limits and subject to such con-
ditions as may be prescribed, incur expenditure in excess of the 
limit provided in the budget approved by the Administrator under 
any head of expenditure. 
40. (1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other lOP 
cords and prepare an annual statement of account including 
profit and loss m.:count and the balance sheet in ~uch form as may 
oc prescribed by the Administrator in consultation with the Comp-
(roller and AuJi[or-Gen.:rcll of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited annually by 
Comptroller .l1\d Auditor General of India and .II.Y 
Incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable bY 
the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and 
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of 
accounts of the Board shall have the same rights, privileges 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and 
ditor-General of India has in connection with the audit of 
ment accoUnts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand 
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other 
menta and papers and inspect any of the offtees of the Board. 

13 
(4) The accounts of the Board as certified by the ComptroUer 
and Auditor-General of India or any person appointed by him in 
th:s behalf together with .the audit report there.:>a shall be forward-
ed annually to the Administrator and the Administrator shall cause 
; the same to be laid before the Metropolitan Council of Delhi. 
CHAPrER V 
MIsCELLANEOUS 
'- 41. If the Board places or carries any pipe or does any work Power to 
;.'" 
~. connected with the water supply or sewage disposal across any require 
i;·IO railway line, it may, with the sanction of the Central Government lrailway 
,. d h .. fi d ' h 'I d' ' evel, etc., an at t e cost ot Its un requlre t e r.ll WdY a mInIstration to to be 
IIJr raise or lower the level thereof. raised or . , 
lowered. 
4z• (1) Without the written permission of the Board, no railway Buildings. 
or private street shall be constructed and no building, wall, fence railways 
other structure shall be erectld on any water works cons- and 
~itnJCtc:d or llldintal.Q.ed by, or vested in, the Board. ~:~e~!e 
(2) If any railway or private street be constructed or any not to be 
wall, fence or structure erected on any water works as erected or 
without the written permission of the Board, the Board construct_ 
cause the same to be removed or to be de.ut with i.Q such mw~ner ed over 
it thinks fit. water 
(3) The expenses incurred by the Board in so doing shall be 
by the owner of the private street) or of the building, fence, 
. or other structure, or, as the case may be, by the railway ad-
tion or the person offending and shall be recoverable as an 
of land revenue. 
(1) The Board may cause to be placed and maintained aque-
conduits and lines of mains or pipes over, under, along 
"'018 any immovable property without acquiring the same and 
any time for the purpose of examining, repairing, altering 
any aqueducts, conduits or lines of mains or pipes 
lI..n,'PiIllIA any ,of its officers to enter on any property over, under, 
pr across which the aqueducts, conduits or lines of mains or 
have been placed: 
that the Board shall not acquire any right of user in 
property uver, under, along or across which any aqueduct 
or line of mains or pipes is placed. 
powers conferred by sub-section (1) shall not be 
in respect of any propeny vested in the Union or under 
or management of the Central Government or railway 
works 
without 
permis_ 
sion . 
Rights of 
user of 
property 
for aque-
ducts, 
ines etc. 

Disputes 
as to 
liability 
for pay-
ment to 
c: by 
Board. 
Summary 
recovery 
of sums 
due from 
reeeiving 
bodies. 
14 • 
administration or vested in any local authority save with the per-
mission of the Central Government or railway administration 
or the local authority, as the case may be, and in accordance with 
any rules made in this behalf: 
Provided that the Board may, without such permission, repair, 5 
renew or amend any existing works of which the character and 
composition is not to be altered if such repair, renewal or amend-
ment is urgently necessary in order to maintain without interrup-
tion the supply of water or disposal of sewage or is such that delay 
',,-,ould be dangerous to health, human life or property. 10 
(3) In the exercise of the powers conferred upon it by tillS 
section, the Board shall cause as little damage and inconvenience 
as may be possible and shall make full compensation for any damage 
lr inconvenience caused by it. 
M. \ 1) If any dispute arises between the Board and any receiv- 15 
ing body as to the liability of that receiving body to pay any sum 
demanded by the Board or as to the amount of any refund, from 
the Board, then, that receiving body may require the Board to reter 
the matter in dispute to the Administrator and the decision of the 
Administration thereon shall be final: 20 
Provided that where the dispute relates to the liability of allY 
receiving body to make any payment to the Board, the payment 
shall be made' to the Board pending the decision of the Adminis-
trator. 
(2) In making any ,such reference, the Board shall furnish t~ 25 
the Administrator and the receivid body concerned a full statement 
of the grounds of ~e dispute and the AdministratOt" shall consider 
that statement together with a like statement received from the said 
receiving body within six weeks of the date of the reference. 
45. If any receiving body does not, within one month of the re- 30 
ceipt of demand for any sum claimed by the Board, pay such sum, 41 
the Administrator may, on the requisition from the Board in this i 
behalf,-
(a) if the balances of that receiving body are kept in the 
Government Treasury, order the officer in charge of the Trea- ~5 
sury to reduce the balances at the credit of that receiving body 
by the amount of the sum due and pay that amount to the 
Board, or 
(b) in any other case, deduct the amount of the sum due 
from nny contribution or sum payable by the Central Government to 40,' 
that receiving body and pay the amount so deducted to the 
Board. " 

15 
48. Without the previous permission of the Administrator, the 
Board shall not,- Board n, 
5 
(a) give up any scheme of work in relation to bulk water 
supply or sewage disposal approved by the Municipal Corpor<l-
tion of Delhi before the commencement of the Delhi Municipnl 
Corporation (Amendment) Act. 1966, or 
(b) give up or slow down the execution of any work under-
taken by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi in pursuance of 
any such scheme. 
10 "P' 47. The' Central Government may, for reasons to be recorded, 
direct tha't aliy specified work, repair. renewal or replacement 
I which Is to be undertaken bv or for the Board under this Act shall 
(! . 'Ie'carrl.d out on behalf of the Board by the emtrs) Government 
I 
aad'the Board shall pay the charges therefor at the rates and sub-
'. ISi''''.to the terms for the time being apJ)licable .in the case of work 
• ",:.) ~; ~4:onstrueted by that Government on behalf of a local authority. 
'48. Whenever it is necessary for the Board to carry out any of 
"works or to make any survey. examination or investigation. prc-
... ·,,..·"""'--"riary or incidental to the exercise of powers or the performance 
'of duties by the Board under this Act, any officer or other em-
. Dloyee of the Board genpra lh·"'" specially empowered by the 
"J:SOllra. may enter upon any land or premises between sunrise anct 
euDset after giving a reasonable notice of the intention to make such 
to the owner or occupier of such land or premises and at any 
_1dI:me with the ·consent in writing of the owner or occupier of 
M ... .ua,Q .or premises for the purpose of carrying out such works 
lQakfng of such survey, examination or investi2ation, 
to gi ve L: 
certain 
works, 
etc., witl 
out per-
mission. 
Employ-
ment of 
Govern-
ment 
agencies 
for 
repairs, 
etc. 
Power OJ 
entry, 
I 
.. 
. ' Notwithstanding an~-rhine cnnt::lined in thi~ Act. if at any time the Supply of 
fi nd h h 'I hI . h' , , f h ' water b\ stat t e watf'r a\':1J ~I e WIT IT IS Tn excess n t e reqUirements Board t', 
receiving bodies unde~ sectinn 72. the Board may, with-the permis- bodies ' 
the Administrator. suppl\' such exc("ss w~ter to any hody in any outside Dc 
to Delhi on such terms ::Ind C('lflditions as mav he aereed 
the Board Rnd that hody. . . 
Any person who- Penalty. 
'. (a) wilfully obstructs any person acting under the autho-
I'Ity of the Board in setting out the line of any works. or pulls 
bt removes any pillar. post or stake fixed in the ground for 
of setting out the Hnes of such works, or defacl?!' 
... ,.. any works made for the same purpose. or 
wilfulJv or negligpntlv hreaks. injures or opens any 
' .... -_._- valve, pipe or other water or sewage work belon~­
Board, or 
llv ohstructs the flo",' of. or flushes. draws off. 
takes water from, any water work belonging to the 
.. 

Members , 
officers 
and other 
employees 
of Board 
to be 
public 
servants. 
18 
Board, or any water or stream by which any such water wori<: 
is sUPIlUed, or 
(d) unlawfully obstrl1"· the flow of, or flushes, draws off. 
diverts or takes sewage from any sewage work belonging to 
the Board, or breaks or damages any electrical transmission line 5 
maintained by the Board, or 
(e) obstructs any officer or other employee of the Board 
in the discharge of his duties under this Act, or refuses or 
wilfully neglects to furnish him with the means necessary for 
making any entry, inspection, examination or inquiry there- 10 
under in relation to any water or sewage work, or 
(f) bathes in. at or upon any water work, or washes, 
throws or causes to enter therein any animals, or throws any 
rubbish, dirt. filth or other offensive matter into any water worl 
or washes or cleans therein any cloth, wool or leather or the IS 
skin of any animal. or causes the water of any sink, sewer or 
drain or of any steam engine or boiler or any other dirty water 
to tum or be brought into any water work. or does any other 
act whereby the water in any water work is fouled or likely to 20 
be fouled, 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees. 
(I. All members of the Board and all officers and other em-
ployees of the Board shall be deemed. when acting or purporting to 
act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act or of any 25 
other law, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of 
the Indian Penal Code. 451 
Power of Ad- S2. (1) The Administrator may Jrive to the Board ~eneral ins-
mfnistrator tructions to be followed by the Board. and such instructions may in-10 give ins-
tructions to elude directions relating to the recruitment and conditions of ser- 30 
Board. vice of officers and other employees of the Board. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
(2) Tn the exercise of its powers and performance of its duties 
under this Act. the Board shan not depart from any ~eneral instruc-
tion issued under sub-section (1) except with the previous permi-
ssion of the Administrator. 3~ 
S3. (1) Thp. Administrator may. by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make ru1es to give pff .. rt to the provisions of this Act. 

5 
10 
Jj , 
17 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing provision, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:-
(a) the term of effice (If, and the manner of filling casu(ll 
vacancies among, the members of the Board under sub-section 
(1) of section 5; 
(b) the salaries and allowances and other conditions of ser-
vice of the Cha~rman, the Member (Engineering) and the Mem-
ber (Finance) and the allowances payable to the elected mem-
bers of the Board, under sub-section (2) of section 5; 
(c) the items of expenditure incurred by the Board that 
may be taken into account for the purpose of calculating the 
final issue rate under sub-sectio, U) of section 23 or for deter-
mining the total net cost of disposal of all sewage under sub-
section (7.) of section 31; 
(d) the date by which and the form in which the budget 
shall be submitted in each year under sub-section (1) of sec-
.. ":on 39; 40_ 
(e) the limits within which and the conditions subject to 
which the Board may incur expenditure in excess of the limit 
provided in the budget under any head of expenditure under 
sub-section (4) of seetio..- 30; 
<f) the form in which the annual statement of accounts 
shall be prepared under sub-section (1) of section 40; 
. (g) the conditions subject to which the Board may exercise the 
.' powers conferred by section 43 in respect of property vested in 
.. the Union or under the control or management of the Central Govern-
ment or rajJW~y administration or Ye5trd in any local authority; 
(h) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as 
be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is 
J.\r~tesslon for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
~ .• 'I"&£" session or in two successive sessions and if before the expiry 
the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately follow-
both Hr.uses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
nOUgl'''': agree that the rule should not be made. the rule shall there-
have efft"ct only in such modified form or he of no ,..ffect. n~ the 
may bp ; S(I. howev<."1", th:lt any ~uch modification or annulment 
be without prejud;ce to the "alidity of a'lything previously 
aWI&I.I'.ler that rule. 
The Board may, with the previous approval of the Admi- P t . ower 0 
by no":ficat: '" in the Official Gazette, make regulations, make re_ 
IM:C:IlnsiistE~nt with this Act and th,. rules made thereunder, for gu}ations, 

Power of 
Adminis-
trator to 
determine 
stores. 
articles, 
etc. 
18 
enabling it to perform or discharg s duties or functions under this 
Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing provision, such regulations may provide for all or .my of thl.: 
following matters. namely:-
(a) the time and place of meetings of the Board and the 
procedure to be followed in regard to tran~action of business at 
such meetings under section 10; 
(b) the manner in which and the purposes for which per-
sons may be associated with the Board under section 11; 
(c) the conditions of appointment and service and the 
scales of pay of the officers and other employees of the Board, 
under sub-section (2) of section 15; 
5 
10 
(d) the rates at which, and the terms on which, the Board 
may make provision for depreciation and for development, reserve IS I 
and other funds under section 37. 
(3) The Administrator may, by notification in the Official . 
Gazette, amend, vary or rescind any regulation which the Adminf!! .'!l. 
trator has appro\'ed; and thereupon the regulation shall have effect .Ji 
accordingly but without prejudice to the validity of any thing pre-. 
viouslY done under that regulation or to the exercise of the powers 
the Board under sub-section (1). 
As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, 
before the constitution of the Board under sub-section (1) of 
3, the Administrator shall, after consultation with the 
Corporation of Delhi, determine-
(a) which stores. articles and other movable 
belonging to or vested in the Municipal Corporation 
for the purpose of the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage ~ .. -
Undertaking. are being used or utilised or are required 
Municipal Corporaticn of Delhi for the maintenance, 
extension of the works or (lther property specified in the Second SCllCUI! 
(b) which debts, obligations and liabilities have 
curred, which contracts have been entered into and 
matters and things have been engaged to be done by, with 
the Municipal Corporation of Delhi in relation to the 
articles and other movable properties referred to in 
or in relation to the works or other property ~pecifit'd in the S~~ 
dule' or in connection with the maintenance, repair 
sion of such works or other property; 

19 
(c) which officers and other employees of the Municipal 
Corporation of Delhi are serving that Corporation and are re-
quired in connection ',\'ith the maintenance, repair or extension 
, or any matter .incidental thereto, of the works or other pro-
[., perty specified in the Sec..>nd ~chedu1e, 
~. 56. On the constitution of the Board under sub-section (1) of 
" section 3,-
Vesting 
of certain 
properties 
(a) the works and other property specified in the Second Schedule in the 
. !~nd all stores, articles and other movable properties referred to Boar~ ,and . " provIsion 
In clause (a) of sectlOn 55 and all mterests of what so ever nature regarding 
and kind therein belo:1ging to or vested in the Municipal Cor- debts, 
lI.l'IInrlllnll.n of Delhi for the purpose of the Delhi Water Supply obliga-
Disposal Undertaking immediately before such tions, em. , ployees rftil\9titultioln shall vest In the Board; etc. ' 
' .• UL(b) all debts, obl:gations and liabilities, all contracts and all 
1Il81AeJ~s and th!ngs, referred to in clause (b) of section 55 and 
immediately before such constitution, shall be dee-
nave been mC:ll"red, entered into or engaged to be done 
_ ....... ' •• h or for the Board; 
all suits, prosecutions and other legal procl!!dill.gs· Ins-
or which might have been instituted by or against the 
WI::lPiU' Corporation of Delhi immediately before such cons-
relation to the work .. and other properties and in-
utPiill;"~i'ft vested in the Board under clause (a) may be 
instituted by or against the Board; 
notwithstanding anything contained in section 15, 
1tmIN!? and other employee of the Municipal Corporation 
to in clause (c""" of section 55 shall be trans-
.' -- and become an officer or other employee of the Board 
"'~.il[lla 'on as the Board may determine and shall hn1d 
the same tenurt", on the same remuneration and undf'r 
terms and conditions of service as he would have held 
lame if the Board had not been constituted and shall con-
J~ be so unless and until such tenure, remuneration and 
conditions of service are duly altered by the Board: 
IWJlaed that the tenure, remuneration and terms and con-
service of any such officer or other employee shall not 
to his d;sad\'a:ltage without the approval of the Cen-
nu:Jrlent: 
further that any sen'ice rendered by any such 
employee before the constitution of the Board 
to be service rendered under the Board. 

Payment 
of value 
of assets 
and lia-
bilities. 
Power to 
supersedt· 
Board. 
20 
S7. (I) Where .. ue sum total of the value of the works and othel 
properties and interests therein vested in the Board under clause 
(a) of section (hereinafter in this section referred to as "the 
assets") exceeds the wm total of the debts, obligations and liabili-
ties which are deemed to have been incurred by the Board under 5 
clause (b) of that section (hereinafter in this section referred to as 
"the liabilities"), such excess ~hall be treated as a loan made to the 
Board by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi and such loan shall 
be paid by the Board to the Municipal Corporation of Delhi on such 
terms and conditions as may be determined by the Central Govern- 10 
ment in this behalf. 
(2) Where the sum total of the liabilities exceeds the sum total 
of the value of the assets, such excess shall be paid by the Munici-
pal Corporation of Delhi to the Board on such terms and conditions 
as may he determined by the Central Government in this behalf. r5 
(3) The sum total of the value of the assets and the sum total of 
the liabilities shall be such amounts as may be arrived at by agree-
ment between the Board and the Municipal Corporation of Delhi 
and where no such agreement can be reached, the amounts shall be 
determined by an arbitral tribunal con:isting of one nominee of 30 
the Board, one nominee of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi and 
a Chairman to be nominated by the Chief Justice of the High Court 
exercising jurisdiction in relation to Delhi. 
(4) An appeal shall lie to the aforesaid High Court against the 
decision of the tribunal and the order of the High Court on such 25 
appeal shall be final. 
S8. (1) If the Central Government, on receipt of a report from the 
Administrator or otherwise, is satisfied that the Beard is unable to 
perform or has persistently made default in the performance of the 
duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act or has 
exceeded or abu~ed its powers, the Central Government may, by·· 
notification in the Official Gazette, supersede the Board for ~uch 
period as may be specified in the notification: 
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-section, 
the Central Government shall give a reasonable time to the Board 
to show cause why it Ehould not be superseded and shall consider 
the explanations and objections, if any, of the Board. 
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (ll. 
superseding the Board,-
(a) all the members of the Board shall, as from the date 
supersession, vacate their offices as such member.; 

(b) all the powers and duties which may by or under the 
I: provisions of this Act or of any other law, be exercised or per-
", formed by or on behalf of the Board, shall, during the period of 
Wft;.. supersession, be exercised and performed by such person or per-
~:;,' ~~ sons as the Central Government may direct; 
L (c) all works and other properties vested in the Board shall, 
pi during the period of supersession, vest in the Central Govern-
ment. 
.(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in 
issued under sub-section (1), the Central Govern-
" (4) extend the period of supersession for such fu,rtber 
: term as it may consider necessary, or 
, (b) reconstitute the Board in the manner provided in sec-
,'tiOD 3. 
An order of supersession made under this section together 
a statement of the reasons therefor shall be laid before each 
of Parliament as soon as may be after it has been made. 
~{i . 
,If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provis~ons of Power to 
the Central Government may, by order, as occasion reo- remov,: 
. anything which appears to it to be necessary for' the dUIlcal~ 
,pf removing the difficulty: 
IJV1f'lM that no such order shall be made after the expiration 
years from the constitution of the Board under section 3. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[Se.e sections 17 (:z) and 22] 
PART A 
at which the BOa1"d shall be bound to supply wate'! in bulk 
, to the Municipal Corporation oj Delhi 
I' '.' . .' 

22 
6. New Rajinde1' .Nagar. 
7. Shadipur. 
8. Kalkaji. 
9. Cantonment. 
10. Industrial area. " . 
II. Overhead Tank at Shahdara. 
PART B 
Places at which the Board shall be bound to supply water in bulk 
to the New Delhi Municipal Committee 
1. Jhandewalan Reservoir. 10 
2. Talkatora Reservoir. 
3. Hasanpur Reservoir. 
4. Cantonment Reservoir. 
PART C 
Place at which the Board shall be bound to supply water in bulk to 15 
the Military Engineer Servic(!s, Delhi Can!onment~ ~ 
Cantonment Reservoir. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 55 and 56) 
PART A 
List of works and olher property relaling to waler supply. 
(1) At Wazirabad. 
(a) Wazirabad barrage. 
(b) All spurs, bunds and guide hanks. 
(c). River training works. 
(d) River intakes and regulator with pipes and channels. 
(e) Raw water sumps and pump houses and pumps. 
(f) Raw water rising mains. 
(g) Raw water settling tanks with thickener plant. 
(h) Raw water conduits up to the Chandrawal I and 'U. 
''0/ 
:~1~'S 1,.-
t 
. , , 
~. 
'f _t' 

23 
(i) New 1st 40 MGD water treatment plant complete up to 
the end of 'clear water pump house. 
(j) Land and staff quarters. 
(k) Steam plant. 
(2) At Chandrawal I and II. 
(a) Complete installations with treatment plants, pump 
houses, pumps, clear water reservoirs, channels and pipe~. 
(b) Land and staff quarters, canteen and dispensary. 
(c) Workshop. 
, ' .. 
~" '" (d)" Godowns. 
: (e) Steam plant. 
~:'(3) At Intake Works, Okhla. 
~~. (a) Intake pier. 
"J'. 
~\.'. 
~r , '(b) Suction wells . 
.. ' !Ife) Raw water pump house and pumps. 
I 
:':; (d) Raw water rising mains up to treatment plant near Jamia 
tR, IO"X 12"X 24" dia. 
t.~"'(e) Land, staff quarters and compound wall. 
~(,._.L 
T~eatment Plant, Jamia Milia. 
treatment plants and installations. 
Clear water reservoirs. 
'Clear water pump house and pumps. 
,. 
, Land, staff quarters and compound wall. 
Milia 
.~, 
All rising mains connecting various treatment plants and 
r.mging in size from I:l' to 48- along with aCcessorie 
, ftt~ings. 
All reservoirs located at the followin,:Jlaees along with 
_d staff quarters. 
Rani Jhansi. 
Flagsta1t". 

(d) Jhandewalan. 
(e) Talkatora 
(f) Upper Ridge. 
(g) New Rajinder Nagar. 
(h). Shadipur. 
(i) Hasanpur. 
(j) Kalkaji. 
(k) Cantonment. 
(l) Industrial area 
24 
(m) RC.C. Overhead Tank Shahdara. 
(7) Booster pumping stations and office q1,larters located at··-
(a) Jhandewalan. 
(b) Talkatora. 
(c) Patel Road. 
(d) Rajinder Nagar. 
(8) . All bulk water ~ply venturi and other meters located at vari-
ous reservoirs and rising main tapping points along with 
chambers and piping. 
(9) Staff quarters at Arambagh Square . 
. PARTB 
List of works and other' property nl4ting to sewage disposal 
(1) Okhla sewage' treatment plant including irrigation chan-
nels. 
(2) Kilokri sewage pumping station including rising main up 
5 
10 
15 
20 
to the gravity duct. 25 
(3) Ring road sewage pumping station including rising main '" 
up to gravity duct. 
(4) Gravity duct from Kilokri pumping station to Okhla .. 
sewage disposal works. 
(5) 66" dis, out-fall sewers (new and old) from Q point' up to JO 
Kilokri pUJDlllag station. 
(6) i~ x F4r dia. sewer from TUak Bridge up to Q point. 
(7) S'-4"x 8'-0' gg shaped sewer from Vinay Nagar up to t 
Kilokd pumping station. ':1 

S 
10 
IS 
25 
(8) S4"-7S"-90"-loS"dia. trunk sewer from Delhi Gate to Ring 
Road pumping station. 
(9) 48" dia. cross connecting sewer between old and new trunk 
sewers along Bhagwan Das Road, Cornwallis Road and 
along Barapulla Nallah. 
(10) North sewage treatment plant near Coronation pillar in-
cluding irrigation channels. 
(11) Najafgarh Nal1ah pump house including 37" dia. rising main 
up to the purification plant. 
(12) 48" dia. trunk sewer from Anda Mugal pump:ng station up 
to pump house. 
(13) West Delhi sewage treatment plant near Keshopurvillage 
in·cluding pumping station aDd irrigation channels. 
(14)f6" dia. trunk sewer along Najafgarh Road from junction 
p jt~l Road up to the purification plant. 
(15) Duplicating rising main from Ring Road pumping station to 
high level gravity duct, . 
(16) Extension of ti' unk sewer from Delhi Gate to Red Fort. 
(17) Trunk sewer along Jail Road from Delhi-Ambala Railway 
Line up to existing 66" dia. sewer (Phase I). 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Water Supply and Sewage Disposai Undertaking of the 
Municipal Corporation of Delhi is at present in ·charge of proc 'S5-
ing and distribution of drinking water within the local limits of the 
Corporation. The Undertaking also makes bulk supplies of drinking 
water to the New Delhi Municipal Committee and the Military 
Engineer Services, Delhi Cantonment, and is also responsible for the 
disposal of sewage in the Corporation and New Delhi areas. With 
a view to meet the expanding water supply requirements of Delhi 
and to deal with effectively the problem of sewage disposal, it is 
proposed to constitute a separate statutory Board, namely, the Delhi 
Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Board to be in charge of pro-
cessing of water and making bulk supplies thereof to the Municipal 
Corporation of Delhi, the New Delhi Municipal Committee and the 
Military Engineer Services, Delhi Cantonment and of the disposal 
of ~wage in the Corporation and New Delhi areas. The Bill is 
intended to at!hieve these objects. 
2. The salient features of the Bill are as under:-
(i) The Board to be constituted under the Bill will be a 
body corporate and wi'll consist of six members. Of these, two 
will be elec~ed by the members of the Metropolitan Council of 
Delhi and one by the members of the Municipal Corporation of 
Delhi, from among themselves and the other three members 
(including the OJairma" will be appointed by the Adminis-
trator. 
(ii) The Board will be charged with the general duty of 
providing bulk supply of water to the Municipal Corporation of 
Delhi, the New Delhi Municipal Committee and the Military 
Engineer Services, Delhi Cantonment and of making adequat~ 
provisIon for the disposal of sewage delivered to it by the 
Municipal Corporation of Delhi and the New Delhi Municipal 
Committee. 
(iii) The quantity of water that may be supplied to .~.a 
aforesaid receiving bodies is to he 'iTP.Ci ", agreement betweellt 
the Board and the concerned receiving body and in case where: 
the total demand of the receiving bodies is in excess of i" 
available supply, the Board will determine the proportion ..• · ..... 
which the water is to be supplied to each receiving body. :~: 

;' ~~." .,.... ,~·"1rt::;r~~:·· ~;.':: .",,~;:.,-'~.- , 27,.i, ~" 
;~r.r~~1 ",.: 
~;: . --0 (iv) The expenditure incurred by the Board on the supply 
II;'~F' water to the receiving bodies will be recovered from the 
.. _odies in the same proportion as the supplies are made to them. 
1:';(' (v) A duty has been cast on the Board to receive in bulk 
, ,}'fV'from the Municipal Corporation of Delhi and the New Delhi 
,,:~.:~ Municipal Committee all sewage delivered to it by the said 
}~~ Corporation or Committee and to dispose of such sewage . 
......... 
. " (vi) The total net cost of the disposal of the sewage will bp. 
.. borne by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi and the New 
pel hi Municipal Committee in such proportion as the Adminis-
'trator may from time to time determine and the same will have 
be paid by the said Corporation and Committee to the Board. 
(~i) In order to enable the Board to discharge its functions, 
iprovision has been made for the making of payments by the 
.Central Government to the Board, by way of grant, loan. or 
(viii) Provision has been made for audit of the accounts of 
the Board by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(ix) If at any time the Board finds that the water available 
it is in excess of the requirements of the Municipal Cor-
poration of Delhi, the New Delhi Municipal Committee and the 
tary Engineer Services, Delhi Cantonment, the Board may 
, with the previous permission of the Administrator, such 
to any body in any State contiguous to Delhi on such 
and conditions as may be agreed between the Board and 
body. 
(x) Certain works and other property of the existing Water 
lUpI"and Sewage Disposal Undertaking of the' Municipal 
r2\l'nn1~~Honof Delhi specified in the Second Schedule to the 
(including those stores, articles and other movable proper-
whicl} are being used or utilised or are required by that 
~~u·.ltion for the maintenance, repair or extension of such 
or other property) and the liabilities relating thereto 
J>r')posed to be transferred to the Board. Provision has 
beo!n made for the allocation of officers and other employees 
·Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Undertaking between 
.• MUnicipa'1 Corporation of Delhi and the Board and for 
II . adjustments between that Corporation and the Board 
l'f'SUlt of the division and transfer of assets and liabilities 
Undertaking to the Board. 

(xi) Provision has been made enabling the Central Govern-
lllel1t to, supersede the Board in case where the Central Gov-
ernment is satisfied that the Board is unable to perform or has 
p~rsistently made default in the performance of the duties im-
posed on it by or under the provisions of the Act or has 
exceeded or abused its powers. 
:~. The other provisions of the Bill relate to matters which are 
incidental to the proper functioning of the Board . 
.. 
NEW DELIII; G.L. NANDA. 
The 2ISt August, 1966. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA. 
T, ., 
'.' ,., 
[Copy of letter No. 3/IO/66-S.R., dated the 23rd Au~t, 1966 frolD,~ 
Shri Jai Sukh Lal Hathi, Min~r of State in)he Ministry of Home Affairs to -
the Secretary, Lok Sabha:.] '~f' 
The President having been infonned of the subject matter of the Bill 
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the maintenance, development 
and regulation of water supply and sewerage services in the Union territotY .' 
of Delhi and for matters connected therewith recommends, under "'&G"-''''-''~ 
~d (3) of article 117 of the Constitution, the introduction of the said 
in 'ind 'itseonsideratioo by the LokSabha. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 36 of the Bill empower5- the Central Government to make grants 
or loans to the Board. Under clause 47 of the Bill, the Central Government 
may direct that any specified work, repair, renewal or replacement which 
is to be undenaken by or for the Board shall be carried out on behalf of the 
Board by the Central Government and the Board shall pay the char~es there-
for at the rates and subJect to the terms tor the time being applicable in the 
case of work constructed by that GO\"ernment on behalf of a local authority. 
To meet the capital requirements of the Delhi \X'atcr Supply ;mJ Sewage 
Disposal Undenaking of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, loans amounting 
to Rs. 225 lakhs and RS.300 lakhs were advanced to the Undertaking by the 
Central Government during the years 1964-65 and 1965-66 respectively and 
a provision ofRs. 330 lakhs has been made for the purpose during the current 
financial year, i.e., 19<)6-67. A suhstantial part of such loan assistance would 
have to be made available to the Bnard when it is constituted to meet its re-
quirements. The provisions of clau.t;e 47 are of enabling nature only and the 
contingency of incurring initial expenditure in relation to matters specified 
in that clause would, if at all, arise only atter the constitution of the Board 
and after watching its working. 
29 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clauses 5. 23. 31. 39, 40 and 43 contain inter alia provisions 
em;>owering the Administrator to make rules with respect to the 
following: :........ 
(a) the terms of office of, and the manner of filling casual 
vacancies among the members of the Board, the salaries and 
al10wances and other conditions of service of the Chairman, the 
Member (Engineering) and the Member (Finance) and the 
allowances payable to the elected members of the Board (clause 
5, ; 
(b) the items of expenditure incurred by the Board that 
may be taken into account for the purpose of calculating the 
final i:,sue rate and for determining the tota'l net cost of disposa] 
of all sewage (clauses 23 and 31): 
(c) the date by which and the form in which the budget 
3hall be submitted in each year, the limits within which and 
the conditions subject to which the Board may incur expenditure 
in exeess of the limit provided in the budget under any head 
of expenditure (clause 39); 
(el) the form in which the annual statement of accounts 
shan lie prepared (clause 40); and 
(E!) the conditions subject to which the Board may exercise 
the pClwers in respect of property vested in the Union Or under 
the control or management of the Central Government or 
railwl:IY administration or vested in any 'local authority (chmse 
43). 
2. Clau:ses 10. 11, 15 and 37 empower the Board to make regula-
tions in rE!spect of the following:-
(a) the time and place of meetings of the Board and the 
procedure to be followed in regard to transaction of business 
at such meetings (clause 10); 
(b) the manner in which and the purposes for which oersons 
may be a~s(\~iated with the Board (clause 11); 

31) • I 
(c) the conditions of appointment and service and the seales 
of pay of the officers and other employees of the Board (clause 
15): 811d 
(d) the rates at which and the terms on which the Board 
may make provision for depreciation and for development. 
reser-ve and other funds (clause 37). 
3. The above are matters of administrative detail and the del~ga. 
r of legislath-e power is, therefore_ of a nonnal character. 

LOK SA13HA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the maintenam .. 'e, 
development and regulation of water supply and sewerage 
services in the Union territo):y of Delhi and for matters 
connected therewith. 
(Shri Gulzarilal N anda, 
Minister 0/ Home Affairs) 