LOK SA.BRA 
-
CORRIGE.NDA 
TO 
THB CENTRAL SAlES TAX (AMENDlJlENr) BILL, 1969 
L-Tg b§1M introduced ID Lok Sabha 7 
1. Page 1, line 6,-
for "(f)" ~ "(j)" 
2. Page 2, line 28,-
m "shal" ~ "shall" 
3. Page 2, IIDe 35,-
after 
4. Page 2, line 38,-
5. 
for "1 969- n read , 
paer\ 6, line 14,-
read 
"1 966: " 
"." , 
{ ,for "Daddalam" ~ "Y add alam" 
6. Rage 13, ~.1ne 7,-
1:2£ "for" ~ "or" 
7. Correct line number on page 3. 
~Sadha 31 ,891 (Saka) 

As IN'l'RODUCID IN Loa: S&BaA 0. 
,. 5 JUL 1965 
(f ':£'1'1; \' 
, .\ 
." ".j? JI/>' ......... . 
. ~ ... / .. ~" 1 
\', ,","\ .. ~ ... '. ,", : . ~". ~" 
BUINo. 63 of .M9 
THE CENTRAL SALES TAX. (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1969 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Central Sales Tax ActA 1956 and to provide for 
certain other matters. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the Republic of 
India as tollows:-
1. This Act may be called the Central Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, Shon 
1969. tiUe. 
74 of 19~6. 5 2. In section 2 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred 
to as the principal Act), in clause (f), for the words "and determined 
in the prescribed manner", the words "and determined in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder" shall be, 
and shall be deemed always to have been, substituted. 
10 . 3. In section 6 of the principal Act,-
(a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be, and 
ShAll be deemed always to have been, inserted, namely:-, 
"(lA) A dealer shall be liable to pay tax under this Act cn 
a sale of any goods effected by him in the cou1'l@ of tnter.State 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
2. 
Amend-
ment." 
section 
6. 

AmeDd-
1JMIIt of 
sectJon 
8. 
lDAenlon 
otnew 
aection 
8A 
Deter-
minatiOn 
or turn-
ovea:. 
- .. 2 
trade or commerce notwithstanding that no tax would have been 
leviable (whether on the seHer or the purchaser) under the sales 
tax law of the appropriate State if that sale had taken place in-
side that State."; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the word, brackets and figure "sub- 5 
section (I)", the words, brackets, figures and letter "sub-section (1) 
or sub-section (lA)" shall be, and shall be deemed to have been, 
substituted with effect from the 1st day of October, 1958. 
4. In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2A) , for the words, 
brackets and figures "Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 10 
(1) or sub-section (2)", the words, brackets, figures and letter "Notwith-
standing anything contained in sub-section (I A) of section 6 or in sub-
St:ction (1) or SUb-section (2) of this section" shall be, and shall be det!med 
to have been, substituted with effect from the 1st day of October, 1958. 
5. After section 8 of the principal Act, the following section shall be, 15 
and shall be deemed always to have been, inserted, namely:-
4.-0. 
"SA. (1) In determining the turnover of a dealer for the purpol'es 
of this Act, the following deductions shall be made from the aggregate 
of the salle prices, namely:-
(a) the amount arrived at by applying the following formula 20 
rate of tax X aggregate of sale prices 
·100--plus rate- or tax 
Provided that no deduction on the basis of the above formula 
shall be made if the amount by way of tax collected by a regis-
tered dealer, in accordance with the provisions of this Act, has 25 
been otherwise deducted from the aggregate of sale prices. 
Exp~nation.-Where the turnover of a dealer is taxable at 
different rates, the aforesaid formula shal be appJied separately 
in respect of each part of the turnover liable to a different rate of 
tu; ~ 
(b) the sale price of all goods returned to the dealer by the 
purchasers of such goods,-
(i) within a period of three months from the date of 
delivery of the goods, in the case of goods returned before 
the 14th day of MRY, 1966: 
(ii) within a period of six months from the date of deli-
very of the goods, in the case of goods returned on or after 
the 14th day of May, 1969; 
35 
Provided that satisfactory evidence of such return of goods 
and of refund or adjustment in accounts of the sale price thereoi 40 
is produced before the authority competent to assess or, as th.· 
case. may be, re-assess the tax payable by the dealer under this 
Act; and 
(c) such other deductions as the Central Government may, 
having regard to the prevalent market coDCiitions, facility of trade 45 
and interests of consumers, prescribe. 

3 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (1), in deter"'~injng 
the turnover of a dealer for the purposes of this Act, no deduction 
shall be made from the aggregate of the sale prices.". 
6. For section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall be, and Subatttu-
5 shall be deemed always to have been, substituted, namely: - tion of 
newaec_ 
tion for 
seetiOll 
9. 
10 
"9. (1) The tax payable by any dealer under this Act on sales of 
goods effected by him in the course of inter-State trade or commerce, 
whether such sales fall within clause (a) or clause (b) of section 3, 
shall be levied by the Government of India and the tax so levied 
shall be collected by that Government in accordance with the provi-
sions of sub-section (2), in the St3te from which the movement of the 
goads commenced: 
Provided that, in the case of a sale of goods during their move· 
ment from one State to another, being a sale subsequent to the fir~t 
15 sale in respect of the same goods, the tax shall, where such sale do~s 
not fall within sub-section (2) of section 6, be levied and collected in 
the State from which the registered dealer effecting the subsequent 
sale obtained or, as the case may be, could have obtained, the form 
prescribed for the purposes of clause' (a) of sub-section (4) of section 
20 8 in connection with the purchase of such goods. 
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act and the rules made 
. thereunder, the authorities for the time being empowered to assess, 
re-assess, collect and enforce paymen~ of any tax under the general 
sales tax law of the appropriate State shall. on behalf of the Govern-
, 5 ment of India, assess,· re-assess, collect and enforce payment of tax, 
including any penalty, payable by a dealer under this Act as if the 
tax or penalty payable by such a dealer under this Act is a tax or 
penalty payable under the general Bales tax law of the State; and for 
this purpose they may exercise all or any of the powers they have 
30 under the general sales tax law of the State; and the provisions of 
such law, including provisions relating to returns, proviSional assess,· 
ment, advance. payment of tax, registration of the transferee of any 
business, imposition of the tax liability of a person carrying on busi-
ness on the transferee of, or successor to, such business, transfer of 
35 liability of any firm or Hindu undivided family to pay tax· in th(l 
event of the dissolution of such firm or partition of such family, re-
covery of tax from third parties, appeals, reviews, revisions, references, 
refunds, penalties, compounding of offences and treatment of 
documents furnished by a dealer as confidential, shall apply 
40 accordingly: 
Provided that i·f in any State or part thereof there is no ,cneral 
sales tax law in force, the Central Government may, b)" ndes made 
in this behalf, make necessary provision for all or any or the matters 
specified in this sub-section. 
45 (3) The proceeds in any financial year of any tax, including any 
penalty, levied and collected under this Act in any State (other than 
a Union territory) on behalf of the Government of India shaH be 
assigned to that State and shall be retained by it; and the proceeds 
a Levy and 
coll«tiUn 
of tax 
and 
penalties. 

Amend. 
ment of 
aeetlon 
lOA. 
Amend .. 
IDent of 
section 
13. 
Validation 
of &SIeSs-
ments, etc:. 
4 
attributable to Union territories shall form part of the Consolidated 
Fund of India.". 
7. Section lOA of the principal Act shall be, and shall be deem(!d to 
have been, renumbered with effect· from the 1st day of October, 1958 as 
sub--section (1) of that section and after the said sub-section (1). the 5 
,oHowing sub-section shall be. and shall be deemed to have beer., 
inserted with effect from the said day, namely:-
"(2) The penalty imposed upon any dealer under sub-sE'ction (1) 
shall be collected by the Government of India in the manner provided 
in sub-section (2) of section 9- 10 
(a) in the case of an offence falling under clause (b) or 
clause (d) of section 10, in the State in which the person purchas-
ing the goods obtained the form prescribed for the purposes of 
clause (a) of sub·section (4) of section 8 in connection with the 
purchase of such goods; IS 
(l:t) in the case of an offence falling under clause (c) (If section 
10, in the State in which the person purchasing the goods should 
have registered himself if the offence had not been committed.". 
8. In section 13 of the principal Act, in clause (f) of sub-section (1), 
for the word, brackets and figure "sub-section (3) ", the word" brackets ~o 
and figure "sub-section (2)" shall be, and shall be deemed always to have 
been, substituted. 
t. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree 
or order of any court or other authority to the contrary, any assessment, 
re-assessment, levy or collection of any tax made Or purporting to have 25 
heen made. any action or thing taken or done in relation to such assess-
ment, re-assessment, levy or collection under the proviSions of the prin-
cipal Act before the 9th day of June, 1969, shall be deemed to be as valid 
and effective as if such assessment, re-assessment, levy or collection 01' 
aetion or thing had been made, taken or done under the principal Act 30 
as amended by this Act and accordingly-
(a) all acts, proceedings or things done or taken by the Govern-
ment or by any officer of the Government or by any other authority 
in connedion with the assessment, re-assessment, levy or colJection 
of such tax shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be, and to have 35 
always been, done or taken in accordance with law; 
(b) DO suit or other proceedings shall be maintained or continued 
in any court or before any authOrity for the refund of any such tax; 
and 
(c) no court shall enforce any decree or order directin~ the re- 40 
fund of 2ny such tax. 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing in 
sub-set!tjon (1) shall be construed as preventing any person-
(a) from questioning in accordance with the provisions of the 
principal Act, as amended by this Act, any assessment, re-assessment,4S 
levy Or collection of tax referred to in sub-section (1), or 
(b) from claiming refund of any tax paid by him in excess of 
the amount due from him by way of tax under the princlpal Act as 
amended by this Act. 

"of 1969. 
5 
10. (1) Where any sale of goods in the course of inter-State trade or 
commerce has been effected during the period between the 10th day of 
November, 1964 and the 9th day of June, 1969, and the dealer effecting 
such foiaJehas not collected any tax under the principal Act on the ground 
5 that no such tax could have been levied or collected in respect of such 
sale or any portion of the turnover relating to such sale and no ·such tax 
could have been levied or collected if the amendments made in the princi-
pal Act- by this Act had not been made, then, notwithstanding anything 
eOlltained in section 9 or the said amendments, the dealer shall not be 
10 hl!lble ,to pay any tax under the principal Act, as amended by thiF Act, in 
respect of such sale or such part of the turnover relating to such sale. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1). the burden of proving that no 
tax was collected under the principal Act in respect of any sale referred 
to in,sub-section (1) or in respect of any portion of the turnover relating 
15 to such sale shall be on the dealer effecting such sale. 
Exemp-
tion from 
liability 
to pay 
taxm 
certain 
case~. 
11. (1) The Central Sales Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 1969, is hereby Repeal 
repealed. and SIlV_ 
ing. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any actipn taken 
under the prinCipal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be d ~emed 
20 to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this 
Act as if this Act had come into force on the 9th day of June, 1969. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The levy of tax on inter-State sales under the Central Sales Tax Act, 
1956, commenced from the 1st July, 1957. The scheme of the Act as 
originally intended was that while matters of a SUbstantive nature, such 
as the incidence of tax, the point of levy, the determination of turnover 
for purposes of calculation of tax including exemptions which should be 
allowed in detennlnlng such turnover, should be regulated by the pro-
visions made in that behalf in the Act itself or in rules made under the 
Act, matters of a procedural nature, such as the procedure for collecti~ 
of tax, the machinery for collection oj tax should be regulated by the 
provisions contained in the local sales tax law of the appropriate State. 
However. on the 10th November, 1964, the Supreme Court in the caf;e 
of the State Of Mysore vs. Yaddawm Lakshminarasimhiah Settll " Sons 
(hereinafter referred to as the Daddalam case) held that the pl'O\Iisions of 
the Act would have the effect of incorporating not only the procedural 
provisions of the local sales tax laws but also the substantive provisions 
thereof. The Court was concerned in this case with a factual situation 
which had arisen before the Act was amended in 1958 and in arriving 
at its conclusion the Court relied upon the wording of section 8(2) and 
section 9 (1) of the Act as they stood before the .Act was amended in 
1958. There was a conflict of opinion amongst the High Courts as to whe-
ther the ruling of the Supreme Court in the aforementioned case held 
~ood even with reference to the provision~ of the Act as amended in 1958. 
In a series of decisions in 1968, the Supreme Court heM that its decision 
in Yaddalam caSe applied with equal force even aft.er the amendment of 
the Act in 1958. The Court also extended the scope of its ruling in 
Yaddalam case and held that the provisions of the sales tax law of the ap-
propriate State would apply not only in respect of point of levy of Central 
Sales Tax but also in respect of deductions to be made in the deter-
mination of turnover for the pUrpOlles of calculating the tax payable 
under the Central Sales Tax Act. 
2. Thesp judgments, therefore. went against the scheme which was 
sought to be given effect to' in the Act and in accordance with which 
the Act had been administered all along. As a result of these judg-
ments, the State Governments would have been required to refund a 
substantial portion of tne taxes levied and collected umler the Act. 
It, therefore, became necessary to promulgate the Central Sales Tax 
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1969 (4 of 1969) on the 9th June, 1969. 
3. The Ordinaillce amended the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. with retros-
pective effect to make it clear that t",x Q'n an inter-State sale of goods 
would be payable notwithstanding th(~ fact that no tax would have been 
levied un'tier the sales tax law of t1' ~ appropriate State, had the sale 
token place inside such State at that point. Further, the Ordinance 
provided that turnover for the purposes of assessment of tax would be 
6 
"~, 

· ~ - .'. 
, ..,' I : " j ,:(,.' • • . , 
tietermined In accordance with the provisions of the Act and the rules 
made the~tii1der. The Ordinance also validated the taxes imposed, 
assessed or ~'ol1ected by the State Governments up to the date of com-
mencement of the Ordinance. The Ordinance made suitable provisions 
to safeguard the interests of dealers who, relying upon the Supreme Conurt 
judgment in Yaddalam case, did not co.lect tax from their customers. 
4. This Bill seeks to replace the Ordinance, subject to certain changes 
of a consequential or clarifying nature, by an Act of Parliament. The 
notes on clauses explain the provisions o"f the Bill. 
NEw DELHI; P. C. SETHI. 
The 18th July, 1969. 
RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 274 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 8/24/69-ST(2), dated the 18th July, 1969 from 
Shri Prakashchand B. Sethi, Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance 
to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The Vice-President acting as President.. having been apprised of the 
subject matter of the above Bill, has been pleased to recommend, in 
pursuance of clauses (1) and (3) of article 117 and clause (1) (,f article 
27" of the Constitution of Lndia~ the introduction and consideration of 
the Bill in the Lok Sabha. 

(;Lause 2.-Thls clause' seeks to amend, with retrospective effect, the 
definition of the term "turnover" to make clear that the turnQver shall 
be determined in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the rules 
made thereunder. 
Clause 3.-This clause seeks to' insert with retrospective effect a new 
sUb-section (lA) in section 6 of the principal Act. New scirsection 
(IA) seeks to provide that tax on inter-State sale of any goods shall be 
payable notwithstantling the fact that no tax would have been levied 
under the sales tax law of the appropriate State if that sale had, taken 
place inside that State. The other amendment which this clause seeks 
to make is of a consequential nature. 
Clause 4.-This is of a consequential end clarifying nature. 
Clause 5.-rrhis clause seeks to insert with retrospective effect a new 
section SA, in the prinCIpal Act. New section 8A provides for the deduc-
tions which should be allowed in determining the turnover of a dealer 
for the purposes of the Act. The de'ductians, provided in rule 11 (2) 
of the Central Sales Tax (Registration and Turnover) Rules, 1957, as 
amended from time to time, regarding the tax . element and the goods 
returned to a dealer, have been incorporated in the section. To cover 
contingencies which may arise in future, power is als·(), being taken to 
prescribe other deductions having regard to the prevalent market con-
'ciitions, facility of trade and interests of consumers. 
Clause ~.-This cleuse seeks to substitute with retrospective effect 
section 9 of the principal Act by a new section. In respect of· ·first inter-
State sale, tax will be payable in the State wherefrom the movement of 
thE' goods commenced. In the case of a second or subsequent sale not 
covered. by sub-section (2) of section 6, the tax will be levied Uld col-
lected in the State where the registered dealer effecting the subsequent 
sale has his place of business. Power is also being taken by the Central 
Government to make, rules for the purpose of providing for the assess-
ment, collection and enforcement of payment of tax under the Act ;n 
any territory where there is no local sales tax law in force. 
It has also been made clear that for the I>urp:)ses of assessment, col-
lection 6l1'd payment of tax, the Act will attrac~ the pl'O'Cedural provi-
sions relating to assessment, collection and payment of tax under the 
general sales tax law of the appropriate State. 
Clause 7.-This clause seeks to transpose, without any change, the 
existing provisions regarding collection of p':'nalty contained in sub-sec-
tian (2) of section 9 of the principal Act to section 10. The transposition 
has become necessary as the other provisions of section 9 are being sub-
stituted. with effect from the commencement of the principal Act. 
It 

!I 
Clctuse a.-This is consequential. 
Clame 9.-This clause provides for validation of past levies and 
collections of tax under the Act up to the date of commencement of this 
Act. 
Cl.a.use 10.-This cl.auseseeks to exempt a dealer from liability to pay 
tax in respect of any sale effected by him during the periO'd between the 
lOth day of November, 1964 (the date of the judgment of the Supreme 
Court in Yaddalam case) and the 9th day of June, 1969 rthe date afcOrn-
mencement of Central Sales Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 1969J, or in 
respect of any portion of turnover relating to such sale if the dealer 
proves that he has, relying upon judicial pronouncements, not collectetl 
tax on such sale or such portion of turnover .. 
ChLuse n.-This clause seeks to repe$l the Ce~.tral Sales Tax 
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1969 and make the usual saving provision. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 utilises the machinery in existence 
in States and Union territories for collection of sales tax. However, in 
the case of any State or part thereof in which local sales tax law is not 
in force, this would not be possible and accordinJly sub-section (3) of 
existing section 9 of the Act confers powers on the Central Government 
to provide for such machinery in respect of such State or part thereof. 
The proviso to sub-section (2) of new section 9, which clause 6 seeks to 
substitute for existing section 9, seeks to centinue these powers of the 
Central Government. The need for utilising these powers has not been 
felt up till now. However, it might become necessary to invoke this 
provision if at any stage, it is decided to cellect Central sales tax in 
respect of inter-State sales emanating from a territory where there is 
• no local sales tax. It is not possible to visualise clearly the expenditure 
that would be inV'olved on this account. As there is no appreciable 
"olume of inter-State trade from such territOries, only a small staff, if at 
all necessary, would be required and the expenditure likely to be involved 
on this account may not exceed Rs. 25,000 per annum. 
10 ... 

MINISTRY OF FINtlltCE 
(DEPARTHENT OF RETffiNUill & INSURANCE) 
••••• 
C ]j,"'NTRAL SALES T iii.. 
The Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 utilises the machinery in 
existence in States and Union tJrritories fo~ collsction of sales 
tax. However, in the case of any State or nart thereof in ,.mich 
local sales tax law is not in force, this ,",ould not be possible 
and acc ordingly sub-section (3) of existing section 9 of t he Act 
confers powers on the Central Government to provide for such 
machinery in respect of such State or part thereof. The nroviso 
to sUb-section (2) of new section 9, wl:11.ch clause 6 seeks to 
substi tute for existing section 9, seel~s to C 0ntinue these pO'.,rers 
of the Central Government. The need for utiltsing these powers 
has not been felt up till nOVT. Ho'"ever, it might become necessary 
to invoke this provision if at an~r stage, it is decided to collect 
Central sales tax in respect of inter-State sales em~nqting from 
a territory 'lThere there is no local sales tax. It is not possible 
to visualise clearly the expenditure that ,",ould be involved on 
this account. As there is ~o appreciable volume of inter-State 
, 
trade from such territoriefj, only a small staff, if at all necessary, 
would be required ~nn the expen(Hture li':ely to be involved on 
this account may not exceed R~.25,OOO per annum. 
The Bi 11 does not involv0. any non-recurring 0xpenditure. 
NEW DELHI 
DATED: 24/7/69. 
Sn 1- P.c. S~THI 
MINISTER IN TiE MINISTRY OF FINi\NCE 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section SA in the principal 
Act. The new section provides expressly for certain deductions which 
may be allowed from the gross turnover of a dealer for the purposes of 
the Act. To provide for contingencies which may arise in future, the 
section seeks to authorise the Central Government to make rules pro-
viding for other deductions having regard to the prevalent market condi-
tions, facility of trade and interests of consumers. Any such additional 
deductions would be to the advantage of the dealers. ~ the section lays 
down clearly the guidelines for providing for such additional deductions 
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
2. Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to substitute a new section 9 for existing 
section 9 of the principal Act. The proviso to sub-aection (2) of the 
new sect jon [which merely re-enacts a similar provision contained in 
sub-section (3) of existing section 9] empowers the Central Government 
to make rules to provide for collection and enforcement of payment .f 
tax under the Act in a State or part thereof where there is no l()('al sales 
tax law. As the matters in respect of which rules can be made under ~e 
proviso pertain to matters of administrative detail and procedure, the 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
11 

....... .., 
~flni­
tions. 
Liability 
to tax 
on inter-
State 
sales. 
Ratellol 
taxon 
sales 'in 
the 
course 
of inter-
State 
trade or 
com-
merce. 
• 
ANNEXURE 
. EXTRACTS FROM THE CENTRAL SALES TAx ACT, 1956 
(74 OF 1956) 
'" '" '" 
2. In this Act. unless the context otherwiserequires,-
'" '" '" '" '" 
(j) i'tumover" used in relation to any dealer liable to tax under 
this Act means the aggregate of the sale prices ·received and receiv-
able by him inrespeet of sales of any goods in the course of inter-
State trade or commerce made during any prescribed period and 
determined!n the prescribed manner; 
'" '" '" 
CHAPTER III 
INTER-STATE SALES TAX 
'" '" 
6. (1) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, every 
dealer shall, with effect from such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, not being earlier than 
thirty days from the date of such notification be liable to pay tax under 
this Act on all sales effected by him in the course of inter-State trade 
or commerce during any year on and from the date so notified. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where a 
sale in the course of inter-State trade or commerce of goods of the des-
cription referred to in sub-section (3) of section 8-
(a) has occasioned the movement of such goods from one State 
to another; or 
(b) has been effected by a transfer of documents of title to such 
goods during their movement from one State to another; 
any subsequent sale to a registered dealer during such movement 
effected by a transfer of documents of title to such goods shall not be 
subject to tax under this Act: 
Provided that no such subsequent sale shall be exempt from tax 
under this sub-section unless the dealer effecting the sale furnishes to 
the prescril,>ed authority in the prescribed manner a certificate duly 
filled and signed by the registered dealer from whom the goods were 
purchased, containing the prescribed particulars. 
'" '" '" 
8. (1) '" '" 
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2), if under the sales tax law of the appropriate State the sale 
or purchase, as the case may be, of any goods by a dealer is exempt 
from tax generally or is subject to tax generally at a rate which is 
lower than three per cent. (whether called a tax or fee or by any other 
name), the tax payable under this Act on his turnover in so far as the 
J2 

turnover or any part thereof relates to the sale of such goods shall be 
niL or, as the case may be, shall be calculated at the lower rate. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section a sale or purchase 
of goods shall not be deemed to be exempt from tax generally under 
the sales tax law of the appropriate State if under that law it is exempt 
only in specified circumstances or under specified conditions or in relation 
to which the tax is levied at specified stages for otherwise than with 
reference to the turnover of the goods . 
• • • • • 
9. (1) The tax payable by any dealer under this Act on sales of goods 
effected by him in the course of inter-State trade or commerce [whether 
such sales fall within clause (a) or clause (b) of section 3] sh~ll be 
levied and collected by the Government of India in the manner pro-
vided in sub-section (3) in the State from which the movement of the 
goods commenced: 
Provided that, in the case of a sale of goods during their mo lement 
from one State to another being a sale subsequent to the first sale in 
respect of the same goods, the tax shall, where such sale does not fall 
within sub-section (2) of section 6, be levied and collected in the State 
from which the registered dealer effecting the subsequent sale obtained 
the form prescribed for the purposes of clause (a) of sub-section (4) 
of section 8 in connection with the purchase of such goods. 
(2) The penalty imposed upon any dealer under section lOA shall 
be collected by the Government of India in the manner provided in 
sub-section (3)-
(a) in the case of an offence falling under clause (b) or clause 
(d) of section 10, in the State in which the person purchasing the 
goods obtained the form prescribed for the purposes of clause (a) 
of sub-section (4) of section 8 in connection with the purchase of 
such goods; 
(b) in the case of an offence falling under clause (c) of section 
10, in the State in which the person purchasing the goods should 
have registered himself if the offence had not been committed. 
(3) The authorities for the time being empowered to assess, collect 
and enforce payment of any tax under the general sales tax law of the 
appropriate State shall, on behalf of the Government of India and sub-
ject to any rules made under this Act, assess, collect and enforce pay-
ment of any tax, including any penalty, payable by a dealer under this 
Act in t.he same manner as the tax on the sale or purchase of goods 
under the general sales tax law of the State is assessed, paid and collected; 
and for this purpose they may exercise all or any Qf the powers they 
have under the general sales tax law of the State; and the ~)rovisions 
of such law, including provisions relating to returns, appeals, reViews, 
revisions, references, penalties and compounding of offences, shall apply 
accordingly: 
Provided that if in any State or part thereof there is no genp.ral. sales 
tax law in force, the Central Government may, by rules made in this 
Levy and 
collection 
of tax 
and 
penalties. 

Imposi-
tion of 
penalty 
in lleuot 
prosecu-
tion. 
Powertc 
make 
ruIN. 
bchaU, make necessary provision for all or any of the matters specified 
in this sub-section, and such rules may provide that a breach of any 
r~ shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees; and where the offence is a continuing offence, with a daily fine 
which may extend to fifty rupees for every day during which the offence 
continues. 
(4) The proceeds in any financial year of any tax, including any 
penalty, leYied and collected under this Act in any State (other than 
a Union territory) on behalf of the Government of India shall be assign-
ed to that State and shall be retained by it; and the proceeds attribut-
able to Union territories shall form part of the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 
• • • • • 
lOA. If any person purchasing goods is guilty of an offence under 
clause (b) or clause (c) or clause (d) of section 10, the authority who 
granted to him or, as the case may be, is competent to grant to him a 
certificate of registration under this Act may, after giving him a reason-
able opportunity of being heard, by order in writing, impose upon him 
by way of penalty a sum not exceeding one-and-a-half times the tax 
which would have been levied under this Act in respect of the sale to 
him of the goods if the offence had not been committed: 
Provided that no prosecution for an offence under section 10 shall be 
instituted in respect of the same facts on which a penalty has been 
imposed under this section. 
• • • • • 
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules providing for-
• • • • • 
(f) the matters in respect of which provision may be made 
under the proviso to sub-section (3) of section 9; 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Central Sates Tax Act, 1956 and to provide for 
certain other mattt:rs. 
(Shri Prakashchand B. Sethi, Minister of State i1z the Ministry of Finance). 