23 of 1955. 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
21 DEC 19b1 
J'jO CV 
~J/~'.J 
BiU No. 'i'Of,Wto,. "'_," .-" .. ,."" .... 
1~ 'STATE BANK OF INDIA (AMENDMENI') 
BIll., 1963 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the State Bank of ·India Act, 1955. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the State Bank of India (Amend- Short title 
ment) Act, 1963. and com-
mence-
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern- ment. 
10 
ment may. by notification in the O1!icial Gazette, appoint. 
2. In section 2 of the State Bank of India Act, 1955 (hereinafter A d men -referred. to as the principal Act) ,- ment of 
(i) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, section 2. 
namely:-
, (bb) "chairman" means the chairman of the Central 
Boardj'; 
(ii) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(dd) "Local Board" means a Local Board constituted 
under section 21;'; 
(iii) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
II (i) "vice-chairman" means the vice-chairman of the 
Central Board.". 

Amencl. 
ment of 
section 
19. 
.AmeD4-
ment of 
section 
20. 
2 
3; In section 19 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1) - ~ 
(i) in clause (a), the words ", except in the case of first 
appointments," shall be omitted; 
(ii) for clauses (c) and (d), the following clauses shall S 
be substituted, namely:-
".:::'.: i . 
"(bb) the presidents of the Local Boards appointed 
under sub-section (5) of section 21, ex 01fi,cio; 
(c) if the total amount of the holdings of the share-
holders, other than the Reserve Bank, whose names 10 
are on the principal register three months before the 
date fixed for election of directors is-
(i) not more than ten per cent. of the total 
issued capital, two directors, 
(ii) more than ten per cent. but not more IS 
than twenty-five per cent. of such capital, three 
directors, and 
(iii) more than twenty-five per cent. of such 
capital, four directors, 
to be elected in the prescribed manner by such share- ao 
holders; 
(d) not less than two and not more than six direc-
tors to be nominated -by the Central Government in 
consultation with the Reserve Bank, from among per-
sons having special knowledge of the working of 2S 
co-operative institutions and of rural econOmy or 
experience in commerce, industry, banking or finance;"; 
(b) sub-sections (2) and (3) shall be omitted. 
4. In section 20 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (2), the words "or, in the case of the ftrst 30 
two appointments, the Central Government," shall be omitted; 

S 
10 
IS 
20 
35 
3 
(b) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
u (5) The following provisions shall have effect in rela-
tion to directors nominated under clause (d) of sub-
section (1) of section 19, to the Central Board reconstituted 
for the first time on or after the commencement of the State 
Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1963, namely:-
• 
(i) if the number of such directors holding office 
at the end of one year from the date of such reconstitu-
tion is not more than three, then one of such directors, 
and if such number exceeds three, then two of them, 
shall retire at the end of the said year; 
(ii) if the number of such directors holding office 
at the end of two years from the date of such recons-
titution is not more than three, tJhen one of such direc-
tors, and if such number is four, then two of them, shall 
retire at the end of the said two years; 
(iii) if the number of such directors holding office 
at the end of three years ,from the date of such recons-
titution is not more than two, then one of such directors 
shall retire at the end of the said three years; 
(iv) any such director holding office for a period of 
four years from the date of such reconstitution shall 
retire at the end of such period: 
(v) the director or directors to retire at the end of 
each year under clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) shall be 
determined by lot.". 
I. For section 21 of the principal Act, the following section shall Substi-
be substituted, namely: _ tution of new 
seCtion 
for sec-
tion 21. 
"21. (1) There shall be constituted at each place where the Local 
State Bank has a local head office, a Local Board which shall Boards. 
consist of the following members, namely:-
(a) the chairman, ex officio: 
(b) all such directors elected or nominated to the Cen-
tral Board under ~la\.lse (c) or clause (d) of sub-section (1) 

4 
of section 19 as are ordinat'ily resident in the area served by 
the branch register of the local head office; 
(c) six members to be D.Ominated by the Central Gov-
ernment in consultation with the Reserve Bank; 
(d) one member to be elected in the prescribed manner 
by the shareholders, other than the :Reserve Bank, whose 
names are en,tered in the branch register of the local head 
oftice, if the total holdings of such shareholders amount to 
two and a half per cent. or more of the total ilSued capiml: 
5 
Provided that a person elected as a member of a Local 10 
Board under this clause shall not cease to be a member 
thereof for reason only that the total holdings as aforesaid 
fall below two and a half per cent. of the total issued 
capital, at any time after his election; 
(e) the secretary aDd treasurer of the local head '5 
office, appointed by the State Bank, ez offieio. 
(2) Where as a result of the establishment of any local 
head office (hereinafter r.eferred to as the new local head office) 
for any area which is already served by the branch register 
of another local head office (hereinafter referred to as the 20 
existing local head office) a Local Board (hereinafter referred 
to as the new I.ocal Board) is constituted for the new local head 
office, any person who is. at the time of such constitution, hold-
ing office as a member of a Local Board (hereinafter referred 
to as the existinJ( Local BORrd) for an existing local head office 25 
under clause (e) or clause (d) of sub-section. (1) and Is ordl-
narilv resident in the orea served by the branch register of the 
new local head office. shall cease to hold office as member of the 
existinll Local Board and shan become a nlember of the new 
Local Board and shall on becominJ( such member Ibp. deemed to 30 
have been nominated or, as the case may be, elected to the new 
Local Board and shalt hold office as such member for the un-
expired portion of his term of office as a member of the exist .. 
ing Local Board. 
(3) Any vacancy caused in the existing Local Board as 8 3~ 
result of any member thereof becomin~ a memlber of the new 
Local Board under sub.-section (2) shan be deemed to be a casual 
vacancy and be filled in accordance with the provisions of leo": 
tion 2!5. 

5 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (d) of 
sub-ieCtion (1) ,-
(a.) on the reconstitution of an existing Local Board 
for the first time on or after the commencement of the State 
, Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1963, or 
(b) on the constitution of a new Local Board under 
sub-section (2) of which .an elected member of an existing 
Local Board does not in pursuance of that sub-section become 
a member, 
10 the Reserve Bank shall nominate a member in place of the 
member to be elected under that clause and such nominated 
member shall be deemed to have been elected under the said 
cliause. 
(5) The Governor of the Reserve Bank shall, in consultation 
IS with the chairman, appoint-
(a) a member of a Local Board nominated or elected 
under cl.ause (c) or clause (d) of sub-section (1) to be the 
president thereof, and 
(b) a member of a Local Board holding office under 
20 clause (b) or nominated or elected under clause (c) or 
clause (d) of that sub-section to be the vice-president 
thereof.". 
6. After section 21 of the principal Act, the following sections Insertion 
.hall be inserted, namely: _ of new sections 
3S 
21A,21B 
and 21C. 
1/21A. (1) Subject to the provIslons contained in this sec- Term of 
tion and in sub-section (2) of section 21, a member of a Local oOke of 
Board nominated under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section members . h II h I of Local 21 or elected under clause (d) of that sub-secbon sao d Board. 
office for two years and thereafter until his successor has been 
duly nominated or elected and shall be eligible for re-nomina-
tion or re-election, as the case may be: I 
Provided that out of the six me~bers nominated under 
clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 21, on the constitution 
of a new Local Board or the reconstitution of an existing Local 
Board for the first time on or after the commencement of the 
State Ban~ of Jndia (Amendment) Act, 1963, three shall retire 

Powers of 
Local 
Board. 
Local 
Commit-
tees. 
6 
at the end of one year and three shall retire at the end of two 
years from the date of the constitution or, as the case may be, re-
constitution of that Local Board, and the members to retire at 
the end of the first year shall be determined by lot. 
(2) A member of a Local Board nominated ,by the Reserve 5 
Bank under sub-section (4) of section 21 shall retire at the 
expiry of one year from the date of such nomination. 
(3) A director of the Central Board becoming a member of 
a Local Board by virtue of the provisions of clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of section 21 shall cease to hold office as such mem- 10 
ber on his ceasing to be a director or on his ceasing to !be ordi-
narily resident in the relevant a'rea. 
(4) The president and the vice-president of a Local Board 
shall each hold office for two years or the remaining period of 
his office as a member of the Local Board, whichever is shorter, J, 
and shall be eligible for re-appointment so long as he is a member 
of the Local Board. 
21B. Save as may otherwise be prescribed and subject to 
any general or speciel directions which the Central Board may 
give from time to time, a Local Board shall, in respect of the 20 
area served by the branch register of the local head office for 
which the Board has been constituted, exercise all powers and 
perform all functle.ns and duties Of .the State Bank in relation 
to any business that may be carried on or transacted by the 
State Bank under sub-section (1) of section S2 and clauses (i) :as 
(excluding the proviso). (ii) , (iii), (v) to (ix), (xa) , (xii) to 
(xv), (xvii), (xviii), (xixb) and (mc) of section 33 and shall 
exercise such other powers and perform such other functions 
and duties as may be conferred on or assigned to it by the 
Central Board. 30 
21C. (1) A Local Committee may be constituted by the 
Central Board for any area and shall consist of such number of 
mempers as may be prescribed. 
(2) The chairman shall be an ex of]icio member of every 
such Loca! Committee. 35 
(3) A LocAl Committee shall exercise such powers and per-
form such functions and duties as the Central Board may con-
fer on or assign to it.". 

s 
10 
• 
7. In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),-
(a) in clause (d), after the words "managing director" the 
d " ' , wor s secretary and treasurer," shall be inserted' , 
(b) for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"Provided that in the case of a member of Local Board 
nominated by the Reserve Bank under sub-section (4) of 
section 21, the disqualification mentioned in clause (h) shall 
not operate for a period of six months from his becoming 
such member.". 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
22. 
S. In section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after the Amend. 
word and figures "section 19", the words, brackets, letter end figures Inent of 
"or any member of a Local Board nominated under clause (c) of section 
sub-section (1) of section 21" shall be inserted. 24. 
IS 9. In section 25 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the !:~n:i 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- section 
"(2) Where any vacancy occurs before the expiry of the 25. 
term of office of a director, other than the chairman, vice-
chairman or a managing director or of a member of a Local 
20 Board other than the secretary and treasurer, the vacancy shall 
be filli!d-
2S 
30 
(a) in the case of an elected director or member, by 
election; and 
(b) in the case of a director nominated under clause 
(d) of sub-section (1) of section 19 or a member of a Local 
Board nominated under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of 
section 21, by nomination in consultation with the Reserve 
Bank: 
Provided that where the duration of the vacancy in the 
office of an elected director or member is likely to be less than 
six months, the vacancy may be filled by the remaining directors 
or members, as the case may be, by co-opting a person not dis-
qualified under section 22.". 
10. After section 31 of the principal Act, the following section Inser-tion of 
35 shall be inserted in Chapter V, namely:- new sec-
tion after 
Iection31. 
u31A. (1) A Local Board shall meet at such time and place Meetings 
and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the trans- of Local 
action of business at its meetings as may be prescribed. Boards. 

8 
(2) All questions at the meeting shall ·be decided by a 
majority of the votes of the members present and in the case of 
equality of votes, the person presiding at the meeting shall have 
a second or casting vote. 
(3) A member who is directly or indirectly concerned or 5 
interested in any contract, loan, arrangement or propOsal en-
tered into or proposed to be entered into byor'on behalf of the 
State Bank, -shall, at the earliest possible opportunity, disclose 
the nature of his interest to the Local Board and shall not be 
present at any meeting of the Local Board when any such CDn- 10 
tract, loan, arrangement or proposal is discussed . unless his 
presence is required by the other members for the purpose of 
'eliCiting information, and no member so required to be· present 
shall vote on any such contract, loan, arrangement or proposal: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall IS 
apply to such member by reason only of his being-
(i) a shareholder (other than a director) holding not 
more than two per cent. of the paid-up capital in any public 
compan~ as de~~ in the Companies Act, 1956;, or ~ny Iof 195':. 
corporabon estabhshed by or under any law for the tIme 2.0 
being in force in India or any co-operative society, with 
which or to which the State Bank has entered into or .made 
or proposes to enter into or make, a contract, loan, arrange-
ment or proposal; or 
(ii) a director ex Officio of the State 'Bank or a director 25 
of a" subsidiary bank. . 
(4) If for any reason neither the president nor the vice-
president is able to be present at a meeting of the· LOC!aI Board, 
any member, other than the secretary .and treasurer, elected by 
the members present from -amongst themselves, shall prealde at 30 
the ineetmg. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained In this sectiOn, the 
chairman, shall preside at any meeting of a Local Board at which 
he is present and in the absence of the chairman, ihe ' vice-
chairmen, if he is a member of the Local Board, shall, whenever 35 
he is present, preside at such meeting.". 
Amend- 11. In section 33 of the Principal Act, in clause (:ri:rb), fCY!' the 
ment of words "seven years", the words "ten years" shall be substituted. 
seetion'SS. 

12. fin seetion 36 of the principal Act, to sub-section (1), the fol- Ametul-
lowing proviso shall be added, namely: _ " mmt ef 
section." 
"Provided that if the balance in the Integration and Deve-
lopment Fund on the date of declaration of any dividends by the 
State Bank is rupees five crores or more, no amount shall the paid 
into tbat Fund under clause (4) and the dividends payable to 
the Reserve Bank shall be paid to that Bank; and if such balance 
on such date is less than rupees five crores, only so much of the 
dividends then payable as will bring such balance to rupees five 
10 crores shall be paid into that Fund and the balance of such divi-
dends shall be paid to the Reserve Bank.". 
13. In section 41 of the principal Act, in clause (a) of sub-secUon Amend-
(7), for the words "a true and correct view", the words "a true and lDeDt of 
fair view" shall be substituted. MetlGD '1. 
15 14. Section 43 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub- Amen£-
section (1) thereof and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the me:t ~ 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- lee on • 
"(2) The officers, advisers and employees of the State Bank 
shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be 
ao entrusted or delegated to them by the Central Board.". 
30 
15. Section 48 of the principal Act shall be omitted. Omiuloa 
af HC-
tion 41. 
16. In section 50 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2) ,- Amend-
(a) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, :.:~:~. 
namely:-
"(d) the powers, functions and duties of Local Boards 
and the restrictions, conditions or limitations, if any, subject 
to which they may !be exercised or performed, the formation 
and constitution of Local Committees (including the num-
ber of members of any such Committee) and o£ committees 
of Local Boards, the powers, functions and duties of such 
Committees, the holding of meetings of Local Committees and 
committees of Local Boards and the conduct of. business 
thereat;"; 
(b) in clause (f), after the words "the Central Board" the 
words "or of Local Boards" shall be inserted; 
(c) c18use (h) shall be omitted. 

to 
spec{li IT:When the Cel*al'BODd 'is recoDltituted for the erR -time 
PtovWons under the provisions of section 19 of the principal Act a amended by 
as to this Act,-
directors. 
Vacation 
of oftlce 
by mem-
~l"i of 
Local 
Boalda. 
(a) the chairman and the vice-chairman of the Central 
Board and the managing directors of the State Bank holding . S 
office as such immediately before such recunstitution shall con-
tinue to hold their respective offices after such reconstitution for 
the unexpired portion of the term of their office; -
(b) all the directors of 'the Central Board deemed to be 
elected under the proviso to clause (c) of sub-sectton (1)0£ sec- to 
tion 19 of the principal Act or nominated under elause (d) of 
that sub-section and holding office as such immediately before 
such reconstitution shall be deemed to have vacated their res-
pective offices on such reconstitution; and the remaining direc-
tors elected under clause (c), and the dil'eetors nominated·under IS 
clauses (e) and (f). of the said sub-section (1) ahall continue to 
-hold office after sw.ch reconstitution until their SuecetsOl'S are 
duly elected under clause (c) or, as the case may be, nomtnated 
under clauses (e) and {f), of sub..section (1) of section 19'01 the 
principal Act as amended by this Act. 20 
18. On the reconstitution of any Local Board for the first time 
under the principal Act as amended by this Act, all members of that 
Local Board holding oftice under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 21 of the prindpal Act or elected or nominated under c1auae (b) 
of that sub-section and holding office as such immediately before as 
such reconstitution, shall be deemed to have vacated their offices on. 
such recoRStitutiOn. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
, The busineesand activities of the State Bank of India have 
in~ vt:ry consid~rably, since the !bank was established on the 
1st, July, 1955. It is, therefore, considered desirable that provision 
should be made for facilitating the creation of a larger number of 
local head offi.ces, for certain changes in the compOsition of the Cen-
tral and Local Boards of the !bank and for v~ting ~e specific 
pow:ers ~ the Local Boards so as to enable ,the bank to dispose of its 
business expeditiously and to imprQve the iquauty of its services 
generally. 
2. AD integration an~ d~velQP11lent fund was created in 1955 for 
~ing, the Q~ve1opment activities of the 'bank. As the '!balance in 
the, fund is now adequate, it is proposed to moctify the relevant pro-
visions of the Act, so as to limit the accumulation in the 'fund at any 
, ' 
time to a sum of Rs. 5 crores. 
3. The notes on clauses explain the various provisions of the bill. 
NEW Da.m: T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
The 18th ,December, 1963. 
11 

:~~II.I"""".FFZ ....... m' ........ 
Note, on ClGuse, 
Clause 3 provides for the revised constitution of the Central 
Board. It is proposed that apart from the Chainnan, the Vice-Chalr-
man, two Managing Directors and one representative each of the 
Reserve Bank. and the Central Government--. ... 
(i) the Presidents of ell Local Boards which have been or 
may be constituted should become Directors of. ·the Central 
Board by virtue of their oIRce, 
(ii) there should be not less than two 'and not more than 
four Directors to be elected by shareholders other than Reserve 
Bank of India whose names are borne 011 the principal ;register 
(as against six directors who are elected at present from the 
various branch registers), and 
(iii) there should be not less than two and not more than 
six directors to be nominated by Central Government in place 
of eight directors who are nominated at present. 
As the elected memlbers of the Central Board will be chosen in 
future from the principal register, the number of local head offices, 
or of branch registers maintained at such offices, will not in future 
be relevant for the purposes of the constitution of the Central Board 
or for periodical elections to it and there will in consequence be no 
implied limit to the number of local head offices which may be 
constituted from time to time. 
t:'lame 4 provides for a consequential amendment to section 20 
and for the rotation of the directors nominated on the re-constitution 
of the Central Board for the first time after the commencement of 
the amended Act. 
Clause 5" provides for the revised constitution of the Local Boards. 
A Local Board, after re-organisation, will (apart from the members 
of the Central Board who are also members of the Local Board) 
consist of eight members Instead of four as at present. Six mem-
bers will be nominated by the Cen.tral Government and one member 
" 
13 

I3 
wnr be elected by shareholders whose 'names are entered on the 
concerned branch ft'gister (as against three nominated members and 
one elected member QS provided fot: at present). The Secretary and 
Treasurer of the Local Head Office, by virtue of his office, will also 
beamember of the Local Board. As the Chairman of the State 
Bank may !lot attend all meetings of Local Board, a President will 
be appointed for every Local Board by the Governor of Reserve 
Bank from the loeal elected or nominated members of the Board. 
Clause 6 seeks to insert three new sectiOns, namely sections' 21A, 
2lB and 2le, which respectively provide for the term of office of the 
members of Local Board, the powers of Local Board and the consti-
tution of Local Committees. In order to provide for the expeditious 
disposal of the business of the bank, the powers of Local Boards are 
proposed to be increased, particularly in so far as the grant of loans 
and advances is concerned. 
Clauses 7 to 10 provide for consequential amendments as a 
result of the provision for the re-constitution of the Local Boards. 
Clause i1 seeks to amend section 33 (xixb) so as to permit the 
State Bank to grant term loans to industrial or commercial units, 
which may be generally approved for this purpose by the Central 
Board, for periods upto ten years (instead of seven years as . at 
present). 
Clause 12 amends section 36. When the State Bank of India was 
established, provJiion was made for the dividends declared by that 
bank, and due to be paid to the Reserve Bank of India, 'to be credited 
(so far as these dividends relate to 55 per cent of the share capital 
of the State Bank of India, which is the minimum required to be 
held by the Reserve Bank of India at any time) to an integration and 
development fund. This fund was intended and has been utilised 
for financing the development activities of the bank. As the amount 
available in this fund' is now considered to be adequate, it is no 
longer necessary to continue the provision for the dividends in ques-
tion to Ibe credited unconditionally or for an indefinite period to the 
fund. It is, therefore, proposed that if the credit balance in the 
fund at the time of the declaration of any future dividend by the 
State Bank is Rs. 5 crores or more, the dividends due to the Reserve 
Bank, on the compulsory minimum holding of shares, should be paid 
to the Reserve Bank, instead of being credited to the fund. 
Clauses 13 to 75. The amendments proposed are of a clariftcatory 
or drafting nature. 

14 
eza..-,If-providea for ~ eouequential IDMdldmellt. to MO-
_.5Q of. the Stat.e·Bak·ollDdla Act which deralI ~ ~tioDI. 
for- Ji~! eft. to the provi&ioDs of the A«. 
. CkluN, 17 providea for the COIlt1nuance in ofBce· of. the Cb.b:",·n, 
Vice Chairman and Man.'ging Direct.o1'8 of the ~ aDd for the. 
vacation of their ofllce by the directors of the Central Board of the 
Bank ,other· than thoee representing the Reserve Bank udtbe Ceo.· 
tnl Government so as to faollitate the recoDSt.itutipn of the Central 
~ UDder. the amended. pt'OVisioa. 

Qause 18, of the Bm teeks to amend section 6O·of the Act -which 
empowers the Central Board to make regulations for the-'Purpose of 
giving effect to the provisions of the Act. The matters in respect 
of which such regulations may be made have been speci1led In the 
Aid section. The amendment to ·the lIection is being proposed with 
a view to enable the Central Board to prescribe inter ali4 the res-
triCtions, conditions or 11m1tations, if iny, 'subject to Which the 
powers, functions and duties of Local Boards may be exeretsed· 'or. 
-performed, and the number of members -of Local Committees. These 
~ ... 'matters of a routine or' 'tiIministrative nature. The -de1eptlon 
of 1egJ8Iative powenis thus of a normal charaeter . 
•• 

Composi-
tion Of 
the Cen-
tralBoard 
" 
ANNJ!:~E 
E~ FROM THE STATE BANK OF INDIA At:r. 1955 (23 or 1955) 
. '. ., . . . -
• 
f 
• 
CHAPTER V 
MANAGEMENT 
'. . • • 
19. (1) The Central Board shall consist of ihe followilig, 
namely:-
"(0) a chairman 'and a vice-chairman to be appointedby' 
the Central Government in consultation, with the Reserve 'Bank' 
and after consideration, except in the· case of first appointment:., 
of the recommendations made by the Central Board in that 
behalf; 
• • • • • 
(c) six directors to be elected in the prescribed manner 
by the shareholders, other than the Reserve Bank, whose names 
are entered in the various branch registers: 
Provided that if the total amount of the holdings of all 
such shareholders on any branch register three months before 
the date fixed for election is below two and a half per cent. 
of the total issued capital, all the directors to be elected Iby the 
shareholders on that register shall be nominated by the Reserve 
Bank, and such directors shall, for the purposes of this Act, be 
deemed to be directors elected under this clause; 
(d) eight directors to be nominated by the Central Gov-
emment in consultation with the Reserve Bank to represent, 
as far as possible, territorial and economic interests and in such 
manner that not less than two of them have special knowledge 
of the 'working of co-operative institutions and of rural economy 
and the others have experience in commerce, industry, banking 
or finance; 
• • • • 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clauses (b) and (c) 
of sub-section (1), on the first constitution of the Central Board all 
the directors referred to in the said clauses shall be appointed by 
the Central Government, and the directors so appointed shall, for 
the purposes of this Act, be deemed to have been appointed or 
elected. as the case may be, within the meaning of the said claUI8& 
16 

17 
(3) All directors of the Central Board first constituted, other 
than the chairman, vice-chairman and managing directors, shall 
retire at the expiry of two years from the appointed day. 
ZOo (l) • • • • • Term of 
. . oftlce of 
(2) A managmg director shall hold offtce for such term, not chairman, 
exceeding five years as the Central Board or, in the case of the manqlng 
first two appointments, the Central Govemment, may fix when ap- director. 
pointing him, and shall be eligible for reappointment. etc . 
• • • • • • 
(5) The following provisions shall have effect in relation to 
directors electeci or nominated to the Central Board after the ex-
piration of two years from the appointed day:-
(i) out of the six directors elected under clause (c) of sub-
section (1) of section 19, two shall retire at the end of one year, 
two at the end of two years and two at the end of three years 
from such expiration; 
(ii) out of the eight directors nominated under clause (d) 
of sub-section (1) of section 19, two shall retire at the end of 
one year, two at the end of two years, two at the end of 
three years and two at the end of four years from such ex-
piration; " 
(iii) the directors to retire at the end of each year under 
clauses (i) and (ii) shall be determined by lot. 
ZL (1) There shall be constituted at each place where the State Local 
Bank has a local head oftlce, a Local Board which shall consist of the Boards 
following members, nam.ely:- and Local 
Commlt-
(4) all the directors elected or nominated to the Central leeR. 
Board under clause (c) or clause (d) of ,ub-eection (1) of 
section 19 and ordinarily resident in the area served by the 
branch register of the local head oftlce; and 
(b) such number not exceeding four to ·be elected by the 
shareholders whose names are entered on the branch register 
or nominated by the Central Government in consultation with 
the Reserve Bank as may be prescribed. 
(2) A local Committee may be constituted by the Central Board 
far any area conaisting of IlUCh nmnber of members as it may 
determine. 
(.2A) The chairman e~ officio shall be a member of every Local 
Board and Local Committee constituted under this section. 

;~'f 
;; 
Dilquall-
ftcaUoaa 
for direc-
torship of 
Central 
Boud. or 
'member-
ship of 
Local 
Boards or 
Com-
mittees. 
"' 
Removal 
from 
oftlee of 
dJI'eclors, 
etc. 
CUual 
vaeancies. 
._., 
18 
(3) A Local Board and a Local Committee shall exercise such 
powers and perform such fu.nctiona and duties as the Central Board 
may assign to the LoCal Board or Local Committee. 
22. (1) No person shall be qualifted to be a directOr of Ute 
Central Board or a member of a Local Board or of a Local Com-
mittee if-
• • • • • 
(d) he holds any oftl.ce of profit under the State Bank other 
than the office of chairman, vice-chairman, managing director, 
or legal or technical adviJer; or 
* • • • • 
(h) in the case of an elected director, he is not registered 
as a holder in his own right of unencumbered sbues in the 
State Bank of a nominal value of at least five thousand rupees 
and in the case of an elected member of a nominal value of at 
least one thousand rupees: 
Provided that in the case of a director or member deemed 
to' have been elected to the Central Board or a Local Board, as 
the case may be, on its first constitution, the disqualification 
mentioned in clause (h) shall not operate fOr a period of six 
months from his ibecoming such director or member. 
* • • • 
24. (I) • • • • 
(3) The Central Government, after consulting the Reserve Bank, 
may remove from oftlce any director nominated UDder clause (d) of 
sUb-section (1) of -section 19 and nominate in his stead another per-
son to fUl the vacancy. 
15. (1) * • 
(2) Where any vacancy occurs before the expiry of the tenn 
of oftlce of a director, other than the chalnnan. Yiee-ehairman or a 
managing director, the vacancy shall be ftlled-
(a) in the case of an elected direetor, by election; and 
(b) in the case of a director nom ta ate«i. UDder c}auae (4) 
of sub-section (1) of lleCtton 19, by nominattonin coasultatfon 
with the Reaerve Bank: 

19 
Provided that where the duration of the vacancy in the office of 
an elected director is likely to be less than six months, the vacancy 
may be ft11ed by the rentaining directors by co-opting a pel"llOn not 
disqualified under section. 22. 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER VI 
BUSINESS OF TID STATE BANK 
• • • • 
33. Subject to the other proVISIons contained in this Act, the Other 
Stat~ Bank may carry on and transat't any of the following kinds busineBe 
of business, namely: - wh1eh the 
State Bank 
• • • • • 
(mb) the advancing or lending of money to persons 
engaged in such industries or classes of industries or in such 
business or trade or classes of business or trade as may be 
specified by the Central Board by directions issued in this be-
half, for any period in excess of six months but not exceeding 
seven years, and subject thereto and to such directions as may 
be issued by the Central Board, such advance or loan may be 
made en such terms and conditions and upon such security 
(including the security of any immovable property) as the 
State Bank may deem fit; 
• • • • 
CHAPrER VII. 
Ftnms, ACCOUNTS AND AU_IT 
may trans-
act. 
38. (J) The State Bank shall maintain a special fwld to be known Int8lra-
as the In~ation and Development lI'und into which shall be lion and 
paid- . Develop-
ment 
(0) the dividends payable to the Reserve 8aD.k on such 
shares of the State Bank held by it IS do not exaeed ftfty-five 
per cent, of the total issued capital; and 
(b) such contributions as'the Reserve Bank or the Centnl 
. Go,vemment may make from time to time. 
• • • • • 
Fund. 

Audit. 
Power to 
relDDYe 
cWkul-
ties. 
Power of 
-20 
'" '" '" '" '" 
(7) The auditors shall make a report to the Central Govern-
ment upon the annual balance sheet and accounts, and in every 
such report they shall state-
(0) whether, in their oplnlOn, the balance sheet is a full 
and fair balance sheet cOilltaining all the necessary particulars 
and properly drawn up so as to exhibit a true and correct view 
of the aftairs of the State Bank, and in case they have called 
for any explanation ~r information, whether it has been given 
and whether it is satisfactory; 
'" '" '" • • 
CHAPI'ER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
'" • • • • 
48. The Central Government may, for the pwpoee of removing 
any difticulties, particularly in relation to transition from the pr~ 
visions of the Imperial Bank of India Act, 1920, to the provisions 47 of 19~. 
of this Act, by order, direct that this Act shall, during sUch period 
as may be specified. in such order, have effect subject to .. ell ada~ 
tations, whether by way of modification, addition or omission, as 
it may deem. expedient: 
Provided that no such. order altall be made after the expiry of 
one year from the appointed day. 
. . '" '" '" 
so. (I) • '" '" '" '" 
=~ (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
makeregu- foregoing power, such"'regulations may provide for-
lations. • • • • • • 
(d) the number of electecl or nominated member. of Local 
Board and Local Committees, the terms of oalee of the mem-
bers, the manner of their election or nomination, the formation 
and constitution of committees of Local Boardl, the powers, 
functions and duties of Local Boards, Local Committees and 
committees of Local Boards, the holding of meeting. of Local 

Boards, Local Committees and committees of Local Boards and 
the conduct of business thereat; 
" ... • • • • 
(f) the manner in which the business of the Central Board 
shall be transacted and the procedure to be followed at the 
meetings thereof; 
• • • • • • 
(h) the delegation of powers and functions ·of the Central 
Board to the vice-chairman, the managing directors or other 
directors or officers or other employees of the State Bank; 
... ... ... ... • 

LOK SABHA 
It. 
B~ 
further to amend the State Bank of India Act, 1955. 
(Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, 
Minister of Finance.) 