'2 of 197 •• 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
) 0 .fU'- 1997 
Bill No. 63 of 1981 
THE CONSERVATION OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE AND PREVENTION 
OF SMUGGLING ACTIVITIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1987 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention 
of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Conservation of Foreign Exchange 
and Prevention of Smuggling Activities (Amendment) Act, 1987. 
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 2nd day of July, 
Short 
title and' 
com-
mence-
ment. 
10 
1987. 
2. In the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Amend-
Smuggling Activities Act, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as the principal ment ot 
Act), in section 9, in sub-section (1) ,- section 9-. 
(a) for the figures, letters and words "31st day of July, 1987", 
the figures, letters and words "31st day of July, 1990" shall be 
substituted; . 
(b) in Explanation 1, in clauSe (i) and(ii) for the words "the , , 
States of Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra and Tamil Nlldu 

Repeal 
and 
saving. 
2 
and the Union territories of Goa, Daman and Diu and Pondicherry", 
the words "the States of Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Maha-
rashtra and Tamil Nadu and the Union territories of Daman and 
Diu and Pondicherry" shall be substituted. 
I 
3. (1) The Cpnservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of S Ord. 4 of 
Smuggling Activities (Amendment) Ordinance, 1987 is hereby repealed. J987. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be 
deemed to have been done Or taken under the principal Act, as amended 
by this Act. 10 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling 
Activities Act, 1974 provides for p~ventive detention of persons in 
certain cases for the purposes of conservation and augmentation of 
foreign exchange and for prevention of smuggling activities. 
2. Section 9 of the Act deals with the detention of any person who 
is engaged in smuggling activities in areas highly vulnerable to smuggling 
and such areas have been indicated in the section itself. Under the pro-
visions of this section, detentions made for activities committed in such 
areas can be up to a maximum period of two years if a declaration is 
made under that section while for detentions for such activities com-
mitted in other areas, the maximum period of detention under the Act 
will be for a period of one year only. This section, however, could apply' 
only in respect of detention orders made before the 31st of July, 1987. 
A comparative analysis of the figures in regard to seizures of contraband 
goods effected in the said highly vulnerable areas during the last three 
y~ars had revealed that the menace of smuggling has not abated in any 
way in the said areas. The longer period of detention for a period of 
two years under this section has, however, proved to be a deterrent effect 
on these smugglers and this provision had also been effectively used in 
combating smuggling activities in these bighly vulnerable areas. It was, 
therefore, considered D;ecessary to continue the provisions of this section 
even in respect of detention orders which may be passed after 31-7-1987. 
Accordingly, the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of 
Smuggling Activities (Amendment) Ordinance, 1987 was promulgated 
by the President on the 2nd July, 1987 to continue the provisions of section 
9 of the Act for a further period of th~e years beyond 31st July, 1987. 
3. This Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance 
NEW DELHI; BRAHM DUTT 
The 14th July, 1987. 
3 

Cases iw. 
which and 
circum_ 
stances 
under 
which 
per80~ 
may be 
detained 
tor 
period! 
longer 
than 
three 
montha 
without 
obtaining 
the 
opiniOn: 
otAdvi-
lOry 
Board. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CoNSERVATION OF FOREIGN ExCHANGE AND PREVENTION 
OF SMUGGLING AcTIVITIES ACT, 1974 
_ (52 OF 1974) 
• • • • • 
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any person 
(including a foreigner) in respect of whom an order of detention is 
made under this Act at any time before the 31st day of July, 1937, may 
be detained without obtaining, in accordance with the prOvisions of 
sub-clause (a) of clause (4) of article 22 of the Constitution, the opinion 
of an Advisory Board for a period longer than three months but not 
exceeding six !Ilonths from the,date of his detention, where the order of 
detention has been made against such person with a view to preventing 
him from smuggling goods or abetting the smuggling of goods or 
engaging in transporting or concealing or keeping smuggled goods and 
the Central Government or any officer of the Central Government, not 
below the rank of an Additional Secretary to .that Government, specially 
empowered for the purposes of this section by that Government, is 
satisfied that such person-
(a) smuggles or is likely to smuggle goods into, out of or through 
any area highly vulnerable to smuggling; or 
(0) abets or is likely to ahiet the smuggling of goods into, out of 
or through any area highly vulnerable to smuggling; or 
(c) engages or is likely to engage in transporting or concealing 
or keeping smuggled goods in any area highly vulnerable to 
smuggling, 
and makes a declaration to that effect within five weeks of the detention-
of such person. . 
Explanation I.-In this sub-section, "area highly vulnerable tv 
smuggling" means-
(i) the Indian customs waters contiguous to the States of 
Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu and the 
tTnion territories of Goa, Daman and Diu and Pondicherry; 
(ii) the inland area fifty kilometres in width from the coast 
of India falling within the territories of the States of Gujarat, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu and the Union 
territories of Goa, ~aman and Diu and Pondicherry; 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
.further to amend the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention 
of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974. 
Shri Brahm Dutt, 
(Minister of State in the Ministry of Finanoo) 