BUI Ro. 88 01 Ina 
THE PRISONERS (ATTENDANCE IN COURTS) 
lULL, 1953 , 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THE PUPLE) 
A 
BILL 
to provide jor the attendance oj prisoners in courts and jor obtaining 
, their evidence therein. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Short title, extent and commencement.-(l) This Act may be 
called the Prisoners (Attendance in Courts) Act, 1953. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir.' 5 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. Deftnltlons.-In this Act,-
(a) 'prison' includes-
(i) any place which has been declared by a State 10 
Government, by general or special order, to be a subsidiary 
jail; and 
(ii) any reformatory, Borstal institution or other institu-
tion of a like nature; 
(b) 'State Government', in relation to a Part C State, means 15 
the Lieutenant Governor or, as the case may be, the Chief 
Commissioner of that State. 
3. Power of courts to require appearance of prisoners to dYe 
evidence or answer a charge.-(l) Any civil or criminal court may, 
if it thinks that the evidence of any person confined in any prison 20 

2 
IS material. in any matter pending before it, make an order in the 
form set forth in the First Schedule, directed to .the officer in charge 
of the prison: 
5 Provided that no civil court shall make an order under this sub-
section in respect of l! person confined in a prison situated outside 
the State in which therourt is held. 
(2) Any criminal court may, if a charge of an offence against a 
person confined in any prison is made or pending before it, make an 
10 order in the form set forth in the Second Schedule, directed to the 
officer in charge of the prison. 
(3) No order made under this section by a civil court which is 
subordinate to a district judge shall have effect unless it is counter-
signed by the district judge; and no order made under this section 
15 by a criminal court which is inferior to the court of a magistrate of 
the first class shall have effect unless it is countersigned by the 
district magistrate to whom that court is subordinate or within the 
local limits of whose jurisdiction that court is situate. 
(4) For the purposes of sub-section (3), a court of small causes 
20 outside a presidency town or the city of Hyderabad shall be deemed 
to be subordinate to the district judge within the local limits of 
whose jurisdiction such court is situate. 
4. Power of state Government to exempt certain persons from 
operation of section 3.-(1) The State Government may, having re-
gard to the matters specified in sub-section (2), by general or spe~ial 
25 order, direct that any person or class of persons shall not be removed 
from the prison in which he or they may be confined, and thereupon 
so long as any such order remains in force, the provisions of section 3 
shall not apply to such person or class of persons. 
(2) Before making an order under sub-section (1), the State Gov-
30 emment shall have regard to the following matters, namely:-
·(a) the nature of the offence for which or the grounds on. 
which the person or class of per~ons is detained in prison; 
(b) the likelihood of the disturbance of public order if the 
person or class of persons is allowed to be removed from the 
35 prison; 
(c) the public interest, generally. 
5. Prisoners to be brought up.-Upon delivery of any order 
made under section 3 to the officer-in-charge of the prison in which 
the person named therein is confined, that officer shall cause him to 
40 be taken to the court in which his attendance is required, so as to be 
present in the court at the time in such order mentioned, and shall 
cause him to be detained in custody in or near the court until he has 
been examined or untJI the judge or presiding officer of the court 
authorises him to be taken back to the prison in which he was confined. 
45 6. Oftlcer In charge of prison when to abstain from carrybla' out 
onler.-Where the person in respect of whom an order is made 
under section 3-
So 
(a) is, in accordance with the rules made in this behalf, 
declared to be unfit to be removed from the prison where he is 
confined by rea~n of sickness or other infirmity; or 
J" I .... 

:~ 
(b) is under committal for trial; or 
(c) is under remand pending trial or PHlding a preliminary 
investigation; or 
(d) is in custody for a period which would expire before the 
expiration of the time required for removing him under this Act ~ 
and for taking him back to the prison in which he is confined; 
the officer in charge of the prison shall abstain from carrying out 
the order and shall send to the court from \\ hich the order had been 
issued a statement of reasons for so abstaining: 
Provided that such officer as aforesaid shall not so abstain where- 10 
(i) the order has been made by a criminal court; and 
(ii) the person named in the order is confined under commit-
, tal for trial or under remand pending trial or pending a prelimi-
nary mvestigation and is not declared in, accordance with the 
rules made in this behalf to be unfit to be removed from the IS 
prison where he is confined by reason of sickness or other 
infirmity; and 
(iii) the-place, where the evidence of the person named in 
the order is required, is not more than five miles distant from 
the prison in which he is confined. 20 
'I. Commissions for examination of prisoners.-In any of the 
following cases, that is to say,--
(a) where it appears to any civil court that the evidence of 
a person confined in a prison is material in any matter pending 
before it and that the attendance of such person in court cannot be 2S 
secured by reason of the provisions of section 6 or of an order 
under section 4 or of the district judge declining under sub-
section (3) of section 3 to counter-sign an order for removal; Qr 
(b) where it appears to any civil court as aforesaid that the 
evidence of a person confined in a prison which is situated out- 30 
side the State ;in which, or is more than fifty miles distant from 
the place at which, such court is held is material in any such 
'matter; 
the court may, if it thinks fit, issue a commission under the provisions 
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908) for the examina- 3S 
tion of the person in the prison in which he is confined. 
8. Certain provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure &ad the 
Code of Clvll Procedure to apply.-Save as otherwise provided in 
this Act and any rules made thereunder, the provisions of the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908) and the Code of Criminal 40 
Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898), as the case may be, shall, so far as 
may ue, apply in relation to the examination on commission or other-
wise of any person confined in a prison as they apply in relation to 
the examination on commission of any other person. 
9. Power to make rules.-(l) The State Govern,ment may, by 4S 
notifica'tion in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the 
'vurposes of this Act. I' , 

s 
10 
15 
20 
4 
. (2). I,n particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregomg power, such rules may provide for-
(a) the procedure for obtaining the countersignature of an 
order made under section 3; , 
(b) the authority by whom and the manner in which a 
declaration that a person confined in prison is unfit to be remov-
ed therefrom, may be made; 
(c) the conditions, including payment of costs and charges. 
subject to which an order made under section 3 by a civil court 
may be executed; 
• (d) the manner in which a process directed against any person 
confined in a prison issued from any court may be served upon 
him; 
(e) the escort of prisoners to and from courts in which their 
attendance is required and for their custody during the periO& 
of such attendance; 
(f) the amount to be allowed for the costs and charges of such 
escort; and 
(g) the guidance of officers in all other matters connected 
with the enforcement of this Act. .. 
10. Repeal.-(l) Part IX of the Prisoners Act, 1900 (III of 1900) 
and the First and Second Schedules to the said Act are hereby re-
pealed. 
(~) If immediately before the commencement of this Act, there 
2S is in force in any Part B State to which this Act extends any law 
corresponding to the provisions of this Act, that law shall, in so far 
as it relates to matters dealt with in this Act, stand repealed on such 
commencement: ' 
Provided that anything done or any action taken under any such 
30 law shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corres-
35 
ponding provisions of this Act and shall continue to have eftect ac- I 
cordingly, unless and unUI superseded by anything done or any .. 
action taken under this Act. 
, 
Court of 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See sub-section (1) of section 3] 
To the officer in charge of the ............... (State name of prison). 
You are hereby required to produce , now a prisoner in 
under safe and sure conduct before the Court of at 
40 on the day of next by of the 
clock in the forenoon of the sa~e day, there to give ev~dence in a 
matter now pending before the sa.ld court. and after t~e sald. .of 
bas then and there given hlS eVldence before the said Court or the 

6 
said Court has dispensed with his further attendance, cause him to 
be conveyed under safe and sure conduct back to the priso~. 
The day of 
A.B. 
(Countersigned) ,C.D. 5 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[S~ sub-section (2) of section 3] 
Court of 
To the officer in charge of the .................. (State name of prison) 
You are hereby required to produce , now a prisoner in 10 
• under safe and sure conduct before the Court of . 
at on the day of next by of the 
clock in the forenoon of the same day. there to answer a char$e now 
pending before the said Court, and after such charge has been dlsposed 
of or the said Court has dispensed with his further attendance, caus€' IS 
him to be conveyed under safe and sure conduct back to the said prison. 
The day of 
A.B. 
(Contersigned) C.D. 

.. 6 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Part IX of the Prisoners Act, 1900, deals with the attendance of 
prisoners and obtaining their evidence in courts. Some of the pro-
visions in this Part for securing- the attendance of a prisoner in court 
to give evidence or to stand his trial, are cumbersome and result in 
avoidable delay in the trial of criminal cases and in needless 
detention of prisoners who are already under trial. 
• The Bill seeks to simplify the procedure for securing the attend-
ance of prisoners in courts by repealing Part IX of the Prisoners 
Act and re-enacting its provisions with suitable modifications as a 
separate law while extending at the same time the provisions of this 
law to the whole of India except Jammu and Kashmir. The Bill 
provides that any civil or criminal court may, if it thinks that the 
evidence of any person confined in any prison is material in respect 
of any matter pending before it, make an order in the prescribed 
. form and send that order direct to the officer-in-charge of tbe prison 
who will be required to comply with it. It will not be necessary, 
as at ,present, to send such an order to the district or sub-divisional 
magistrate ,of the area where the prison is situated or to the Gov-
ernment of the State if the prisoner is in a different State. No civil 
court may, however, make an order in respect. of a person confined in 
a prison situate outside the State in which the court is held. In such 
cases, a commission may suffice. The Bill also provides (as in section 
43 of the present Act) that in certain circumstances and subject to 
certain exceptions the officer-in-charge of the prison may abstain from 
carrying out the order, as for example, where the prisoner is unfit to 
be :t;'emoveci by reason of sickness or other infirmity or is under com-
mittal for trial or is in custody for a period which would expire before 
the date on which he is required to be produ-ced before the court. 
K. N. KATJU. 
NEW DELHI; 
!,he 5th December, 1953. 

• 
HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE . ' 
A 
BILL. 
to provide for the attendance of prisoners in courts and for 
obtaining their evidence therein . 
• 
(Shri Kazlas Nath Katju, 
M,inister jor Home Affairs.) 
G IPD-~.s P8-12-12-53-17oo . 