54 of 1 ... 
As llftW)Dt1CID m Lox SAIaA 
~i 
_No. 63 olt98,2, 
THE MONOPOLm3 AND RESTRlCTfVE TRADE PRACTICES 
(AMJIMDME'NT) . BILL, 1982 
A 
BILL 
fu,Tther to amend the Monopolies and Restrictive Tf'aie Practices Act, 1989. 
Ba it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic 
of India as follows;-
L .(1) This Act may be called the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade 
Practices (Amendment) Act, 1982. 
5 (I) It ahaU come into foroe on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Ofticial Gazette, appoint. . 
abort 
title 
and com· 
!Deuce-
ment. 
a. In section 2 of the Monopolies and Bestrictive Trade 
Act, 1989' . (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act).-
~actlces Amend· 
10 
... (a) in cl&U18 (d),-
,(') for the portion beJimring with the warda' ·'dOminant 
uadertaldng" means' and endi!rg with the words "rendered in 
India or any' substantial part thereof:", tbe following shall be 
.1 SUbstituted, nam.e]y:-
I "dOminant undertaking" means-
(i) an undertaking which has all the following three 
features, that. is to 88Y,-
,(eli) it 1& an undertaking within the purview at 
the Industries Act; . 
'(bi) it has a liceJl:ll8d ~~ 1.or the produc .. 
tion of goods of ~ cJ8IMptlioD;, and. 
mentof 
section 2. 

(ei) ita licensed capacity for the production of 
IUCh goods or the aggregate of its licensed capacity, 
ad of the licensed capacity of inter-connectecl ' 
undertakings, for the production of such goods is 
not less than one-fourth of the total installed capa- 5 
city in India for the production of such goods; or 
<ii) an undertaking which has all the following 
three features, that is to say,-
.(Gii). it. is an undertaking within the purview of 
the Industries Act; 10 
.(bii) it, by itaelf or along with inter-connected 
undertakings produces, supplies, distributes or other-
wise controls not less than one-fourth of the total goods 
of any description that are produced, supplied or 
distributed tin India or any substantial part thereof; 15 
and 
(cii) it has no licensed capacity for the produc-
tion of such goodsj or 
.. (iii) an undertaking which has both the following 
,eatures, that _ to say.- flO 
·(aiii) it is not an undertaking within the pur-
view of the Industries Act; and 
(biii) it, by itself or along with inter-cOnnected 
undertakings produces, supplies, distributes or other-
wise controls not lees than ooe-fourth of the total 25 
goods of any description that are produced, supplied 
at: diatributed. in India or any: substantial part there-01· .... . , , -. 
,(w), an undertaking which provides or otherwise 
controls not less than one-fourth of any: services that are 30 
rendered in India or any' substantial part thereof,:' A 
~(ii). in the proviso, for the words "t.hJe clause", the words, 
bncketa and figures "/Rlb-clauses. (ii), and .(iiO, of tbis claJ,lle" 
Ihall be IUbet1tutedi 
.(iii), in E:tpl4n4tion 1, for the words "not less than one-third 35 
ot'. the words "the licensed capacity of inter-connected. under-
takjD., for the production of any goodI is not less than one-
fourth of the installed capacity for the production of such goods 
or not less than one-fourth of" shall be substituted, and for the 
\1rWd8 "any service", the words "any service, 81 the cue may: 40 
be," shall be substituted; 
(itl) for E:tplanation 111, the following Ezp14t14tion shaU be 
IUbsUtuted, namely:-
"E~lanation III.-The question as to whether any 
undertaking, either by itself or along with tnter-connected 45 
undertakings, producea, supplies, distributes or controls one-
fourth of any goods or provides or controle one-fourth of any 
aervba may be determined according. to any of the follow-
m, ctiteria,. namely, value, cost, price, quantity or capacit7" 
of tbe &OOda or eervicea."; So 

1. 
(u) in Explanaticm IV, for the words "In detennintnt', the 
words, brackets and figure. "In determining with reference to 
the features specified in sub-clause (U), (iii) or (tv), as the case 
may be," shall be substituted; . 
(fJ) after clause (e), the foDowing clause shall Pe Inserted, 
namely:- ' 
c (ee) "goods of any description" in relation to an under-
taking within the purview of the Industries Aet, means any 
article which falls under an item in the First Schedule to that 
10 Act;'; 
·(c) after clause (f), the following clauses shall be Inserted. 
nalDely:- I 
c (11) "Industries Act" means 'the 'Industries (Development 
and Regulation) Act, 1951, and includes any rules, notifications or 
orders thereunder; ,.Jre'if ,I 
(Iff) "installed capacity" means installed capacity as recog-
nised under the Industries Act or any returns thereunder;'; 
(d) after clause (g), the following clause shall De'1DJerted, 
namely:- , " , 
110 I (gg) "licensed capacity", in relation to goods of lilly d .. 
cription and with respect to an undertaking within the purview 
of the Industries Act, means the licensed or productive capacity 
of sucll undertaking in relation to such goods, in accordance with 
the certfflcate of registration, licence, letter of intent or permi8-
25 sion granted to it under the Industries Act and includes any in-
crease in such capacity as may be approved by Government 
under that Acti'i 
4~ 
(e) after clause (l), the 'tollowing clause shall be inserted. 
name1y:- I 
I (II) "produce" includes manufacture and an its grammatl. 
cal variations and cognate expressions shall be construed accord-
ingly;'; I " 
(f) after clause (v), the following clause shall be fnserted, 
namely:- I -
, (vv) Ctundertaking within the purview of the Inctustrf-
Act" means an undertaking pertaining to a scheduled tDdUItrJ 
86 defined in that Act;', 
3. In section 21 of the principal Act,-
(4) in sub-section (2), for the E:cp14"atiOft, the following '8~ 
planation sluill be substituted, namely:-
ItEo1'PlcItuJtion.,-For the purposes of this sectiOD, .. under-
taking shall be deemed to expand substantially in my manner tt, 
as a result of such expansfon,-
(a) in the case cit an undertakin/i!' withfn the purview of 
the Industries Act and having a licensed capaclty for tbe 
production of goods, of any description, there would be _ 
increue of such U~ensed capacity by not 1_ thaa tw..tJ-
five per cent. thereof; ~ 
~ 
lDIIltal 
""'-.r. 

, '\ 
po.-." 
eD' C" 
.. 
, (b) in the case of an Ul1dartaJdag to which clause "(b)' 
of section 20 appiUes but to which clause (s) of this B~14111&­
tMm', dees not apply, the production, marketing, supply, dis-
tribution or control of any goods or the provision of any 5' 
Bervices would increaae by, ,not less thantwenty-ftve per eent. 
of the goods produced, marketed, suppUed, distrtbutea or 
Controlled, or services provided, by it immediately before such 
ftpUlsfon; ,; , --
(e) in the case df any other undertaldng,-r 
, 10 
(i) it would have additional assets of a value of not 
Ie. thaD. twenty-ftve, per eent. of the value of fts assets' 
immediately 'before such expansion; or 
'(U) tlieproduetion, marketi,n/!. supply, distribution 
or control of any goods or the ~roviston of any services 
would Increase by not less than twenty-five per cent. of IS 
the goods ~ .oduced, maTketed. supplied, ' distributed or 
eontrolled, or services provided, by it immediately before 
such expansion."; -' -
(b) for sub-section (4)', tlie following sub-section man be 
substituted, namely: _ 20 
, 
• (4) Nothing, in this section shall aPOlv to any undertaldng 
,.in' so 'far as the expaDSion i8 effected by the replacement, 
, renovation or modernisation of the whol. or any l'8rt of the 
maehtnery or other equipment of the undertaking or by the 
in~anation of any b;tlanclng equipment. 15 
.E~7UItion.-II'or the purposes of this sub-section ''balancfng 
equipment" means any equipment or device needed for removing 
any production bottle-neck, and includes the installation of any 
equipment 01" device in the tool room, ancillary seniees or 
inspection department where such installation has a bearing on SO 
the quantum and quality of production to be scbieveii'. 
4. In section 22 of the principal Act. in sUb-section (1), fM. the words, 
brackets. letter and filtUres "to which clause (a) of section 20 applieff', 
the words "to whfch this Part applies" shall be substituted. 
S. After seet10n 22 of the prindpal Act, the following section shall be 95 
inserted, namely:- ~ ·"'-Tl'.""W'-· 
'22A.. (J) The Central Govemment may, py notiflcation in t1ie 
Oftlclal Gazettp. _ direct that tub1ect to suel\ terms and condftloflS 
as may be specifted in the notiftcation all or an" df the provtafcms of 
.1I«tfcm 21 or sectlon 22 shall not apply to any propoaal_ - 40 
-(a) in respect of an industry or set"\tice speci1leCl in tJie noti-
fication: -- - l' '--1~--: 
,Pro9fded that no industry or 8ftVlee shaD be 80 speclftetl 
tDdeIstbe Central Government is 9dt1ed bavtng'regard to an 
~ant faCtors that it is of high naftonalprforlty; ; 41) 

f3 of 1961. 
, 
(b). for the 1nereaae in the production of "any goods or the 
p~on of any services which are meant exelusfve1y for export 
outside India; or 
(c) which relates to an undertaking established or propc.ed 
5 to be estabUshed in a free trade zone. 
10 
20 
E:z:plana.tion.-In this sub-section, "free trade zone" has the 
same meaning as in clause (i) of the Explanation to section lOA of 
tlie Income-tax Act, 1961. 
(2) Every notijication issued under sub-section (1') shall liave 
efJect for such period not eX(:eed.ing five years at a time as may be 
specified in the notification. 
(3) Every notift.cation issued under sub-section (1) .ball be laid. 
as soon as may be after it is. issued, before each House of ParUament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thfrty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more sucCessive sessloDs, and 
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the suceessive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the notification or both Hou. agree that the 
notification should not be made, the notification shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anythmg previously 
done under that notification.'. 

STATEMENT OF OBJ!'.CT! AND KBASQNS 
The question of making comprehensive amendments to.1!he Monapoliea 
Ind Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969, with a view to removing tlie 
lacUnae and the difficulties experienced in its administration is under 
t1ie consideration ot Government. Pending the completion of this exami-
nation, it is considered necessary to make certain amendments in the 
Act with a view to secure some of the socio-eeonomic objeCtives in fuller 
measure and in the context of the need for higher productivity and out-
put, for encouraging exports in the interests of the economy of tlie coun-
try and for removing certain constraints in achieving higher productivity. 
Hence this Bill. 
2. The amendments proposed in the Bill seek to prOvide, among other 
thinp, for the following matters:-
(1) The deftnition of "dominant undertaking" as contained in the 
Act is proposed to be recast into two broad classifleations-one 
coming within the purview of the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951, and the other which is outside. depending on 
whether the provisions of that Act aJ:Qly to such undertakings or not. 
Even in respect of undertakings to which th~ Industries Act applies. 
a distinction is proposed to be made between undertakings whi(!h havp. 
licensed capacity for the Qronuction of certain goods and undertakings 
which have no such licensed capacity. -The dominance in respect of 
undertakings which have a licensed capacltywiU be dl!termined on 
the basis of such lIcensea capacity for any ~ods and the total installed 
capacity of such goods for the whole country. . In respect of under-
takings to which the Industries Act applies but whfchhaVe no 
licensed capacity and in respect of other undertakings to which the 
Industries Act does not aPl?ly, the - existing criteria of dominance 
wouln be applicable. 
(2) It is also proposed to reduce the share of nroduction. supply. 
distribution or control of goods or services which would render 
an undertaking a 'dominant undertaldnJl from one-third to one-
fourtli. In the case of undertakin~ which have a licensed c8t?!lclty. 
dominance will arise if the licensed capacity for any ~oods if! not less 
than one-fourth of the total installed capacity for such goods for the 
whole country. -- --~~i·'''iIII _f~ 
(3) Licensed capacity is also proposed to be made the test for 
;'etermininJl substantial expansion of underlaldnlZ!ll com'np.; within the 
purview of the Industries Act while retainin« the existin~ criterla 
of determining substantial expansion in respect of other under-takings. --l-' "-"'-" ... ,.,..,"", 
(4) To increase production of certain items of hil!b nAtioni'll 
r,Jnoritv and goods which are meant exclul'livelv for eYPOl't outside 
1ndil'l. it is proposed to empower the Central Government to e:ocemnt, 
bv notification, certain industries. services 0'1" undertakinm:; from 
obtaininp; approval under the Act" for substantial expansion or for the 
establishment of any new undertakings. 
(5) The other amendment!! included in the Bill are consequen-
tial in nature.' -~-. ,-"" 
~. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectivefl. 
NEW Dam; JAGANNATH KAUSHAL. 
The 22nd Aprlt, 1982. - .. - _.,'- ,- '" 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5 df the Bill, which seeks to insert a new IiCtion 22A in the 
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969, empowers the 
Central Government, by notiftcation in the Official Gazette, to direct. that 
the provisions of section 21 or section 22 of that Act shall not apply' to 
any proposal-
(i) in respect of any indlUtry or service specJ1ied in the noti-
fication if tbe Central Government is satisfied having regard to all 
relevant factors that such industry or service is of high national 
priority; or / 
:(ii) for the increase in the production of any goods or the lA'o-
vision of any services which are meant exclusively for aport OUtside 
India; or 
(iii) which relates to an undertaking established or proposed to 
be established in a free trade zone. 
2. The notifications under this section will be issued by the Central 
Government only after taking into consirleratfon the guidelines indicated 
in the section. Every notification issued will also have eftact only for 
a period not exceeding five years at a time as may be speclfied. in tl1e 
notification. Provision has also been made tor the laying of all such 
nc,tifications before each House Of Parliament. ' 
3. The delegation of legislative power is thus normal in character. 
1 

De8ni-
tioDa. 
~ 
in'RAcrs noM THE UONOPOLDIS AND Rl'aaIC'l'lVJI 'l'RAR ~ Atn, 1969 
(54 01' 1889) 
• • • • •• 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(d) "dominant undertaldng" melDs an undertaking wh1eh either 
by ltse11 or along with tnWr-eolmected undertattnaa,-
.(i) produces, supplies, distributes or otherwise controls Dot 
less than one-third of the total goods or any description that are 
p&'OC:Iueed, supplied or diBtrSb1lted in I:DdIa fir aD.1 substantial 
part thereof. or 
,(U) provides or otbenrile contlow not 1_ thaD one-third 
of any services ~at are ·ftlDdeed iD India fit Illy IIlbltllltfal 
part thereof: 
Provided that for thA purpoM8 of tbla clause, the gooda prod.~ 
by an UDdertaking which doea DOt empIO)--
(CI) more than fifty workers on any day of the relevant 
year, and in any part of which a manufac~1 process is beiDI 
carried on with the· aid of. P,Ower or is ~dJnar1l1 110 carried. on. 
or I 
(b) more than one hundred workers on any day' of the 
relevant year, and in any part of which a manUfacturing pro-
cess is being carried on without the aid of power or is ordiDarlll 
80 carried 0111 
ahall not be taken into account. 
• • • ... • 
~1ana'tion I.-Where not less than one-third of the P.fa. 
duction, supply, distribution or control of 8D1. aoods or the pra. 
.~. : vision or control of any service is shared by tnter-COnDeCted 
UDdertakin.p, each such' undertaldni shall be deemed, !or the 
purposes of this Act, to be a dominant undertaking. 
• • • • • 
E~1anation lll.-Any' undertaking which, either by' itself or 
along with inter-connected und~s, produces, supplies, 
distributea or controls one-third of any "ooda or p'rovi.del or 
controls one-third of any: services according to any' of the follow-
. ing criteria, namely, value, cost, (?rice, quantity. or capacity, of 
the goods or services or the number of workers employed for 
the production, supply t distribution or control of such goods or 
tor the renc:leriJJg of such services, shall be deemed to be a 
dominant undertaldng. 
8 

63 of 1961. 
".. , ........... i _ •. 
'1'.' • 
Explanation IV.-In determining the question as to w~1Ihet 
an undertaking is or is not a dominant undertaking, regard sPiall 
be had to-
(i) the lowest production made, or services render~i by 
the undertaking concerned during the relevant year, an'd 
(ii) the figures published by the Central Govemment 
with regard to the total production made or Ilefvlces 
rendered in India or any substant"al part t.ereof durirlk the 
relevant year . 
• • 
• • • • 
21. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law fl;r the 
time being in force no undertaking shall give effect to any propOlltiU for 
its sub&tantia1 expansion unless such proposal has been approved Hy the 
Central Government. 
Explanation.-For the purpose of this section, an undertaking shall 
be deemed to expand I)ubstantially if, after such expansion,-
;. 
(a) 1n the case of an undertaking to which clause (a) 0'1 st!etion 
20 applies,-
(i) the value of its assets, before the expansion, would 
result in an increase by not less than twenty-five per cent. of 
such vlUue, or 
(ii) the production, supply or distribution of any goods 
or the provision of any services by it before the expansion, would 
result in an increase by not less than twenty-five per Cent. of 
the goods produced, supplied, distributed or controlled, or 
services provided, by it; 
(b) in the case of an undertaking to which clause (b) of section 
20 applies, the production, supply, distribution or control of any 
,oods or the provision of any services by it would result in an 
Increase by not less than twenty-five per cent. of the goods pro-
duced, supplied, distributed or controlled, or services provided, by 
it before the expansion. 
• • • • • 
(4) Nothing in this section shall apply to any industrial undertaking 
(which. is not a dominant undertaking) to which section 13 of the 
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, applies, in 80 far 
as the expansion relates to production of the same or similar type of good!. 
22. (1) No person or authority, other than Government, sha,ll, after 
the commencement of this Act, establish any new undertaki~ which, 
when established, would become an inter-connected undertakmg of an 
undertaking to which clause (a) of section 20 applies, except under, and 
in accordance with, the previous permission of the Central Government. 
• • .. .. • 
~ ..... ., 
--., 
Expan-
"sian at 
under-
"takin, •. 
Estab-
lishment 
at new 
under-
takinls. 

" 
,f ''',''- -
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
-'f • 
.. __ I -...,., , 
further to amend the MonopoZies and Restrictive Trade Practices 
Act,. 1969 • 
. ' 
(Shri Jagannath Kaushat, Minister for Law, Justice and Comp4'n?J 
Affairs.) 
• 