Bill No. 63 of 1954. 
THE DELIMITATION COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) 
BILL,1954 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Delimitation Commission Act, 1952. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. Short title.-This Act may be called the Delimitation Commis-
sion (Amendment) Act, 1954. 
2. Insertion of new section SA in Act LXXXI of 1952.-ln the s 
Delimitation Commission Act, 1952, after section 9, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely: - . 
"9A. Redetermination of seats fOT scheduled Castes or 
scheduled tribes on correction of census figures.-(l) Where, at 
any time before the publication in the Gazette of India of the 10 
final order of the Commission determining in respect of any Part 
A State or PartB State the matters referred to in sub-section (2) 
of section 8, the census figures pertaining to the population of 
the scheduled castes or scheduled tribes of that State are correct-
ed by the competent census authority in order to rectify any IS 
bona fide mistake or omission during enumeration, and the 
corrections so macJe are duly published by that authority and 
brought to the notice of the Commission,-
(a) the said figures as so corrected shall be taken to be 
the latest census figures for the purposes of section 8; 20 
(b) the Commission shall, by order published in the 
Gazette of India, redetermine on the basis of those figures the 
number of seats, if any, to be reserved for the scheduled 
castes or scheduled tribes of the State in the House of the 

• 
2 
Pedple and the Legislative Assembly of the State in accord-
ance with the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 8 and 
make any corrections that' may be found necessary in i~ 
final order determining the matters referred to in that sub-
S section; and 
(c) on such publication, the said final order as so corrected 
shall have the full force of law and shall not be questioned 
in any . ..court. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (3) of section 8 shall apply in 
10 respect of the redetermination of numbers under clause (b) of 
sub-section (1) of this section. 
(3) As soon as may be after publication in the Gazette of 
India every order made under clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall 
be laid before the House of the People." 

• 
3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
When the Delimitation Commi~sion began its work early in 1953 
it had the 1951 population figures as published by the Registrar 
General in Census Paper No. IV which gave for each State the total 
"population as well as the population of the scheduled ca!?tes and 
scheduled tribes of that State. Certain errors and omissions in the 
tabulation of figures pertaining to the scheduled castes in four States 
were subsequf'ntly brought to the notice of the Registrar General, 
.and as a result, he issued corrections to the published figures, as 
regards Hyderabad and Saurashtra towards the end of October, 1953, 
as regards Rajasthan in August, 1954, and as regards Uttar Pradesh 
in November, 1954. The Commission was able to take into account 
the revised figures for Hyderabad and Saurashtra and fix the" number 
of reserved seats for the scheduled castes of those States in its 
Final Order No.3,' dated the 13th November, 1953. In regard to 
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh, however, the revised figures were 
published long after it had made its Final Order under sub-section 
(1) of section 8 of the Delimitation Commission Act, 1952. The Com-
mission is not competent to amend its Final Orders except to the 
very limited extent permitted by section 10 of the Act. It is obviously 
desirable that in cases where the Census authorities find ~t necessary 
to revise the published figures in order to rectify bona fide mistakes 
and omissions during tabulation and where there is still time for the 
Commission to take the revised fi,gures into account, it should be 
authorised to do so. The Bill seeks to give the necessary legal 
authority for this purpose. 
C. C. BISWAS. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 15th December, 1954. 

, 
LOK SABHA 
_ ........... 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Delimitation Co~missjon ACT, 195Z. 
• 
(Shri C. C. Bis'Was, 
Minister for lflw.) 
GIPD-LAD-U22 LS-16-12-S4-1770 