As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

"9 A Noy 2006

Bill No. 63 of 2006

THE CUSTODIAL CRIMES (PREVENTION, PROTECTION AND
COMPENSATION) BILL, 2006

By
‘Suri Mouan Sincu, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for the prevention of and protection against custodial crimes and for
compensation in cases of custodial offences, Sor appointment of Vigilance
Commissioner and District Vigilance Commissioners for custodial
offences and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called the Custodial Crimes (Prevention, Protection and Short title and
Compensation) Act, 2006. ‘commencement,
5 (2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.

(@) “custodial crime” or “custodial offence” means an offence caused against any
arrested person or a person in custody when that person was in the custody of a police
officer or a public servant who has power under any law to arrest and detain a person in

[© custody, by the police officer or by the public servant concerned having the custody of that
person during that period;

(0) “custody” shall include both legal and illegal arrest or custody;


2

(०) "District Vigilance Commissioner" means the District Vigilance Commissioner
for custodial offences appointed under sub-section (3) of section 17;

(d) “Government” means the Government of a State or the Government of a
Union Territory, as the case may be;

(०) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made by the Government under this 5
Act; =
(0) “Vigilance Commissioner” means the Vigilance Commissioner for custodial
offences appointed under sub-section (/) of Section 17; and

(g) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Indian
Penal Code or the Code of Criminal Procedure; 1973 shall have the meanings respectively [०
assigned to them in these codes.

Presumption 3. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 or inany 1
in custodial other law in force, in a prosecution of a police officer or any public servant for a custodial
Hite offence, including death or injury in custody, the Court may presume that the offence, death
deaih(ar or injury was caused by the police officer or the public servant having the custody of that [57
injury. person during that period.
é (2}-The Court, in deciding whether or not to draw a presumption under sub-section

(J), shall have regard to all the relevant circumstances including, in particular, (a) the period

of custody, (8) any statement made by the victim as to how the injuries were received, being

a statement admissible in evidence, (c) the evidence of any medical practitioner who might 20

have examined the victim, and (d) evidence, ifany, of any magistrate who might have recorded

the victim's statement or attempted to record it.

Conditions 4. A police officer arresting a person who has been concerned in an offence under any
precedent to Jaw must be reasonably satisfied, and must record such satisfaction, relating to the following
arrest. matters, namely:— ae

(a) that the complaint, information or suspicion is not only in respect of an
offence having been committed, but is also in respect of the complicity of the person to
be arrested in that offence;

(6) that the arrest is necessary in order to bring the movement of the person to be
arrested under restraint, so as to inspire a sense of security in the public or to prevent 30
the person to be arrested from evading the process of law or to prevent him from
committing similar offence or to prevent him from interfering with evidence or witnesses
or from indulging in violent behaviour in general; and

(c) that the arrest, and not a service of notice of appearance under sub-section
(7) of section 5, is absolutely necessary. 358

Notice to 5. (1) A police officer may instead of arresting the person concerned, issue to him a

appear. notice of appearance requiring him to appear before the police officer issuing the notice at
such place as may be specified in the notice and to co-operate with the police officer in the
investigation of the offence mentioned in the notice. :

(2) It shall be the duty of a person to whom hotice has been issued under the sub- ५०
section (7) to comply with the terms of the notice and so long as such a person continues to
do so, he shall not be arrested in respect of the offence mentioned in the notice, unless for
reasons to be recorded, the police officer is of the opinion that he ought to be arrested.

(3) Where a person to whom notice has been issued under sub-section (/), fails, at
any time, to comply with the terms of the notice, it shall be lawful for the police officer to arrest US
him for the offence mentioned in the notice, subject to such orders as may have been passed
in this behalf by a competent court.

Presumption 6. Where a person is to be arrested, then, unless the circumstances indicate to the

asto contrary, his submissibn to custody on an oral intimation of arrest shall be presumed, and

ria ‘0 unless the circumstances otherwise require, the police officer shall not actually touch the So
< person of the one being arrested.



\o

20

30

35

of 1974.40

3

7. (1) Whenever a person is arrested by a police officer, intimation of the arrest shall be
immediately sent by the police officer (along with intimation about the place of detention) to
the following person, namely:— पु

(a) a relative or friend or other person known to the arrested person, as may be
nominated by the arrested person;

(8) failing (०) above, the local legal aid committee.
(2) Such intimation shall be giver by telephone or telegram or by any other method
as may be convenient and as may convey the intimation fast enough and the fact that such

intimation has been sent shall be recorded by the police officer under the signature of the
arrested person.

(3) The police officer shall prepare a custody memorandum and body receipt of the
person arrested, duly signed by him and by two witnesses of the locality where the arrest has
been made, and deliver the same to the relative of the person arrested, if he is present at the
time of arrest or, in his absence, send the same alongwith the intimation of arrest to the person
mentioned in sub-section (/).

(4) The custody memo mentioned in sub-section (3) shall contain the following
particulars:—
(@ name of the person arrested and father's:name or husband's name;
(6) address of the person arrested;
(०) date, time and place of arrest;
(d) offence for which the arrest has been made;

(०) property, if any, recovered from the person arrested and taken into charge at
the time of the arrest; and

(0 any other relevant particular.

" 8. The person arrested shall have the right to have the presence and advice of a legal
practitioner during interrogation and his legal practitioner shall be allowed to remain present
and to advise him.

9. A police officer effecting an arrest shall inform the person arrested as soon as he is
brought to the police station, of the rights of the arrested person under sections 7 and 8 and
shall make an entry in the police diary about the following facts:—

(@) the name of the person who was informed of the arrest;

(6) the fact that the person arrested has been informed of his rights under sections
7 and 8;

(c) the name of the legal practitioner of the person arrested; and

(@) the fact that a custody memorandum has been prepared as required by sub-
sections (3) and (4) of section 7.

10. When an arrested person is produced before a Magistrate, the Magistrate shall
satisfy himself that the provisions of sections 4,5,6,7,8,9 and sub-section (/) and (2) of
section 11 have been duly complied with and shall further inform the arrested person of his
right to medical examination under section 54 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

11. (1) Except in unavoidable circumstances, no male child below the age of fifteen
years or a female shall be arrested after sunset and before sunrise, and where such unavoidable
circumstances exist, the police officer making the arrest shall, by making a written report,
obtain the prior permission of the immediate superior officer not below the rank ofan inspector

US" for effecting such arrest, if the case is one of extreme urgency, he shall, after making the arrest,

forthwith report the matter in writing to his such immediate superior officer, with the reason
for arrest and the reason for not taking prior permission as aforesaid and shall also make a
similar report to the Magistrate within whose jurisdiction the arrest has been made.

Right to
intimation of
arrest to
telative,
friend or
other person,
and custody
memorandum,

Right to Legal
Practitioner
during

interrogation
Record in
police diary as
to rights of
the arrested
person.

Magistrates
satisfaction
as to
compliance
with certain
sections.
Provisions as
to male child
and female.


Medical
examination
of the
arrested
person or the
person in
custody.

Information
of custodial
crimes and
procedure
thereafter.

4

(2) Where a female is to be arrested, then unless the circumstance otherwise require
and unless the police officer arresting is a female, the police officer shall not actually touch
the person of the woman for making the arrest.

Explanation: The provisions of sub-section (2) are in addition to the provisions of
section 6.

(3) A female in custody shall be escorted by the Matron or Female Warden or
Female Police Officer, if required to leave the female enclosure, such matron or female warden
or female police officer shall remain with the female who is in custody or in prison till her
return to the enclosure or release from the custody or the jail.

(4) A female relative of the female in custody shall be allowed to accompany the 10
female who is in custody during her transit from one enclosure to another or for the purpose
of being taken to the court or for investigation.

(3) A male child of less than fifteen years of age in custody shall be allowed to be
accompanied by his relative during his transit from one enclosure to another or for the
Purpose of being taken to the court or for investigation. : Is

12. (1) Where under section 54 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or otherwise, 2 of
a Magistrate directs the examination of the body of an arrested person or a person under
custody, the said examination shall be conducted by a Registered Medical Practitioner or
through a Government Hospital available, as the Magistrate may, direct.

(2) A female arrested or in custody shall be examined by and under the supervision 20
of only a lady medical practitioner as the Magistrate may direct and the examination shall be
conducted with strict regard to decency.

(3) The medical practitioner to whom an arrested person or a person in custody is
forwarded under sub-section (J) or (2), shall without delay examine him/her and prepare a
record and specifically record the following details about the person examined:— 25

(1) the name and address of the person examined and of the person by whom he/
she was brought.

(2) the age of the person;

(3) the injury external and internal, if any, on the persons;

(4) general mental condition of the person; 30
(5) other material particulars and any other relevant details; and

(6) where the person is a woman, whether or not she is pregnant.

(4) The report of the medical practitioner shall precisely state the reasons for any
conclusion arrived at by the medical practitioner and the exact time of commencement and
completion of the medical examination. iS q

(3) The medical practitioner shall without delay forward his report to the Magistrate
who had directed the examination of the body.

(6) The person examined shall be entitled to a copy free of cost of the report of the
medical practitioner under this section as soon after the Magistrate received the report under
sub-section (5). Yo

13. (7) Every information relating to the commission of a custodial crime or offence if
given orally to an officer in charge of a police station, shall be reduced to writing by him or
under his direction and be read over to the informant and every such information whether
given in writing or reduced to writing as aforesaid shall be signed by the person giving it, and
the substance thereof shall be entered in book to be kept by such officer in such form as may us
be prescribed in this behalf.

(2) A copy of the information as recorded under sub-section (J) shall be given
forthwith, free of cost, to the informant and shall also be forwarded immediately to the
Vigilance Commissioner or the District Vigilance Commissioner as the case may be.


5

(3) Any person (including Legal Aid Centre or Non-Governmental Organisation or
any friend or relative) aggrieved by a refusal on the part of an officer in charge of a police
station to record the information referred to in sub-section (7) may file a petition giving the
substance of such information—

(a) before the Chief Judicial Magistrate in case of custodial offences other than
5: those involving death of the victim, or

(6) before the Sessions Judge in case of custodial offence involving death.

(4) The person filing a petition under sub-section (3) shall also forward a copy of
the petition to the Vigilance Commissioner or the District Vigilance Commissioner, as the case
may be. =

lo (5) The Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Sessions J judge, as the case may be, if
satisfied on a preliminary enquiry that there is a prima facie case, may himself hold enquiry
into the complaint made under sub-section (3) or direct other Judicial Magistrate or Additional.
Sessions Judge, as the case may be, to hold an enquiry and direct the ministerial officer of the
Court to make a complaint to the Competent Court in respect of offence that may appear to
[६ have been committed.

(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 190 of the Code of Criminal
2 of 1974 Procedure, 1973, the Competent Court shall on a complaint made under sub-section (5) take”
cognizance of the offence and try the same.

(7) The Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Sessions Judge, as the case may be, may
2° obtain the assistance of the Vigilance Commissioner or the District Vigilance Commissioner
or any public servant or authority as he may deem fit in holding the enquiry under sub-
section (5).
14. (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 357 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
2 of 1974 1973. where the court convicts a public servant of a custodial offence including an offence
| 2§ resulting in death or bodily injury, being an offence constituted by an act of such public
servant against a person in his custody, the provisions of this section shall apply,

(2) The Court, when passing judgement in any case to which this section applies,
shall order that the Government in connection with the affairs of which such public servant
was employed at the time when such act was committed, shall be liable jointly and severally

30 with such public servant to pay, by way of compensation, such amount as may be specified in
the order.

(3) An order for payment of compensation under this section may also be made by
an appellate court or by the High Court or Court of Session when exercising its powers of
revision.

35 (4) While rewarding compensation in any subsequent suit relating to the same
matter, the civil court shall take into account any sum paid or recovered as compensation
under this section.

(5) The amount awarded under this section not be less than:

(a) rupees twenty five thousand in case of bodily injury, not resulting in death;
uo (8) rupees two lakh, in case of death.

(6) In fixing the amount of compensation under this section, the court shall, subject
to the provisions of sub-section (5) take into account all relevant circumstances, including
(but not necessarily limited to) the follwoing:

(a) the type and severity of the injury suffered by the victim;
us (2) the mental anguish suffered by the victim;
(c) the expenditure incurred or likely to be incurred on the treatment and
rehabilitation of the victim;
(@ the actual and projected earning capacity of the victim and the impact of its
loss on the persons entitled to compensation and other members of the family;

Compensation
in custodial
offence.


6

(e) the extent, if any, to which the victim himself contributed to the injury;
(9 the expenses incurred in the prosecution of the case.
(7) In case of the death or permanent disablement of the victim, the court may take
into account the estimated annual income of the victim as multiplied by the number of years
of his estimated span of life. 5
(8) Pending final determination of the proceeding, the Court may award, by way in
interim relief, such compensation as it may think proper in the circumstances of the case at
any stage of the case, even before judgement of conviction is passed.
(9) The Government may recover any amount paid by it as compensation under this
section wholly or partly as it may think proper, from the delinquent public servant. lo
‘No previous 15. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 197 of the Code of Criminal
sanction of _ Procedure, 1973, no previous sanction of the Central or State Government shall be necessary 2 of

pt कर for prosecution of a police officer or a public servant accused of any custodial offence
offence alleged to have been committed by him.
prosecutions. :
Punishment 16. Whoever, being a police officer or a public servant— 1S
for knowing! हि oe rene ah
आल दे (a) knowingly disobeys any- direction of any law prohibiting him from requiring
any direction the attendance at any place of any persons for the purpose of investigation into an
of law. offence or other matter, or
(8) knowingly disobeys any other direction of the law regulating the manner in
which he shall conduct any investigation or arrest, to the prejudice of any person, shall 20
be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine or
with both.
Vigilance 17. (1) Every State Government and the Government of a Union Territory shall, by
Se notification in the official Gazette, appoint a person to be known as the Vigilance
and District oe: odial
Vigilance Commissioner for Custodial Offences. 25
Commissioner. (2) The Functions and powers of the Vigilance Commissioner shall be to—
(०) exercise superintendence over all investigations and prosecutions with
Tespect to custodial offences;
(®) give directions to the concerned officers in all matters relating to investigation
of and prosecution for custodial offences; 30
(¢) review the progress of investigations and prosecution with respect to custodial
offences;

(4) tender advice to the Government on all matters relating to custodial offences;
(e) call for information from any concerned officer or authority about custodial
offences and about action taken on his recommendation or advice; 35
@ collect or cause to be collected such statistics or data and other information
as may be necessary for appropriate and effective discharge of the functions of the
Commission;
(g) hold any inquiry pursuant to sub-section (7) of section 13; and
(h) discharge any other function as may be prescribed. Uo
(3) The Government may, in consultation with the Vigilance Commissioner, appoint
by notification in the Official Gazette, a District Vigilance Commissioner for each District.
(4) The Government may authorise a District Vigilance Commissioner to have
jurisdiction over another district also for which no separate District Vigilance Commissioner
has been appointed. Use
(5) A District Vigilance Commissioner shall have such powers and perform such
function as may be entrusted to him by the Vigilance Commissioner appointed under sub-
section (J) and shall discharge his duties subject to his directions.


Gi

(6) The qualification for appointment as Vigilance Commissioner or District
Vigilance Commissioner and their terms and conditions of service shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(7) The Government may, in consultation with Vigilance Commissioner; make
5 rules with respect to strength of thestaff of the Vigilance Commissioner or District Vigilance
Commissioners and their conditions of service.

(8) The Government shall in making any rules or regulations governing matters
relating to custodial offences, consult its Vigilance Commissioner.

(9) All directions relating to recording and investigation of and Prosecution for,
Jo custodial offences given by the Vigilance Commissioner or the District Vigilance Commissioner
shall be binding upon the officer concerned.

(10) The Vigilance Commissioner shall present annually a consolidated report on
his functioning and on the administration of this Act to the Government, and the Government
shall cause a copy thereof, together with its memorandum, to be laid before each House of the

|S State Legislature within four months from the date of the teceipt of the report by the Government
or till the Legislature meets, next, whichever is later.

18. (1) The State or the Union Territory Government, as the case may be, may by Power to
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the Purpose of carrying out the provisions make rules.
of the Act.

20 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing process,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely—

(a) the form of the register as to information in respect of custodial crimes or
offences maintained under section 13;

(6) the qualifications for appointment as Vigilance Commissioner or District
25 Vigilance Commissioner and their terms and conditions of service under sub-section
(6) of section 17;

(¢) the strength of the staff and their conditions of service under sub-section @-~
of section 17;

(@) any other power of function of the Vigilance Commissioner to be prescribed
30 under clause (8) of sub-section (2) of section 17.

19. Every rule made by the Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as maybe Rules to be
after it is issued or made, before each House of the Legislature, while it is in session, for a total laid before
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive  Lesislature.
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the

35” successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Incidents of custodial crimes are a matter of serious concern anda disturbing factor in
the society. They reflect ‘betrayal of custodial trust by a public servant against the defenceless
citizen. As the Supreme Court has observed in Kishore Singh V. State of Rajasthan (AIR 1982
SC624)—

“nothing is more cowardly and unconscionable than a person in police custody being
beaten up, and nothing inflicts a deeper wound on our constitutional rights.”

The constitutional and statutory framework in India contains a number of provisions
safeguarding the liberty and the life of an individual. Nevertheless, there is a pressing need
to supplement these sufeguards to deal effectively with custodial offences which represent
an onslaught on the law, human dignity and human right of the defenceless and vulnerables.
There are important judicial pronouncements on the subject. In addition, the Law Commission,
the National Police Commission, the National Human Rights Commission, etc. have all made
several recommendations.

Provisions against custodial crimes require amendments to a number of Central Acts
like the Indian Penal Code the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the Indian Evidence Act,
1872 and others. Instead of these scattered amendments, it is, however, desirable to have a
comprehensive legislation on the subject for the convenience of those in custody, their
relatives, the concerned officials and the human rights organizations,

The Bill seeks to provide for prevention of and protection against custodial crimes, for

compensation in case of custodial offences, for appointment of Vigilance Commissioners and
District Vigilance Commissioners, and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.

New DEetHt; MOHAN SINGH.
July 26,2006



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 14, sub-clause (2) provides for payment of compensation by Government/
public servants concerned to the victims of custodial offence. Clause 17, sub-clause (1)
provides for appointment of Vigilance Commissioner for custodial offences and sub-clause
(3) provides for District Vigilance Commissioners, sub-clause (6) authorizes the Government
of the State or the Union territory to determine their terms and conditions of services. Sub-
clause (7) of the said clause 17 provides for the staff of the Vigilance Commissioners and the
District Vigilance Commissioners. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of respective States, as the case
may be.

A rough estimate of non-recurring expenditure to every State is about rupees fifteen
lakh to set up the office of the Vigilance Commissioner and the District Vigilance Commissioners.
The recurring expenditure towards pay and allowances by each State is estimated to be
approximately rupees fifty lakh per annum.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Sub-clause (1) of Clause 13 of the Bill authorizes the Government of the State or the
Union territory, as the case may be, to prescribe the form of the register as to information in
respect of custodial offences.

2. Sub-clause (6) of Clause 17 empowers the concerned Government to prescribe by
rules made under the Act, the qualification for appointment as Vigilance Commissioner or
District Vigilance Commissioners and to fix their terms and conditions of service.

3. Sub-clause (7) of clause 17 lays down that the strength of the staff for the Vigilance
Commissioner and the District Vigilance Commissioners and their conditions of service be
prescribed by the Government concerned. i

4. Clause 18 of the Bill empowers the State or the Union territory Government to make
tules, by notification in the Official Gazette, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of
the Bill. In particular, such rules may provide for all or any of the matters mentioned in
paragraphs 1 and 2 above.

5. Clause19 provides that rules made under the Bill are required to be laid before the
Legislature.

6. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are generally matters of procedure
or administrative details and it is not practicable to make detailed provisions for them in the
Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the prevention of and protection against custodial crimes and for
compenation in cases of custodial offences, for appointment of Vigilance
Commissioner and District Vigilance Commissioners for custodial offences and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Mohan Singh, M.P,)

MGIPMRinD—1957LS(S4)—07.08.2006.