1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI JAYADEV GALLA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 63 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. For article 340 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted,
namely:—
"340. (1) There shall be a Commission for the Backward Classes to be known
as the National Commission for the Backward Classes.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, the
Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other
Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of the Chairperson, Vice-
Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be such as the President may by
rule determine.
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Commission
shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.
(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission—
(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards
provided for the Backward Classes under this Constitution or under any other
law for the time being in force or under any order of the Government and to
evaluate the working of such safeguards;
(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of
rights and safeguards of the Backward Classes;
(c) to participate and advise on the planning process of socio-economic
development of the Backward Classes and to evaluate the progress of their
development under the Union and any State;
(d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the
Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;
(e) to make in such reports recommendations as to the measures that
should be taken by the Union or any State for the effective implementation of
those safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare and socio-
economic development of the Backward Classes; and
(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare
and development and advancement of the Backward Classes as the President
may, subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify.
(6) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of
Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be
taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the reasons for the non-
acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
(7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with which
any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the
Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the State
along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the
recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any,
of any of such recommendations.
(8) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in sub-
clause (a) or inquiring into any complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of clause (5),
have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in respect of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part
of India and examining him on oath;
National
Commission
for Backward
Classes.
Substitution of
new article for
article 340.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or
office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents;
(f) any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine.
(9) The Union and every State Government shall consult the Commission on all
major policy matters affecting Backward Classes.".
5

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is a diverse country with different castes, religions and groups. Inspite of this
diversity, India is united and one of the reasons for such unity is that the framers of the
Constitution have taken care of interests of all citizens irrespective of caste, colour and creed
while making the Constitution. But, unfortunately, Backward Classes who constitute more
than fifty per cent. of the total population are not getting their due share in the absence of
appropriate provisions in the Constitution.
There is no doubt that article 340 of the Constitution deals with appointment of
Commission to look into the conditions of Backward Classes, provide grants by Union and
States and also talks about laying reports in Parliament, etc. But, it does not deal with the
core aspects of the Backward Classes.
The existing Commission does not have the jurisdiction to investigate and monitor all
matters relating to the safeguards provided for the Backward Classes under the Commission
or under any other law; it cannot inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation
of rights and safeguards; it cannot participate in the planning process of socio-economic
development of Backward Classes and advise the State or the Central Government; the
present Commission does not have the powers of a Civil Court as it has been in the case of
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes Commissions and it is not mandatory on the
part of Union or State Governments to consult the present Commission on major policy
matters relating to the Backward Classes, apart from other deficiencies in the existing
Commission.
Secondly, in pursuance of various representations and requests made, Parliamentary
Committee for Welfare of Backward Classes, in its First Report, recommended for conferring
constitutional status on the National Commission for Backward Classes at par with National
Commission for Scheduled Castes and the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes to
deal with various grievances and to undertake welfare measures.
Thirdly, some States classified Backward Classes on the basis of castes or communities
into two or three groups such as Backward Class and most Backward Class. Some other
States classified Backward Classes into A, B, C, D Groups as per their status and occupations.
But, there is no such classification made in the Central List of Other Backward Classes.
In view of the above and in the absence of constitutional status to the National
Commission for Backward Classes and in the absence of an effective mechanism or forum
with constitutional status to deal with grievances and various other issues relating to Backward
Classes, the proposed Bill seeks to amend the Constitution to confer constitutional status
on the National Commission for Backward Classes.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JAYADEV GALLA
February 10, 2015.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for setting up of a National Commission for Backward
Classes. It also provides for appointment of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members of
the Commission. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about
rupees ten crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.

6
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
340. (1) The President may by order appoint a Commission consisting of such persons
as he thinks fit to investigate the conditions of socially and educationally backward classes
within the territory of India and the difficulties under which they labour and to make
recommendations as to the steps that should be taken by the Union or any State to remove
such difficulties and to improve their condition and as to the grants that should be made for
the purpose by the Union or any State and the conditions subject to which such grants
should be made, and the order appointing such Commission shall define the procedure to be
followed by the Commission.
(2) A Commission so appointed shall investigate the matters referred to them and
present to the President a report setting out the facts as found by them and making such
recommendations as they think proper.
(3) The President shall cause a copy of the report so presented together with a
memorandum explaining the action taken thereon to be laid before each House of Parliament.
* * * * *
Appointment
of a
Commission
to investigate
the conditions
of backward
classes.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Jayadev Galla, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4352LS(S3)—03-03-2016.