1
THE COCONUT GROWERS (WELFARE) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI M.K. RAGHAV AN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for certain welfare measures and other facilities for coconut growers
and  for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Coconut Growers (Welfare)  Act, 2014.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the State Government,
and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “coconut” means coconut and its products including by-products and its
extracts;
Bill No. 63 of  2014
Short title.
Definitions.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(c) “Committee” means Coconut Development Committee constituted under
section 3;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) “scheme” means Coconut Growers Welfare Scheme formulated under
section 3.
3. (1) The Central Government shall formulate a scheme for the welfare of coconut
growers to be known as the Coconut Growers Welfare Scheme.
(2) The scheme shall be administered by a Committee to be known as the Coconut
Development Committee.
(3) The Committee shall consist of—
(i) a Chairperson, who shall be nominated by the Central Government;
(ii) two members, representing the Governments of coconut growing States, to
be nominated by the Central Government;
(iii) two members representing coconut agriculturists who are growing coconut
on large scale; and
(iv) two members representing small coconut growers.
(4) The Chairperson and members of the Committee shall be nominated by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other conditions of service of the
Chairperson and members of the Committee, shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. Without prejudice to the powers of the Central Government, the scheme shall
include:—
(i) framing of a comprehensive insurance scheme for loss or destruction of
coconuts;
(ii) providing technical and other kinds of specialized assistance to coconut
growers;
(iii) fixing minimum support price for coconuts;
(iv) creation of adequate procurement and storage facility for coconuts;
(v) providing assistance for export of coconuts and its products;
(vi) encouraging research in coconut related fields with a view to promote it as
a healthy edible item;
(vii) provision of adequate marketing facilities for coconut growers; and
(viii) provision of electricity and water facilities to coconut growers at subsidized
rate.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds for the purposes of this Act.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of  the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Coconut
Growers
Welfare
Scheme.
Provisions to
be made under
the scheme.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Coconut is an important item in our daily life. It is not only used as an important food
item but also used as offering in temples. It is regarded as a religious symbol also. Coconut
and its by-products like coconut oil, coconut water are used in large quantities for various
purposes. But unfortunately, there are no adequate facilities for coconut growers. Coconut
is grown only in few States in our country and also in very few other countries of the world.
As such, there is adequate export potential for coconut which would earn us
considerable foreign exchange. Coconut oil has a number of uses including preparation of
certain medicines. The coconut based industries are suffering from numerous problems
including problems relating to its storage, marketing, procurement and export.
The Bill seeks to overcome the problems mentioned above.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; M.K. RAGHA VAN
June 30, 2014.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the formulation of a welfare scheme for coconut
growers. It also provides for the constitution of a Committee to administer the scheme.
Clause 4 provides for the activities to be undertaken under the scheme. Clause 5 provides
that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds for the purposes of this Act. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It
is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees  eight crore is also likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

GMGIPMRND—1311LS(S3)—23-07-2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for certain welfare measures and other facilities for coconut growers
and  for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri M.K. Raghavan, M.P .)