1
THE  WELFARE OF FAMILIES OF DEFENCE PERSONNEL BILL, 2020
By
SHRI MANOJ KOTAK, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of a fund for the welfare of families of defence personnel who
are killed in action or seriously injured during such action and for
matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Welfare of Families of Defence Personnel Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "defence personnel" means a person employed in the Army or the Air Force
or the Navy or central paramilitary forces or in any institution connected with defence
of the country and who is killed in action or sustained serious injuries resulting in
permanent disability in any warlike situation or in a terrorist attack;
Bill No. 63 of  2020
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10

2
(b) "dependant family member" includes—
(i) spouse; or
(ii) son (including adopted sons); or
(iii) daughter (including adopted daughter); or
(iv) in case of unmarried defence personnel, brother or sister wholly
dependant on such personnel; or
(v) parents, if the defence personnel was their only child;
(c) "Fund" means the Welfare of Families of Defence Personnel Fund constituted
under section 3; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as the Welfare of Families of the Defence Personnel Fund with an initial
capital of rupees ten thousand crore for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) There shall also be credited to the Fund voluntary donations by citizens.
4. The Fund shall be utilised for providing following facilities in such manner, as may
be prescribed, to the defence personnel or their dependant family members—
(i) free housing facilities;
(ii) free education to the children of defence personnel;
(iii) free health care facilities;
(iv) loan facilities for self-employment; and
(v) payment of lump sum amount of rupees two crore to the dependant family
member in case of death of the defence personnel.
5. (1) The Central Government shall—
(a) ensure that the defence personnel or their dependant family members, as
the case may be, get mandatory benefits as early as possible which shall include—
(i) payment of rupees two crore within ten days to dependant family
members in case of death of the defence personnel; and
(ii) government job to one eligible dependant family member within twenty
days;
(b) ensure that all the facilities, as prescribed by the Central Government or
the concerned State Government, are provided to the dependent of the defence personnel
without making them visiting the Government offices frequently;
(c) provide free railway pass to the surviving defence personnel or their dependant
family members, as the case may be;
(d) provide reservation of not less than five per cent. to the surviving defence
personnel or their dependant family members, as the case may be, in government and
private sector jobs.
(2) For the purpose of clause (b) of sub-section (1), the District Magistrate concerned
shall be responsible for making all facilities available to the defence personnel or the dependant
family members, as the case may be under this Act.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
an Inspection and Promotion Committee for effective implementation of the provisions of
this Act.
Constitution
of the Welfare
of Families of
the Defence
Personnel
Fund.
Utilization of
Fund.
Responsibility
of the
appropriate
Government.
Constitution of
Inspection and
Promotion
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(2) The Inspection and Promotion Committee shall consist of—
(a) the Prime Minister —Chairperson, ex-officio;
(b) Union Minister of Defence—member, ex-officio;
(c) Chief Ministers of the State Governments—members, ex-officio;
(d) one Member of Parliament each from the Council of States and the House of
the People to be nominated by the Presiding Officers of the respective Houses-
members, ex-officio;
(e) the Ministers of Social Welfare of the State Governments-members, ex-officio;
(f) the Ministers of Home Department of the State Governments-members,
ex-officio;
(g) the Chief Secretaries of the State Governments- members, ex-officio;
(h) one senior military officer of the Union Ministry of Defence to be nominated
by the Central Government—member-Secretary; and
(i) one officer from the Indian Administrative Service or of equivalent rank to be
nominated by the Central Government.
(3) The meeting of the Inspection and Promotion Committee shall be held twice a
month:
Provided that the Chairperson may call for a meeting of the committee as and when
required.
(4) The Union Ministry of Defence shall provide the secretarial and financial
assistance to the Inspection and Promotion Committee.
(5) The Inspection and Promotion Committee shall ensure that all benefits as stipulated
under section 4 in respect of the defence personnel or their dependant family members, as
the case may be, be provided within the stipulated time period without any prejudice and
discrimination on the basis of caste and language.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The soldiers of the Indian forces are getting martyred in terrorist attacks and firing at
the border by enemy. The financial condition of most of the families of martyrs soldiers is not
as good as it should have been. The promises made by the State Governments take years to
see the light of the day. Even to get the government facility, they have to visit government
offices for the years to get the required formalities fulfilled. In such a situation, they have to
face a lots of difficulties whereas the whole nation feels proud on their supreme sacrifice to
protect the country.
Some of the examples of the sacrifice to the nation worth mentioning are that of martyr
Javra Munda of Khunti Murahoo who was killed in a terrorist attack at the local headquarters
of the Indian Army near Line of Control (LoC) in Uri sector of Jammu and Kashmir on
September 18, 2016; martyr Santosh Gop from Tengra village in Basia block in Gumla, martyr
Vijay Soreng of Farsama village in Basia block, Gumla who was killed in an attack on CRPF
personnel in Pulwama, Jammu and Kashmir on February 14, 2019 and case of martyr Lance
Naik Albert Ekka from Jari village of Gumla who had shown his bravery in the Indo-China war
of 1962 and Indo-Pak war. All of them had sacrificed their life in the name of honour of our
country. Although the Government is very liberal in giving compensation, yet it is not
adequate keeping in view the rising inflation. Their dependant family members are yet to
receive the support and assistance required to lead a dignified life.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for,—
(a) prompt mandatory benefits to be provided by the Government within thirty
days without any prejudice and discrimination on the basis of caste and language
including—
(i) payment of rupees two crore within ten days to the dependant family
members in case of death of defence personnel; and
(ii) a government job to the eligible dependant family member within twenty
days;
(b) facilities to be provided to the dependents of the martyrs at a time without
visiting government offices frequently for the same;
(c) free railway pass to the defence personnel or their dependant family members,
as the case may be;
(d) reservation of not less than five per cent, to the defence personnel or their
dependant family members, as the case may be, in Government and private sector jobs;
(e) constitute an Inspection and Promotion Committee under the Chairpersonship
of the Prime Minister for effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MANOJ KOTAK
February 6 , 2020.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Welfare of Families of the Defence
Personnel Fund by the Central Government. Clause 5 provides for the appropriate Government
to ensure that the defence personnel or their dependant family members get prompt mandatory
benefits within thirty days without any prejudice and discrimination on the basis of caste
and language under their jurisdiction inter alia including payment of rupees two crore
within ten days to the dependant family members and a Government job within twenty days
to the eligible dependant family member, etc. Clause 6 provides for constitution of an
Inspection and Promotion Committee for effective implementation of the provisions of this
Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees Six Hundred Crores per
annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees One Hundred Fifty Crores is also likely to
be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of a fund for the welfare of families of defence personnel who
are killed in action or seriously injured during such action and for
matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Manoj Kotak, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5429LS(S3)—27.02.2020.