 Bill No. 63 of 2023
THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA (ESTABLISHMENT OF
A PERMANENT BENCH A T THIRUV ANANTHAPURAM
BILL, 2023
By
DR. SHASHI T HAROOR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Permanent Bench of the
High Court of Kerala at Thiruvananthapuram.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the High Court of Kerala (Establishment
of a Permanent Bench at Thiruvananthapuram) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. There shall be established a permanent Bench of the High Court of
Kerala at Thiruvananthapuram and such Judges of the High Court of Kerala,
being not less than five in number, as the Chief Justice of that High Court
may, from time to time nominate, shall sit at Thiruvananthapuram in order to
exercise the jurisdiction and power for the time being vested in that High
Court in respect of cases arising in the district of Thiruvananthapuram and
such other territories within that State as the President may by notification
specify.
5
Establishment
of a Permanent
Bench of
High Court
of Kerala at
Thiruvananthapuram.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The principal seat of the Kerala High Court is at Ernakulam, which is
situated at a distance of 200 kilometers from the State Capital,
Thiruvananthapuram. Ever since the formation of the State of Kerala in
1956, there has been a demand for the establishment of a permanent Bench
at the State Capital.
It has been observed that the State is a principal litigant in a majority of
cases pending in the High Court of Kerala. This leads to the State Government
incurring considerable expenditure on account of travelling allowance and
leave allowance given to the Government employees for travelling from
Thiruvananthapuram, the state capital to Ernakulam for depositions.
Moreover, it has been the policy of the successive Governments that justice
should be taken to the doors of the litigants and therefore the litigants should
not be compelled to go long distance to the Court. In the interest of
administration of justice, the court must be easily accessible to the litigants
and witnesses.
It will be, therefore, appropriate if a Bench of High Court is established
at Thiruvananthapuram in the State of Kerala.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;       SHASHI THAROOR
February 17, 2023.
3

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Permanent Bench of the
High Court of Kerala at Thiruvananthapuram.
————
(Dr. Shashi Tharoor, M.P .)