 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
                                                              Bill No. 63 of 2022
THE PALLIATIVE CARE BOARD BILL, 2022
By
ADV. DEAN KURIAKOSE, M.P.
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
PALLIATIVE DRUGS
3. Palliative drugs.
CHAPTER III
THE PALLIA TIVE CARE BOARD
4. Constitution and incorporation of the Board.
5. Secretary and other officers.
6. Advisory Committees.
7. Functions of the Board.
CHAPTER IV
REGISTRATION OF OWNERS OF PALLIA TIVE CARE FACILITIES
8.   Registration of owners of palliative care facilities.
9.   Details to be made by registered owners.
10.  Power of State Government to make rules.
CHAPTER V
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
11.  Grants and loans by the Central Government.
12.  Palliative Care Fund.
13.  Budget.
14.  Annual report.

ii
CLAUSES
15.  Accounts and audit.
16.  Annual report and auditor’s report to be laid before Parliament.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
17.  Penalties for obstructing an officer or member of the Board in the discharge
of  his duties and for failure to produce books and records.
18.  Delegation.
19.  Members, officers and employees of the Board to be public servants.
20.  Protection of action taken in good faith.
21.  Power to enter.
22.  Power to make rules.
23.  Power to make regulations.
24.  Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
25.  Power to remove difficulties.
THE SCHEDULE.

     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
                                                              
Bill No. 63 of 2022
THE PALLIATIVE CARE BOARD BILL, 2022
By
ADV. DEAN KURIAKOSE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the development and
standardization of Palliative care services in the country
and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:–
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Palliative Care Board Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Board” means the Palliative Care Board constituted under
sub-section (1) of section 3;
(b) “caregiver” means a  person engaged in providing palliative care services;
(c) “doctor” means a registered medical practitioner with a valid degree
from any of the affiliated medical colleges in the country under National Medical
Commission;
 (d) “institution” means an entity that provides palliative care services; and
 (e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
CHAPTER  II
PALLIATIVE DRUGS
3. (1) For the purposes of this Act, “palliative drug” means a drug approved for
palliative care and used to ameliorate the symptoms of terminal illness, as specified in
the Schedule to this Act.
(2) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do
in the public interest and for reasons to be specified in the notification published in the
Official Gazette, amend the Schedule so as to add a palliative drug to the said schedule
or remove any palliative drug from the said schedule.
(3) Every notification issued under sub-section (2) shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is issued, before both Houses of Parliament.
CHAPTER  III
THE PALLIA TIVE CARE BOARD
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute, for the purposes of this Act, a Board, to be called the Palliative Care
Board.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to
contract and shall, by the said name, sue and be sued.
(3) The Board shall consist of such number of members, not exceeding
ten, as may be prescribed, and unless the rules made in this behalf otherwise
provide, the Board shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) three members from amongst Members of Parliament, of whom
two shall be elected by the House of the People and one by the Council of
States;
(c) three members to represent respectively the Ministries of the Central
Government dealing with—
(i) Health and Family Welfare;
(ii) Chemicals and Fertilizers; and
(iii) Finance;
 (d) three members to represent the National Medical Commission, as
nominated by its chairperson;
(4) The office of member of the Board shall not disqualify its holder for being
chosen as, or for being, a member of either House of Parliament.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
2
Palliative
drugs.
Constitution
and
incorporation
of the Board.

(5) The term of office of the members and other conditions of service of the
members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The Chairperson shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of the
Board, exercise and discharge such powers and duties of the Board as may be delegated
to him by the Board and such other powers and duties as may be prescribed.
 (7) The Board shall elect from amongst its members a Vice-Chairperson who
shall exercise such of the powers and perform such of the functions of the Chairperson
as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the Chairperson.
 (8) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalidated merely by reason
of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board;
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the
Board;
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits
of the case.
5. (1) The Board may appoint the Secretary and such other officers and
employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions
under this Act.
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the Secretary and other officers
and employees of the Board shall be such as may be determined by regulations.
6. (1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the Board may, from time to
time, constitute such committees as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of its
functions.
(2) Every committee constituted under sub-section (1) shall consist of such
number of persons as the Board may deem fit.
7. The Board may—
(i) develop, promote and regulate palliative care infrastructure in the country;
(ii) undertake programs and projects for promotion of palliative services in
the country;
(iii) assist and encourage studies and research for improvement of palliative
care medicines, treatment methods and training of practitioners;
(iv) strive towards stabilization of prices of drugs and implements used in
palliative care;
(v) evolve suitable quality standards and introduce certification of services
provided by doctors and caregivers;
 (vi) suggest measures for control of quality of drugs and treatment methods;
(vii) give licenses, subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed,
to the caregivers in the palliative care domain;
(viii) collect statistics with regard to palliative care demand and supply in
the country;
(ix) promote co-operative efforts among doctors and caregivers in
collaboration with local self governments;
3
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Secretary and
other officers.
Advisory
Committees.
Functions of
the Board.

(x) provide financial or other assistance for improved methods of palliative
care in different parts of the country with special focus to rural areas and remote,
inaccessible regions;
(xi) provide guidelines for training in palliative care, administration of drugs
and treatment methods;
(xii) maintain register of doctors, caregivers and institutions for palliative
care purpose;
(xiii) suggest measures for improvement and availability of drugs and
give recommendations on price, export conditions and manufacturing
conditions;
(xiv) collect statistics from institutions, doctors, caregivers and public to
assist policy making in the palliative care field;
(xv) secure better working conditions improvement of amenities and
incentives for doctors, caregivers engaged in palliative care; and
(xvi) undertake, assist or encourage scientific, technological and economic
research.
CHAPTER  IV
REGISTRATION OF OWNERS OF PALLIA TIVE CARE FACILITIES
8. (1) Every owner or trustee of palliative care facilities, shall, before the
expiration of one month from the date on which he first became owner or trustee of
such facilities, apply to the registering officer appointed in this behalf by the
State Government to be registered as an owner in respect of each facility owned
by him:
Provided that the State Government may, for sufficient reasons, extend the time-
limit for registration by such period as it thinks fit.
(2) The registration once made shall continue to be in force until it is cancelled
by the registering officer.
9. (1) Every owner and trustee registered under section 8, shall furnish such
details,  including the number of persons given palliative care and palliative drugs
administered, to the Board in such form and manner,  as may be prescribed.
(2) Any person who fails to furnish any detail as required under
sub-section (1) or furnishes any particular which is false and which he knows to be
false or does not believe to be true shall be punishable with fine which may extend to
five hundred rupees.
(3) The Board may authorize an officer to visit any facility at any time to
verify the accuracy of any detail made under this section or to ascertain the productive
capacity of the estate.
10. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules to carry into effect the provisions of section 8.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules
may prescribe the form of the application for registration and for cancellation of
registration, the fee payable on such applications, the particulars to be included in
such application, the procedure to be followed in granting and cancelling registration,
the registers to be kept by registering officers and the supply by registering officers
of information to the Board.
4
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Registration of
owners of
palliative care
facilities.
Details to be
made by
registered
owners.
Power of State
Government to
make rules.
45

CHAPTER V
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
11. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law, in this behalf, make to the Board grants and loans of such
sums of money as it may consider necessary.
12. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Palliative Care
Fund to which shall be credited—
(a) grants and loans made to the Board by the Central Government;
(b) fee levied and collected in respect of licenses granted under this
Act; and
(c) sums received by the Board from such other sources as may be
decided by the Central Government.
13. The Board shall prepare in such form and at such time, as may be prescribed,
its budget for each financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of
the Board and forward the same to the Central Government.
14. The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time, as may be prescribed,
its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial
year, and submit the report to the Central Government.
15. The accounts of the Board shall be maintained and audited in such manner
as may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, be
prescribed and the Board shall furnish to the Central Government before such date,
as may be prescribed, copy of its audited accounts together with the auditors’ report
thereon.
16. The Central Government shall cause the annual report and auditor’s report
to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
17. Any person who—
(a) obstructs any member authorized by the Chairperson in writing or any
officer or other employee of the Board authorized by it in this behalf or any
person authorized in this behalf by the Central Government, in the exercise of
any power conferred, or in the discharge of any duty imposed, on him by or
under  this Act; or
(b) having control over or custody of any account book or other record, fails
to produce such book or record when required to do so by or under this Act,
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
18. The Board may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to the
Chairperson or any other member or to any officer of the Board, subject to such
conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers
and functions under this Act as it may deem necessary.
19. All members, officers and other employees of the Board shall be deemed,
when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to
be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
20. No prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government,
or the Board or any committee appointed by it, or any member of the Board or such
committee, or any officer or employee of the Government or the Board or any other
5
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Annual report
and auditors’
report to be
laid before
Parliament.
Accounts and
audit.
Annual report.
Budget.
Palliative Care
Fund.
Penalties for
obstructing an
officer or
member of the
Board in the
discharge of his
duties and for
failure to
produce books
and records.
Members,
officers and
employees of
the Board to be
public servants.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Grants and
loans by the
Central
Government.
Delegation.
45

person authorized by the Government or the Board, for anything which is done or
intended to be done in good faith under this Act or the rules or regulations made
thereunder.
21. Subject to any rule made in this behalf, any person, generally or specially
authorized by the Board in this behalf, may, whenever it is necessary so to do, for any
of the purposes of this Act, at all reasonable times, enter upon any land or premises
and make any inspection or inquiry or do such other act or thing as may be prescribed:
Provided that no such person shall enter any building or any enclosed courtyard
or garden attached to a dwelling-house (unless with the consent of the occupier thereof)
without previously giving such occupier at least twenty-four hours’ notice in writing
of his intention to do so.
22.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,  such rules
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: —
(a) the constitution of committees under section 6;
(b) the conditions and the restrictions with respect to the exercise of the
power to enter under section 22; and
(c) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect
of which provision is to be, or may be, made by rules.
23. The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and the
rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act.
24. Every rule made by the Central Government and every regulation made
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
25. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary
for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two
years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
6
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Power to enter.
Power to make
rules.
Power to make
regulations.
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
40

THE SCHEDULE
[See Section 3]
1. ALS
2. Alzheimer’s Disease
3. Breast Cancer
4. Bone Marrow Transplant
5. Cancer
6. Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
7. Colon Cancer
8. Congestive Heart Failure
9. COVID-19
10. Dementia
11. Eosinophil Associated Disease (EAD)
12. Head and Neck Cancer
13. HIV/AIDS
14. Huntington’s Disease
15. Kidney Disease
16. Leukemia and Lymphoma
17. Liver disease
18. Lung Cancer
19. Multiple Myeloma
20. Multiple Sclerosis
21. Ovarian Cancer
22. Pancreatic Cancer
23. Parkinson’s Disease
24. Prostate Cancer
25. Pulmonary Fibrosis
26. Sickle Cell Anemia
27. Stroke
28. Organ Transplant
29. Neurological Disorders
30. Muscular Atrophy
31. Spinal Muscular Atrophy
7

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The number of citizens affected by non-communicable diseases is increasing
at a very rapid rate. This situation is set to worsen with the increase of elderly
population in the country. The diseases like cancer and terminal decline of internal
organs are getting more common. This is partly because of the lifestyle changes and
also because of the increase in life expectancy. In this situation, it is imperative that
the nation have robust systems for palliative care.
Palliative care is basically aimed for that population which suffers from terminal
illness and the efficacy of standard treatment methods on their well-being is low. In
many cases, the medication could lower the quality of life. This is seen in the case of
chemotherapy for cancer. These medicines could be toxic to body and could decrease
the quality of life of patient, while only marginally increasing the living years of the
patient. In this situation, the patient and family must be given an option to take an
informed decision. This decision could take patient away from standard medical care,
and be placed under palliative care. Here, the patient will be given drugs and other
treatment mechanisms to ameliorate pain and suffering. The patient could be put on
the palliative track, where they can attain a peaceful death without prolonged suffering.
This is part of modern medicine and is a theme of intense research.
The need is to set up a system that will govern and regulate palliative care. It
is also necessary to conduct research and create rules and regulations that will improve
the drug availability, mode of drug administration and other treatment methods adopted
in the palliative care. Palliative care need not be always conflated with terminal illness.
It could also be useful for patients who are bedridden for a long time for treatment or
takes a long time for recuperating from an illness or surgery. Having a robust ecosystem
to support such medical interventions greatly improves the standard and quality of
life of the people of our country.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;            ADV . DEAN KURIAKOSE
February 4, 2022.
8

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Palliative Care Board.
Clause 5 provides for appointment of secretary, offices and employees of the
Board. Clause 11 provides for grants and loans by the Central Government for the
Board. Clause 12 provides for constitution of Palliative Care Fund. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about one hundred crore per
annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely
to be involved.
9

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clauses 10 of the Bill empowers the State Governments to make rules to give
effect to the provisions of registration of owners and trustees of palliative care facilities.
Clauses 22 and 23 of the Bill empower the Central Government and the Palliative
Care Board, respectively to make rules and registration, respectively, for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules and regulations will relate to matters of
detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
10

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the development and
standardization of Palliative care services in the country
and matters connected therewith.
————
(Adv. Dean Kuriakose, M.P .)