Bill No. 63 of  2024
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
By
Aൽඏ. Dൾൺඇ Kඎඋංൺ඄ඈඌൾ,  M.P.
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
 Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2024.  
  ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2. After article 49 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:– 
  “49A. The State shall endeavour to–
   ( a) include lessons regarding secularism in the school and college curriculum; and
   ( b) encourage exercises and social conventions that foster the unity and integrity of 
India by promoting a sense of fraternity that is firmly rooted in the secular ethos of the 
Republic.”.
Short title and 
commencement.
As ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Insertion of new 
article 49A.
Promotion of 
secularism.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
 Indian model of secularism is very different from the European model of secularism. It is rooted in the ideals of cooperation and harmonious existence. The State is not completely separated from religion. Rather, the State treats every religion equally and promotes an atmosphere of harmonious co-existence. This is because, the founding fathers of the republic realised that the State has to play a pro-active role in maintaining the secular fabric of the country. The elected Union Government and other organs of the State should uphold the secular spirit of the constitution. But, the secular ethos of the Constitution is not something, that could be left to the vagaries of transient electoral majorities. The nature of Indian society must be protected by inculcating a spirit of fraternity amongst all communities that reside in India. To ensure this, a constitutional mandate must be placed over the elected governments to inculcate the spirit of secularism through school and college education.
 Hence this Bill.
   Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං; DEAN KURIAKOSE 
June 21, 2024.  
2

LOK  SABHA
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
(Adv. Dean Kuriakose, M.P .)