Short title and 
commencement.
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 63 of 2025
THE PUNJAB MUNICIPAL CORPORATION LAW (EXTENSION TO 
CHANDIGARH) AMENDMENT BILL, 2025
By
Shri Manish Tewari, M.P.
a
BILL
further to amend the Punjab Municipal Corporation Law  
(Extension to Chandigarh) Act, 1994.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India as  
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Municipal Corporation Law (Extension to 
Chandigarh) Amendment Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5

2. In the Schedule of the Punjab Municipal Corporation Law (Extension to Chandigarh) 
Act, 1994, in Part II,—
(A) in section 4, in sub-section (3), in clause (ii), for the words “with voting rights”, 
the words “without voting rights” shall be substituted;
(B) in section 8, in sub-section (2), for the words “Administrator”, the words “duly 
elected Mayor” shall be substituted;
(C) in section 13A,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “Administrator and his decision”, the 
words “Committee and the decision of the Committee” shall be substituted; and       
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:–
“(1A). The Committee under sub-section (1) shall consist of—
(a) sitting High Court Judge nominated by the Chief Justice of the Punjab 
& Haryana  High Court;
(b) retired High Court Judge nominated by the Chief Justice of the  Punjab 
& Haryana  High Court; and
(c) the District & Sessions Judge, Chandigarh.
(D) in section 38, for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
“(1) The Mayor, the Senior Deputy Mayor and the Deputy Mayor shall be 
directly elected by all the electors of the Chandigarh parliamentary constituency:
Provided that the office of the Senior Deputy Mayor and the Deputy Mayor 
shall be reserved by rotation for the members of the Scheduled Castes and women.
(1A) The term of the Mayor, the Senior Deputy Mayor and the Deputy Mayor 
shall be five years and co-terminus with the tenure of the Corporation.”;
(E) after Section 38, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:–
“38A. The Mayor, the Senior Deputy Mayor and the Deputy Mayor would 
be removed only by motion supported by a two-third majority of the elected 
Councillors present and voting.
38B. (1) The Mayor, the Senior Deputy Mayor and the Deputy Mayor shall 
function as Mayor in Council. 
(2) All decisions of the Council shall be taken by consensus:
Provided that if consensus is not achieved, the decision shall be made by a 2:1 
majority and the decision shall be put into an agenda item for the consideration of 
the full house of the Municipal Corporation which shall be decided only by the 
elected members of the Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh through a simple 
majority of those present and voting.
38C. (1) The provisions of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution of India, 
regarding anti-defection law, as applicable to the Members of the Parliament and 
State Legislative Assemblies, shall apply to the elected representatives of the 
Municipal Corporation. 
(2) The Mayor, the Senior Deputy Mayor and the Deputy Mayor shall cease 
to be in office if they defect from the political party from which they have been so 
elected or resign from the political party which they were originally elected to that 
position.”;
(F) in section 41A, in sub-section (1), for the words “Administrator”, the words 
“duly elected Mayor” shall be substituted;
(G) in section 41E, in sub-section (1), for the words “Administrator”, the words 
“duly elected Mayor” shall be substituted;
Amendment of 
the Schedule.
2
5
10
15
25
35
20
30
40
45
Removal from 
Office. 
Mayor in 
Council.
Anti Defection. 

(H) after Section 45, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:–
“45A. Subject to the provisions of this Act and notwithstanding any other 
law for the time being in force, all matters relating to the governance of Union 
territory of Chandigarh, except those pertaining to law and order, shall be under the 
jurisdiction of the duly elected Mayor.
45B. (1) All officers of the Chandigarh administration, except those exercising 
purely police or law and order functions, shall be under the jurisdiction of the 
Mayor-in-Council.
(2) The annual confidential reports of all the officers of the Chandigarh 
administration, except those exercising law and order functions, shall be written by 
the Mayor, the Senior Deputy Mayor and the Deputy Mayor, respectively.
(3) The Mayor, the Senior Deputy Mayor and the Deputy Mayor, as the case 
may be, shall provide their comments on every officer from the rank of Sub-
Divisional Magistrate or its equivalent, with the Mayor in Council which shall be 
the reviewing and accepting authority for the Annual Confidential Report:
Provided that for all civil functions performed by officers engaged in police 
or law and order duties, they shall be accountable to the Mayor-in-Council in 
so far as their actions and Annual Confidential Reports are concerned:
Provided further that the process of initiating and accepting Annual 
Confidential Report in so far as law and order functions are concerned, the 
established hierarchy currently in practice shall be followed.”; and
(I) for section 47, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“47. (1) The Commissioner of the Corporation shall be appointed exclusively 
by the Mayor-in-Council from a panel of officers proposed by,—
(a) the Government of Punjab;
(b) the Government of Haryana ; and
(c) the Government of Union Territory of Chandigarh.
(2) The Commissioner shall report to the Mayor-in-Council. 
(3) For the purpose of the Annual Confidential Report, the Deputy Mayor and 
the Senior Deputy Mayor shall be the reporting authorities, while the Mayor of the 
Municipal Corporation shall be the reviewing and accepting authority in so far as 
the Annual Confidential Report of the Commissioner of the Municipal Corporation 
is concerned:
  Provided that where the Commissioner holds a lien on any service under 
any Government, the Mayor-in-Council may, at any time, place his services at 
the disposal of that respective Government.”.
.
3
Governance of 
Union territory 
of  Chandigarh. 
Administrative 
Jurisdiction of 
the Mayor in 
Council.
Appointment of 
Commissioner.
5
10
15
25
35
20
30

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Punjab Municipal Corporation Law (Extension to Chandigarh) Act, 1994, governs 
the functioning of the Chandigarh Municipal Corporation. The current method of electing the 
Mayor, the Senior Deputy Mayor and the Deputy Mayor by the Members of the Chandigarh 
Municipal Corporation every year more often than not leads to extraneous factors and 
considerations playing themselves out. This undermines the very essence of democracy. 
Moreover, such frequent annual elections subvert the integrity of the democratic process and 
divert attention from governance to perennial political maneuvering.
Under the existing provisions, the tenure of the Mayor, the Senior Deputy Mayor and 
the Deputy Mayor is limited to one year, despite the fact that the Municipal Corporation 
itself has a tenure of five years. This short tenure has led to several challenges in the efficient 
administration and governance of the Corporation.
Frequent changes in leadership result in discontinuity in decision-making, disrupts 
the implementation of long-term projects and hinders the smooth functioning of the 
Corporation. The limited tenure does not allow sufficient time for the Mayor to familiarise 
himself/herself with the complexities of municipal governance, and engage meaningfully 
with stakeholders, or execute developmental plans effectively. Furthermore, the repeated 
conduct of elections for the post of Mayor, the Senior Deputy Mayor and the Deputy Mayor 
every year leads to unnecessary expenditure of public funds, which could otherwise be 
utilised for developmental activities.
In addition to these structural inefficiencies, the principal Act vests significant and 
largely unrestricted powers in the Union Territory Administrator, rather than the elected 
Corporation. This undermines the autonomy of the Municipal Corporation and hampers its 
ability to execute developmental works efficiently. The lack of adequate decision-making 
authority at the elected level weakens grassroots governance and poses a serious challenge 
to the democratic fabric of the municipal administration. Strengthening the role of elected 
representatives is essential for ensuring accountable, transparent, and responsive governance 
at the local level.
In light of these concerns, the present Bill seeks to amend the Punjab Municipal 
Corporation Law (Extension to Chandigarh) Act, 1994, to provide for a stable and efficient 
governance structure by ensuring that the tenure of Mayor, the Senior Deputy Mayor and 
the Deputy Mayor is aligned with the tenure of the elected Municipal Corporation and the 
three are directly elected by all the electors of the Chandigarh parliamentary constituency 
for a term of five years. This will promote administrative continuity, better execution of 
municipal projects, and more effective governance for the residents of Chandigarh.
The proposed amendment is a necessary step towards strengthening the institutional 
framework of the Chandigarh Municipal Corporation, ensuring greater accountability in 
urban governance and upholding the principles of democratic de-centralisation, where 
except for law and order the governance of Chandigarh is vested in the Mayor in council. 
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                                              M A N I S H  T E W A R I  
February 14, 2025
4

ANNEXURE
[Extracts from the Punjab Municipal Corporation Law (Extension to 
Chandigarh) Act, 1994]
(45 of 1994)
*                 *                    *                       *                     *                   *                       *
THE SCHEDULE
(See section 2)
THE PUNJAB MUNICIPAL CORPORATION ACT, 1976
(PUNJAB ACT 42 OF 1976)
PART I
*                 *                    *                       *                     *                   *                       *
PART II
Section 4. (1) *               *                    *                       *                     *            *               *
(3) The Corporation shall be composed of the following members, namely:― 
(i) members to be directly elected, representing wards; 
(ii) nine members with voting rights to be nominated by the Administrator, from 
amongst the persons who are eminent or distinguished in public affairs or those who 
have special knowledge or practical experience in respect of municipal administration; 
and
*                 *                    *                       *                     *                   *                       *
Section 8. (1) *               *                    *                       *                     *            *               *
(2) The Administrator shall, by an order in the Official Gazette, determining,― 
(a) the number of wards; and
(b) extent of each ward.
*                 *                    *                       *                     *                   *                       *
Section 13A. (1) If any question arises as to whether a member has become subject to 
any disqualifications mentioned in section 13, the question shall be referred for the decision 
of the Administrator and his decision shall be final.
*                 *                    *                       *                     *                   *                       *
Section 38. (1) The Corporation shall, at its first meeting in each year, elect one of its 
elected members to be the Chairperson to be known as the Mayor and the other two such 
members to be the Senior Deputy Mayor and the Deputy Mayor of the Corporation: 
Provided that during the duration of the Corporation, the office of the Mayor shall 
be reserved in favour of a member who is a woman for the first and the fourth year of the 
Corporation and in favour of a member belonging to a Scheduled Caste in the third year of 
the Corporation.
*                 *                    *                       *                     *                   *                       *
5

Section 41A. (1) There shall be constituted such number of Wards Committees consisting 
of one or more wards, within the territorial area of the Corporation, as the Administrator 
may, from time to time, by order published in the Official Gazette, determine. The order 
shall indicate the name of the Wards Committee and also the extent of the area comprised 
within the jurisdiction of such Committee.
*                 *                    *                       *                     *                   *                       *
Section 41E. (1) The Administrator may, by order published in the Official Gazette, 
constitute one or more Special Committees in addition to Wards Committees and the 
Committees referred to in section 42, as he thinks fit for the exercise of any power or 
discharge of any function which the Corporation, may, by resolution, delegate to them or 
for inquiring into, reporting or advising upon any matter which the Corporation may refer 
to them.
*                 *                    *                       *                     *                   *                       *
Section  47. (1) The Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
a Class I officer, of the Government a minimum service as such of ten years as the 
Commissioner of the Corporation. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of Section (3), the Commissioner so appointed shall hold 
office for a term of three years in the first instance: 
Provided further that his appointment may be renewed for a term not exceeding 
three years: 
Provided further that no officer who has attained such age of superannuation as 
may from time to time be fixed by the Government shall be appointed or continue as 
Commissioner. 
(3) The Government—
(a) shall recall the Commissioner if at a special meeting of the Corporation called 
for the purpose a resolution for such recall has been passed by a majority of not less than 
two-thirds of the total number of members; 
(b) may recall the Commissioner at any time during the term of his appointment by 
giving a notice of at least one month to the Corporation.
6

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Punjab Municipal Corporation Law (Extension 
to Chandigarh) Act, 1994
_______ 
(Shri Manish Tewari, M.P .) 