1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI A.T. NANA PA TIL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
2. In article 24 of the Constitution, for the words “fourteen years”, the words “eighteen
years” shall be substituted.
Short title.
Bill No. 63 of 2015
Amendment
of  article 24.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The problem of child labour has assumed alarming proportion in the country. One of
the primary reasons for this being that the households are finding it difficult to sustain
themselves in view of increasing poverty and unemployment and hence engaging children
in various kinds of hazardous works to increase their income. The problem of child labour
is also increasing as a result of increasing migration to urban areas due to little employment
opportunities in rural areas. Even though Government has implemented a number of schemes
to root out this problem, the problem is still persisting. Article 24 of the Constitution provides
that no child below the age of fourteen years shall be employed in any factory or mine or
engaged in any hazardous employment. Even under the Right of Children to Free and
Compulsory Education Act, 2009, the provision for free education has been made for children
upto fourteen years of age. Employers are using child labour not only to lower their cost of
production but also to increase labour availability. This happens due to widely prevalent
poverty, illiteracy and other forms of economic deprivation. Since the law forbids employment
of children below fourteen years of age only, the factory owners can lawfully employ
children, who are in their tender years, in occupations that require hard labour. This robs the
childhood of small children and also makes them vulnerable to various forms of exploitation.
However, there are several other laws under which children have been defined as
those who are eighteen years or below. In view of this, it is not justifiable to keep age limit
at fourteen years for the purpose of their employment. The Bill, accordingly, seeks to amend
article 24 of the Constitution with a view to increase the age limit for child labour to eighteen
years. This will help protect childhood of our future generation from any kind of exploitation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; A.T. NANA PATIL
February 5,  2015

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE  CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * * *
24. No child below the age of fourteen years shall be employed to work in any factory
or mine or engaged in any other hazardous employment.
* * * * * *
Prohibition of
employment of
children in
factories, etc.

LOK  SABHA
——————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri A.T. Nana Patil, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4748LS(S4)—03-03-2015.