1
Short title and
commencement.
THE  BUREAU OF ACCOUNTABILITY BILL, 2017
By
SHRI VISHNU DAYAL RAM, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a Bureau of Accountability to suggest measures for
rooting out corruption; making the administration efficient and for matters
connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as  follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Bureau of Accountability Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  63 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Bureau” means the Bureau of Accountability established under section 3;
and
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Bureau to be known as the Bureau of Accountability for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) The Bureau shall consist of—
(i) three serving or retired Judges of the Supreme Court of India of whom one
shall be appointed as the Chairman of the Bureau;
(ii) the Cabinet Secretary to the Central Government, as member;
(iii) the Home Secretary to the Central  Government, as member;
(iv) Director to the Intelligence Bureau, as member;
(v) Director of the Central Bureau of  Investigation, as member;
(vi) one retired General of the Army, as member,
(vii) an eminent social worker, as member;
(viii) an eminent political activist, as member;
(ix) three serving or retired Chairpersons of Public Sector Undertakings to be
nominated by the Central Government, as members,
to be nominated by the Central Government; and
(x) two members of Parliament, one each from the House of the People and the
Council of States, to be nominated by the Presiding Officers of the respective Houses.
(3) The members of the Bureau shall have a tenure of six years from the date of their
appointment or nomination, as the case may be.
(4) The office of the Bureau shall be at New Delhi.
(5) The Central Government shall appoint such number of Officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the efficient functioning of the Bureau.
(6) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
members and officers and staff of the Bureau shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Bureau shall take  steps and suggest measures to the Central Government to—
(i) make the administration corruption free;
(ii) accelerate the pace of working in the Ministries of the Government of India;
and
(iii) implement the policies framed by the Central Government within the prescribed
time period.
5. The members of the Bureau shall carry out surprise inspections of various Ministries
and Departments of the Central Government and the Public Sector Undertakings from time to
time and suggest measures for carrying out administrative reforms in the functioning of the
Union Ministries, Departments and Public Sector Undertakings.
6. The Bureau shall formulate rules for its internal working and the rules so made shall
be laid before Houses of Parliament.
Definitions.
Establishment
of a Bureau of
Accountability.
Functions of
the Bureau.
Powers of the
Bureau.
Procedure to
be followed by
the Bureau in
its
functioning.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to
carry out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before
each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under such rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It has been emphasized time and again that low performing and inefficient bureaucracy
is a big hurdle in the development of the country. Some senior  officers and their subordinates
working in Government offices do not dispose of their official works within the prescribed or
reasonable time period. Many important files remain pending for months in Government
Offices and offices of Public Sector Undertakings which in turn leads to corruption. It is,
therefore, necessary that a high powered permanent Bureau should be set up to accelerate
the pace of work of bureaucracy and ensure timely completion of work. This will also  help in
rooting out corruption.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VISHNU DAYAL RAM
February 27, 2017.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall establish a Bureau of
Accountability. It further provides that the Central Government shall appoint such number
of officers and staff as it considers necessary for the efficient functioning of the Bureau.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a Bureau of Accountability to suggest measures for
rooting out corruption; making the administration efficient and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—5096LS(S3)—27-03-2017.