Bill No. 64 of 1955 
... 
THE INSURANCE (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1955 
• 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

BUt No. '" of 1955. 
THE INSURANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, I955 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Insurance Act, 1938. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called th~ Insurance (Amendment) Act, SLort title and com-
1955. \ mencement. 
~ (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the first day 
- of November, 1955. 
IV ':If 1938. 2. In the Insurance Act, 1938 (hereinafter referred to as the Insertion of 
princ~pal Act), after sectiori 52B, the following section shall be ~;BBc:ction 
inserted, namely:-
10 "52BB. (1) If the Administrator is satisfied that any person Powers of 
has rendered himself liable to be proceeded against under section Adminiltra-
106, he may, pending the institution of proceedings against such ~~~ r~:~~;ty 
person under that section, by order in writing, prohibit him or liable to 
any ot~er person from transferring or otherwise disposing of any ~m:::-
15 property which, in the opinion of the Administrator, would be tion 106. 
liable to attachment in proceedings under that section. 
20 
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the Admi-
nistrator under sub-Section (1) may, within fourteen days from 
the date on which the order is served on him, appeal against 
such order to the Central Government, and the Central Govern-
ment may pass such order thereon as it thinks fit. 
(3) An order made by the Administrator under sub-section 
(1) shall, subject to any order made by the Central Government 

2 
on appeal, be in force fur a period of three months from the date 
of the order unless, before the expiry of the said period, an 
application is made under sub-section (1) of section 106 to the 
court competent to exercise jurisdiction under that sub-
section, and when such an application is made, the order shall, 5 
subject to any order made by that court, continue in force as if 
it were an order of attachment made by that court in proceed-
ings under that section. 
(4) An order made by the Administrator under this section 10 
shall,-
(a) in the case of an order affecting a corporation or 
firm, be served in the manner provided for the service of 
summons in rule 2 of Order XXIX or rule 3 of Order XXX, 
as the case may be, in the First Schedule to the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908, and IS VII of 1908. 
(b) in the case of an order affecting a person not being 
a corporation or firm, be served on such person-
(i) personally, by delivering. or tendering to him 
the order, or 
(ii) by post, or 
(i'ii) where the person cannot be found, by leaving 
a copy of the order with some adult male member of his 
. family or by affixing such copy to some conspicuous part 
of the permises in which he is known to have last resided 
20 
or carried on business or personally worked for gain, 2S 
and every such order shall also be published in the Official 
Gazette. 
(5) If any question arises whether a person was duly served 
with an order under sub-section (4), the publication of the order 
in the Official Gazette shall be conclusive proof that the order 30 
was so served, and a failure to comply with the provisions of 
clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (4) shall not affect the 
validi ty of the order. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any 
property in respect of which an order has been made by the 35 
Administrator may, with the previous permission of the Admi-
nistrator and subject to such terms and conditions as he may 
impose, be transferred or otherwise disposed of. 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law 
for the time being in force, the transfer or other disposition of 40 

s 
)0 
XLV of 1860 
Vof 1908. 
IS 
20 
XLVofI860. 
~o 
3S 
3 
any property in contravention of any order made by the Adminis-
trator under this section or of any terms and conditions 
imposed by him shall be void. 
(8) For the purpose of enabling him to form an opinIOn as 
to whether any.property would be liable to attachment in pro-
ceedings under section 106 or for the purpose of enabling him to 
institute proceedings under that section, the Administrator may 
require any person to furnish information on such points or 
matters as, in thz opinion of the Administrator, may be relevant 
for thz purpose, and any person so required shall be deemed to 
be legally bound to furnish such information within the meaning 
of section 176 of the Indian Penal Code. 
(9) The Administrator shall have all the powers of a civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit 
in respect of the following matters, namely:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of wit-
nesses and examining them on oath; 
(b) requiring the production of documents; and 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
and any proceeding before the Administrator under this section 
shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of 
sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code. 
(10) Save as provided in this section or in section 106, and 
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force,-
(a) no suit or other legal proceeding shall lie in any 
court to set aside or modify any order of the Administrator 
or the Central Government made under this section, and 
(b) no court shall pass any dzcree, grant any injunction 
or make any other order which shall have the effect of 
nullifying or affecting in any way any such order.". 
3. In section 52G of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the Amendment 
words and figures "sections 52A to 52C inclusive", the following shall of section 
be substituted, namely: _ )2G. 
"section 52A, section 52B, section 52BB or section 52C". 

4 
substitution 4. For section 106 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
~~:efur':_ be, and shall b~ deemed always to have been, substituted, namely:-
don 106. 
Power of 
court to or-
der restora-
tiOl1 of pro-
perty of in-
surer or 
compensa-
dOD in cer-
tain cases. 
"106. (1) If, on the application of the Controller or an Adminis-
trator appointed under section 52A or an insurer or any 
policy-holder or any member of an insurance company or the 5 
liquidator of an insurance company (in the" event of the insur-
ance company b~ing in liquidation), the court is satisfied-
(a) that any insurer (including in any case where the 
insurer is an insurance company any person who has taken 
part in the promotion or formation of the insurance com- 10 
pany or any past or present director, managing agent, 
manager, secretary or liquidator) or any officer, employee or 
agent of the insurer,-
(i) has misapplied or retained or become liable or 
become accountable for any money or property of the I ~ 
insurer; or 
(ii) has been guilty of any misfeasance or breach 
of trust in relation to the insurer; or 
(b) that any person, whether he is or has been in any 
way connected with the affairs of the insurer or not, is in 20 
wrongful possession of any money or property of the insur~r 
or having any such money or property in his possession 
wrongfully withholds it or has converted it to any use 
other than that of the insurer; or 
(c) that by reason of any contravention of the provi- 25 
sions of this Act, the amount of the life insurance fund has 
been diminished; 
the court may examine any such insurer, director, managing agent, 
manager, secretary or liqUidator or any such officer, employee 
or agent of the insurer or such other person, as the case may be, 30 
and may compel him to contribute such sums to the assets of 
the insurer by way of compensation in respect of the misapplica-
tion, retainer, misfeasance or breach of trust as the court thinks 
fit, or to pay such sum as may be found due from him in respect 
of any money or property of the insurer for which he is liable 35 
or accountable or to restore any money or property of the insurer 
or any- part thereof, as the case may be; and where the amount of 
the life insurance fund has been diminished by reason of any 
contravention of the- provisions of this Act, the court shall have 
power to assess the sum by which the amount of the fund has been 40 
diminished and to order the person guilty of such contravention to 
contribute to the fund the whole or any part of that sum by way of 

S 
compensation; and in any of the aforesaid cases the court shan 
have power to order interest to be paid at such rate and from such 
time as the court may deem fit. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-
, section (1) or sub-section (3), where it is proved that any money 
or property of an insurer has disappeared or has been lost, the 
court shall presume that every person in charge of, or having a 
disposing power over, such money or property at the relevant 
time (whether a director, manager, principal officer or, any other 
10 officer) has become accountable for such money or property 
within the meaning of sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of sub-
section (1), and the provisions of that sub-section shall apply 
accordingly, unless such person proves that the money or pro-
perty has been utilised or disposed of in the ordinary course of 
IS . the business of the insurer and for the purpose of that business 
or that he took all reasonable steps to prevent the disappearance 
or loss of such money or property or otherwise satisfactorily 
accounts for such disappearance or loss. 
(3) Where the insurer is an insurance company and any of 
~o the acts referred to in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) 
has been committed by any person, every person who was at 
the relevant time al director, managing agent, manager, liquidator, 
secretary ·or other officer of the insurance company shall, 
for the purposes of that sub--section, be deemed to be liable for 
.2S that act in the same manner and to the same extent as the 
person who has committed the act, unless he proves that the act 
was committed without his consent or connivance and was not 
facllitated by any neglect or omission on his part. 
(4) Where at any stage of the proceedings against any person 
30 under this section (hereinafter referred to as the delinquent), 
the court is satisfied by affidavit or otherwise-
(a) that a: pTima facie case has been made out against 
~he delinquent; and . 
(b) that it is just and proper so to db in the interests 
3' of the policy-holders of an insurer or of the members of an 
insurance company, 
the court may direct the attachment of-
(i) any property of the insurer in the possession of 
the delinquent; 
(it) any property of the delinquent which belongs 
to him or is deemed to belong to him within the meaning 
of sub-section (5); 

6 
(iii) any property transferred by the delinquent 
within two years before the commencement of proceed-
ings under sub-section (1) or during the pendency of 
such proceedings, if the court is satisfied by affidavit or 
otherwise that the transfer was otherwise than in good S 
faith and for consideration. 
(5) For the purposes of sub-section (4), the following classes 
of property shall be deemed to belong to a delinquent,-
(a) any property standing in the name of any person 
which by reason of the person being connected with the IC> 
delinquent, whether by way of relationship or otherwise, 
or on account of any other relevant circumstances a'ppears 
to belong to the delinquent; 
(b) the property of a private company in respect of the 
affairs of which the delinquent, by himself or through his.lS 
nominees, relatives, partners or persons interested in any 
shares of the company is able to exercise or i~ entitled to 
acquire control, whether direct or indirect. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section a person shall 
be deemed to be a nominee of a delinquent, if, whether directly 20-
or indirectly, he possesses on behaJf of the delinquent, or may 
be required to exercise on the direction or on behalf of the 
delinquent, any right or power which is of such a nature as to 
enable the delinquent to exercise or'to entitle the delinquent to 
acquire control over the company's affairs. loS 
(6) Any claim to any property attached under this section 
or any objection to such attachment shall be made by an appli-
catioJ.l to the court, and it shall be for the claimant or objector 
to adduce evidence to show that the property is not liable to 
attachment under thjs section, and the court shall proceed to 3C> 
investigate the claim or objection in a' summary manner. 
(7) When disposing of an application under sub-section (1), the 
court shall, after giving all persons who appear to it to be inter-
ested in any property attached under this section an opportunjty 
of being heard, make such order as it thinks fit respecting the 35. 
disposal of any such property for the purpose of effectually 
enforcing any liability . under this section, and all such persons 
shall be deemed to be parties to the proceedings under this 
section. 
. . . 
(8) In any proceedings under this section the court shall 40' 
have full power and exclusive jurisdiction to decide all questions 

VII of 1913· 
Amendment 
of section 
107· 
10 
IS 
20 
• 2S 
3S 
1 
of any nature whatsoever arising thereunder and, in particula,r, 
with respect to any property attached under this section, and no 
other court shall have jurisdjction to decide any such question in 
any suit or other legal proceeding. 
(9) In making any order with respect to the disposal of the 
property of any private company referred to in clause (b) of 
sub-section (5), the court shall have due regard to the interests 
of all persons interested in such property other than the delin-
quent and persons referred to in that clause. 
(10) This section shall apply notwithstanding that the act 
is one for which the person concerned may be criminally liable. 
(11) In proceedings under this section the court shall have 
aU the powers which a court has under section 237 of the Indian 
Companies Act, 1913. 
(12) This section shall apply jn respect of a provident 
society as defined in Part III as it applies in respect of an 
insurer. 
(13) On and from the commencement of the Insurance 
. (Amendment) Act, 1955, the court entitled to exercise 
jurisdiction under this section shall be the High Court within 
whose jurisdiction the registered office of the insurer is situate 
(hereinafter referred to as the High Court) and any proceedings 
under this section pending at such commencement in any court 
other than the High Court shall, on such. commencement, stand 
transferred to the High Court. 
(14) The High Court may make rules providing for-
(a) the manner in which enquiries and proceedings may 
be held under this section; 
(b) any other matter for which provision has to be made 
for enabling the High Court to effectively exercise its 
jurisdiction under this section .... 
5. In section 107 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),-
(a) after the words "the Controller", the words and figures 
"or an Administrator appointed under section 52A" shall be 
inserted~ 
. 
(b) fOF the words, brackets and figures "any director, 
manager ot other officer of an insurer or any person who is 
liable under sub-section (2) of section 41", the words, brackets and 

8 
figures "any director, managing agent, manager, secretary or 
other officer of an insurer or any liquidator or any employee or 
agent of an insurer or any person who is liable under sub-section 
(2) of section 41 or any other person" shall be substituted. 
~ 6 6. The Insurance (Amendment) Ordinance, 1955, is hereby 5 
of I9!iS. repealed. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The scope. of the existing section 106 of th~ Insurance Act is 
somewhat limited. It has proved inadequate for dealing with cases 
where the diminution of the life insurance fund has occurred 
because of some action other than a contravention of the Act or by 
a person who is not in any way connected with the insurer. There 
is also the danger that a delinquent in order to evade any decree 
that may be passed against him in proceedings under section 106 
may fraudulently conceal or transfer his property. The scope of 
section 106 is, therefore, being enlarged to include within its ambit 
all possible cases of misfeasance. The court exercising jurisdiction 
under that sectjon is also being empowered to attach-
(a) any property of the insurer in the possession of the 
delinquent; 
(b) any property of the delinquent which belongs to him 
or which although ostensibly standing in the name of any other 
person (including a private company which is controlled by the 
delinquent) really belongs to him; and 
(c) any property transferred by the delinquent within two 
years before the commencement of the proceedings against him 
or during the pendency of such proceedings. 
2. It is possible that in' certain cases the delinquent may conceal 
or transfer his property before any proceedings are instituted 
against him' under section 106. In order to meet such a situa-
tion, an Administrator appointed under section 52A is being 
empowered, pending the institution of proceedings by him under 
section 106 against the delinquent, to attach any property which 
may be liable to attachment by the court in proceedings under that 
section. An order of attachment made by the Administrator wHl 
have effect for a period of two months only but subject to any order 
made by the .court will continue in force if proceedings under section 
106 are instituted before the expiry of that period. 
3. Since section 106 in its revised form confers very wide powers 
upon the court, the jurisdictjon under that section will henceforth' 
be exercised by a High Court. 
4. The Bill makes certain . other incidental and consequential 
amendments in the principal Act. 
NEW DELHI; C. D. DESHMUKH. 
The 28th November, 1955. 
9 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INSURANCE ACT, 1938 
(IV of 1938) 
• • * • • 
Pr~tectiOll of 520. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
~d~~ ra:! against an Administrator for anything which is in good faith done 
tions s2A to or intended to be done in pursuance of sections 52A to 52C inclusive. 
520. 
* • • • • 
Wrongfully 106. (1) If on the application of the Controller or an insurer or 
~}~:~=ce any member of an insurance company or any policy-holder or the 
fund. liquidator of an insurance company (in the event of the insurer 
being in liquidation) the Court is satisfied that by reason of any 
contravention of the provisions of this Act the amount of the life 
insurance fund has been diminished, every person who was at the 
time of the contravention a director, manager, liquidator or an 
officer of the insurer shall be deemed in respect of the contravention 
to have been guilty of misfeasance in relation to the insurer unless 
he proves that the contravention occurred without his consent or 
connivance and was not facilitated by any neglect or omission on 
his part; and the Court shall have aU the powers which a Court has 
under sections 235 and 237 of the Indian' Companies Act, 1913, and VII of 1913. 
shall also have the power to assess the sum by which the amount 
of the life insurance fund has been diminished by reason of the 
misfeasance and to order any person guilty thereof to contribute 
to that fund the whole or any part of that sum ~ way of compen-
sation. 
(2) This section shall apply in respect of a provident society as 
defined in Part III as it applies in respect of an insurer. 
• • • * * 
....1 
Previous 107. (1) Except where proceedings are instituted by the Con-
~=teof . troller no proceedings under this Act against an insurer or any 
~er&! Cor director, manager ot other officer of an insurer or any person who 
;=:p~f is liable under sub-section (2) of section 41 shall be instituted by 
any person unless he has previous thereto obtained the sanction of 
the Advocate General of the State where' the principal place of 
business in the States of such insurer is situate to the institution of 
such proceedings: 
10 

11 
Provided that where the principal place of business of such 
insurer is situated in a Part C State references in this section to 
Advocate General of the Province shall be construed as references 
to the Attorney General for India. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
L _ _ 
A 
BILL 
funher to amend the Insurance Act,· 1938. 
(Shri C. D. Deshmukh, Minister of Finance) 
GIPD-LAD-I401 LS-3O-II-SS-I600. 