30 of 1954. 
. ,-. 
As INTRODVCJ:D IN LoK SABRA ON 
",' , 
-<. 
; ,. ~ 
I.': 
,., . 
Bill No. 64 0' 1989 
THE SALARY. ALLOWANCES AND PENSION OF MEMBERS 
OF PARLIAMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1989 
A 
BILL 
f'urther to 'amend the Salary, ALlowances aM Pension of Members 
of Parliament Act, 1954. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fortieth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Mem- Short 
bers of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1989. title. 
5 2. In section 6A of the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of 
Parliament Act, 1954, to clause (b) of sub- section (1) and claUSe (iii) 
of su"'sectioD (6), the foRowing ~all beaclded at the ~d, numely:-
"and back". 
Amend~ 
ment of 
section 
6A. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Every member of Parliament representing the Union territory of 
Andaman and Niooba.r Islands and the Union territory of Labhadweep is 
entitled to air travel facility along with his spouse or companion from the 
usual place of residence in the Island to the nearest airport in the main 
land of India. For the return journey, steam~ facllity is provided at 
present. On the recommendation of the Joint Committee on Salaries and 
Allowances of Members of Parliament, it is proposed to allow air travel 
facility for the return journey also from the nearest airport in the mainland 
to the usual place of residence in the Island. 
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object. 
NEW DELHI; H. K. L. BHAGAT. 
The 7th August, 1989. 
'2 

FINANCIAL MZMO!tANDUM 
The Bill seeks to amend provWoo.s of section 6A of the Act to provide 
for air travel facility to every member representing the Union territories 
of Andaman and Nicobar Islands arui Lakshadweep and his spouse or com-
panion on the return joumey from the nearest airport in the mainland of 
India to the usual place of residence in the Island. 
2. The aboore prO\Ti'ldon ·ia apeeted to tnvehe .. reeuninS .~ 
from the Consolidated Fund of india to the taae of Ra. 3%,8GO per annum. 
.approximately. 
3. 'nle pnmslons of. the Bill will not involve any 'Other expenniture 
other recurring at non-teClDrlftg. 
I 

Free 
tr8Dlit 
by 
steamer. 
-AN~iXI1RE I· '. t 
EXTRACTS FROM THE SALARY, ALLoWANCEs AND PENSION OF MEMBERS OF 
PA!lLIAMENT A;e-r, 1954 
, -:It ., -,' 
(30 OF 1954) :F' r. 
-. • • • · :. 
SA. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 6, every member 
repl'ellenting the· UBiOll territory .of tbe~an and Nico~,IslanQs or 
the Union -tenitory of Laklbadweep· shall.....;. 
• • • • • • 
(Q)be entitled to an aJJlount ~ual to the ·fare by air from his 
usual place of residence to the nearest.. airport in the main land of 
India: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be construed as absolv-
ing the member from payment of any diet charges payable by him during 
such trav~l. 
• • • • • 
(6) In addition to the facilities provided to a member under sub-
section (1), he shall also be entitled-
• • • • • 
(iii) to an amount equal to the fare by air either for the spouse, 
if any, of the member or for one person to accompany the mem~r 
from the usual place of residence in the Island to the nearest airport 
of the main land of India: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be construed as 
absolvin~ the person accompanying the member or the spouse of the mem. 
ber from oaym'?nt of any diet cJiarges pavable by such person or spome 
during such travel. 
• • • • • 
4 & 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Salaly, Allowances and Pension Of Members of 
Parliament Act, 1D54. 
(Shn H. K. L. Bhagat, Ministe1' of Parliamentary Affairs.) 