8m No. '4 of 1961 
THE INDIAN RAILWAYS (SECOND 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SA8HA 
ON 28TH NOVEMBER, 1961) 
-
2--'f<) , " ," , , 

9 of 1890. 
8 ot 1923. 
BIU No '1 of 1961. 
THE INDIAN RAILWAYS (SECOJS]) AMENDMENT) 
BILL, I¢>I 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Railway. Act, 1890. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:~ I 
1. This Act may be called the Indian Railways (Second Amend- Short tide. 
ment) Act, 1961. 
5 2. In section 82A of the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (hereinafter Amendment 
referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (2), for the words ohection 
"ten thousand rupees", the words "twenty thousand rupees" shall 82.\. 
be substituted. 
3. For section 82H of the principal Act, the following section shall Substitution 
10 be substituted, namely:"""; '1' ofn~w sectIon for 
. .. tcction 82H. 
"82H. (1) The rIght of any person to claIm compensatIon Saving alto 
under section 82A shall not affect the right of any such person to ~rtain 
recover compensation payable under the Workmen's Compensa- rIghts. 
tion Act, 1923 or any other law for the time being in force; but 
IS no person shall be entitled to claim compensation more than once 
in respect of the same accident. 
20 
(2) Nothing in sub-eection (1) shall affect the right of any 
person to claim compensation payable under any contract or 
scheme providing for payment of compenaation for death or per-
sonal injury or f()r damage to property or any .um payable under 
any policy of insurance.": ! 

Amendment 
ot"section 
126. 
Amendment 
oflection 
127· 
Amendment 
ofaection 
128. 
4. In section 126 of the principal Act, for the words "with trans-
portation for life or with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to ten years", the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"with imprisonment for life or with rigorous inlprisonment 
for a term which may extend to ten years: 5 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons 
1;0 the contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, 
where a person is prescribed with rigorous imprisonment, 
such rigorous imprisonment shall.-
(a) in the case of a first conviction, be not less than 10 
three years, or 
('b) in the case of a subsequent conviction, be not less 
than seven years.". 
5. In section 127 of the principal Act, for the words "transportation 
for life", the wo.rds "imprisonment for life" shall be substituted. IS 
6. In section 128 of the principal Act, for the words "with 1m-
prisonment for a term which may extend to two years", the follow-
ing shall be substituted, namely:-
"with imprisonment for a term which may ext~nd to five 
years: 20 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons 
to the contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, 
such imprisonment shall.-
(a) in the case of a first conviction, be not less than six 
months, or 
(b) in the case of a subsequent conviction, be not less 
than two years.". 

~ 
7 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under section 82A of the Indian Railways Act, 1890, the maxi-
mum liability of the railway administration for loss occasione« by 
the death of a passenger dying as a result of a railway accident aad 
for personal injury and loss of property is limited to Rs. 10,000 in 
respect of anyone person. In view of the present increased COlt of 
living and the per capita income, it is proposed to raise thiJ limit to 
Rs. 20,000. 
Section 82H of the Act provides that the right to claim compen-
sation under section 82A does not affect the right to claim compen-
sation under the Workmen's Compensation Act or any other law for 
the time being in force. This has been interpreted to mean that, ia 
respect of the same accident, claims may be made' for compensatioR 
under the Railways Act as well as under the Workmen's Compen-
sation Act or any other law. Prima facie, there seems to be no rea-
son why compensation should be paid under more than one law 
especially when the railway has assumed liability whether there is 
negligence on the part of the railway or not and also when the maxi-
mum limit of liability is to be increased to Rs. 20,000. It is accordingly 
proposed to restrict the right to claim compensation under anyone 
of the laws referred to above. This does not, however, affect the 
right to claim compensation under any contract or scheme or policy 
of insurance. 
Section 126 of the Act provides a penalty of imprisonment which 
may extend to 10 years. In practice, however, the courts haye 
usually let off the criminals with lighter punishments which have 
not proved to be sufficiently deterrent. It is, therefore, proposed to 
amend the section so as to provide for a minimum punishment unle. 
there are special and adequate reasons for not awarding the minimum 
sentence. It is also proposed to amend section 128 (which deals with 
a cognate offence) on similar lines. 
The Bill is intended to give effect to the above proposals. Oppor-
tunity has also been taken to make certain other amendment. of • 
formal nature. 
NEW DELHI; 
JAGJIVAN RAM. 
The 21st November, 1961. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Under section 82A (2) of the Indian Railways Act, the maximum 
limit of liability of the railway administration in respect of anyone 
person is Rs. 10,000. Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to increase this 
maximum. limit to Rs. 20,000. In view of the increase in the maxi-
mum. limit of compensation, it will be necessary to revise the rates 
at which compensation is payable. This involves additional expendi-
ture from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that the 
additional expenditure on this account will approximately be Rs. 8 
lakhs per annum; in other words, the total expenditure is likely to be 
Rs. 13.5 lakhs as against Rs. 5·5 lakhs at present. 
:\.~ ' ... ' ... ·;,i: 

82A, 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIA.N RAIL~A.YS ACT, 1890 
(9 OF 1890) 
.. .. .. .. .. 
.. .. .. .. .. 
Liability of 
railway ad-
ministration 
(2) Th I ' b'l't f 'I d' 't t' d thi ,in respect or e la 11 y 0 a ral way a mmls ra Ion un er s sectIon lCCidcnts'to 
shall in no case exceed ten thousand rupees in respect of any one ~rain8 can'J'" Inl as eD-
gers . person. 
.. • • • • 
82H. Nothing contained in the foregoing sections relating to the Sa\'l~1 al to 
right of any person to claim compensation under section 82A shall ~:~~ 
affect the right of any such person to recover any compensation pay-
~ of 1923, able under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, or any ather law 
for the time being in force or under any contract or scheme providing 
for payment of compensatio:1 for death or personal injury or for 
damage to property or any sur.! payable under any policy of insurance, 
.. .. .. .. .. 
126, If a person unlawfully-
(a) puts or throws upon or across any railway 
stone or other matter or thing, or 
Maliciously 
wrcckin, or 
any wood attemptiol , to wreck a 
(b) takes up, removes, loosens or displaces any rail, 
sleeper or other matter or thing belonging to any railway, or 
(c) turns, moves, unlocks or diverts any points or other 
machinery belonging to any railway, or 
(d) makes or shows, or hides or removes, any signal or light 
upon or near to any railway, or 
(e) does or causes to be done or attempts to do any other act 
or thing in relation to any railway, with intent, or with knowledge 
that he is likely, to endanger the safety of any person travelling 
or being upon the railway, he shall be punished with transporta-
tion for life or with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to ten years, 
train. 

6 
Maliciously 127. If a person unlawfully throws or causes to fall or strike at, 
hurting or against, into or upon any rolling-stock forming part of a train any 
~~~~Pt~'n~ wood, stone or other matter or thing with intent, or with knowledge 
tr~"efling by that he is likely, to endanger the safety of any person being in or 
railway. upon such rolling-stock or in or upon any other rolling-stock forming 
part of the same train, he shall be punished with transportation fC'r 
life or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years. 
Endangering 128. If a person, by any unlawful1lct or by any wilful omission or 
=-;'~na ;:_ neglect, endangers or causes to be endangered the safety of any 
ve,lIina br person travelling or being upon any railway, or obstructs or causes 
=ilfui~ tz to be obstructed or attempts to obstruct any rolling-stock upon any 
omit,ioD. railway, he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term whic1 
may extend to two years. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Railways Act, 1890. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) cf 
article 117 of the Constitution of India, recommendt:d to 
Lok Sabha the introduction and cL'nsideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(ShriJagjiwan Ram, 
Mimster of Railways.) 