As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
• . , :l 
'·'r·'· 
" 
.~ 
.' l 
) 
, .~ 
BlII '0. '1of I'" 
(SUPPLY) AMENDMENT BILL, 1966 
BILL 
. :?~ 
~. further to amend the EZectricity (SuppZy) Act. 1948. 
,.~ it enaeted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the 
:.:1Iiipiblic of India as follows:-
••• ,l;l. This Act may be called the Electricity (Supply) Amendment Short 
. 1866. title. 
After section 1 of the Electricity (Supply) Act,. i948 (herein- Insertion 
. to as the princip,aI Act), the following ~OD shall be :!c~~:n 
namely: -" lA. 
,' ..... ~ • .IJ". The provislo •• of this Act rela" .. to State Electricit, 
•· ....... 1 •• lalda ceased to Jaave drcct ba tile Vaioa Territory of 
el'ect &om the 7tJa AprU, 19S8, b, virtue of sectioa 
dae Dellai Municipal Coroporation Act, 19S7, slaall revive 
.. CODle iato Iorce fn tlaat V.fOD tel'l'ltol'J _ sucla date .. tlae 
Provisions 
of Act 
rel.tiD, 
to State 
Electricity 
Board8 

to revive 
In the 
Union 
territory 
ofn-illU 
and appky 
thereto 
with 
certain 
modUlea- , 
tions. 
Insertion 
of new 
Tenth 
Schedule. 
Constitu-
tion and 
composi-
. lioo of 
State 
Eleetri_ 
cit)' 
Board. 
'I 
-
2 
State GoYer .. meat may, by .. otificatfonln the Ofticial Gazette, 
appomt, 10, ho"ev~, that ia their application to that Union 
territol'J;the laid provisions shall be subject to the modifica. 
tlo .. , apecl1lccll:a tlae Te .. th Schedule." 
J. After tho: Ninth Schedule to th'! principal Act, the following 5 
Schedule shan be inserted, namely:-
1. .section 5-
'THE TENTH SCHEDULE 
(See section lA) 
For section 5, substitute- 10 
"5. (1) The State Government shall, as soon as may be 
after the issue of the notification under section lA constitute, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, a State Electricity 
Board under such name as' shall ·be specified in the notifica-
tion. 
. . 
!_. ,,0' OJ ~~ .i.Phe Board shan consist of a Chairman to be appoint-
ed ·b,. the . state': Government· and ftve: othef' memberS of 
whom-
IS 
(a) two shall be elected by the members of the 
M«:tropolitan Council of Delhi from among themselves; 20 
. (b) one shall be elected by thememhe:s of the 
Municipal Corporation of Delhi from amo?8 themselves: 
(e) two shall be appointed by the State Govemment. . 
o 4 
(3) The Chairman and the two members appointed by 1 
the State Government shall be full.time members, and of 2~ 
them-
(a) one shall be a person who has experience of. 
and hu ahown capacity in, commercial matters and 
admfnfstration; 
(b) one shali be ~ ,~~trica(enpeerof wide eX-
perience; and 

r 
-II') 
3 
(c) the other shall be a person who hal experience 
of accounting and financial matters in a public utility 
undertaking, preferably an el~icity supply under-
taki n& 
~4) A ~rson shall be disqualllled for being appointed 
Q a member of the Board if he is a member of Parliament 
or of any State Legislature. 
(5) No act done by the Board shall be called in question 
on the ground only of the exj·te.DI:e ~ . any vacancy in, or 
any. defect in the constitution of, th~ Board~". . , 
2. Section..6 GnG. 7- ~ 
~ .. ;. . omi~ectio~ 6 and 7. 
" ... ~ .... 
• ,.. 3. Section s:-
For "re-appointment", substitute "re-appointment or, 
as' the case- may be, re-election" . 
. ~. . 4. Section 10-
(a) in sub-section (1). in clause (d) , omit "or any local 
authority"; 
(b) in sub-section (3), for "appointed", substitute "appoint-
ed or, as the case may be, elected"; 
(c) in sub-section (4), for "re-appointment", substitute 
C"re-appointment or re-election"; 
(d) in sub-section (5) ,for "and appoint a' Chairman and 
members in their places", substitute "and reconatitute the Board 
in accordance with the provisiOns of section 5~'. 
Ii'or "or any other member of the Board", substitute "or any 
.other member of the Board appointed .by the State Government". 
(4) for sub-section (1), substitute-
:. cc (1) The State Government shaD constitute a State 
Electricity Consultative Council for the State."; 
in sub-section (2), omit "or the State Governments 
D~II'ft •• ..t" wherever occurrin" and "or thiDk". 
~. ..:,.,. 
. ; i . ~'} .. 
.. 
r 
j 
I 
t: 

Board to 
proVIde 
bulk 
supptyof 
electricity 
for Muni-
CIpal Cor-
poratio:: 
of Delhi, 
New Delhi 
Municipal-
Commit-
tee and 
Military ,"" 
Engineer 
Services, 
Delhi 
Canton-
ment. 
7. Section 18--
After clause (a), insert-
"(00) to carry out any scheme for the generation and 
supply of electricity prepared and sanctioned in relation to 
the Union t.erritory of Delhi or any part thereof by any S 
competent authority before the constitution ot the Board and 
execute any work undertaken in pursuance of any such 
scheme;". 
8. New section 18A-
After section 18, insert- 10 
"18A Without prejudice to the provisions of section 18, 
the Board shall be bound to provide bulk supply of eleetri-
city for the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, the New Delhi 
Municipal Committee and the Militaiy "Engineer Services, 
Delhi Cantonment, up to the quantity demanded by each of IS 
these authorities or, if the total demand is in excess of the 
,available supply, up to such proportion in the case of each 
of these authorities as the Board may, with the approval of 
the State Government, determine .... 
\ "" 
.' 
~, 
9. Section 60-
. ';': 
In sub-sections (1) and (2), for "under sub-section (4) of 
section 1", substitute "under section lA". 
10. Section 61-
(a) in sub-section (3), for "on the table of the House or, as 
the case may be, Houses of the State Legislature", substitute 
"before the Metropolitan Council of Delhi"; 
'(b) in SUb-section (4), for "State Legislature", 
" Metropolitan Counctl of Delhi". 
11. Section 63-
Omit "with the approval of the State Legislature,". 
12. Section 6~ 
,.In sub-section (3), omit "with the approval of the State 
Legislative Assembly,", 
13. Section 66-
_ r:::, Omit the proviso. 
." 

14. Section 69-
In clause (a) of sub-section (5), (or "State Legislature", 
substitute "Metropolitan Council of Delhi". 
15:- Section 75-
5 In sub-section (lA), for"State Legislature", substitute "MetrO-
politan Council of Delhi". 
-16. Section 78-
In clause (a) of sub-section (2), for "re-appointment", sub-
stitute "re-appointment or re-electioli". 
17. New sections 83A, 83B, and 8~C-
After section 83, insert-
"fi3A. As soon as may be after the issue of the notifi- Power of 
cation under section lA, but before the constitution of the State 
Board under section 5, the State Government shall, after con- Govetrnt -.. mm 0 
sultation with the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, deter- determine 
mine-- stores, 
articles, 
(II) which stores, articles and other movable pro- etc~ 
perties belonging to,or veJ;ted in,the Municipal Corpora-
tion of Delhi for the purpose of the· Delhi Electric Supply 
Undertaking, are being used or utilised, or are required, 
by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi,for the generation 
of power or for the maintenance, repair or extension of 
generating stations, main transmission lines of 33 k.v. 
and above and sub-stations receiving power from such 
transrn ission lines; 
(b) which debts, obligations and liabilities have been 
incurred, which contracts have been entered into and 
what all matters and things have been engaged to be 
done by, with or for the Municipal Corporation of Delhi 
in relation to the stores, articles and other movable pro-
perties referred to in clause (II) or in connection with 
the generation of power or in connection with the main-
tenance, repair or extension of generating stations, main 
transmission lines of 33 k.v. and above and sub-stations 
receiving power from such transmission lines; 
(e) which officers and other employees of the Muni-
cipal Corporation of Delhi ~re serving that Corporation 
and are required in connection ~ith the generation of 
.. . 

Vesting 
of certain 
properties 
in the 
Board, 
provision 
regarding 
debts, 
obUga-
tiona, etc. 
6 
power or in connection with the maintenance, repair or 
extension of generating stations,main tra, smission lines 
of 33 k.v. and above aad sub-stations receiving power 
from such transmission lines or in connection with 
any matter incidental to such generation, maintenance, S 
repair or extension. 
83B. On the constitution of a Board under section 5,-
(II) all generating stations, main transmission lines 
of 33 k.v. and above and works pertaining th~eto, all 
sub-stations receiving power from such transmission 10 
lines and all interests of 'whatsoever nature and kind 
therein, belonging to or vested in the Municipal Cor-
poration of Delhi for the purpose of the Delhi Electric 1 
Supply Undertaking immediately before such constitu-
tion, shall vest in the Board; r 1j 
(b) all stores, articles and other movable proper-
"ties referred to in clause (a) of section 83A shall vest 
jn the :poard; 
(c) all debts, obligations and liabilities, all eon-
tracta and alL m.ltters and things referred to in clause 
(b) of section 83A and subsisting immediately before 
sQCh COI)Stitution shall be deemed to have been incur-
red, entered into or engaged to be done by, with or for 
the Board; 
(d) all suits, prosecutions and other legal proceed-
ings iJ)stituted or which might have been instituted by 
or against the Municipal Corporation of Delhi imme-
diately before such constitution in relation to the pro- . 
perties and interests therein vested in the Board under 
clauses (a) and (b) may be continued or instituted by 
or against the Board; 
(e) all bye-laws relating to electric supply made by 
the Municipal Corporation of Delhi under sub-
section (1) of section 481 of the Delhi Municipal Cor-
poration Act, 1957, and in force immediately before 
RUch constitution shall, in so far as they relate 
to any matter pertaining to the functions of the Board . 
and are not inconsistent with the provisions of thiS 
. Act, continue to be in force and be deemed to be regu-
lations made by the Board under section 79 unlels and 
until they are superseded by regulations made und" , 
that .ec:tiOD; 
, 

7 
(f) notwithstanding anything contained in section 
15, every officer and other employee of the Municipal 
Corporation of Delhi referred to in clause' (e) of 
section PA shall be transferred to and be~ome an offt-
cer or other employee of. the Board with 'such .des1~a­
tion as the Board may determine and shall hold ofllce 
·by the same tenure, on the same' remuneratiqn, and 
under the same terms and conditions of service as he 
would have held the same if the Board had not been 
constituted, and shall continue to be so unless and until 
such tenure, remuneration aDd terms and conditions of 
service are duly altered by th~ ~1-d: . .. 
Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms 
and conditions of service of ,any sllch ofticer or other 
employee shall not be altered to his disadvantage with-
out the approval of the CpQt"1 1 Government: 
Provided further that any service rendered by any 
such A>fftcer or other employee before the constitution 
of the Board shall be deemed to be service rendered 
under the Board; 
"'1" • 
(g) the Municipal Corporatlon at Delhi shall, in 
respect of the supply of electricity at a voltage below 
33 k.v. in Delhi [as defined in clause (10) of section 2 
of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957], continue 
to have all the powers and obligations of a licensee 
under the Indian Electricity Act, 1910, and this Act 
shall' be deemed to be the licence of the Municipal Cor-
poration of Delhi for such supply, for the purpoEes of 
that Act. 
8ac. (1) Where the sum total of the value of the pro- Payment 
perties and interests therein vested in the Board under ot 
clauses (a) and (b) of seetio!" RSB (h~"fter In th!1 valetsue of d , ass an section referred to as 'the assets ) exceeds the sum total of liabilities. 
the debts, obligations and liabilities which are deemed to 
have been incurred by the Board under clause (e) of that 
IeCtion (hero-after in this section referred to as ~the 
Pab"it;es'), such excess shall be treates! as I loan made to the 
Soard by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi. and such loan 
8h~11 be fe- paid by the Board to the Municipal Corporation of 
Jlelht on such terms and ~nditions as may be determined by 
a.o ,Cent ra' Government in this behalf. 

8 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 67 
and 68, the loan referred to in sub-section (I) shalt be re-Paid by 
the Board to the Municipal Corporation of Delhi from the 
depr~ciation reserve created under section 68 and any fur-
ther amount that may be necessary for such payment shall S 
be paid from the balance referred to in clause (x) of section 
87. 
(3) Where the sum total of the liabilities exceeds the 
sum total of the value of the· assets such excess shall be 
paid by the Municipal Corporation of'Delhi to the Board {)n 10 
such terms and conditions as may be determined by the 
Central Government in this behalf. :, 
(4) If there is a dispute between the MUnicipal Cor-
poration of Delhi and the Board relating to the value of the I~ 
assets or the SUm tot1' of the liabilities, such dispute shall be 15 
determined by ar bitration. 
(5) For the purpose of this section, ''value'o-
(a) in relation to any generating station or main 
transmission line, means the value of such generating ~ 
station or main transmission line as determined in accor- 2 . 
dance with the provisions of the Fourth Schedule; 
i"'" , 
(b) iD relation to any other property or interest 
therein, means such sum as may be certified by an audi- . 
tor appointed by the State Government in this behalf I 
to have- been the amount properly incurred on and inci- 2 
dental to the acquisition of such property or interest.".' 

S~ATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
. On the 18th August, 1965. in reply to a Starred Question in the 
Lok Sabha, the important changes contemplated in the organisa-
tional set up of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi wete indicated 
by the Government. It was then stated that the existln« Delhi 
Blectric Supply Ul'ldertak;rg would be tep"ced' by' 
a statutory Board which would generate power and make bulk 
supplies to the local bodies for distribution to consumers. This 
Bill has been brought forward to give effect to that proposal. 
~" . --... . _ .... ····_··1 
'.. 2. Under section 286 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 
195'1, the provisions of tlle Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, relatIDg 
to State Electricity Boards ceased to have effect in the Union terri-
tory of Delhi from the date the Corporation was est8blished . 
. Clause. 2 of the Bill seeks to re'\rive and bring into force these pro-
visions in the Union territory of Delhi subject to the modifications 
specified oJn the Schedule to the BiII. The important modificationS 
.are as follows:-I,:.' . 
(1) Having regard to the special requirements of Delhi. 
paragraph 1 of the Schedule seeks to modify section 5- of the 
. Act so as to provide that the Board will consist of 
member~. Of these. two will be elected by the members of 
.' Metropolitan Council of Delhi and one by the members of 
.the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, from among themselves . 
. ',The remaining three mf'mhcr::. including the Chairman. will be 
appointed bv the State Government. 
(2) Paragraphs 10. 14 and 15 of th~ Schedule seek to 
modify the provisions of sect!ons 61. 69 and 75 of the Electricity 
. (Supply) Act, 1948 so as to provide for' the annual ftnancial 
I statement, the accounts together with the audit report th~reon 
and the annual reports. of the Board being placed before the 
Council of Delhi. 
(3) The functions of generation and bulk supply of ele~-
~:ity of the existing Delhi Electric Supply Unde~nR wJll 
taken over by the Board. Provision has been made in the 
section 83B proposed to be inserted by paragraph 17 at 
to the effect that all generating ltations, trans-
lines' of 33 KV and above and all other works pertain-
9 

.--: r ., 
" 
ro 
.\ 
ing thereto, including sub-stations receiving supplies from such 
transmission lines, will be vested in the Board and all debts, 
liabilities and obligations incurred by the Municipal Corpora-
tion of Delhi in relation to such assets would be deemed to 
have been incurred by the Board. Provision. has also been 
qlade in that section for the allocation of the ofticers and other 
employ~s of the Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking between 
the Corporation and the Board. Paragraph 17 of the Schedule 
also seeks to insert another new section S3C to make provision 
for determination of the value of assets transferred to the 
BO~l'd' a~d for t~e_ ftnaJ¥:ial adjustment between 'the Board and 
" - ~ tlieCorporation re~~ding- the difference between. the value of 
assets and the sum total of· liabilities, 
... ~NEW,.P~i G. L. NANI'A . 
Th~ j 2U't A.ugust, 1C)66 • 
.... l: 
, ," 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
TIlE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
rCopy of letter No. 3/3/66-SR, dated the 23rd August, 1966 from Shri Jai 
Sl@! ~t~a~.~ of Stale in the Ministry of Home Affairs to 
the Secretary, Lok. Sabha.] 
The President having. been informed of the sub,ect matter of the Bill 
further to amend the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, recommen~, under 
clauses (I) and (3) of article 117 of the Constitution, the introduction of the 
said Bill in and its consideration hy the Lok Sabha. 

II 
FINANCIAL MEMOR,\~DUM 
Section 16 of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 provides for the consti 
tution of a State Eltctricity Ccnsultative Council consisting of members of tht 
Board and such other persons, being not less than seven and not more than 
fifteen, as the State Government may appoint after consultation with bodie', ! 
or representatives of the interests specified therein. Section 17 of the Act 
makes provision for constitution for Local Advisory Committees·for such 
, Ilreas as the State Government may determine. Under section 78 of the Act. 
~(;. the State Government may make rules providing inler alia for the term, and 
ri';lconditions of appointment of members of the State Electricity Consultative 
~f Council and Local Advisory Committees. 
, S~ction 60 of the Act, as proposed to be modified by _paragraph 9 of the 
" to the Bill, provic1es that all expenditure which the' State Govern-
'ment (Central Government in the case of the Union territory of Delhi) may, 
later th'lD two months after the first constitution of the Board, declare to 
, have been incurred before the issue of the notification under section IA 
on capital account in connection wi$ the purposes of the Act shall be deemed 
'. '"fo be a loan advanced to the Board under section 64. 
Section 63 of the Act as modified by paragraph I I of the Schedule provi-
for making of subventions to the Board on such terms and conditions as 
"State Government may determine. Section 64 of the Act provides 
'State Government may from time to time advance loans to the Board 
terms and conditions as that Government may determine. 
• Section 66 of the Act provides for guarantee of the payment of the principal 
interest of any loan proposed to he raised by the Board or of either the 
or the intel"est. 
The rules made under section 78 of the Act regarding the terms and 
mtllOns of appointment of members of a State Electricity Consultative 
and Local Advisory Committees may also provide for payment of 
to these members tor attending the meetings of the Council and 
It is estmated that the expenditure on this account will 
rupees two thousand per annum. 
expenditure is likely to be incurred under section 60 as the functions 
to be entrusted to the Board would continue to be discharged by the 

Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking until they are transferred to the Board 
No subventions have been made by the Central Government to that Under-
taking so far. Nor is it likely that any subvention will be made to the BomJ. 
To meet the capital requirements of the Undertaking, loans amounting to 
Rs.4,IS,68t4oo and Rs. 6,R3. 40,000 were advance~ to it by the Central 
Government during the years 1964-65 and 1965-66 respectively and a provi-
sion of Rs. 700 lakhs has been made for that purpose during the current 
financial year, i . e. 1966-67. A substantial part of such loan assistance will 
have to be made ava~1able to the Board when it is constituted, to meet i~ 
n:quiremen~. 

.... 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Section 78 of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 provides for the 
making of rules to give effect to the provisions of the Act and sub-
section (2) of that section provides for the matters with respect 
to which rules may be made. These matters inteT alia include the 
'powers of theChairman and the term of o8ice of tbeChairman and 
other members of the Board, the conditions under which they shall 
. be eli_bIe for reappointment and their remuneration, allowances 
and other conditions of service, the conditions subject to which the 
. Board may borrow under section 65, the manner in which stock 
;;.IIRS'I.&CU by the Board shall be issued, transferred, dealt with and re-
I·.U"~'II:OU and the business of the Board upon whiCh the Local Advi-
. P1 Committees concerned shall be coDSUlted. Paragraph 15 of 
Schedule to the Bill seeks to modify sub-section (2) of section 
so as to empower the State Government to make rules also re-
the conditions under which the elected members of th(~ 
.. Board shall be eligible for re-election. 
2. Section 79 of the said Act empowers the Board to make re-
pjlatllOns not inconsistent with the Act and the rules made there-
to provide for all or any of the matters specified therein. 
matters inter alia include the administration of the funds and 
property of. the Board and the maintenance of its accounts, 
BlUUtonin2 and holding of meetings of the Board, the time and 
which such meetings shall be held, the conduct of business 
and the number of members necessary to constitute a 
and the duties of officers and. servants of the Board and 
salaries, allowances and other conditions of service. 
The matters with respect to which rules under section 78 (in-
the conditions under which the elected members of the 
shall be eligible for re-e-Iection) and the regulations under 
79 may be made are matters of a rou&e nature or of 
and the delegation of legislative power is therefore, of a 
character. 
13 

CODStitu-
dOll and 
eompoei-
tiODof 
State 
Electricity 
Boards, 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE ELECTRICfIY (SUPPLY) ACT, ·1948 
(54 OF 1948) 
• • • * '. 
,CHAPTER m .,1 
~ I } 
,:t 
., . , 
5. (1) The State Government mall as soon"as may:be'rafier th.~ 
issue· of ~h~ notification UDder sub-6ection (4) ·of ·sectiOh' .J;, "eonstitu~ 
'by not~ftcation in the OJIlcial Gezette a State Electricity Bt1*rd' und~ 
such name as shall be specified in the notification. . .,' ~.~ 
(2)Tbe J BO'at'd shall consist of not les~ thaD three and not mor1t 
than seven members appointed by the' State Govemm'ent..; 
• • • • 
(4) Of the members-
(a) one shall be a ~rSon who has experience of, aDd 
'ahOWn capteity. in, COiIiDier:cl81 'matters and a~'~~~i~~j . . ( ..... 
(b) one eball be an electrical' engineer'\Vith·\Vid~.~~rtfml!l 
and 
(C)6fie shaIl be a ~rson who has experience of C,,;""UIAU 
and financial matters in a public utility undertaking, ...... ~.f'A'~1l 
an electricity supply undertaking. 
(5) One of the members possessing any of the qualifications 
cifi8ci'in sub-section (4) ~hall be appointed by the State GOver'IUIII._ 
to be the Chairman of the Board. ' 
(6) A person shall be disqualified from being appoUited or 
a member of the Board if he is, or within the twelve months laSt 
ceding was, a member of Parliament or of any State Legislature 
any local authority. 
(7) No act done by the BC?ard shall be called in question on 
ground only of the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect ill 
constitution of, the Board. 
~ ..... ~ ... -....... . 

TS 
I. (1) Subject to the pr~visions of this section, the Government 
01 any State ~ay, after it has issued a not~cation undeJ;' sub-section 
• ~'t~) of .sec~ion 1, in lieu of constituting a Board under section 5 ,enter 
~ t~~o an agr~ement with the Government of a cOlltiguoU!\ St~te to 
, .... provide that the Board constituted for the latter State rhall exercise 
2'. the fun~tions of a Board under this Act in the former State. 
:~~~k(2)' Subject to ~uch modifications (be!ng of a character not affect-
. ing the general cperation of the agreement) of the terms of the 
I . 
:,'agreement as may from time to time be agreed upon by the State 
.' Governm~nts concerned, an ~greement entered into under this sec-
tion shall be for a period of nDt less than twenty-five years but may 
. ,'detel:Jllined earlier by mutual coJl£ent. 
. J,\~,q:r~1Dent under this section may-
. . 
(a) make such financial arrangements between the par~J-
UftLU ... State Governments' as may be n~ry for th.,e pUrposes 
agreement; , . 
(b) pro.y~d.e ;,fOl; consul~tioJ;l. betweeJ;l the N~ti,ci~t~l. State 
Governments either generally or with reference to particular 
,.matters arising under this. Act; 
;~'I (c) g~n~rally make such incidental, supplementary orancll-
" W'~vision,s, not inconsistent with this Act, as may be. d~m-
nltt;:~sary. or expedient for giving effect to the· agreement. 
, . ' 
an agreement is entered into under ~.ection 6, the.J>arti-
,~ate Governments shall, by notification in the O1Bcial 
~W6lre·'a date on which the agreement shall· come frltb 
.~ a~ter. th$,t da~ 
the Board constituted for the one State shall have all 
'ftn·WA' .... and duties of a Board under this Act in respect of 
States as if they constituted a tingle State; 
(b) referen~ in this Act to the Sta\e shall, unl~ the sub-
Or context otherwise requir£s, be construed as references to 
State, and in particular, the references in section 61 to the 
Legislature shall be construed as references to the Legis-
'1119"'''_ft of both States; 
.. (c) I~ pro"fisions of secti,op 80m relation to the ~WDption 
~l1~,Board of the rights and liabilities of the State Govern-
ari~ing before the first constitution of the Board shall apply 
assumption by the Board of the rigbts and liabilities of 
tlovernment of the State to which the exereile of its func-
Inter-
State 
agreemeut 
to extend 
Board's 
jurisdic-
tion to 
another 
State. 
Dectol 
Inter-
State 
agree-
ment. 

Term of 
office and 
conditionli 
for re-
appoint_ 
mentol 
memberi 
of the 
Bo~ 
tions under this Act is extended under the agreement, as if hi 
that section for the words "before the first constitution of the 
Board" there were rubstituted the words and figure "before the ' 
date on which the agreement under section 6 came into force". , 
8. The Chairman and other members of the Board shall hold . 
office for such period, and shall be eligible for re-appointment under 
such conditions, as may be prescribed, . 
• • • • • 
Removal 10. (1) The State Government may suspend from ofBce for such. 
~ :~T- period as it thinks fit or remove from office any member of the Board . 
members. who--
Tempo-
r8l')' 
absence of 
members. 
• • • • • 
(d) becomes or seeks to become a member of Parliament or 
any State Legislature or any local authority; or 
• • • • • 
(3) No order of removal shall be made under this section w.uJ,~ 
the member concerned has been given an opportunity to submit 
explanation to the State Government, and when such order Is 1ICIi:I''""''~~ 
the seat of the member removed shall become vacant and 
member may be appointed under section 5 to fill up the vacancy . . . 
.. '. :(4). A member w~ohas been removed shall not be eligible for _ 
appointment as member or in any other capacity to the Board. 
(5) If the Board fails to carry out its functions, or refuses or 
to follow the directions issued by the State Government under 
Act, the State Government may remove the Chairman and the 
bers of the Board and appoint a Chairman and members in 
places. 
• • • • • 
11. H the Chairman or any other member of the Board is by 
ftrmity or otherw)se rendered temporarily incapable of carrying 
his duties or is absent on leave or otherwise in circumstances 
involving the vacation of his appointment, the State Gclve~rDllDelU! 
may appoint another person- to officiate for him and carry 
hi~ functions under this Act or any rule or regulation made 
under. 
• ,. • • 

17 
16. (1) The State Government shall constitute a State Electricity 
. Consultative Council for the State, and in cases to which sections 6 
and 7 apply, the State Governments concerned shall constitute such 
one or more State Electricity Consultative Council or Councils and 
for such areas as they may by agreement determine. 
(2) The State EI~tricity Consultative Council shall consist of the 
members of the Bo~rd and such other persons being not less than 
seven and not more than fifteen as the State Government or the 
State Governments concerned may appoint after consultation with 
such representatives or bodies representative of the 'following inter-
as the State Government or the State Governments concerned 
6fllfn1a or ihink fit, that is to say, local self-government, electricity 
industry, commerce, industry, transport, agriculture, labour 
in the electricity supply industry and consumers of electri-
but so that there shall be at least one member representing each 
. interest in the Council. 
• • • • 
CHAPTER IV 
~~~ POWERS AND DUTIES OF STATE ELECTRiCITY BoARDS 
~J;:. ~~s. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board shall be charg-
['1\1 With the general duty of promoting the co-ordinated development 
•. the generation, supply and distribution ot electricity within the 
. ···"in the mOf!t efficient and economical manner, with particular 
. .. to such development in areas not for the time being served 
''l'''~'''ll--'-.J served by any licensee, and without prejudice to. the 
of the foregoing provisions it shall be the duty of the 
to prepare and carry out schemes sanctioried under 
:lllllDt.:!l' V; 
• • • • 
State 
Electri-
city Con-
sultative 
Council. 
General 
duties 
of the 
Board. 
) All debts and obligations incurred, all contracts entered ~ard to 
all matters and . thin~ engaged to be done by, with or for :~:~ 
Government for any of the purposes of this Act before the Hons Of 
.. constitution of the Board shall be deemed to have been incurred, State 
into or engaged to be done by. with or for the Board: and Govern_ mentin or other legal proceedings instituted or which might but for respect of 
of the notification under sub-section (4) of U!Ction 1 have matters 
by or against the State Government may be contlnu- to which 
~'~~"'''ICU by or against the Board. Utis Act applies . 
• • • • 
expenditure which the State Government may, not later 
. months after the first constitution of the Board, declare to 
, inC!Urreci before the issue of the notiftcation under sub-

Annual 
financial 
statement. 
Subven-
tions to 
the Board. 
Power of 
Board to 
borrow. 
18 
purposes of this Act shall be deemed to be a loan advanced to the 
Board under section 64 on the date of the said declaration and all 
the assets acquired by such expenditure shall thereupon vest in the 
Board. 
61.,(1) ... ... ... • • 
(3) The State Government shall as ~oon as may be after the re-
ceipt of the said statement cause it to be laid on the table of the 
House, or as the case may be, Houses of the State Legislature; and 
the said statement shall be open to discussion therein, but shall not 
be subject to vote. 
(4) The Board shall take into consideration any comments made 
on the' said st~tement in the State Legislature. 
... • • • 
63. The State Government may, with the approval of the State 
Legislature, from time to time make subventions to the Board for 
the purpOSef of this Act on such terms and conditions as the State 
Government may determine. 
I~ ... ... ... ... 
65. (1) ... • • • • 
(3) The maximum amount which the Board may at any time have 
on loan under sub-section (1) shall be ten crores of rupees, unless, 
the State Government, with the approval of the State Legislative 
Assembly, fixes a higher maximum amount . 
• • • • • 
Guarantee 66. The State Government may guarantee in such manner as it 
of loans. thinks fit the payment of the principal and interest of any loan pro-
posed to be raised by the Board or of either the principai or the 
interest: 
Provided that the State Government sball, SO long as. any such 
guarantees are in f~rce. lay before the House or, as the case rna1 
be, Houses of the State Legislature in every year during the budget;\~ 
session a statement of the guarantE>es, if any, given during the cur-t 
rent financial year of the State and an up-to-date account of the toUlIII';. 
sums. if any, which have been paid out of State revenues by ",.lIlg(J1J1Ua 
of any such guarantees or paid into State revenues towards 
ment of any money so paid out . 
• • • 

19 
69. (1) • • • • • 
(5) The State Government shall-
(a) cause the accounts of the Board together with the audit 
report thereon forwarded to it under sub-section (4) to be laid 
annually before the State Legislature; and 
• • • • • 
75. (1) • • * * • 
(lA) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1) the 
Rntll .. ..t shall, as soon as may be after the end of each financial year, 
~ .. ·.Dlt'eDiare and submit to the State Governm.ent in such form as may 
......... "LJI1<O prescribed a report giving an account of its activities during the 
financial year and the report shall also give an account of 
activiti~s, if any, which are likely to b~ undertaken by the Board 
. next financial year; and the State Government shall. cause 
~ch report to 'be laid before the State Legislature as soon as 
be after it is received by the State Government. 
• • • • • 
(1 • • • • 
Accounts 
and 
audit. 
Annual 
reports, 
statistics 
andre-
turns. 
Power to 
make 
In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the rules 
.... ~U&.LI.,.. power, such rules may provide for-
(a) the powers of the chairman and the term of office of 
chairman and other members of the Board, the conditions 
, which they shall be eligible for re-appointment and their 
p.qJ!lel1ltion, allowances and other conditions of service; 
* * * * • 

LOKSABHA 
, 
; . ,';' .' 
J' 
, ! 
~ • , •• ~. • ! •. 1 f '. "'. '; -
I , 
A . .' 
. ~!.:~, BILL . .: .. ~ ... :, . . . . . . .. 
futtlierto',amend the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948~ 
\I·,j"')~! J.:·,·llJ·I~:.,:;,t!'o' \.1';~' '., . ~. " _." . 
'!>.-:,.: '-;;1 .!'··h;d:~, '!1 . ,1' " 
'y"r,~ '·J.::,(!!}r.ir";:'~~~l' 1"<' ,"" ---
~ ~}, .. :t~l } ~V:~.l. .~.!~!-
: ... ','~ ':~I ~lf~;,{' ,'I! 
(Slari Gulzarilal N anda,~; 
Minister 0/ Home Affairs), 