Bill No. 64. of 1980 
THE SMUGGLERS AND FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANIPULATORS 
(FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY) AMENDMENT BILL, 1980 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators 
(FCJI1'feiture Of Property) Act, 1976. 
BE it cn~ctcd by Parliament in the Thirty-first Ycar of thc Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Smugglers and Foreign Exchange 
MRnipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Amendment Act, 1980. 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. Iu section 12 of the Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators 
(F'orfeiture of Property) Act, 1976 (hereinafter referred to as the 
prinCipal Act) ,-
10 (a) after sulHlection (6), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(6A) Notwithstanding anything contained in wb-section 
(6), where the Chairman c:GD8iders it necessary so to do for the 
e.'Cpeditious dispoIa1 of appeals under this section, he may 
15 ccmstitute a Bench of two members and a Bench so constituted 
Short 
titll! 
Ilnd COlD-
mence. 
menl 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
1201 
Act!a 
of 1978. 

Amend. 
mE'nt of 
Metion 
28. 
".;. .... "'~. ~ .. ~V.· 2 
may exercise and discharge the powen aDd fwaetions of the 
Appellate Tribunal: 
Provided that if the members of a Bench so cons.tituted 
differ on any point or points, they shall state the point or 
points on which they differ and refer the same to a third mem- S 
ber (to be specified by the Chairman) for hearing on such point 
or points and such point or points shall be decided aceording to 
the opinion of that member."; 
(b) after sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely: - 10 
"(8) On application to the Appellate Tribunal and on pay-
ment of the prescribed fee, the Tribunal may allow a party to 
any appeal or any person authorised in this behalf by such party 
to inspect at any time during office hours, any relevant records 
and registers of the Tribunal and obtain a certified copy of any 15 
part thereof.". 
3. In section 26 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause 
(a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(aa) the fees which shall be paid for the inspection of the 
records and registers of the Appellate Tribunal or for obtaining a 20 
certified copy of any part thereof under sub-6ection (8) of section 
12;". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
.. Sub-section (6) of section 12 of the Smugglers and Foreign Exchange 
Manipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976 provides that the Chair-
man of the Appellate Tribunal under that section may constitute Benches 
consisting of three members for hearing appeals under the Act. As 
only a three-member Tribunal has been constituted under the section, 
in the day-to-day working of the Tribunal it has been found that when 
one member avails himself of leave on ground of illness etc., the Tri-
bunal is not able to function. It is, therefore, proposed to amend this 
section tf) provide for constitution of Benches consisting of two mem· 
bers and to make a suitable provision fOl" resolving differences which 
may occur on any point or points between such members while dis-
posing of an appeal. 
2. It is also proposed to avail of the present opportunity to imple-
ment the assurance given to the Lok Sabha Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation [vide Tenth Report of the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation (Sixth Lok Sabha) pages 14 to 15] to the effect that the 
rule-making provision in the Aet would be suitably amplified so as to 
spell out expressly that the power thereunder to make rules includes 
the power to provide for fees for the inspection of records and the 
registers of the Appellnte Tribunal or for obtaining certified copies of 
any part i,hereof. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; R. VENKATARAMAN. 
The 8th March, 1980. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Qause 3 of the BID seeD to aD;leDd su1>aect1on (2) at section 28 or 
the Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators (!'orfeJture of Pro-
perty) Act, 11176 to insert a new clause (aa) therein. 1lle new clauae 
1s for providing tbat rules may be made under the section with re8J¥!et 
to the fees whIch shaD be paid for the inspection of the records and 
the registers of the Appellate Tribunal or for obtaining a certified copy 
of any part rthereot unaer sub-section (8) of section 12. This pertam, 
to a matter of detail. Hence tbe delegation of legislative power is of a 
normal character. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM TIlE SMUGGLERS AND FOREIGN ExCHANGE MANIPULATOII8 
(FORFEITURE Ot' PROPERTY) ACT, 1976 
(13 OF 1976) 
... ... 
12. (1) ... ... • 
(6) The (.lowers and functions o( the Appellate Tribunal may be 
exercised and discharged by Benches consisting of three members and 
constituted by the Chairman 01 the Appellate Tribunal. 
(7) The Appellate Tribunal may regulate its own procedure . 
• ... ... • 
26. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules to carry (Jut the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the followin, 
matters, namely:-
(a) the terms and conditions of service of the Ch;:lit1l'J.an and 
~ .~ 'of the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (~) Of 
section 12; 
... ... ... ... 
Condi:. 
tution 
of~ 
lateTl'L. 
bunal 

LOK SABRA 
r-,:, 
, : 
1\ 
BILL 
L " , 
to amend the Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulaton (J'orfeit;ure 
of Property) Act, 1976. 
(Shri R. Venkataraman, Minuter of Fincznce.) 