Bill No. 64 of 1954 
THE CONSTITUTION (FOURTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 
1954 
[As INTRODUCED IN THE LOK SABHA] 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. Short title.-This Act may be called the Constitution (Fourth 
Amendment) Act, .1954. 
2. Amendment of article 3t.-In article 31 of the Constitution, for 5 
clause (2), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:-
"(2) No property shall be compulsorily acquired or requisi-
tioned by the State save for a public purpose and -save by 
authority of a law which provides for compensation for the 
property so acquired or requisitioned and either fixes the amount 10 
of the compensation or specifies the prineiples on which, and the 
manner in which, the compensation is to be determined and 
given. 
(2A) Where a law does not provide for the transfer of the 
ownership or right to possession of any property to the State, it IS 
shall not be deemed to provide fq[ the compulsory acquisition or 
requisitioning of property by the State. notwithstanding that it 
deprives any person of his property.". 
3. Amendment of article 31A.-In article 31A of the Constitu-
b r ~ 
(a) for clause (1), the following clause shall be, and shan 
be deemed always to have been, substituted, namely:-
"(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in article IS, 
no law providing for-
(a) the acquisition by the State of any estate or of 2S 
any rights therein, or 
(b)' the extinguishment or modification of any rights 
in estates or in agricultural holdings, 'or 
(c) the maximum extent of agricultural land that 
may be owned or occupied by any person and the dis- 30 
posal of any agricultural land held in excess of such. 
maxim'..Lm, whether by transfer to the . State or' other-:' . 
wise. or 
(d) the acquisition or requisitioning of any immov-
able property for the relief or rehabilitation of persons 35 
displaced from their original place of residence by 

10 
20 
• 
25 
30 
2 
reason of the setting up of the Dominions of India and: 
Pakistan, or 
(e) . the acquisition or requisitioning for a public' 
purpose of any land, buildings or huts declared in pur-
suance of law to constitute a slum or of any vacant ox:' 
waste land, or 
(f) the taking over of the management of any pro-· 
perty by the State for a limited period either in the 
public interest orin order to secure the proper manage,., 
ment of the property, or 
(g) the transfer of any undertaking, wholly or in\ 
part, from one company to another or the amalgamation 
of two or more companies either in the public interest or' 
in order to secure the proper management of the under-
taking or of any of the companies, or 
(h) the extinguishment or modification of any' 
rights of managing agents, managing directors, directors .. 
managers or shareholders of companies, or 
(i) the extinguishment or modification of any rights 
accruing by virtue of any agreement, lease or licence for 
the purpose of searching· for. or winning, any mineral 
or mineral oil, or for the purpose of supplying power, 
light or water to the public, or the premature termina-
tion or cancellation of any such agreement, lease or 
licence, 
shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsis~ 
tent with, or takes away or abridges any of the rights con~ 
ferred by, article 14, article 19 or article 31: 
Provided that ~ere such law is a law made by th~ 
Legislature of a State, the provisions of this article shall not 
apply thereto unless such law, having been reserved for the 
consideration of the President, has received his assent."; and 
(b) in sub-clause (b) of clause (2) ,-
(t) af'tft the words lIan estate" the words "or agricul-
. tuNl holding" shall be, and shall be deemed always to have 
been, insertedj and 
(ii) after the word "~ure-holder", the words "raiyat, 
under-raiyat" shall be, and shall be deemed alwus to have 
been, inserted. 
40 4. Amendment of article 305.-For article 305 of the Constitution, 
the followmg article shall be substituted, nlfmely:-
45 
"305. Saving of e.riding laws and laws prOViding for State-
M09U)poLie •• ..-Nothing in articles .301 and 303 shall affect the 
provisions of any exilting law; and nothing in article 301 shall 
affect the operation of any law made before the commencement 
of the ~onstitution (Fourth Amendment) Act,.,J.95i in so far as' 
it relates to,or prevent Parliament or the Legislafiii:e of a State 
from makine any law relating to, any such matter as is referred 
to in lUb-clause (ii) of clause (6) of article 19.~. 

3 
5. Amendment of the Ninth Schedule.-In the Ninth Schedule to 
the Constitution, after entry. 13, the following entries shall be added, 
namely:- ' 
"14. The Bihar Displaced Persons Rehabilitation (Acquisi-
tion of Land) Act, 1950 (Bihar Act XXXVIII of 1950). 5 
15. The United Provinees Land Acquisition (Rehabilitation 
of Refugees) Act, 1948 (U.P. Act XXVI of 1948). 
16. The Resettlement of Displaced Persons (Land Acquisi-
tion) Act, 1948 (Act, LX of 1948). 
, , 
17. Sections 52A to 52G of the Insurance Act, 1938, as inserted 10 
by section 42 of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950 (Act 
XLVII of 1950). 
18. The Railway Companies (Emergency Provisions) Act, 
1951 (Act LI of 1951). 
19. Chapter III-A of the Industries (Development and IS 
Regulation) Act, 1951)is inserted by section 13 of the Industriesr. 
(Development and 'Regulation) Amendment Act, 1953 (Act XXVI 
of 1953) ,". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
This Bill seeks to amend articles 31, 31A and 305 of, and the 
Ninth Schedule to, the Constitution. 
2. Recent decisions of the Supreme Court have given a very wide 
meaning to clauses (1) and (2) of article 31. Despite the difference 
in the wording of the two clauses, they are regarded as dealing with 
the same subject. The deprivation of property referred to in clause 
(l) is to be construed in the widest sense as including any curtail-
ment of a right to property. Even where it is caused by a purely 
regulatory provision of law and is not accompanied by an acquisi-
tion or taking possession of that or any other property right by the 
Stat'.? the law, in order to be valid according to these decisions, has 
to provide for compensation under clause (2) of the article. It is 
considered necessary, therefore, to re-state more precisely the State's 
power of compulsory acquiSition and requisitioning of private pro-
perty and distinguish it from cases where the operation of regu-
latory or prohibitory laws of the State results in "deprivation of 
property". This is sought to be done in clause 2 !If the Bill. 
3. It will be recalled that the zamindari abolition laws which 
came first in our programme of social welfare legislation were 
attacked by the interests affected mainly with reference to articles 
14, ]9 and 31, and that in order to put an end to the dilatory and 
wasteful litigation and place these laws above challenge in the courts, 
articles 31A and 31B and the Ninth Schedule were enacted by the 
Constitution (First Amendment) Act. Subsequent judicial decisions 
interpreting articles 14, 19 and 31 have raised serious difficulties in 
the way of the Union and the States puttihg through other and 
equally important social welfare legislation on the desired lines, 
e.g., the following:-
(i) While the abolition of zamindaris I>LIld the numerous 
intermediaries between the State a.nd the tiller of, the soil has 
been achieved for the most part, our next objectives in land 
reform are the fixing of limits to the extent of agricultural land 
that may be owned or occupied by any person, the disposal of 
any land held in excess of the prescribed maximum and the 
further modification of the rights of land owners and tenants in 
agricultural holdings. 
(ii) The proper planning of urban and rural areas require 
the beneficial utilisation of vacant and waste lands and the 
clearance of slum areas. 
(iii) In the interests of national economy the State should 
have tull control over the mineral and oil resources of the coun-
try, including in particular, the power to cancel or modify the 
terms and conditions of prospecting licences, mining leases and 
similar agreements. This is also necessary in relation to public 
utility undertakings which supply power, light or water to the 
public un!ier licences granted by the State. 
4 

5 
(iv) It is often necessary to take over under State manage-
ment for a temporary period a commercial or industrial under-
taking or other property in the public interest or in order to 
secure the better management of the undertaking or property. 
Laws providing for such temporary transference to State manage-
ment should be permissible under the Constitution. 
(v) The reforms in company law now under contemplation, 
like the progressive elimination of the managing agency system, 
provision for the compulsory amalgamation of two or more 
companies in the national interest, the transfer of an under-
taking from one company to another, etc., require to be placed 
above challenge. 
It is accordingly proposed in clause 3 of the Bill to exter}d the 
scope of article 31A Sf) as to cover these- categories of essential 
welfare legislation. 
4. As a corollary to the proposed amendment of article 31A, it 
is proposed in clause 5 of the Bilt to include in the Ninth Schedule 
to the Constitution two more State Acts and four Central Acts which 
fall within the scope of sub-clauses (d) arid (f) of clause (1) of the 
revised article 31A. The effec~ will be their complete, retrospec-
tive validation under the provisions of article 31B. 
5. A recent judgment of the Supreme Court in Saghir Ahmed v. 
the State of U.P. has raised the question whether an Act providing 
for a State monopoly in a particular trade or business conflicts with 
the freedom of trade and commerce guaranteed by article 301, but 
left the question undecided. Clause (6) of article 19 was amended 
by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act in order to take such 
State monopolies out of the purview of sub-clause (g) of clause (1) 
of that article, but no corresponding provision was made in Part 
XIII of the Constitution with reference to the opening words of 
article 30l. It appears from the judgment of the Supreme Court 
that notwithstanding the clear authority of Parliament or of a State 
Legislature to introduce State monopoly in a particular sphere of 
trade or commerce, the law might have to be justified before the 
courts as being "in the public interest" under article 301 or as 
amounting to a "reasonable restriction" under article 304(b). It is 
considered that any such question ought to be left to the final decision 
of the Legislature. Clause 4 of the Bill accordingly proposes an 
amendment of article 305 to make this clear. 
NJIlw DELHI; 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU. 
The 17th December, 1954. 

• ANNEXURE 
ExTaAcTS FROM THE CONSTITU'nON 01' INDIA 
• • • • • 
PART HI 
. ~. • • • • • 
Right to Property 
Compulsory 31. (1) No person shall be deprived 
acqulIition save by authoJ.:ity of law. 
of his property 
of property& 
(2) No property, movable or immovab~e, including any-
interest in, or in any company owning, any commercial or 
industrial undertaking, shall be taken possession of or 
acquired for public purposes vnder any law authorising the 
taking of such possession or such acquisition, unless the law 
provides for compensation for the property taken possession 
of or acquired and either fixes the amount of the 
compensation, or specifies the principles on which, and the 
manner in which, the compensation is to be determined and 
given. 
• • • • • 
Saving of. 3lA. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing 
l!~s pro,,}: provisions of this Part, no law prov~ding for the acquisition 
acquisition by the State of a~ estate or of any rights therein or for 
of estates, the extinguishment or modification of any such rights shall 
etc. be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent 
with, or takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred 
by, any provisions o:f this Part: 
Provided that where such law is a law made by the 
Legislature of a State, the provisions of this article shall 
not apply thereto unless such law, having been reserved 
for the consideration of the President, has received his 
assent. 
(2) In this article,-
(a) the expression "estate" shall, in relation to 
any local area, have the same meaning as that expres-
sion or its local equivalent has in the existing law re-
lating to land tenures in force in that area, and shall 
also include any jagir, inam or muafi or other similar 
grant; 
(b) the expression "rights", in relation to an 
estate, shall include any rights vesting in a proprietor, 
sub-proprietor, under-proprietor, tenure-holaer or 
other intermediary and any rights or privileges. in 
respect of land revenue. 
6 • 

7 
. 31B~ Without prejudice to the generality of the provi- V~tiOll of 
slOJllJ~ontained in article 31A, none of the Acts and Regu- ocr,rR Afts 
la.ti~8 specified in the Ninth Schedule nor any of the pro- ~on8. egu a-
VISIons thereof shall be deemed to be void or ever to have , b 'd h ' eco~~ V~I.' on ~ e groll;nd that such Act, Regulation or 
prOVlSIO? IS mconslStent WIth, or takes away or abridges any 
of the rIghts conferred by, any provisions of this Part, and 
notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any 
court or tribunal to the contrary, each of the said Acts and ... 
Regulations shall, subject to the power of any competent 
Legislature to repeal or amend it, continue in force . 
• • • • • 
PART XIII 
TRADE, COMMERCE AND INTERCOURSE WITHIN THE 
TERRITORY OF INDIA 
301. Subject to the other provisions of this Part, trade, Freedom of 
commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of India :!':~~ c~~d 
shall be free. intercourse. 
302. Parliament may by law impose such restrictions on Po~cr of 
the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse between one rarb~ent 
State and another or within any part of the territory of r~tric=8e 
India as may be required in the public interest. on trade. 
I commerce 
and inter-
course. 
303. (1) Notwithstanding anything in article 302, ~:at~~"~~:~. 
neither Parliament nor the Legislature of a State shall have Jative poweu 
power to make any law giving, or authorising the glving of the ynion 
of, any preference to one State over another, or making, ~~te.o ~~h 
or authorising the making of, any discrimination between regard to 
one State and another, by virtue of any entry relating to trade and 
trade and commerce in any of the Lists in the Seventh commerce. 
Schedule. 
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent Parliament 
from making any law giving, or authorising the giving of, 
any preference or making, or authorising the making of, 
any discrimination if it is declared by such law that it is 
necessary to do so for the purpose of dealing with a situ-
ation arisin~ from scarcity of goods in any part of the 
territory of India. 
304. Notwithstanding anything in article 301 or article Restrictions 
303, the Legislature of a State may by law- ~~e:~~e, 
(a) impose on goods imported from other States:!.e ::~ 
any tax to which similar ~oods manufactured or pro- States. 
duced in that State are subject, so. however. as not to 
discriminate between goods so imported and goods so 
manufactured or produced; and 

• 
8 
(b) impose such reasonable restrictions on the 
freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse with or 
within that State as may be required in the public in-terest:· . . Provided that no Bill or amendment for the pur-
poses of clause (b) shall be introduced or moved in the 
Legislature of a State without the previous sanction of 
the President . 
Bffect ofarti- 305. Nothing in articles 301 and 303 shall affect the pro-
cles 301 ~d visions of any existing law except in so far as the President 
~03 on eXlst- may by order otherwise provide ang laws. . 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
fqrther to amend the Constitution of India. 
(Shri lawaharla.l NehnJ., 
Prime Mtniltet'). 