LOK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE COMPANIES (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 1964 
(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 6, line 20~-
atter~ "debentures of" insert 
2. Page 13, line 30, - . 
n " , 
for "subtituted" ~ "substituted" 
3. Page 15, line 6,-
.!2!:. "28" ~ "281" 
4. Page 20, line 23,-
~ " he" 
5. Page 21, line 26,-
(1 ) after II with" 1nsert " " , . 
I , (11) after "by" insert " n , 
6. Page 29, line 17,-
for "include" read "induce" - -
7. 'Page 41, 11ne 3 fron botton,-
1..9!. "powers contenplated 1n the aforesaid clauses 
are of a norT!lal", substitute -
"possible to provide for then in the Act itself. 
The rule-nak1ng" 
8. Page 48, line 1,-
!.2!. "226" ~ "228" 
9. Correct line nunbers on pages 2, 4 and 22. 
NEW DELHI; 
Septenber 19 19~4 
Bhadra 28, 1~86{ aka) 

1 . of 19&6. 
All INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
a 1 SEP ,_ 
BiD No. " of 11M 
THE COMPANIES (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 1964 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Companiea Act, 1936. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Companiea (Second Amend- Short title 
ment) Act, 1964. and com-
mence-
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govem- ment. 
ment may, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, appoint and cIl1!er-
ent dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. 
2. In section 1 of the Companies Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred Amend-
to as the principal Act), in sub-section (3), the followina further ment of 
10 proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely: _ section 1. 
20 
"Provided further that it 'shall apply to the State of Nags-
land subject to such modifieations, if any, as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.". 
3. In section 2 of the principal Act,-
(i) in clause (8), after the word "deeds,", the word 
ers", shall be inserted; 
Amend-
"vouch- ment OIl 
section 2. 
(U) in clause (30), after the words "manager or secretary", 
the words "or any person in accordance with whose directions or 
instructions the Board of directors or anyone or more of the 
directors is or are accustomed to act," shall be inserted. 
1054(B) LS-l. 

Amend. 
mentor 
section 
10K. 
Amend. 
mentol. 
section 13. 
Amend. 
mentol 
section 2l. 
Amend. 
mentof 
section 
faA. 
2 
4. In section 10E of the principal Act, after sub-section 
following sub-sect.ton shall be inserted, namely:-
(4), the 
,J!'~ " (4A). The Board, with t he previous approval of the Centra~ 
Government, may, by order in writing, authorize the chairman 
or any of its other members or its principal officer (whether 5 
known as secretary or by any other name) to exercise and dis-
charge, suhject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as mey 
be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions as it 
may think fit; and every order made or act done in the exercise 10 
of such powers or discharge of such functions shall be deemed 
to be the order or act, as the case may be, of the Board". 
5. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-eectlon (1) ,-
(i) in clause (b), the word "and" shall be omitted; 
(ii) for clause (c), the following clauses shall be substituted, 15 
namely:-
"(e) the main objects of the company to be pursued by 
the company on its incorporation and objects incidental or 
anci11ary to the attainment of the main objects; 
(d) the other objects of the company not included"' in 
clause (e); and 20 
(e) in the case of companies (other than trading cor-
porations), with objects not confined to one State, the 
States to whose territories the objects extend.". 
8. To section 21 of the principal Act. the following proviso shall 
be added, namely:- 25 
"Provided that no such approval shall be required where 
the only change in the name of a company is the addition 
thereto or, as the case may be, the deletion therefrom, of the word 
"Private", consequent on the conversion in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act of a public company into a private com- 30 
pany or a private company into a public company!'. 
7. In section 43A of the principal Act, in sUb-section (6), after 
clause (a), the fdllowing clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(aa) to a private company in which shares are held by 
one or more bodies corporate incorporated outside India, which 3S 
or each of which, if incorporated in India, would be a private 
company vrithin the meaning of this Act, if the Central Gov-
ernment, on an application made to it in this behalf by that pri-
vate compMW. by c.rder so directs; or", 

Amend-
mesatof 
lIection'lB. 
Amend_ 
mentor 
,ection 78. 
11. In section 76 of the principal Act,-
(4) to clause (a) of sub-section (1), the following proViso 
shall be added, namely:- I 
"Provided that the company shall not show in such ~ 
turn any shares as having been allotted for cash If cash has '5 
not actually been received in respect of auch allotment and 
only book adjustment has been made without cash having 
..... ......,.:a ". 
~., 
(b) in sub-section (3), for 'the words "is inadequate, he may 
extend that period as he thinks fit", the following words shall be 10 
substituted, namely:-
"is or was inadequate, he may, on application made in that 
behalf by the company, whether beloN or after the expiry 
of the said period, extend that period as he thinb tit"; 
(c) in sub-section (4), for the proviso, the followin, proviao IS 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"Provided that in case of contravention of the proviso to 
clause (4) of sub-section (1), every such ofticer, and every 
promoter of the company who is guilty of the contravention 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to tive 20 
thousand rupees.". 
11. In section 76 of the prinCipal Act,-
(4) in sub-section (1)-
(i) in clause (iii), the word "and" occurring at the 
end shall be omitted; 
(ii) in clause (iv), the word "and" shall be inserted 
at the end; and I 
(iii) after clause (iv), the follOwing c'lauae shall be 
inserted, namely:-
2S • 
.. (v) a copy of the contract for the payment of the 30 
commission is delivered to the Registrar at the time 
Qf delivery of the prospectus or the statement in lieu 
of prospectus for registration."j 

s 
JO 
;6 
(b) after sub-sectiOll'l (4), the following sub-section shall 
be inserted, namely:--, 
"(4A) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared 
that no commission shall be paid under clause (a) of sub-
section (1) to any person on shares or debentures which 
are not offered to the public for subscription .... 
11. In section 108 of the principal Act, after sub-section 
the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(IA) E"et'f iDstftlmant of transter-
(1), Amend_ 
mentol 
section 108. 
(a) shaQ be in the pftlllCribed fonn obt.inabI., from 
the prescribed au.thority who IhaIl stamp or otherwise en-
do.nae ther.eon the date on whicla. it is issued, aad 
(I» shall be delivered to the compu.y r-
(i) in the case of shares dealt in or q~o~ on • 
~ised stock exchange within six mGllths from such 
date, 
(ii) in any other case, within two mODths from that 
date.". 
14. In section 111 of the principal Act, except in sub-section Amend_ 
20 (4A), for the words "the Central Government" or the words "that ment ot 
Government", wherever they occur, the words "the Tribunal" shan section 
be substituted.' 111. 
3' 
15. In seetien 149 of the principal Act,-
(a) after sub-section (2), the follOWing 
be inserted, namely:-
Amend_ 
ment of 
sub-section shall section 
149. 
.. (2A) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-
section (1) and sub-section (2), a company (whether it is a 
public company or a private company) having 8 share capi-
tal, whether or not it has issued a prospectus inviting the 
public to subscribe fOr its shares shall not at any time com-
mence any business in relation to the objects specifted in 
c~use (c) or clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 13, 
unless-
(a) the company has approved of the commence-
ment of any such business by a special resolution passed 
in that behalf by it in genera] meeting; and 
(I» there has been fUed with the :Registrar a 
duly verifted declaration by one of'the c:UrectOll's or 

Amend_ 
mentof 
section 
153B. 
Amend_ 
mentof 
section 
158. 
Amend-
mento! 
section 
188. 
• 
the secretary, in the prescribed form, that clause (a) 
has been complied with; 
and if the company commences any such business ill ('on-
travention of this Bub-section, every person who is respon-
sible for the contravention shall, without prejudice to any S 
other liability, be punishable with fine which may extend 
to five hundred rupees for every day during which the 
contravention continues.". 
(b) in sub-section (7), for the word "Nothing", the words, 
bracket& figure and letter "Save as otherwise provided in sub- 10 
section (2A), nothing" shall be substituted. 
1 •. In section IS3B of the principal Act, in Bub-section (4) ,-
(i) in clause (b). for the words "where the trust money 
invested in shares in, or debentures of, a company", the words 
"where the value of the shares in, or debentures of, a company, IS 
held in trust" shall be SUbstituted; 
(ii) the following Explanation shall be inserted at the 
end, namely:-
(Explanation.-The expression "the value of the shares 
in. or debentures of a .company" in clause (b) means,- 20 
(i) in the case of shares or debentures acquired by 
way of allotment or trans1er for consideration, the 
cost of acquisition thereof, and 
(ii) in any other case, the paid-up value of the 
shares.'. 2 S 
17. In section 159 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) in clause <f), the word "and" occurring at the end 
shall be om.itted~ 
(b) in clause «(1), the word "and" shall be inserted at the 
end .. ': 30 , I 
(c) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, 
JWnelY:-i I 
"(h.) every person referred to in clause (b) of sub-
aecti()n (11) of section 307.". 
18. In section 163 of the principal Act. in sub-section (1). in the 3' 
proviso, in clause (i), the word "and" shall be inserted at the end 
and clause (ii) shell be omitted. 

7 
1 •. In section 174 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for Amend-
the words "public company, and two members personally present ment ot 
in the case of a private company,", the words, brackets, figures and section 
letter "public company (Qther than a public company 'Which has 174. 
5 become such by virtue of section 43A), and two members personal-
ly present in the caSe of any other company," shalt be substituted. 
ZOo In section 203 of the principal Act, in Bub-section (6), the Amend-
words, brackets and figures, 'and for the purposes of the said sub- ment.t Of .. . sec Ion clause (11), the expression "oftlcer" shall include any per8()n JD 203. 
10 accordance with whose directions or instructions the Board of 
directars of the company has been accustomed to act' shall be 
omitted." ", 
I 
11. In section 209 of toe principal Act.-
(a) in sub-section (1)-
15 (i) in clause (b), the word "and" occurring at the end 
shall be omitted; I 
(ii) in clause (e), toe word "and" shall be inserted at 
the end~ 
(iii) after clause (e), the following clause shall 
20 be inserted, namely:-
" (d) in the case of a company engaged in pro-
duction, processing. manufactUring or mining activi-
ties, such particulars relating to utilisation of material 
or labour as may be prescribed, if such company ic; re-
quired by the Central Government to include Ruch 
particulars in the books of account;"; 
(b) for SUb-section (4). toe following sub-section ShRtl he 
substituted, namely:-
"(4) (a) The books of account and other book8 and 
30 papers shall be open to inspection by any director during 
business hours. 
(b) The books of account and other books and papt>TII 
shall be open to inspection during business hours-
(i) by the Registrar, 
Amend_ 
mentor 
section 
209. 

8 
(ii) by any oftleer of Government authorised. by the 
Central Government in this behalf: 
Provided that no such inspection shall be made by the 
Registrar or such oftlcer unless he is of opinion that .. -
cient ·cause exists for such inspection: 5 
Provided further that such inspection maybe made 
without giving any previous notice to the company or any 
oftlcer thereof. 
(c) The Registrar or such ofticer may during the course 
of Jnspection- Ie 
(i) make or cause to be made copies of the books 
of account and other books and papers, 
(ii) place or cause to be placed any marks of iden-
tification thereon in token of the inspection having been 
made. 15 
(d) In order to enable the Registrar or such officer to 
make an inspection of the books of account and other books 
and papers of the company, it shall be the duty of the 
company-
(i) to produce to the Registrar or such officer such 20 
books of account and other books and papers of the 
company as the Registrar or such officer may require, 
(ii) otherwise to give to the Registrar or such offi-
cer all assistance in connection with the inspection 
which the company is reasonably able to give."; 2S 
(c) in sub-section (6) ,-
(i) in clause (a), the following shall be inserted at the 
end, namely:-
"and lall oftlcers and other employees and agents [as 
defined in sub-section (6) of section 240] of such man- 30 
aging agent or secretaries and treasurers"; 
(ti) in clause (c), the word "and" occurring at the end 
shall be omitted; 
(iii) in clause (d), the word "and" shall be inserted at 
the end; 3' 

10 
20 
30. 
35 
~ .. 
r 9 
(w) after clause (d), the following clause shall be in-
serted, namely:-
"(e) whether or not a company has a managing 
agent or secretaries and treasurers, every ofRcer and 
other employee and agent (defined as aforesaid) of the 
company.". 
2Z. In section 227 of the principal Act,-
(4) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section 
be inserted, namely:-
Amend-
mentot 
shall section 
rJ/l. 
"(lA) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-sec-
tion (1), the auditor shall mquire-
(4) whether loans and advances made by the com-
pany have been properly secured and whether the 
terms on which they have been made are not prejudi-
cial to the interests of the company or its members; 
(b) whether transactions of the company which 
are represented merely by book entries conform to 
normal business practices accepted by established prin-
ciples of accountancy; 
(c) where the company is not an investment com-
pany within the meaning of section 372, whether so 
much of the assets of the company as consist of shares, 
debentures and other securities have been sold at a 
price less than that at which they were purchased by 
the company; 
(d) whether loans and advances made to individu-
als and private concerns have been shown as deposits; 
(e) whether personal expenses have been charged 
to revenue account; 
<f) where it is stated in the books and papers of 
the company that any shares have been allotted for 
cash, whether cash has actually been received in res-
pect of such allotment, and if no cash has actually been 
so !received, whether the position as stated in the a~­
count books and the balance-sheet is correct, regular 
and not misleading."; 
(b) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(4A) The Central Government may, by general or 
40 special order, direct that, in the case of such class or des-
cription of companies as may be specified in the order, the 
10M (B) L.S.-2. 

.A.mend-
mentol. 
section 
228. 
laertIoD 
of new 
section 
233B. 
Audit 01. 
cost acco- ' 
untsin 
certain 
cases. 
.A.mend-
mentol. 
section 
234A 
10 
auditor's report shall !llso include a statement on such mat-
ters as may be specified therein.". 
23. In section 228 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the 
words "may, by ,rules made in this behalf, exempt", the words "may 
make rules providing for the exemption of", shall be substituted. S 
24. After section 233A of ,the principal Act. under the sUb-head-
, ing "Audit", the following section shall be inserted, namely:-
"233B. (1) Where in the opinion of the Central Govern-
ment it is necessary so to do for the purpose of obtaining a true 
and fair view of the state of affairs of any company engaged in :10 
production, processing, manufacturing or mining activities, the 
Centnl Government may, by general or special order, direct 
that an audit Of cost accounts of the compaby thall be conduct-
ed in such manner as may be specifted in the order by an audi-
tor who shall be either a cost aecountant within the meaning of IS 
the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959, or such other per- 23 of lN8. 
80Il possessing the preSl!ribed qualifications. 
(2) An auditor under this section shall be appointed by the 
company in general meeting and the pr<Wistona of section 224 
- shall apply, as far as may be, in relation to IRlch auditor as they ~ 
apply in relation to an auditor appointed under that section. 
(3) An audit conducted by an auditor under this section 
shall be in addition to an audit conducted by an auditor ap-
pointed under section 224. 
(4) The provisions of section 227 and sections 229 to 233 2S 
shall, sa far as may be, apply in relation to an audit under this 
section. 
(5) The auditor shall make his report in such form as may 
be prescribed and the provisions of sections 216 and 219 shall 
apply in relation to such report as they apply in relation to a!o 
report made by an, auditor appointed under section 224. 
(6) A copy of the auditor's report' under this section shall 
be fUed with the Registrar within thirty days from the date of 
the signing of the "port.". 
25. In section 234A of the principal A:et,- 3S 
(a) in sub-section (1), after the words "make 'an applica-
tion", the words "to the Tribunal or" shall be inserted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the word "Magistrate", the 
words "Tribunal or Magistrate," 88 the oase may be, shall b~ 
substituted; 40 

Ib-
! . 
IS 
20 
r. 
, 
3S _ 
. ,-
11 
. '. 
(c) in sub-seeiion (3).-
(i) for the word "Magistrate", the words "Tribunal or 
Magiatrate. as the case maybe," shall be substituted; 
(ii) in the proviso, after the words "extracts from them", 
the words "or place identification marks on them or any part 
thereof" shall be in~rted; 
(d) in sub-section (4), after the word "search" and the word 
. . "searches" the words "or seizure" and "the words "or seizures" , 
shall respectively be inserted. 
28. In section 240 of the principal Act,- Amend-
mentof 
(8) in clause «(I.) of sub-section (1), for the words "to section 
produce to an inspector", the words "to preserve and to produce 240. 
to an inspector or any person authorised by him in this ·behalf," 
shall be substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shal~ 
be inserted, nam.ely;-
"(1A) The inspectar may, with the previous approval 
of the Central GoveJ,"tlment, require any body corporate, 
firm or individual [other than those referred to in sub-
section (1)] to furnish such information to, or produce such 
books and papers before him or any person authorised by 
hUn i.Jl this behalf as he may consider necessary if the fumi-
$.ing of such information or the production of such ,books 
and pa~rs is relevant or necessary for the purposes of his 
inve&tiiation. . 
(lB) The inapector may keep in his custody any books 
and papers produced under sub-section (1) or (1A) for such 
period not later than the conclusion of the investigation as 
he considers necessary and thereaf\er shall return the same 
to the company. ,body corporate, finn or individual by whom 
or on whose ~ the })QQ_ and papers BEe· pl'oduced: 
Provided that if certified copies. of the books and papers 
produced under sub-section (1..4) are furnished to the ins-
pector, he shall return those books and papers to the body 
cor~Ol'8te, ftrm· or individual coneerned."; 
" (c) for sub-sections (2), (3), (3A) and (4), the following 
sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:-
"(2) An inspector may examine on oath-
(0) any of the persons referred to in sub-section 
(.1); ud 

AmeDd· 
mentof 
.eet1on 
240A. 
~ . , 
12 ' 
(b) with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, any other person, 
in relation to the affairs of the company, other body cor-
porate, managing agent, secretaries and treasurers or usa-
ciate, as the case inay be; and may administer an oath ~ 
ilCcordingly lind for that purpose may require any of those 
persons to appear before him personally. 
(3) If any .person fails without reasOJiable ea~ or 
refuses-
(a) to produce to an inspector or any person 10 
authorised by him in this behalf any book or paper 
which it ia his duty under sub-section (1) 01' sub-
section (1A) to produce; or 
(b) to furnish any information which it is his duty 
under sub-section (1A) to furnish; Or I, 
(e) to appear before the inspector perSonally when 
required to do so under sub-section (2) or to aliswer 
any question which is put to him by the inspector in pur-
suance of that sub-section; or 
(d) to sign the notes of anf examination referred 20 
to in sub-section (5), 
h~ shall be punishable with imprisoilin~nt fat a term which 
may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend 
to two thousand rupees, lOr with both, and also with a further 
fine whkh may extend to two hundred rupees for every 2, 
clay after the first during which the failure or refusal 
continues."i 
(d) in sub-section (5), the word, brackets and ftgure "or 
(4)" shall be omitted. 
17. In section 240A of the principal Act,-
(II) in sub-section (1), after the words "make an applica-
tion", the worda "to the Tribunal or" shall ,be inserted; 
(b) m sub-section (2), for the word "Magistrate". the wordt 
"Tribunal or Magistrate, as the case may bet shall be lub.U· 
tuted; !s 
(c) in 8u:b-section (3)-
(i) for the word "Magistrate", the words "Tribunal or 
Magistrate, as the case may be," shall be substituted; 

(ii) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:-
"Provided that the inspector may, before returning 
such books and papers as aforesaid, place identification 
J marks on them or any part thereof."; 
(d) in sub-section (4), after the word "search" an~ the word 
"searches", the words "or seizure" and the words "or seizUre," 
shall respectively be inserted. 
28. In section 241 of the principal Act, in ~lause (a) of sub- .Amend" 
It) sectien (2), after the word "any report", the brackets and words mentof 
20 
~o 
35 
"(other than an interim report)" shall be inserted. section 
241. 
29. After section 250 of the principal Act, the following section InsertiOn 
&hall be inserted, namely: --:0 of new 
section' 
250A. 
"250A. An investigation may be initiated under section 235, Voluntary 
237, 239, 247, 248 or 249 notWithstanding that--- windin, 
(a) an application has been made for en order under ~:m~any 
section 397 or section 398; or etc., not to 
stop inves-
(b) the company has pa$se~ a special resolution for tigation 
voluntary winding up, proceed-
inp. 
and no investigation so initiated shall ·be stopped or suspended 
by reason only of the fact that an application referred to in 
clause (a) has been made or a special resolution referred to in 
clause (b) has been passed.". 
30. In section 252 of the principal Act,- aA.mend-
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "public company", the =~~f 
words. brackets, figures and letter '1>ublic company (other than 252. 
a public company Which has become such by virtue of section 
43A)" shall be substiiuted; 
(it) in sUb-~ection (2), for the word "private", the word 
"other" shall be subtituted; 
31. To section 259 of the principal Act, the following provisO shall tAmend. 
~ added, namely:- mentof 
aection 
"Provided that where such permissible maximum is twelve 259. 
or less than twelve, no approval of the Central Government shall 
be required if the increase in the number of its directors does 
not make the total number of its directors more than twelve.". 

Amend-
mentof 
section 
264. 
aa. m section 2CK of the priru:i~ Act..-
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "other than a per~ln", 
the words "other than a director retiring by rotation or other-
wile or a person" shall be substttuted: 
(ii) for sub-section (2), the followinS sub-section ~all be ~ 
substitut~, namely:-
"(2) A person other thaD-
(a) a direetor reo-appointed after retirement by rota-
tion or immediately on the expiry of hit term of dee, 
or 
(b) an additional or alteraate d~t or a pelIOn 
filling a casual vacancy in the o~ Qf a diredor Wlder 
section 262, appointed as a director or re-appointed as an 
additional or alteroote director, immediately on the 
10 
expiry of his terms of ofBc&, or IS 
(c) a person named as a director of the company 
under its articles as first registered. 
shall not act as a director of the company unless he has 
withiJl thirty days of hi. appointm8Jlt signed and filed with 
the Registrar his consent in writinll to aft al aueh dttector.". 20 
Amend- IS. In section 2fJ6 of the principal Act, sub-seetion (4) shall be 
mentof omitted. 
section 
266. 
Omission 
ofseetion 
271. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
273. 
Amend-
mentof 
aection 
280. 
:W. Section 271 of the principal Act. shall be omitted. 
35. In,ection 273 of the principal Act. for the word and. ~. 
"to 2..72~', the word and figures "and 2.72" shall ,be subBtit~d .. 
• lu ~iM ~ of the prineiQal Ad, fot' ~liICti.on·1 (1) and 
(2), the following sub-sections shall be 8Ubttitu~, namely:: ...... · 
"(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, a person 
ah.ul· n&fj. be capable of beina appoin\ed, or· sha.\l BOt act ~ a 
director of a company if he has attained the 8M. Ql .. saveniy-ftv.e '30 
ye~ I 
(.2) A direcwr of a COGlp8DY sJW.l vaate hia. ojftoe at. the 
eoDduaion ()f the 8DR\Ial general meetin&cOlmIllltnciq next. alter ,. 
be atta~ the age of se.veaty.-flve yean: 

:·5 
13 
'Provided. that e director who has attained the age of seventy-
five years before the commencement of the Companies (Second 
A.nieftd.tDent) Act, 1964 and is in office at such commencement 
shall vacate his office at the conclusion of the first annual general 
meeting held after such commencement.". 
37. Section 28 of the principal Act shall be omitted. Omission 
of section 
281. 
38. In section 282 of the principal Ad, for the words-"siX1:y-ftve Amend-
years", the. words "seventy-five years" shall be substituted. ment of 
section 
282. 
39. In section 285 of the principal Act, for the words beginning Amend. 
10 with "three calendar months" and ehding with "and the date of the ment of 
next meeting", the words "three months and at least four such section 285. 
meetings shall be held in every year" shall be substituted. 
40. After section 294 of the principal Act, the following section Insertion 
shall be inserted namely: _ of ~ew , section 
I.s "294A. (1) A company shall not payor be liable to pay to 294A: . 
its sole selling agent any compensation for the loss of his office ~Ohl~l­
in the following cases: - p~ent 
(a) where the appointment of the sole selling agent of com-
ceases to he v.alid by virtue of Bub-section (2A)of section pen'Sation . to sole 
20 294; selling 
(b) where the sole selling agent resigns hisoftlce in agents 
view of the reconstruction of the company or of its amalga- for IOS8 of 
mati on with any other body corporate or bodies corporate Offt~i in 
and is appointed as the sole selling agent of the reconstructed :~e:. n 
25 company or of the body corporate resulting from the amal-
gamation; , 
(c) wlaere the sole selling .agent resigns his alice, other-
wise than on the reconstruction of tfte COmp8By' or its amal-
gamation as aforesaid; 
30 (d) where the . BOle Hlltng agent has been guilty of 
Iraud 'fir bteach of' trust In relation to, or of !foss negli-
gence in, the conduct of his duty as theS61e ~mng agent; 
. (e) where the sole selling agent has instigated, or has 
·tak-e!l part dIrectly or indirectly in bringing about, the ter-
35 mination of the sole selling agency. 
(2) Tke C01IlpeD$Qtion which may be paid by a company to 
its sole selling agent for loss of office shall not exceed the 
remuneration which he would have earned if he had been in 
ofJice for the unexpired residue of his ·term, or for three years, 

16 
whichever is shorter, calculated on the basis of the average 
remuneration actually earned by him during a period of three 
years immediately preceding the date on which his office ceased 
or was tenninated, or where he held his office for a lesser peri~ 
than three years, during such period.". 5 
Amend- 41. In section 303 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the 
ment of words "or in any of the particulars contained in the register" and the 
lection proviso shall be omitted. i 
303 • 
.Amend-
mentof 
section 
30'1. 
Amend-
mentof 
aect.ion 
809. 
42. In section 307 of the principal Act, for sub-section (11), the 
following sub-section shan be substituted, namely: - 10 
" (11) The provisions of this section and section 308 shall 
apply to, and in relation to,-
(a) every managing agent, secretaries and treasurers or 
manager of a company; and 
(b) every person (other than a director) where five per IS 
cent. or more of the equity share capital of a pubUc company-
is held by him or in trust for him or of which he has any 
right to become the holder whether on payment or not, 
as they apply to, and in relation to, directors.". 
43. In section 309 of the principal Act-- 20 
(i) in sub-section (1), the following shall be added at tlie 
end, namely:-
"and the remuneration payable to any such director deter-
mined as aforesaid shall be inclusive of the rem~eration pay-
able to such director for services rendered by him in any 25 
other capacity: - , 
Provided that any remuneration for services rendered by 
any such director in any other capacity shall not be so in-
c1ildedif-
(a) the services rendered are of a professional na- 30 
ture, and 
(b) in the opinion of the Centra! Government, the 
director possesses the requisite qualifications for the prac-
tice of the profession and such practice is his principal 
occupation"; 35 

17 
(ii) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
II (4) A director who is neither in the whole-time em-
ployment of the company nor a managing director may be 
5 paid remuneration-
10 
either 
(a) by way of a monthly payment with the approval 
of the Central Government; 
or 
(b) by way of commission if the company by special 
resolution authorises such payment: 
Provided that the remuneration paid to such director, or 
where there is more than one such director, to all of them 
together, shall not exceed-
IS (i) one per cent. of the net profits of the company, 
if the company has a managing or whole-time director, a 
managing agent or secretaries and treasurers or a mana-
ger; 
(ii) three per cent. of the net profits of the company, 
~o in any other case: 
Provided further that the company in general meeting 
may, with the approval of the Central Government, authorise 
the payment of such remuneration at a rate exceeding one 
per cent. or, 8! the case may be. three per cent. of its net 
25 profits.". ' ~ 
30 
35 
44. To section 310 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall Amend-
be added, namely: _ ment of 
8~on . 
"Provided that the approval of the Central Government shall 310.· . 
not be required where any such provision or any amendment 
thereof purports to increase, or has the effect of increasing, the 
amount of such remuneration only by way of a fee for each 
meeting of the Board or a committee thereof attended by any such 
director and the amount of such fee after such increase does not 
exceed one hundred rupees.". 
Amend-
ment of 
41. In section 314 of the pPinclpal Act,-
(a) in sub-sectio.n (1)- section 
consent", the word "co~- 314. (i) for the words "previous 
sent" shaH be §~~'tttuted; . 
1054 (B) LS-3. 

~ 
mentof 
aeetlon 
370. 
18 
(ii) for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"PrO'lided that it shall be sufficient if the special 
resolution according the consent of the company is pass-
ed at the general meeting of the company held for the' 5 
first time after the holding of such office or place of 
profit: 
Provided further that where a relative of a director 
or a finn in which such relative is a partner, is appointed 
to an office or place of profit under the company or a 10 
sJ1.bsidiafY th~reof without the knowledge of the director, 
the consent of the company may be obtained either in the .' 
genera1 meeting aforesaid or within three months from 
'the date of the appointment, whichever is later."; 
(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 15 
substituted, namely:-
.. (2) U any office or place o! profit is held in contraven-
tjon of the provisions of sub-section (1), the director, partner, 
relative, finn, private company, managing agent, secretaries 
and treasurers or the manager, concerned, shall be deemed to 20 
have vaeated his or its office as such on and from the date 
next following the date of the general meeting of the com-
plPY referred to in the first proviso or, as the case may be, 
the date of the expiry of the period of three months referred 
to in the second proviso to that sub-section, and shall also be 25 
liable to refund to the company any remuneration received or 
the mopetary equivalent of any perquisite or advantage en-
joyed by him or it for the period immediately preceding the 
date aforesaid in respect of such offtce or place of proftt.", 
•. In section 370 of the principal Act,-
(4) in sub-seclion (1)-
(i) the wOl'ds "which is under the same management as 
the lending company" shall be owtted; 
(it) the follow ina pr9vi1o shall be added at the end, 
namely:- 3S 
"Providedtbat the awegat. of the loaza 80 made to 
all bodies carporate shall not exceed without the prior 
approval of the Central Government-
(a) tldrty flieI' eem.t. of. the aggregate' of the sub-
scribed capital of tlw lendlng eoln~anr 'and its free 40 . 

S 
reserves where adl): such other bGdies, eorpoliatJe> are 
not under the same management IS the lcdin.r' eorn. 
pany; 
(b) twenty per cent. of the aareptw of the 
subscribed capital of the leRding compan,.-aM itl , 
free resel'Ves where all such other bodies COI'perate 
are under the sa~ management aa the lenclinf com· 
pany."; 
(b) in sub-section (lC), in clause (b), after the words: ''Pf~ 
10 vided by the lending company", the words "in relation to any 
such body corporate" shall be inserted; 
(c) in sub-section (1 D) , for the words "every such loan, 
guarantee or security", the words, brackets, figure and letter 
"ev,ery loan, guarantee or security referred to in sub-section 
IS (le)" shall be substituted. 
47. In section 372 of the principal Act, in' SUb-section (13), after Amend:' 
the word, brackets and figure "sub-section (2) ", the words, brackets :::;;;r 
and figure "and sub-section (5)" shall be inserted. 3'12. 
48. In section 391 of the principal Act, to sub-section (2).. the .Amend· 
26 following proviso shall be added, namely: _ ment of. 
sectlon 
"Provided that no order sanctiOning any compromise or ar-
rangement shall be made by the Court unless the' Court is satisfied 
that the company or any other person by whom an application 
has .been made under sUb .. seetion (1) has disclosed to the Court, 
2S by affidavit or otherwise, all material facts relating to the com· 
pany, such as the latest financial position, of' the oompany, the 
latest auditor's report on the accounts of the company, the pen-
dency of any investigation proceedingB in relation to Ithe company 
under sections 235 to 251, and the like.", 
391. 
30 49. In section 394 of the principal Act, to sub-section (1), the .Amend· 
3S 
following provisos shall be added, namely: _ ment of section 
- 3k "Provided that no compromise or arrang~ent' proposed for 
the purposes of, or in connection with, a scheme- fbi-'the amalga-
mation of a company, which is being wound up, with any other 
company or companies, shall be sanetioned by the 'Court unless 
the: Court has received a report from the Company Law Board 

lnsertion 
of new 
section 
394A. 
Notice to 
be given 
to Central 
Govern-
ment for 
applica. 
tions under 
sections 
391 and 
394, 
.Amend-
ment of ,. 
section 
395. 
or the Registrar that the affairs of the company have not been 
conducted in a manner prejudicial to the interests of its mem-
bers or to public interest: 
Provided further that ,10 order for the dissolution of any 
transferor company under clause (iv) shall be made by the Court 5 
unless the Official Liquidator has. on scrutiny of the bQoks and 
papers of the company, made a report to the Court that the 
affairs of the company have not been conducted in a manner pre-
judicial to the interests of its members or to public interest.". 
50. After section 394 of the principal Act, the following section 10 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"394A. The Court shall give notice of every application 
made to it under section 391 or 394 to the Central Government, 
and shall take into consideration the representations, if any. 
made to It by that Government before passing any order under 15 
any of these sections.". 
51. In section 395 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (3), for the words "the transferor com-
pany shall thereupon register the transferee company as the 
holder of those shares: ", the following shall be substituted, 20 
namely:-
"the transferor company shall-
(a) thereupon register he the transferee company as 
the holder of those shares, and 
(b) within one month of the date of such reglstra- 25 
tion, fnform the dissenting shareholders of the fact of 
such registration and of the receipt of the amount or 
other consideration representing the price payable to 
them by the transferee company: "; 
(b) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall 30 
be inserted, namely:-
"(4A) (a) The following prOvisions shall apply in rela-
tion to every offer of a scheme or contract involving the 
transfer of shares or any class of shares in the' transferor 
company to the transferee company, namely: - 35 
(i) every such offer or every circular containing 
such offer or every :recommendation to the members of 
the transferor company by its directors to accept such 

S 
10 
IS 
21 
offer shall be accompanied by such information as may 
be prescribed; 
(ii) every such offer shall contain a statement by 
or on behalf of the transferee company, disclosing the 
steps it has taken to ensure that necessary cash will be 
available; 
(Ui) every circular containing, or recommending 
acceptance of, such offer shall be presented to the Re-
gistrar for registration and no such circular shall be 
issued until it is so registered; 
(..,) the Registrax may refuse to register any such 
circular which does not contain the information requir-
ed to be given under su~lause (i) or which sets out 
such information in a manner likely to give a false 
impression; and 
(v) an appeal shall lie to the Court against an 
order of the Registrar refusing to register any such 
circular. 
(b) Whoever issues a circular referred to in sub-clause 
(iii) of clause (a), which has not been registered, shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred 
" rupees. . .. 
52. In the principal Act, in Chapter V of Part VI. after section 
396, the following section shall be inserted, namely:-
Insertion 
of new 
section 
396A. 
"396A. The books and papers of a company which has been Preserva-
amalgamated with CXl' whose shares have been acquired by tion of d 
another company under this Chapter shall not ,be disposed of =:;Sa~f 
withOlUt the prior permission of the Central Government and amalga-
before granting such permission, that Government may appoint mated 
a person to examine -the books and papers or any of them for company. 
the puxpose of ascertaining whether they contain any evidence 
of the commission of an offence in connection with the promotion 
or formation, or the management of the affairs, of the first 
mentioned company or its amalgamation or the acquisition of its 
shares .... 
53. In the principal Act, in Chapter VII of Part VI,- Amend_ 
mentol 
(a) in the heading, for the words "ADVISORY COMMISSION'~, Chapter 
the words "ADVISORY CoMMITrEE" shall be substituted; VII of 
Part VI. 

Appoint-
mentof 
Advisory 
Committee. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
497. 
(b) for sections 410, 411, 412; 41a, 414 and 415, the following 
section shall be substituted, namely: ~ 
"410. For the purpose of advising the Central Govern-
ment and the Company J,.aw Board on such matters arising 
out of the administration of this Act as mlJY be referred to S 
it by that Government or Board, the Central Government 
may constitute an Advisory Committee consisting of not 
mar.e thaIJ five pel1sons wi1lh suitable qu.aliftuations .... 
54. In section 497 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), for the 
wOl'd.s "Provided that", the following shaH: he subl«tuted, namely:- 10 
"ProyidEtd that the company shall not be deemed to be dis-
solved until the Official Liquidator has, OD scrutiinV of the books 
and papers of the company, made a report to the Court that the 
affairs of the company have not b~en conducted in a manner pre-
judicial to the interests of its members or to pUblic interest: IS 
Provided further that". 
Amend- .. In section 509. of tlul principal Act, in sub-section (6), for the r 
ment of wPl'QJ "Provided that", the following shall be subatituted,. munely:-
section 
509. "Provided that the company shall not be deemed to be dis-
Insertion 
of new 
secUoo 
51lA. 
Applica-
tion of 
section 454 
to VOlWl-
tarywind-
ingup. 
solved, until the Official Liquidator has, on JCrutiny of the books 20 
and papers oithe company, made a report to the Court that the 
affairs of the company have not been conducted in a manner 
prejudici~ to the interests of its members or to public interest: 
Provided further that". 
56. After section f)11, of the principal Act, the fOOlowing section 2S 
shall· be inserted, namely:-
"511A: The prpvisions of sectipn 454 shall, so far as may be, 
apply to every volulltary winding up as they apply to the wind-
ing qp by the Cuu.rt except that references to:-
(a) the Court shall be omitted; 
(b) the Official Liquidator or the pr6visional' liquida-
tpr, shalll~e construed as references to theJiquictator; and 
(c) the "relevant date'" shall be. construed i., references 
to the date of commencement of the winding up.". 
" 

23 
57. III ,sectioD 5ga of the principal Act, in clause (c), the words Amend-
"or the particulars cootained in the list of the directors and secre- ment of 
tary" shall be omitted. section 
593. 
58. For section 635A of the principal Act, the following sections Substi'tu-
, wll ~ substituted, namely: - tionOi( 
10 
20 
new sec-
tions for 
~ection 
83M. 
"63iA. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall Protection 
lie against the Government or any officer of Government or any ~f ac~s 
other person in respect of anything which is in good faith done g: ~~ith. 
or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rules or 
orders made thereunder, or in respect of the publication by or 
under the authority of the Government or such officer of any 
report, paper or proceedings. 
635AA. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law Non-dis-
for the time being in force, the Registrar, any officer of Govern- ~losureof 
h h 11 d d·' 1 mforma-ment or any ot er person s all not be compe e to ISC ose to t' . Ion In 
any court, tribunal or other authority whence he got any infor- certain 
mation which- cases. 
(a) has led the Central Government to direct a special 
audit under section 233A or to order an investigation under 
section 23~, 237, 247, 248 or 249; or 
(b) is or has been material or :relevant in connection 
with such special audit or investigation.". 
59. After section 637A of the principal Act, under the sub-head- Insertion 
ing "Gra.nt of approval, .?tc., subject to conditions and levy of fees of 1'l~W 
a, on applications", the following section shall be inserted, namely:- :~;n 
3S 
"637B. Notwithstanding anything contained In this Act,-
(a) where any application required to be ntade to the 
Central Government under any provision of this Act in 
respect of any matter is not made within the time specified 
therein, that Government may, for reasons to be recorded 
in writing, condone the delay; 
(b) where any document required to be filed with the 
Registrar under any provision of this Act is not filed within 
the time specified therein. the Central Government may. fo1' 
reasons to be recorded in writing, condone the delay.". 
Cond~. 
tion of 
delays 11\ 
certain 
callell. 

Insertion 
of new 
section 
MOB. 
Forms of, ' 
and proce-
dure in 
relation 
to, certain 
applica- , 
tions. 
..\mend-
mentof 
Schedule 
lA. 
Minor 
amend. 
Jnents. 
24 
60. After section 640A of the principal Act, under the sub-head-
ing "Schedules, Forms and Ruler', the following section shall be 
inserted namely:-
"640B. (1) Every application made to the Central Govern-
ment under section 259, 268, 269, 310, 311, 326, 328, 329, 332, 343,'S 
345, 346, 352, 408, or 409 shall be in such form as may be pres-
cribed. 
(2) (a) Before any application is made by a company to 
the Central Government under any of the sections aforesaid, 
there shall be issued by or on behalf Of the company a general 10 
notice to the members thereof, indicating the nature of the 
application proposed to be made. 
(b) Such notice shall be published at least once in a news-
paper in the principal language of the district in which the 
registered office of the company is situate and circulating in IS 
that district, and at least once in English in an EngUsh news-
paper circulating in that district. 
(c) Copies of the notices, together with a certificate by the 
company as to the due publication thereof, shall be attached to 
the application. 30 
(d) Nothing in clause (a), (b) or (c) shall apply to a. 
private company which is not the managing agent of a public -
company.". 
61. In Schedule IA of the principal Act, sedaIs 23 to 49 (betll 
inclusive) shall be omitted. ~, 
62. The amendments directed in the Schedule, being amendments 
relating to matters of minor detail or of a clariftcatory or consequen-
tial nature, shall be made fn the sections of the principal Act speci-
fied therein. 

THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 62) 
MINOR AMENDMENTS IN THE COMPANIU ACT, 1956 
, Section 2.-ln clause (49A), for "Tribunal constituted", substitute 
"Companies TribuRal constituted". 
Section lOA.-In sub-section (1), for "constitute a Tribunal", 
substitute "constitute a Tribunal to be known as the Companies 
Tribunal". 
10 Section 44.-In clause (b) of sub-section (1), for "fourteen", 
substitute "thirty". 
Section 75.-For "one month", in all places, substitute "thirty 
days". 
Section 95.-1n sub-section (1), for "one month", substitute 
IS "thirty days". 
Secti01t 97.-ln sub-section (1), for "fifteen", substitute "thirty". 
S('cticm 107.-1n sub-section (5), for "fifteen", substitute "thirty". 
S~ctioll 125.-For "twenty-one", in all places, substitute "thirty". 
Section 127.-1n sub-section (1), for "twenty-one", in all places 
20 substitute "thirty". 
Section 128.-For "twenty-one", substitute "thirty". 
Section 137.-ln sub-section (1), for "fifteen", substitute "thirty". 
Section 138.-ln sub-section (1), for "twenty-one", substitute 
"thirty" . 
35 Section 146.-For "twenty-eighth" and "twenty-eight", substitute 
respectively "thirtieth" and "thirty". 
Section 156.-For "Court" and "fourteen", in all places, substitute 
respectively "Tribunal" and "thirty". 
Section 157.-ln sub-section (2), for "one month", in both places, 
30 substitute "thirty days". 
Section 159.-1n sub-section (1), for "forty-two", substitute 
"sixty". 
1054 (B) Li-4. 

Section 160.-1n sub-section (1), for "forty-two", substitute 
"sixty". 
Section 192.-1n sub-section (1), for "fifteen", substitute "thirty". 
Section 193.-For "fourteen", in all places, substitute "thirty". 
Section 220.-1n sub-section (1), for "at the same time as the 5 
copy of the annual return :referred to in section 161", substitute 
"within thirty d~ys from the datt~ on which the balance-sheet and 
the profit and loss account were so laid". 
Section 303.-1n. sub-section (2), for "twenty-eight", in all places. 
substitute "thirty". 10 
Section 394.-ln sub-section (3), for "fourteen", substitute 
"thirty". 
Section 404.-1n sub-section (3), for "fifteen", substitute "thirty". 
Section 445.-In sub-section (1) and in sub-section (lA), for 
"one-month", substitute "thirty days". 
Section 481.-1n sub-section (2), for "fourteen", substitute 
"thirty" . 
Section 509.-1n sub-section (6), for "twenty-one", substitute 
"thirty" . 
15 
Section 516.-In sub-section (1) , for "twenty-one", substitute 20 
"thirty" . 
Section 559.-In suh-section (2), for "twenty-one" , substitute 
"thirty". 
Section 592.-1n sub-section (1), for "one month", sUbstituLe 
"thirty days". 2S 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In pursuance of its terms of reference, the Commission of Inquiry 
on the administration of Dalmia-Jain Companies made certain 
recommendations for the amendment of the Companies Act with a 
view to prevent in future malpractices of the nature observed by 
it, and also to ensure due and proper administration of the funds 
and assets of companies in the interest of the investing public. 
Later, at the instance of Government, a Committee consisting of 
Shri C. K. Daphtary and 8hri A. V. Visvanatha Sastri examined 
the recommendatiGIlS ,of the Commission of Inquiry and made some 
suggestions o'f 1t8 own for amending the ·--said Act. The Bill, inter 
!alia, seeks to implement the recommendations of the Commission 
of Inquiry and the Daphtary-Sastri Committee. 
2. Opportunity is also being taken (i) to strengthen the provi-
sions relating to investigation into the affairs of companies and to 
provide for more effeCtive audit in dealing with cases of dishonesty 
and fraud fu the corporate sector, and (ti) to simplify some of the 
procedural requirements which are at present burdensome to the 
companies without being of corresponding advantage to the Govern-
.ment . 
• 3. The notes on clauses explain the provisions of the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
The 14th September, 1964. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of Letter No. 12/49/63-PR, dated the 14th September, 1964 
from 8hri T. T. Krishnamachari, Minister of Finance to the 
Secretary, Lok Babba.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Bill further to amend the Companies Act, 1956, recommends 
to the House the consideration of the Bill under article 117 (3) of the 
Constitution, 
27 

Notes on clatl.3e, 
Cla1£8e 2.-The Companies Act at present extends only to one of 
the three districts of N agaland, namely, the District of Tuensang. 
It is not applicable to the other two "districts, namely, Kohima and 
Mokokchung. On the recommendation of the Government of N aga-
land it is proposed to extend the Companies Act to the whole of 
Nagaland State. 
Clau.se 3.-Sub-clause (i) .-It is proposed to make clear that 
books and papers which are sometimes interpreted to exclude 
vouchers should include such documents. This is necessary to en-
suxe that they are maintained along with other books and papers, 
and are available to Inspectors for purposes of investigation. 
Sub-clause (ii) .-As recommended in paragraph 24 of Part II of 
the Report of the Commission of Inquiry on the Administration of 
Dalmia-Jain Companies (hereinafter referred to as the Commbsion'. 
Report), it is proposed to expand the definition of 'Officer' 80 as to 
bring within its ambit any person in accordance with whose ins-
tructions the Board or any of the directors of a company is accustom-
ed to act. This is designed to counter the trend whereby dummy 
directors are appointed on Boards of companies to implement 
policies of a dubious nature, while masterminds mainly instrumental 
in evolving these policies remain in the background. 
Clause 4.-The Act, as it stands, does not provide for delegation 
of powers by the Company Law Board to the officers of the Board. 
This creates administrative difllculUes and causes unnecessary delays. 
This clause is intended to provide for such delegation with the ap-
proval of Government. 
Clause 5.-This clause seeks to implement the recommendation 
of the Daphtary-SQtri Committee based on the observations con-
tained in pRragrapbs 2 to 5 of the Commission's Report. The pur-
pose of the amendment is to provide for clear definitions of the 
main and the suba'diary objects of a company in its Memorandum 
of Jlssociatton. 
Clause 6.-This amendment does away wih the technical neces-
sity of obtaining Government's approval under section 21 for the 
mere addition or deletion of the word "Private" from a company's 
28 

29 
name, consequent on its conversion from a pUlbUc into a private 
company or vice versa. 
Clause 7.-It 1s proposed to give power to the Central Govern-
ment to exempt from the provisions of section 43A auy Tlr;vato 
company in which shares are held by one or more bodies corporate, 
incorporated outside India] if the constitution of the said body r.or~ 
porate or each of the bodies corporate is such that it could be treated 
3!11 a private company under the Indian Company Law. T~e amend-
ment is calCUlated to remove the ditftculty said to be exppricnccn by 
small industries working in collaborating with small foreign com-
nanies of the nature of Indian private companies, because of the 
reRtrictior.s applicable to public companies in regard to manag·:rial 
remuneration, etc. 
Clause S.-This clause is based on the rp.commendation contained 
in paragraph ] 1 of the Commission's Report. It seeks to make it 
an offence to make applications for shares in the name of, or to 
include the allotment of shares to, fictitious persons. 
Clau$e 9.-This clause is based on the recommendation made by 
the Vivian Bose Commission and the DarJ1tary-S('stri Comm1ttpe. 
This is intended to safeguard the amount.c; paid by the applicants 
for shares until such time as the minimum subscription is col1"!cted 
by the company. The proposed amendment to section 69 (4) is on 
the lines indicated by the Daphtary-Sastri Committee. 
Clause lO.-This clause seeks to rectify a drafting defect in sec-
tion 73 (5). This sub-section, which defines the circumstances in 
which the operation of the section would not apply, uses the phrase 
"permission shall not be deemed to be refused" while the operative 
part refers to "permission has not been granted". This difference 
in the expressions used has given rise to a doubt whether a company 
would be exempt~ from the opetrative part of this section in the 
circumstances mentioned in sub-section (5). The intention of this 
clause is to clarify the position. 
Clause 11 (a) .-The amendment to clause (a) of sub-section (1). 
which is based on the recommendations of the Daphtary-Sastri 
Committee, seeks to impose a duty on the promoters and directors 
of a company to ensure that the share-capital reflects cash or other 
valuable assets and is not supported by merely book adjustments. 
Clause 11 (b).-The amendment to section 75(3) empowers the 
Registrar of Companies to grant, in appropriate cases, such exten-
sion of time as he thinks fit for filing the return of allotment even 

30 
wh,en the applicatiQu for the extension is lll6de after the expiry of 
one month specified in suh-sections (1) and (2). Simultaneously it 
is also proposed to delete the existing proviso to sub-section (4) 
which gives power to the Court to grant extension of time when the 
delay exceeds one month. The amendment is designed to save 
companies from the expenses involved in applying to a Court, and 
help them in obtaining extension of time speedily from the Regis-
trars. 
Clause 12.-This clause is based on the recommendation contain-
ed in paragraph 10 of the Commission's Report, and seeks to make 
it clear that under-writing commission should not be paid except 
in respect of shares or debentures offered to the public. It also re-
quires that the company should file with the Registrar a copy of 
the contract for payment of the under-writing commission at the 
time of the delivery of the prospectus. 
Clause l3.-The new sub-section (1 A) of section 108 seeks to 
impose restrictions on the period of -currency of blank tmnsfers on 
the lines of the Tecommendation in paragraph 19 of the Commission's 
Report. The proposed restrictions are--
(a) that every instrument of transfer shall be in the pres-
cribed form bearing the date of issue stamped by the prescribed 
authori.ty; and 
(b) that the said instrument is required to be delivered to 
the company within six months from the date of issue in the 
case of listed shares and within two months from that date in 
the case of any other shares. 
These restrictions are designed to curb the abuse inherent in the 
system of blank transfer. 
Clause 14.-Section lOA already provides for the Tribunal to 
exercise the powers of the Court under section 155 for the rectifica-
tion of the Share Registers of companies. Since the powers of the 
Central Government under section 111 of the Act to hear appeals 
against refusal by companies to register transfer of shares, are of a 
quasi-judicial nature and somewhat allied to those of the Court 
under section 155, the powers and functions of the Central Govern-
ment under section 111 in regard to appeals against refusal to regis-
ter transfer M shares are, by this amendment. proposed to be con-
ferred on the Tribunal. 
Clam! 15.-This clause is based on the recommendation contained 
in paragraph 6 of the Commission's RepOTt as endorsed by the Daph-
tary-Sastri Committee. It seeks to prohibit a company from com-
meneing any business in relation to its objects without obtaining the 

j1 
prior .. pprQval of the share-holders by a special resolution. It also re-
quires a declaration of compliance with the provision of this section 
being filed with the Registrar. 
Clause 16.-A doubt has arisen as to how the value of shares and 
debentures should be calculated for purposes of section l53B (4). 
The explanation sought to be inserted by this clause makes the posi-
tion clear. 
Clau.se 17.-This clause should be read with "lause 42 which seek 
to amend section 307. These two amendments are based on the re-
commendations of the Vivian Bose Commission that the beneficial 
holdings above five per cent. limit should be disclosed so that the 
name of the real holders of such shares, as distinct from those of the 
nominees by whom such shares are ostensibly held, are known. 
Clause l8.-This clause seeks to simplify the procedure contem-
plated in section 163 under which a company is required inter alia, 
to give notice in newspapers of their intention to maintain regis-
ters, indexes, returns and copies of certificates and documents at 
places other than the registered office of the company. It is felt that 
this requirement entails avoidable expenditure on the companies 
concerned, and should not be insisted upon. In any case, notice of 
such intention has tu be given to Registrars of Companies. This 
would suffice. 
Clause 19.-This clause seeks to remove a practical difficulty in 
respect of section 43A public companies where there may be less 
than five members. It is, therefore, proposed to modify section 174 
and provide for two members to form a quorum. 
Clause 20.-By virtue of the definition of the term 'Officer' as pro-
posed to be revised by clause 3(ii) supra, the words sought to be 
omitted from section 203, by this amendment, are redundant. 
Clause 21.-The object of the amendment of sub-section (1) of 
section 209 is to ensure that in respect of companies engaged In pro-
duction, processing, manufacturing or mining activities which may 
be specified by notification issued by the Central Govemment. proper 
records relating to utilisation of material and labour are available 
which would make the efficiency audit possilble. 
It is proposed to re-ciraf,t sub-section (4) with· a view 
to making it clear that the Registrar of Companies or any officer 
authorised in that behalf may illBpect the books of account and other 
books and papers of the company without giving any previous 
notice to the company or any officer thereof, if sufficient cause exists 

32 
for such inspection and take copies of and put identification marks 
on, the documents so inspected. Oppurtunity is also taken to make 
it obligatory on the company and it.; officers to produce the neces-
sary books of account; etc., for inspection by the Registrar ar any 
other officer and to give them all possible assistance in connection 
therewith. The changes proposed in sub-section (6) are· intended 
to make the officers and other employees and agents of the company 
and of its managing agents, secretaries and treasurers also responsi-
ble for taking reasonable steps to secure compliance with the re-
.quirements of section 209. 
Clause 22.-(a) This clause is based on the recommendation of 
the Daphtary-Sastri Committee and seeks to provide against the 
situation revealed in the Commission's Report under which the in .. 
vesting public lost heavily by contributing to the capital of the com-
panies which indulged in dubious practices not open to normal audit. 
(b) It is proposed tv insert a new sub-section namely, sub-
section (4A) in section 227 to enable the Government to issue 
suitable instructions to auditors. This provision is analogous to 
section 619 which empowers the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
to issue similar instructions to the auditors in respect of Govern-
ment companies. 
Cl.a'UBe 23.-'l'his amendment is of a drafting nature and is in-
tended to enable Government to delegate the powers of granting 
exemption under section 228(4) to the officers of the Company Law 
Board. / . &~ 
Clause 24.-A new section is proposed to be in ~ co 1 uced as sec-
tion 233B to enable Government to issue necessary directions for 
conducting cost audit of companies engaged in manufacture or 
mining activities. 
Clause 25.-This clause seeks to give concurrent powers to the 
Tribunal constituted under section lOA to order search and seizure by 
the Registrar. These powers are at present enjoyed only by First 
Class Magistrates (or the PreSidency Magistrate). 
Clause 26.-This clause seeks to provide certain facilities to.!ns-
pectors appointed under this Act to investigate various aspects of 
company matters. The need for such amendment is based on the 
experience of the difficulties encountered by the Inspectors in carry-
ing out the duties entrusted to them. 
Clau.se 27.-This clause seeks to confer on the Tribunal consti-
tuted undel- section lOA concurrent powers to order SC..lrch and 

ieizure by Inspectors appointed under the Act. Thil provision ii 
complementary to that made in clause 25 where similar concurrent 
powers are sought to be conferred on the Tribunal to order searches 
and seizures by Registrars of Companies: 
Clause 28.-The existing section 241 requires that the report of 
the Inspector should be sent to the company concerned. A doubt 
has been expressed that the existing provision might be construed to 
include not only the report in its final form but also such interiltl 
reports as the Inspector may choose to furnish. The amendment 
makes it clear that such interim reports need not be sent to the 
companYi 
Clause 29.-The proposed amendment is based on the recommen~ 
dation made by the Daphtary-Sastri Committee in the light of the 
Commission's Report. One of the methods by which investigation 
into the affairs of the company was sought to be delayed was by 
raising technical objections to it on the ground that applications for 
relief against oppression and mismanagement were pending before a 
Court or that the company concerned had gone into liquidation. 
The proposed section 250A provides that investigations may be ini-
tiated notwithstanding the voluntary winding up of the company 
or the pendency of such applicatiOns in Court. 
Clause 30.-This clause is intended to remove a practical difficulty 
in respect of section 43A public companies where the members need 
not be more than two. It is, therefore, proposed to modify section 
252 and provide that in the case of such companies the minimum 
number of directors should be two and not three as is the case with 
other public companies. 
Clause 31.-The clause is intended to obviate the need for un-
necessary references by the companies to the Government or the 
Company Law Board. Under the existing provision of section 259 
any increase in the number of directors beyond the maximum pres-
cribed by the Articles of Association requires the approval of Gov-
ernment. It is now proposed that the approval of Government 
would not be required far increase in the number of directors up to 
twelve irrespective of the provisions in the Articles of Association. 
Clawe 32.-Section 264 requires that a person proposed as a candi. 
date for the office of director should ftle with the company his con-
lent to act as director, if appointed. It also requires that a person 
other than a director re-appointed after retirement by rotation ah.n 
not act as director unless he has filed with the Registrar his consent 
in writing to act. as such. This amendment :<leeks to exempt persona 
1054 (B) LS-5.' 

II 
who have served as DIrectors 1ft the 1nlmetfll'teptec:ellDt term troD\ 
these requirements. It is felt that in the case of sueh pel"IODI1be 
requirement to me tbeir consent in writing is a tarmallty Wh1c1l 
could well be ~ispensed with. 
Clawre '33.-This clause proposes to delete sub-sectton '(4) of 
section }66 as tbeinformation filed under this sub-section :is <tther-
wise avafiable with the Registrar. 
'ClcuBe S4.-i'his clause proposes' to delete -eerd10ll 1ft t4~ 
The tn'farmatiMl "about theshrrre quaHfteatioft ef 'ftle cSiNeItors ~ 
be available to the Registrar in the annual returns in whidl tae ia-
formation is .included. 
Clauae S5.-This &meftdment is -consequewtial 10 ·delette C sect_ 
1'l1. I , • ; : ,. i .. :fJ 
Clauae H.-The preeent provision regaNicg the 're~ .age -ef 
a DJrector 3s co»tamed in section 280. Ueder ,this eeotion *he 
normal. Tetiring age ;for a Director i8 sixty-4lve, but ·be coWd coatume 
beyODd this :ageprovidec1 a special J.'e8OhrttlM is palled by the 00IIl-
pany. The aDtelldment leeks to Il'aile the ate .of, retiremeat of • 
Director to seventy-five bll'tmab!s no proviliOll 'f4r ·oontiauaJaae be-
yond that age by a special resolution or otherwise. The amendment 
<also "~ends the retiring age to private emftpelUes to whidh it had 
bftherto not been 8])l'liC81ble. 
0hru.Be 1r1.-The "ae1eti~n of section 281, whiCh is prCJpMed by :this 
ctaase, j- ~ntitll to the amendrnentof -secticm "280. 
ClaUle 38.-The proposed amendment of section 282 is also con-
sequential to the amendment of section 28U. 
Clause 39.-The wording of section 285, asft stands, is rather in-
volved and has given rise to certain doubt!!. It is 'proposed to make 
the position clear and provide 'for a meeting to be 'held at least once 
in every three months and at least four times every year. 
Claure '4O.-This clause is based on the dbservattonsof 'the Vtvt&n 
Bose Commission regarding the abuse arising out ·of payment 01 
compensation to sole selling .agents for the uneJq)ired ,period o.f their 
agreement. The Commission has suggested that in certain 
cir.cwnstances no compensation should be paid at all. while in othera 
compensation should be paid only for the unexpired .portion of the 
agreed term not exceeding three years. This clause seeks to insert 
a new HCtion to implement these recommendations. 

Clause 4l.-Tbis clause seeks to give relief to the companies- to 
tae extent that it would not be requirecl to inform the Reptrar of 
cbanges of particulan in respect of their Directors, Managing 
Directors, Maaaging Agent.a, Secretaries and Treasurers, Ma~8 or 
Secretaries except in the annual return. 
Clause 42.-Sub-section (11) of section 307 is sought to be sub-
stituted by a new sub--section, which, in addition to the existing 
provision. will requ.i.re notification of beneficial holders of more than 
Ave per cent. of the equity share capital. This proposed amendment 
is in implementation of t.he recommendations marle by the Com-
mJssion. 
Ctmue 43.- (i) The restriction an remuneration of Directors is 
IOmetimes sought to be ewded by the Directors holding teclmical or 
other appointments in addttioo to t~ir Di1'eotorships. This clawe 
seeks to provide for such eases being brought within the purview of 
flIi6 sectiOR; 
(ii) There is no provision at present for payment of motlthly 
salaries to part-time Directors. In rp!!pOnse to the suggestion made 
by the Chamber of Commerce it is pruposed that a provision should 
be made for such payment in appropriate cases. 
Clau.se 44.-This clause seeks to rehtx the requil'ements of the 
existing s..<>ction 310 to. allow companies without reference to the 
Central Government t& increase the fees of the Directors for attend-
ing meetings of the :&a.rc;l 01' of Commid;tees thereof up to rupees 
one huncked for each s~h meeting. 
Cb.&.se 45.-ln response to the suggesUens received from the 
Chambers of Cbmmeree it is proposed in this cl'souse to relax the re-
fluiremems regard~ftg prenous consent of the company in regard to 
tbe appointment of a D!'l'ecter or a partner or a relative of such 8 
Director, etc., to hold an offtce or 8, place of profit in the company. 
In plaee of sueh previous consent it is now bein.g provided that a 
special resolution should be obtained at the first g~nera1 meetin-g 
held after such an appOintment is made_ 
Ckue 4G.-Tbe VWi&n Bose Commialian suggested that inw. 
campany lGa:ai ehQuJ4 ruk at pu' wiUa inWr-compat.ly iQvestments 

38 
and should be subject to the same restrictions as the latter. In p8.rti-
cular, the Commission recommended that the loans referred to in 
section 870 shouid be subject to the restrictions contained in section 
372. This clause seeks to amend sedion 370 accordingly. 
Clau.&e 47.-Some of the Chambers have represented that the re-
quirements of section 372(5) that no investment shall be made by a 
company unless it is sanctioned by a resolution passed at a meeting 
of the Board of Directors with the consent of all the Directors pre-
sent at the meeting should not apply to investment companies. This 
clause seeks to implement this recommendation. 
Clause 48.-Arish~ g out of the findings of the Vivian Bose Com-
mission, the Daphtary-Sastri Committee has recommended that pro-
vision should be made for the disclosure of all material facts to a 
Court such as the financial position, the latest audit report, the pen-
dency of investigation proceedings, etc., before a court accepts a pr0-
posal of compromise at the instance of the liquidator. This clause 
seeks to implement this recommendation. 
Cla~e 49.-This clause is also based on the same findings of the 
Vivian Bose Commission as the clause above that an opportunity 
should be given to the Company Law Board or the Registrar to re-
port to the Court about the affairs of the company. 
Clause 5O.-Based on the recommendation in paragraph 46 01 the 
Commission's Report, the proposed section 394A makes it obligatory 
on the Court to give notice to the Central Government of every 
application made to it under section 391 or 394 and to take into con-
sideration the representations made by that Government, before pass..: 
ing any order on the proposed compromise or arrangement or scheme 
of amalgamation. This would enable the Government to study the 
proposal and raise such objections thereto as it thinks fit in the light 
of the facts and information available with it, and also place the 
Court in possession of certain facts which might not have been dis-
closed by those who appear before it so that the interests of the 
investing public at large may be fully taken into account by the 
Court before passing its order. 
Clause St.-Paragraphs 37 to 43 of the Commission's Report have 
dealt with the need for checking the malpractices in relation to the 
Take-over' offers and acquisition of shares of dissenting shareholders 
under a scheme or contract approved by the majority. With a vieW 
to ,preventing such malpractices it is considered necessary to take 
e#ective metlB\ll'e8, on the unes suggested in the said Report, to en-

,., 
lUre that adequate information is disclosed in a take-over ofter to the 
share-holders so that they could be allowed to judge for themselves 
whether or not to accept the offer. For this purpose it is proposed to 
amend section 395 to provide that any such offer or any circular, etc., 
eontaining such offer shell be accompanied by such information as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government and shall contain a 
statement disclosing the steps taken by or on behalf of the company 
making the offer, disclosing the steps it has taken to ensure that 
necesaary cash will be available for payment of consideration for the 
shares to be acquired. It is also provided that no such circular, etc., 
should be issued until a copy thereof is presented to and registered 
by the Registrar. The Registrar will also have the power to refuse 
to register any such circular if it does not contain all the requisite 
information or if it sets out any information in such a way as to give 
a false impression. As a further safeguard to the dissenting share-
holders, the proposed amendment imposes an obligation on the trans-
feror company to intimate to them the fact of registration of the 
transferee company as the holder of the shares under transfer and 
Riso of the receipt of the amount or other consideration representing 
the price payable to them by the transferee company. 
Clause 52.-This amendment is based on the finding of the Vivian 
Bose Commission and the recommendations of the Daphtary-Sastrf 
Committee. It is intended to prevent the practice of destroying in-
criminating accounts and records of the company which has been 
amalgamated with another company. This clause seeks to provide 
that permission of Government should be obtained before such re-
cords are destroyed. 
Clause sa.-This clause proposes to delete sections 410 to 415 In 
regard to the Advisory Commission and seeks to enact a single clause 
In lieu thereof constituting an Advisory Committee. 
Clauses 54 and 55.--On the basis of the findings of the Vivian Bose 
Commission and the recommendation made by the Daphtary-Sastri 
Committee, it is proposed to amend sections 497 and 509 to provide 
that a company which has been brought under voluntary liquidation 
should not be dissolved until the official liquidator has scrutinised 
the books and papers of the company and made a report to the court 
that its aft'airs have not been conducted in a manner prejudicial to 
the interests of its members or the public interest. 
Clause 56.-A new section 5UA is proposed to be inserted in order 
to ensure that the liquidator in case of voluntary winding up will 
have adequate information about the affairs of the company on the 
lines specified in se¢ion 454 in regard to compulsory winding up by 
court. 

3& 
Clauu- S'l.-Thia alause seelcs to exempt foreign, compRnies from 
the requiHm.ent te infonn the Registr.ar of changea of particuI8.I'I of 
their DirectOl'8 and Secretaries. Suclil. information is not ~y 
essentiai ham the point of view of Gwernment and mAY callie Ull-
D2Ces.fi&ty hMassment to the company conrerued. 
ClaUft 58.-(i): 1'bis cliawJe seeb to elaborate II8CtioIIl _A and 
tadeumify-
(a.), persons acting in iOOd faith in pUJ:lUanc:e of the Act 
w~ may not be Gov-el'llDleD.t ofticer; and 
~) In respect of puiblieatiOD by fir anckr tile autbGrit" of 
Govemmeftt or such oIftcers of any auch report, paper or pro-
ceediJrg. 
(ii) A new section 635A is proposed to be inserted so that, GQV-
emment or any person acting in this behalf is Bot compelled to dis. 
clQSe the sources of information received by it or him. It is intend,. 
ed to. eJaSure that the flow of iufonnation is npt impeded 'by the 
idantity of the sourc:es being revealed. 
Clause 59.-ThB clause seeks to. empower GOV'eI'ilment to (.'(1AI-
done l1elaYi in the matter of complying with certam. pl"Qv1si0na. of 
the Act. This. would help companies in cases {)f genuine hardship. 
C1ua:tt 66.-A new serliou MOB is proposed to be imserted OIl the 
..m.s of the existi~ semon 412', whi£b is proposed to be deleted 
IIOQC with other sections regarding ~ Acivisory CIMllI!riS&ton. 
Clause 61.-The existing Schedule IA of the Act provides far a 
list of relatives in 49 items. This list is proposed to be reduced by 
t1eletiDg item as- to 49 fboth inc~). 
Clause 62.-A SChedule. has b-een added to the Bill to prDVide for 
minor amendments or amendments of a clariflcatory or consequen-
tial nature. The- majority of these amendments rel!afJe! to cae item, 
l'lADlely, the provision of a uniform time limit of thirty ctaye for the 
I1mg- .r various clocmnents by tJte. compaI!1' before the Registrar. 
Thi. 1IDifo.rm time limit is intended to help the companies in c0m-
plying with the· prO'Vilions of the Aet. 

~. " , ,-, .. -. r'1l"4ANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
In para 19 of its Report, tIhe Commts&ion ·Gf Inquiry on the tuiIai-
trlItration -of Dalmia-lam Comp8llies :has reoommencied the impoIi-
tion of restriCtions ft the periOd dfctul"eney of blank tl"auIen 8C) 
as to curb the abuse inherent in the system .of blank lransfen. 0 .. 
13 of ,the Bill seeks to implement this recommendation iby inserting 
a new sub-section in section 108 of the Companies Act to provide 
that (a) every instrument of transfer shall be in the prescribed 
form obtainable from, and bearing the date of issue stamped by 
the prescribed authority and (b) the said instrument shall be de-
livered to the company within 6 months from the date of issue in 
the case of listed shares and within two months from that date in 
the case of any other shares. 
2. For the present Government propose to designate the various 
Stock Exchanges and Registrars of Companies under the Company 
Law Board as the prescribed authority for the 81bove purpose. Only 
expenditure that can be antiCipated in this behalf will be on account 
of printing of the prescribed forms and remuneration payable to 
the clerical sta1f engaged by the Stock Exchanges for assisting them 
in performing the functions of the prescribed authority and other 
incidental eJq)enses. As far as can be anticipated at present, the ex-
penditure involved is not likely to exceed Rs. 40,000 per annum as 
indicated below-
Staff consisting of 10 Lower Divn. Clerks .as. 24,000 
Cost of printing transfer forms, including 
cost of paper. Rs. 3,000 
Incidental expenses including stationery, 
furniture etc. Rs. 13,000 
TO'l'AL Rs. 40,000 
3. The provisions' in clause 53 of the Bill for the constitution of 
an Advisory Committee, in place of the Advisory Commission which 
has been set up :by the Central Government under the existing sec-
tion 410 of the Companies Act, will involve expenditure on account 
of travelling and daily allowance payable to the Members of the 
Committee when they come to Delhi or any other place to attend 
meetings. No salary or honorarium will, however, be paid to the 
39 

40 
members of the Advisory Committee. Recurring apenditure, U 
far as can be anticipated on account of travelling and daily allow-
ance, is estimated at about Rs. 30,000 per annum as against total 
annual expenditure of about Rs. 58,000 on the Advisory Commission. 
The expenditure on the Advisory Committee would., therefore, be-
much less than that incurred on tbe Advisory Commission and the 
provision in clause 53 of the Bill will not thus involve ·any fresh 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clauses 13, 15, 21, 23, 24, 51 and 60 of the Bill contain inter alia 
provisions authorising the Central Government to prescribe the 
following: -
(a) the form in which the instrument of transfer in respect 
of shares is to be drawn up and the authority from whom such 
form would be obtainable (clause 13); 
(b) the form in which the declaration that the company has 
approved of the commencement of any business in relation to 
the objects specified in clause (c) or clause (d) of sub-section (1) 
of section 13 is to be filed [clause 15 (a) ]; 
(c) the particulars relating to utilisation of material or 
labour to be included in the books of account kept by a company 
engaged in production, processing, manufacturing or mininl 
activities [clause 21 (a)]; 
(d) qualifications which a person must possess for conduct-
ing the audit of cost accounts of companies and the form in 
which the report of such audit shall be made (clause 24); 
(e) the information that must accompany (i) every offer of 
a scheme or contract involving the transfer of shares of one com-
pany to another or (ii) every circular containing such offer or 
(iii) every recommendation to the members of the transferor 
company by its directors to accept such offer (clause 51); 
(f) forms in which applications under sections 259, 268, 269, 
310, 311, 326, 328, 329, 332, 343, 345, 346; 352, 408 and 409 shall be 
made (clause 60). 
The above are matters of administrative detail and it is scarcely 
powers contemplated in the aforesaid clauses are of a normal 
powers contemplated in the aforesaid clauses are of a normal 
character. 
41 
1054 (B) LS-6. 

Short 
title, com-
mence-
mentand 
extent, 
Defini-
tions. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRAC1lS f'ftOM lIIE OoMl'ANIG A-cr, 1956 
(1 OF 1956) 
• • • • • • 
1. (1) • • .. .. .. 
(S) It extends to the whole of India: 
Provided that 'it sM11 DOlt apply to the State o! J'BIImlU and 
Kashmir except to the ex1lent to 'WIbich" the 'prov.isions dtilis Act 
relate to the incorporation, regulation and winding up of banking, 
insurance and financial corporations. 
i.., 
Z. In 'this Act, ani1!ss tire' ccmtext otherwitle requires,-
• • • • • • 
(8) ''book Ed paper" and "bo6k or paper" i&clude accounts, 
deed&, writmgs, .and :d.ooumeots; 
• .. • • • • 
(~~ "officer" inclades any director, managi.Dg .agent, ~ecre­
,iaries and,t1'eUU1'el'S, manager or secretary, and .also in-
cludes-
(4) where the managing ag.emt, the -secretaries and 
t!re8lUretS or the 8ec:reta.ry is or are a fum, uy partner 
in the firm; 
(b) W'here the managing agent :(Jril' the secretaries and 
treasurers is or 'are '8 bc!Idy col'p<>l'lEte,.my direeter "Or 
msn&ger of. the body COfIPOl"ate; 
(c) where the secretary is a .body corporate, any 
director, managing agent, secretaries and treasurers or 
manager of the body corporate; 
but, save in sections 477, 478, 539,543, 545, 621, 625 and 633 does 
not include an auditor; 
• • • • • • 

13. (1) The memorandum of every company shall state-
• • '" '" ... • 
Require-
ments 
with res-
(b) the State in which the registered office of the cam.pany pect to memo-
ia to be- sit1/late; and randum. 
(c). the objects of the company, and, except in the case ot 
trading corporations, the State or States to whose territories 
the objects extend . 
• ... ... ... ... ... 
21. A company may, by special resolutwn and with the approval 
of the Central Government signified in writing, change its name. 
• ... ... ... ... '" 
69. (1) • '" • ... ... 
(4) All moneys received from applicants for shares shall be 
deposited and kept deposited in a Scheduled Bank until they are 
returned in aecordance with the provisions of sub-section (5) or 
until the certificate to commence business is obtained under section 
149. 
In the eV'ent of any contravention of the provisions of this sub-
section, every promoter, director or other person who is knowingly 
responsible for such contravention shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees . 
... '" • '" '" '" 
73. (1) '" '" '" '" '" 
(5) For the purpose of this section, permission shall not be 
deemed to he refused. if it is intimated that the application for per-
mission though not at present granted, will be given further consi-
deration. 
... ... • • ... '" 
Change 
of name 
by com-
pany. 
Prohibi-
tion of 
allotment 
unless 
minimum 
subscrip-
tion 
received. 
All'ot-
mentof 
shares 
and 
deben-
tures to 
be dealt 
in 00 
stock 
exchange. 
75. (1) Whenever a company having a share capital makes any Return 
allotment of its shares, the company shall. within one month there~ as to 
after,- allot-
.. ments. 
·~.I 
(a) file with the negistrar a return of the allotments. stating 
the number and nominal amount of the shares comprised in 
the allotment, the names, addresses and occupations of the 
allottees, and the amount, if any, paid or due and payable 
on ellCh share; 
• • • • • • 

Power to 
refuse 
registra-
tion and 
appeal 
against 
refusal. 
44 
(3) If the Registrar is satisfied that in the circumstances of any 
particular case the period of one month specified in sub-sections (1) 
and (2) for compliance with the requirements of this section is in-
adequate, he may extend that period as he thinks fit; and if he does 
so, the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall have effect in 
that particular case as if for the said period of one month the ex-
tended period allOiWed by the Registrar were substituted. 
(4) If default is made in complying with this section, every 
officer of the companr who is in default shall be punishable with 
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day during 
which the default continues: 
Provided that, in case of defaulting filing with the Registrar any 
document required to be filed by this section within the time speci-
fied therein, the company, or any officer who is in default, may 
apply to the Court for relief, and the Cou~ if satisfied that the 
omission to file the document was accidental or due to inadvertence 
or that on other grounds it is just and equitable to grant relief, may 
make an order extending the time for the filing of the document 
for such period as the Court may think proper . 
• • • • • • 
111. (1) Nothing in sections 108, 109 and 110 shall prejudice 
any power of the company under its articles to refuse to register 
the transfer of, or the transmission by operation of law of the right 
to, any shares or interest of a member in, or debentures of, the 
company. 
(2) If a company refuses, whether in pursuance of any power 
under its articles or otherwise, to register any such transfer or 
transmission of right, it shall, within two months from the date on 
which the instrument of transfer, or the intimation of such trans-
mission, as the case may be, was delivered to the company, send 
notice of the refusal to the transferee and the transferor or to the 
person giving intimation of such transmission, as the case may be. 
If default is made in complying with this sub-section, the com-
pany, and every officer of the company who is in default, shall be 
punishable -with fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every 
day during which the default continues. 
(3) The transferor or transfere~, or the person who gave intima-
;tion of the transmission by operation of law, as the case may be, 
may, where the company is a public company or a private company 
which is a subsidiary of a public company, appeal to the Central 
C'n>vemment against any refusal of the company to register the 

45 
transfer or transmission, or against any fai~ure on its part, within 
the period. referred to in sub-section (2), either to register the trans-
fer or transmission or to send notice of its refusal to register the 
same. 
(4) An appeal to the Central Government under sub-section (3) 
shall be made-
(a) in case the appeal is against the refusal to register a 
transfer 01'1 transmission, within two months of the receipt by 
him of the notice of refusal; and 
(b) in case the' appeal is against the failure referred to in 
sub-section (3), within two months from the expiry of the 
period referred to in sub-section (2) . 
• • • • • • 
(5) The Central Government shall, after causing reasonable 
notice to be given to the company and also to, the transferor and 
the transferee or, as the case may require, to the person givting 
intimation of the transmission by operation of law and the previous 
owner, if any, and giving them a reasonable opportunity to make 
their representations, if any, in writing, by order, direct either that 
the transfer or transmission shall be registered by the company or 
that it need not be registered by it; and in the former case, the 
company shall give effect to the decision within ten days of the 
receipt of the order. . 
(SA) Before making an order under sub-section (5) on an appeal 
against any refusal of the company to register any transfer or 
transmission, the Central Government may require the company 
to disclose to it the reasons for such refusal, and on the failure or 
refusal of the company to disclose such reasons, that Government 
may, notwithstanding anything contained in the articles of the 
'company, presume that the disclosure, if made, would be unfavour-
able to the company. 
(6) The Central Governm.entmay, in its order. aforesaid, givte 
such incidental and consequential directions as to the payment of 
costs or otherwise as it thinks fit. 
(1) All proceedings in appeals under sub-section (3) or in rela-
tion thereto shall be confidential, and no suit, prosecution or other 
legal proceeding shall lie in respect of any allegation made in such 
proceedings, whether orally or otherwise. 
(8) In the case of a private company which is not a subsidiary 
of a public company, where the right to any shares or interest of a 

46 
member in, or debentures of, the company, is transmitted by a sale 
thereof held by a Court or other public authority, the provisions 
of sub-sections (3) to (7) shall apply as if the com'pany were a 
public company: 
Provided that the Central Government may, in lieu of .an order 
under suh·section (5), pass an. order directing the company to 
regiater the tran.un.ission of the right unless any member or mem-
ben. of the company specified in the order acqUire the right afore-
said wjthin such time as may be allowed for the purpose by the 
order, on payment to the purchaser of the price paid by him there-
for or such other sum as the Central Government may detennine 
to: be a reasonable oompensation for the right in all the ctrcurns-
tances of the case. 
(9) If default is made in giving effect to the order of the 
Central Government within the period specified in sub-seetiqrl (5) 
CI!I' to a direction of that Government given under the proviso to 
suD-8ection (8), the company, and every officer of the company who 
is in default, shall be punishable with fine which may elCteD.Q to 
ODe thousaDd rupees, and. with a further fine which may extend to 
0JJe hundred rupees for every day after the first during which t1te 
default continues. 
113 •. (1) • • • • • 
Declll'lltion (4) The provisions of this section and section 187B shall not 
II to .hares . I' and deben- apply m re ItIOn to a trust-
tures held (a) where the trust is not created by imtrumeat in 
in trust. writing; or 
Place of 
keeping, 
and 
inspection 
of, regis-
ters and 
returns. 
(b) even if the trust is created by instrument in writing, 
where the trust money invested in shares in, or debentures of, 
a company-
(i) does not exceed one lakh of rupees, or 
(ii) exceeds one lakh of rupees but does not exceed 
either five lakhs of rupees or twenty-Ave per cent of the 
paid-up share capital of the company, whicllever fl le .... 
• • • • • • 
183. (1) The register of members commencing fn:m the date of 
the registration of the company, the "index of members, the register 
and index of debenture holders, and copies of all an1m8l returns 
prepared under. sections 159 and 160, together with tbe copies of 
certificates and documents required to be annexed thereto under 
sections 160 and 161, shall be kept at the registered offtce of the 
company: 

Provtded that I!IUch registers, indexes, returns and cop4es of 
cer.ti&atesand documents or any or more of them may, instead of 
being kept at the registered office of the company, be kept at any 
other place within the city, town or village in which the registered 
office is sitUate, if-
(i) s\lchCJther place has been approved for thispurpase by 
a special resolution passed by the company in general Dl8eting, 
(ii} the purport of the ,l>roposed special resolution has been 
advertised in advance for three consecutive days in at least 
two newspapers circulating in the neighbourhood of the tegis-
tered oftiee of the company, and 
{iii) the Registrar has been given in advance a copy of't'hE 
proposed special. resolution. 
• • * • * • 
lK. (1) UJ3less the articles of the company provide for a larger Quorum 
nwnber, five members personally present in the case of public com- for 
pany, and two members personally present in the case of a private meeting. 
company, 'Shall be -the quorum for a meeting 0If theC1illllllpa!ly. 
* • • • ... ... 
•. {J~ * ... * * ... 
Power to 
(6) An order may 'be made by virtue of sub-'C'lause {ii) .m clause restrain 
(~}of sW>-sectian (1), notwithstanding that the person concerned fraudulent 
may be criminally liable in respect of the ma.tters on the ground rr::ns 
of which the order is to be made, and for the purposes of the said managing 
sub-clause (ii), the expression "Ofticer" shall inell1de any person m com-
accordance with whose directions or instructions the Beard of panies. 
diltectors of the ·company has ,been accustomed to ACt. 
* • • • • .. 
~. (1) • ... • • • 
~4~ D.e ·books of aoeoW1:t .shall be apen to inspection by any 
~ duriDg b1£Siness h&urs: 
Provided that the books of account shall also be open to inspec-
tion by the Registrar or by any officer of GOIIIel'nment a:Wihoriaed by 
the 'Central Government in this behalf if in the opinWn of the 
Registrar or such Officer Sl1'fftcient cause exists for the .iD&pec,tion, 
,of tAe bookB cf account. 
• • • •• • 
Books of 
account 
to be kept 
by com-
pany. 

Audit at 
accounts 
of branch 
oftlce of 
company. 
Seizure 
ofdocu-
mentsby 
Relistrar. 
226. (1) • • • • • 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing pr0-
visions of this section, the Central Government may, by rules made 
in this behalf, exempt any branch office from the pro~sions of this 
section to the extent specified in the rules and in making such rules 
the Central Government shall have regard to all or any of the 
following matters, namely:-
• • • • • • 
234.&. (1) Where, upon information in his possession or other-
wise, the Registrar has reasonable ground. to believe that books and 
papers of, or relating to, any company or other body corporate, or 
any managing agent or secretaries and. treasurers or managing 
director or manager of such company or other body corporate, or 
any associate of such managing agent or secretaries and treasurers, 
may be destroyed, mutilated, altered, falsified or secreted, the Re-
gistrar may make an application to the Magistrate of the First Class 
or, as the case may be, the Presidency Magistrate having jurisdic-
tion for an order for the seizure of such books and papers. 
(2) After considering the application and hearing the Registrar, 
if necessary, the Magistrate may, by order, authorise the Regis-
trar-
(a) to enter, with such assistance as may be required, the 
place or places where such books and. papers are kept; 
(b) to search that place or those places in the manner 
specified in the order; and. 
(c) to seize such books and papers as he considers neces-
sary. 
(3) The Registrar shall return the books and papers seized under 
this section as soon as may be, and. in any case not Later 'than the 
thirtieth day, after such seizure, to the company or the other body 
corporate or, as the case may be, to the managing agent or the secre-
taries and treasurers or the associate of such managing agent or 
secretaries and treasurers or the managing director or the manager 
or any other person, from. whose custody or power they were seized 
and inform the Magistrate of such return: 
Provided that the Registrar may, ·before returning such books 
and papers as aforesaid, take copies of, or extracts from them or 
deal with the same in such other manner as he considers necessary. 
(4) Save as otherwise provided in this section, every search made 
under this section shall be carried out in accordance with the provi-

5 of 1898. 
G 
sions of the 'Code of Crlminar Procedure, 1898, relating to searches 
made under- that Code. 
• • • • • • 
240. (1) It shall be tlie duty of all officers and other employees Produe. 
And agents of the company, and where the company is or was tion of 
managed bv a managing anent or secretaries and treasurers, of all docu-. '- '" ments officers and other employees and agents of the managing agent or and evi .. 
secreta ties and treasurers; and where the affairs of any other body dence, 
corporate, or of a managj,ng agent or secretaries and. treasurers, or 
of an associate of a managing agent or secretaries and treasurers, 
are invest1g'1lt~ ~ virtae' of section' 239, Mall' oftlm!rs and other 
empt0y'M8 and argents of sueh btJdy corporate, man~ng agent', 
s~r~at'ies IImi h'easurel'S; or aesociate, at'ld' where such managing 
agent; sectet~lind' treasu~:rs ot" associate is at" was a ftrm, of all 
pertnel'S in tl'k fttmt-
(a) to produce to an inspector all books and papers of, or 
relattn~rto, ttie- company or; as the ease may be; of' or' relating to 
the other body corporate, managing agent, sect'e'f;arie$ find 
treasurers or associate" which are in their custgdy or power; and 
(b) otherwise to give to the inspector all _istatoll::e ih· con-
nection with the investi~tion which they are reasonably able 
to give. 
(2)' All bl~ n1ay examine on oath' any of' the persons 
rete.! ~ fa br'sub;.section (1), in relation to the afhir'8' of 'the com-
party, other- 'beidy cotponlte, managinJj?; agent, secretaries' stitt' trea-
surers or associate, as the case may be; and may adtnfntsteor an oath 
accordingly and for that purpose may require any. of tllose persons to 
appear before him personally. 
(3) If any sueb' person fails without' _easonable cause or 
refuses-- ' 
(a~ to"Jlrodbeeto an impector tmy book or pl'p~ wHich it is 
bis'duty t1nc1er'~ or to produce; or' 
(b) to'Slppetir befbre ttte ihspector personany wilen required 
to do so under sub-!lection (2) or to answer any question 
which- is put t<>. him by the inspector in pursull'l'1ce of 
that sub-section; 
th~ insp~t()r may certify the failure or refusal under his hand to 
the Court alia ma,ke an application to the Court to hold an enquiry 
into the case; and tne Court may. thereupon, after taking such 
~cfence, if' any, as may be produced against or on behalf of the 
alkged ottendt.<r' and hearing his explanation, if any, make an order 
1054 (B) LS-7. 

Seizure 
ofdocu-
mentsby 
inspector. 
for the production by him before the inspector of all such books 
or papers within a date to be specified in the order or requiring such 
person to answer any question which may be put to him by the 
inspector. 
(3A) Any such person who disobeys an order of the Court under 
sub-section (3), shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend 
to two thousand rupees, or with both and also with a further fine 
which may extend two hundred rupees for every day after the 
first during which the disobedience continues. 
(4) If an inspector thinks it necessary for the purpose of his 
investigation that a person whom he has no power to examine on 
oath should be so examined, he may apply to the Court and the 
Court may, if it sees fit, order that person to attend and be examined 
on oath before it on any matter relevant to the investigation, and 
on any such examination-
(a) the inspector may take part therein eitlier personally or 
by a legal practitioner; 
(b) the Court may put such questions to tlie person examin-
ed as the Court thinks fit; 
(c) the person examined shall answer all such questions as 
the Court may put or allow to be put to him, but may 
at his own cost employ a legal practitioner, who shall be at 
liberty to put to such person such questions as the Court may 
deem just for the purpose of enabling him to explain or qualify 
any answers given by him: 
Provided that, notwithstanding anything in clause (c), the 
Court may allow the person examined such costs as in its discre-
tion it may think fit, and any costs so allowed shall be treated 
as part of tlie expenses of tlie investigation. 
(5) Notes of any examination under sub-section (2) or (4) shall 
be taken down in writing and shall be read over to or by, and signed 
by, the person examined, and may thereafter be used in evidence 
against him. 
• • • • • 
240A. (1) Where in the course of investigation under section 
235 or section 237 or section 239 or section 247, the inspector has 
reasonable ground to believe that the books and papers of, or 
relating to, any company or other body corporate or any managing 
ag~nt or s~etaries ~nd treasurers or managing director or manager 

5 of 1898. 
• of such company or other body corporate, or any associate of such 
managing agent or secretaries and treasurers may be destroyed, 
mutilated, altered, falsified or secreted, the inspector may make an 
application to the Magistrate of the Fust Class or, as the case may 
be, the Presidency Magistrate, having jurisdiction for an order for 
the seizure of such books and papers. 
(2) After considering the application and hearing the inspector, 
if necessary, the Magistrate may by order authorise the inspector-
(a) to enter, with such assistance, as may be required, the 
place or places where such books and papers are kept; 
(b) to search that place or those places in the manner speci-
fied in the order; and 
(c) to seize books and papers he considers necessary for the 
purposes of his investigation. 
(3) The inspector shall keep in his custody the books and papers 
seized under this section for such period not later than the conclu-
sion of the investigation as he considers necessary and thereafter 
shall return the same to the company or the other body corporate, 
or, as the case may be, to the managing agent, or the secretaries and 
treasurers or the associate of such managing agent or secretaries and 
treasurers or the managing director or the manager or any other 
person, from whose custody or power they were seized and inform 
the Magistrate of such return. 
(4) Save as otherwise provided in this section, every search made 
under this section shall be carried out in accordance with the provi-
sions of the. Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, relating to searches 
made under that Code . 
241. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The Central Government-
(a) shall forward a copy of any report made by the inspectors 
to the company at its registered office, and also to any body cor-
porate, managing agent, secretaries and treasurers or associate 
dealt with in the report 'by virtue of section 239; 
• • • • • • • 
!Inspec-
tors' 
report. 
252. (1) Ever~ public company shall have at least three directors. Minimum 
(2) Every private company shall have at least two directors. 
• • • • • • • 
number of 
directors • 

Increue 
innum-
bero! 
direc-
tors to 
require 
Govern-
ment 
sanction. 
Consent 
ofcandi-
date for 
director-
ship to 
beflled 
with the 
company 
and eon· 
sent to 
act as 
director 
to be 
flIed 
with the 
Reeistrar. 
Restric-
tionson 
appoint-
ment or 
advertise_ 
ment of 
director. 
Filing 
of~­
ratiOn of 
share 
qualifica-
tion by 
director. 
Saving. 
:52 
Dt.In the CaseOfB public .company.or a p.ri.va~,~y .which 
is a subsidiary .of 'a public company, any inereaae in.:tbe ,DUQ;Lber of 
its directors, except-
(a) in the case of a company which was in existence on the 
21st day of July, 1951, an increase which was within the permis-
sible maximum under its articles as in force on that date, and 
(b) j.ntbe 9ase of a~oJ.np~y W:-W$ C~ orm,ay'collle into 
.j!~~atter .th6l.t .date, an in~.~e ~hich js w~t~in ~e perm.is-
sible maximum under its articles as first registered, 
'" • • '" '" • • 
264. (1) Every person (other than a person who has left at 
the ()tlice of the company a notice under section 267.signj.fying his 
candidature for the office of a director) propQSed as a candidate for 
the ofJlce of a director shall sign, and fiJe with the company, 
his consent in writing to act as a directqr, if appoint.ed. 
(2) A person other than a director re-appoint~ after retirement 
l?y 'Fotation s~all not act as a director of' a company unless he has 
wjthin thJ+.ty days of hi:; (lppointment sign~ and filed with the 
~trar,' his consent in writing to act as su.ch .director. 
• .. • .. • ... 
'286. (1) • • • =It • 
(4) On the application for registration of the memorandwn and 
tbJ:'! ¥ucles, if any, of a company, the applicant .shall file with the 
Re~is~r~ a llst of the persons whohavecQllsented to be directors 
of the cQJ1lPanYi an4, if tb.is list contaip.s the name of ~ny person 
who has not so consented, the applicant sh~ll .b.e p:unishable with 
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. . 
• • • • • 
271. Every director, not being a technical director or a director 
appOinted by the Central or a State Government,shall within two 
J;J;lo,n~ . af.ter bi.$ .appoin~ent, or in tbec~se of a .clj.r~ctor holding 
otn~' ~~ Jp.~ cpWJ;lle~cement of U1~ COJll~ni,es (i\nUm.dJlWlt) Act, 
l~, .wit'llin t.wo lllanths after such cqmm~n~~e.I),t, .flle w.ith the 65 of 1960. 
Registrar a ~s;lar.ation specifying theq!J.i.Uftc~til.ln .~hiJ.re$ b~ld by him. . r • 
• • • • • 
273. Sections 270 to 272 shall not apply to a private company, 
u~s it js a'.8Ilblidiary of a public company. 
• •• • • • 

i2lO.,(1) Save a -otherwise' provided ill sectwll ~l,·a pel'~-6hal1 Age 
not ,be oapable of -being -appointed a Eiireetor 0! a pub14c '~OI'RpQlly or limit. 
of a private company which 1sa subsi<iilM'y ot a -pubhc -company, '11 
.-has attained the age of sixty..five years. 
(2) Save as aforesaId, a director of a public compal~y or of a 
private company which is a subsidiary of a puolic ,compan,y shaH 
vacate 'his Qftice at the conciusion of theannu,al general mee~m.g 
commencin~ next after he attains the age ofsixty~fiveyears: 
Provided that this ~~b~tjoJl WIl,Jl9.t AaPlv \P a u~r 'lWJ)O 
is in office at the co~encemen.t of this A.ct so as to require the 
termination of the ,pppointment then helli by him befOf~ t~,con­
clusion of the third al}nual general meeting held after :tbecom-
~encement of this Act, but shall ~pply so as to terininate the appoint-
ment ~for~id a,t the conclusion of that meeting. if ,he ,~dartained 
the age of sixty.;five years ,before the commencement pf the meet-
mg: 
PrDIVided further that where a person llas been appointed as a 
ciirec:toroat;apub1.ic C;:Gmpany or o.f a private company which isa 
subsidiary of a public company, before he has attained tbe ..age of 
sitd~"~~f! YRPs,jle ;smtllnot be ,l'equired ,to ~at.e ,his .a&ipe within 
'ilP~i04 ,of iJ1ree years,fI.£.ter his appointQ3Wlt lJW!l'~~ on the >FOUIld 
.tQ.Atb.e~fl ,Mtt»ueJi tm,t age wijhin,\hat period . 
• • • • • 
281. (1) Nothing in section 2.80 sn/1.1111z:event tqe FWP9~P..t~n.'Wt of ~g~ 
a director who has ~ttained tlle ilge of sixty-five Ycf!~rs or re9-Wf,e a ~~~~t 
director to retire Who .b,as attained tlwt a,ge, if. hi~ ~lWQin~ep.t ~ pr if com-
was made or approved by a resolution passed by the company in pany so 
general meeting and specifically declaring that the age )~mtt Jlhall resolves. 
not apply to himJ 
• 
t{~ ,S»ecial n()tice shall iberequired ,·of ·aIlY .iuch 'fesokltion; and 
'wUesi,)tU~ . notice ,~ .gLven, the resolution ..ahall:be-void. 
(3) Notice of any such resolution given to the company, and by 
the company to its members, must state or must have stated the age 
of the person to' whom it relates . 
. 282. (7) ~ny per~n who ~s ~ppoint~~, pr .to rus lwQ.wl~~e is ~::. 
proWfed to be .. a,ppoint~d, director of.il ~o.mp~py at ,a .t~e <w~p4e to cIis-
~. pttained the a~e C!f .sixty,five yef!,.rs Qr .s~ch )Q)VeJ.' Jlge, :if ,~,;~ close 
IP,-ay be ~pecifled in ~he coplp~ny's a.r~icI~s in .tl\i$.Rf!4~t, .11 fi~e age. 
notice of his age to the comEany: 
• • • 

Doard 
to meet 
at least 
once in 
every 
three 
calendar 
months. 
Register of 
54 
285. In the case of every company, a meeting of its Board 01 
directors shall be held at least once in every three calendar months; 
and not more than two months shall intervene between the last day 
of the calendar months in which such meeting is held and the date 
of the next meeting: 
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, direct that the provisions of this section shall 
not apply in relation to any class of companies or shall apply in 
relatiOlli thereto subject to such exceptions, modifications or condi-
tions as may be specified in the notification. 
• • • • • 
303. (1) • • • • • 
directors, (2) The company shall, within the periods :respectively mentioned 
managing in this sub-section, send to the Registrar a return in duplicate in the agents, secre- prescribed form containing the particulars specified in the said 
taries register and a notification in duplicate in the prescribed form of any 
and change among its directors, managing directors, managing agents, 
treasurers, secretaries and treasurers, managers or secretaries or in any of the 
etc. particulars contained in the register, specifying the date of the 
Registerot 
directors, 
share-
holdings, 
etc. 
Remu-
neration 
of direc-
tors. 
change. I 
The period within which the said return is to be sent shall be a 
period of twenty-eight days from the appointment of the first direc-
tors of the company and the period within which the said notification 
of a change is to be sent shall be twenty-eight days from the happen-
ing thereof: 
Provided that the notiflcation of any change in any of the parti-
culars contained in the register shall be sent within twenty-eigM 
days of the close of the year during which the change occurred. 
* * * • * 
307. (1) • * • • * 
(11) The prOVisions of this section and section 308 shall apply to 
managing agents, secretaries and treasurers and managers as they 
apply to directors. 
• • • • • • 
309. (1) The remuneration payable to the directors of a company, 
including any managing or whole-time director, shall be determined, 
in accordance with and subject to the provisions of section 198 and 
this section, either by the articles of the company, or by a resolution 
or, if the articles so require, by a special resolution, passed by the 
company in general meeting. 
•• " . • • • 

55 
(4) In the case of a director who Is neither in the whole-time 
employment of the company nor a managing director and whose 
remuneration does not include anything by way of a monthly pay-
ment, the company may, by special resolution, authorise the payment, 
to such director, or where there is more than one such director, to all 
of them together-
(a) if the company has a managing or whole-time director, 
a managing agent or secretaries and treasurers, or a manager, of 
a commission not exceeding one per cent. of the net profits of the 
company; 
(b) in any other case, of a commission not exceeding three 
per cent. of the net profits of the company: 
Provided that the company in general meeting may, with the 
approval of the Central Government, authorise the payment of com:-
mission at a rate exceeding one per cent., or as the case may be, three 
per cent. of its net profits. ~ 
• • • • • 
314. (1) Except with the previous consent of the company accord- Director, 
ed by a soecial resolution _ etc., not -, to hold 
• • • • • offlce or 
place 
Provided that where a relative of a director or a finn in which of profit. 
such a relative is a partner, is appointed to an offtce or place of profit 
under the company or a subsidiary thereof without the knoWledge 
of the director, the consent of the company may be obtained within 
three months from the date of the appointment; and if such consent 
is not obtained witnin that period or is refused, the relative or the 
firm shall be deemed to have vacated his or its offtce. or place on and 
from the date of expiry of that period and shall be liable to refund 
to the company any remuneration drawn by him or it for the period 
immediately preceding that date . 
• • • • • 
(2) If any offtce or place of profit under the company or a subsi-
diary thereof is held in contravention of the provisions of sub-section 
(1), the director concerned shall be deemed to have vacated his oftlce 
as director with effect from the first day on which the contravention 
occurs; and shall also be ~iable to refund to the company any re-
muneration received, or the monetary equivalent of any perquisites 
or advantage enjoyed by him, in respect of such oftlce or place of 
profit. 
• • • • • 

Loans. 
etc., to 
compa-
niesun-
derthe 
same 
manale-
ment. 
Purc:hue 
by com-
panyof 
.hares, 
etc., of 
other 
companies. 
Power 
and 
duty to 
acquire 
shares of 
share_ 
holders 
dis-
IIeIltinl 
from 
ICheme. 
" M:' (1)' Ncr eom~rt" (~,@i'eina'fEE!It' it\ t¥1i~ s~tlbrr'refeffed' to as 
IC~. 1~<Wt\'g cO'ttl~") ~ ...... 
(4), Male&. aay loan to, or-
(~, gi.~t!- M\y ~til'n'tet!, 01" prOVide-any- 9'ecUriiY, h\' eoM!C" 
tion with a loan made by any other person to~ or' to any' ot1'l~r 
pei18t')n by" . 
art'Y ti~' e6t{1otilte w1\~c'fi: is urttl!t fhe same' tn-an'a'gement as' the 
lei'1d\l1~ cbmp&l1" uh'fe~s tHe maiHrlg 01 such loan, the' giViflg of Sbch 
guarantee or the provision of such security has been pt~fo't1s1y 
a1lMrdli:af 'by tI' s~O'1!rl rellll)iutton of tire' lemttti-r C!OMpIIJl~. 
• tI .' rei • 
(b Y ttie following particulars in respect of every loan made, 
guarantee given or ,security provided by the lehding company 
under thft; section:..!I: 
• • • • • 
(lD) Particulars of every such loan, ~ or sacawlty atmlI· 
be entered in the register aforesaid within three days of the making 
of such loan, or the giving of such guarantee or the provision of 
sdr !leCwtity" dr iro the dIIII!J of any man'macieo, pt'1bt6!e' given: or 
s~ p!"O'tided betbPe- tire dVinnNnoement of the Od1'l'lpllll1el' 
(~ty }tetl 1_, \t)ithin three months from'stmh' COl'ldflE!IDJ-
roM at sbcft! fttttbtrt time mJty aweedfnt six mtm'tM as tile CGIh. 65 of 1960. 
ptn,-' !DaY' "" speeial r1IIeluti6nr alloW'. 
. .' . .. .' 
tit. (1'1 .... .' .. • • 
(-., 'l'ke'i'tc1tiittbtlla'oft1tH1 st!dftorl. ~~ thef{~ prt;VfSd'to sub-
section (2) shall 8'1so apply to an in~Mtnettt cotnpan,~ 
.' • ... .. 
• .. • .. 
~ WlhIlN< at notio8" hits' beeIt- givem: by the transfeHe- eomPu11 
u .... suMeotionl (~.1IDd ,the-'Court h. not, Oh tm1 ~t1CM'!fttid~ 
by- the.~~shaPeltb1dett made- an' order m"ttut1eOfttNty, tht!' 
tNllafltNe-: OOIDPSrrtr sbaU; On \ ther-expiry of one mbn.t1f fmrrr t1i~: di~ 
oawhioh-the ne-tItte lIesbt!ertgiyen, or, itatl a;p1teatton ~,tIw!'e'ottrt. 
by the dissenting shareholder is then pending, after that applicatltsft' 
has been disposed of, transmit a copy of the notice to the transferor 
company to~ther with lan instrument of transfer executed on behalf 

57 
of the shareholder by any person appointed by the transferee com- or con-
pany and on its own behalf by the transferee company, and payor tract 
transfer to the transferor company the amount or other conaid.era- bapproyed . f ymllJO-tion represen~ing the price payable by the transferee company or rit.)'. 
llie shares which, by virtue of this section, that company is entitled 
to acquire; and the transferor company shall thereupon register the 
transferee company as the holder of those shares. 
.. .. .. .. .. 
CHAPTER VII.-CONSTITVTION AND POWERS OF ADVISORY COMMISSION 
·410. For the purpose of advising the Central Government on the Appoint-
matter referred to in clause (a) of section 411, on the applications men~ of 
referred to in clause (b) of that section and on such other matters as AcdVlS~ry . ommlS-the Central Government may thmk fit, the Central Government sion. 
shall-
(a) constitute a Commission (hereinafter called the "Advi-
sory Commission") consisting of not more than five persons with 
suitable qualifications; and 
(b) appoint one of those persons to be the Chairman of the 
Commission: 
411. It shall be the duty of the Advisory Commission to inquire Duties 
into and advise the Central Government- of Advi-
sory 
(a) before a notification IS issued under section 324 in res- Commis-
pect of any description of industry or bUSiness, on the neces- sion. 
sity for, and advisability of, issuing the notification; 
(b) on all applications made to the Central Government 
under section 259, 268, 289, 310, 311, 326, 328, 329, 332, 343, 345, 
346, 352, 408, or 409; and 
(c) on all other matters which may be referred to the Com-
mission by the Central Government: 
Provided' that it shall not be necessary for the Central Gov-
ernment to refer to the Advisory Commission any application 
under section 408 or section 409 which in the opinion of that 
Government is of a frivolous nature or deals with matters of 
minor importance: 
Provided further that the Central Government may, in the 
case of any application under section 408 or section 409 which 
has been, or may be,· referred to the Advisory Commission, make 
such interim order as it thinks fit but it shall not make any final 
order on such application except after considering the advice 
tendered by the Advisory CommiSSiOn. 
1054 (B) LS-8. 

Forms 
and pro-
cedure 
in cases 
referred 
to Ad-
visory 
Com-
mission. 
Powers 
of Ad-
visory 
Com-
mission. 
58 
412. (1) Every application made to the Central Government 
under any of the sections referred to in clause (0) of section 411 
shall be in such form as may be prescribed. 
(2) (a) Before any application is made by a company to the 
Central Government under any of Uie sections aforesaid, there shall 
be issued by or on behalf of the company a general notice to the 
members "thereof, indicating the nature of the application proposed 
to be made. 
(0) Such notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper 
in a principal language of the district in which the registered office 
of the company is situate and circulating in that district, and at least 
once in English in an English newspaper circulating in that district. 
(c) Copies of the notices, together with a certificate by the com-
pany as to the due publication thereof, shall be attached to the 
application. i 
(d) Nothing in clause (a), (b) or (c) shall apply to a private com-
pany which is not the managing agent of a public company. 
413. For the purpose of making any inquiry under section 411, 
the Advisory Commission may-
(a) require the production before it of any books or other 
documents in the possession, custody or control of the company 
and relating to any matter under inquiry; 
(b) call for any further information or explanation, if the 
Commission is of opinion that such information or explanation 
is neceuary in order that the books or other documents pro-
duced before it may afford full particulars of the matter to 
which they purport to relate; 
(c) with such assistants as it thinks necessary, inspect any 
books or other documents so produced and make copies thereof 
or take extracts therefrom; 
(d) require any managing director or any other director, 
managing agent, secretaries and treasurers, manager or other 
officer of the company, or any shareholder or any other person 
who, in the opinion of the Commission, is likely to furnish in-
formation with respect to the affairs of the company relating to 
any mattp.r under inquiry. to appear before it and examine such 
person on oath or require him to furnish such information as 
may be required; and administer an oath accordingly to the 
person for the purpose.~ ! 

59 
414. If any person refuses or neglects to produce any , book or 
other document in his possession or custody which he is required to 
produce under section 413 or to answer any question put to him relat-
ing to any matter under inquiry, he shall be punishable with im-
prisonment for a term which may extend to two years and shall 
also be liable to fine. 
415. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Com-
mission or the Chairman or any member thereof or against the 
Central Government, in respect of anything which is in good faith 
done or intended. to be done in pursuance of this Chapter, or of the 
provisions referred to in section 411, or of any rules or orders made 
thereunder: 
... ... ... ... ... 
497. (I) ... ... ... ... ... 
(5) The Registrar, on receiving the account and either the return 
mentioned in sub-section (3) or the return mentioned in sub-section 
(4), shall forthwith register them and on the expiration of three 
months from such registration, the company shall be deemed to be 
dissolved: . 
Provided that the Court may, on the application of the liquidator 
or of any other person who appears to the Court to be interested, 
make an order deferring the date at which the dissolution of the 
company is to take effect, for such time as the Court thinks fit . 
... ... ... • • 
509. (1) ... • ... • ... 
Penal-
ties. 
Immu-
nity for 
action 
taken in 
good 
faith. 
Final 
meeting 
and 
dissolu-
tion. 
Final 
meeting 
(5) On receiving the account and also, in respect of each such ~d 
t · 'th th et t' . b' h disaolu-mee mg, el er e r urn men loned m su -section (3) or t e return t' 
i ed · b . ( Ion. ment on In su -section 4), the Registrar shall forthwith register 
them, and on the expiration of three months from their registration, 
the company shall be deemed to be dissolved: 
Provided that the Court may, on the application of the liquidator 
or of any other person who appears to the Court to be interested, 
make an order deferring the date at which the dissolution of the 
company is to take effect for such time as the Court thinks fit . 
• • • • • 

Return 
to be 
delivered 
to Regis-
trarby 
foreign 
company 
where 
docu-
ments, 
etc., aJ.;. 
teredo 
Protec-
tion of 
acts done 
in good 
faith. 
60 
513. If any alteration is made or ocems in-
• • • • • 
(c) the directors or secretary of a foreign company or the 
particulars contained in the list of the directors and secretary; 
or I 
• * * • • 
63SA. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie apinst ofIicers of Government for anything which is in good 
faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or 
any rules made thereunder. 
• * * * * 
SCHEDULE IA 
[See section 6(c)] 
LIST or RBLATIVBS 
* • • • • 
23. Husband's fatber. 
24. Husband's mother. 
25. Husband's sister. 
26. Wife's father. 
27. Wife's mother. 
28. Wife's brother. • 
29. Wife's sister. 
30. Wife's sister's husband. 
31. Father's brotherJ 
32. Father's sister. 
33. Mother's brother. 
34. Mother's sister. 
35. Father's brother's wife.i 
36. Father's sister's husband. 
37. Mother's brother's wife. 
38. Mother's sister's husband. 
39. Brother's son.i 
40. Brother's son's wife: 

·61 
41. Brother's daughter. 
42. Sister's son 
43. Sister's daughter. 
44. Father's brother's son. 
45. Father's brother's daughter. 
f7'f 
46. Father's sister's son. 
47. Father's sister's daughter. 
48. Mother's brother's son. 
49. Mother's brother's daughter. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Companies Act, 1956. 
(Shri T. T. Kris""-«luIri, 
M;";".,. of Pittattee.) 