As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
8W No. 64 or I.' 
THE INTER-STATE WATER DISPUTES (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1968 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Inter-State water l)i,spl£tes Act, 1956. 
BI: it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Inter-State Water Disputes (Amend- Short 
ment) Act, 1968. title. 
33 of 1956. 5 2. In section 4 of the Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 (here- Amend-
inafter referred to as the principal Act), for sub-section (2), the ment of 
10 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely: _ section 4-
.. (2) The Tribunal shall consist of a Chairman and two other 
members nominated in this behalf by the Chief Justice of India 
from among persons who are, or have been, Judges of the 
Supreme Court or are Judges of a High Court.". 
, 

Amend_ 
ment of 
section 5. 
!'Inaer-
tion of 
new 
.ection 
5A. 
Filling Of 
vacancies. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 9. 
Amend-
ment of 
eection 10. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 13. 
3. In section 5 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(4) If the members of the Tribunal differ in opinion on any 
point, the point shall be decided according to the opinion of the 
majority.". S 
" After section 5 of the principal Act, the followini section ahall 
be inserted, namely:-
"5A. If, for any reason a vacancy (other than a temporary 
absence) occurs in the office of the Chairman or any other 
member of a Tribunal, the Central Government shall appoint 10 
another person in accordance with the provisions of sub-section 
(2) of section 4 to fill the vacancy, and the investigation of the 
matter referred to the Tribunal may be continued by the 
Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is filled.". 
5. In section 9 of the principal Act, in SUb-section (4), for the 15 
worda "Subject. to any rules that may be made under this Act", the 
words "Subject to the provisions of this Act and any rules that may 
be made thereWlder" Shall be substituted. .. 
6. In section 10 of the principal Act, for the words "The presiding 
officer of a Tribunal", the words "The Chairman and other memben 20 
of a Tribunal" shall be substituted. 
7. In section 13' of the principal Act,-
(1) in clause (d) of sub-section (2), for the word.s "the 
presiding officer", the words "the Chairman and other members" 
shall be substituted; 
(2) fOr sub-Beetion (3), the follo.wini sub-aection shall be 
substituted, namely:-
25 
"(3) Every rule made under this section. shall be laid as 
soon. as ma~ be, after it is made, before each House of Parlia-
ment while. it is in session for a total period of thirty days, 
which may be comprised in one session or in two successive 30 
.1110111, and if before the expiry of the Beasion in which 

I 
it is 80 laid or the session immediately following, both Housel 
agree in making any modification in the tule or both Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall there-
after have eftect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modi-
fication or annulment shall be without prejutiice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule.". 

qTATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956, provides for the con-
stitution of a Tribunal consisting of one person from among persons 
who are or have been Judges of the Supreme Court or are Judges 
of a High Court nominated in this behalf by the Chief Justice of 
India. River water disputes affect a large number of people. The 
stakes involved in these disputes are very high. The welfare of 
millions of people depends on "an equitable settlement of these 
disputes. The issues on which the Tribunals give award, thus affect 
the welfare of millions of people for all times to come. Further, 
these issues are often of a highly complex nature involving many 
technical and socio-economic issues. There has, therefore, been a 
growing feeling that such important questions should be determined 
not by a one-man Tribunal but by a group of three. The Bill leeks 
to amend the Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956, to provide for a 
Tribunal of three persons who are or have been Judges of the 
Supreme Court or are Judges of a High Court. 
NEW DELHI; K. L. RAO 
The 12th July, 1968. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA z 
[Copy of letter No· DW.II-32(27)/68, tiated the 20th July, 1968 
from Dr. K. L. Rao, Minister of Irrigation and Power to the Secretary, 
Lok Sabha]. 
The President, having been informed about the lIubject matt.!r of 
the Inter-5tate Water Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 1968, has, under 
articles 117 (1) and 117 (3) of the Constitution, recommended to the 
Lok Sabha the introduction anti consideration of the Bill. 
"" ."" 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Section 4 of the Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 (33 of 1956) 
empowers the Central Government to constitute Water Disputes 
Tribunals for adjudication of water disputes. Under clause 2 of the 
Bill, the Tribunal will consist of three judges who are or have been 
judges of the Supreme Court, or are judges of a High Court. Under 
clause 6 of the Bill, the Chairman and other members of a Tribunal 
and the assessors will be entitled to receive such remuneration, 
allowances or fees as may be prescribed. The expenditure involved 
will be initially borne by the Central Government but will later 
on be adjusted in accordance with the decision of the Tribunals. The 
proposed amendment would involve an additional recurring expendi-
ture nf a'DProximately Rs. 1,50,000 per annum for each Tribunal. 

MEMORANDUM~INGDELEGA'rED LEGISLATION 
mause(d) 'of su.b-seotion (2) of section 13 of the Act, as proposed 
to ''belamended 'by cmuse7 of'the Bill, empowers the Central Govem· 
ment to make rules providing for payment of remuneration,allow-
anc~es or fees to the Chairman and other members of a Tribunal 
and assessors. These are matters ofa\:iministrative detaU '8llCl :can 
hardly be 'provided in ,the Bill itself.1:'he delegation of :legislaUw 
power is, therefore, df tl normal ehaneter . 
'- • 

ExTRActs FROM THE llm:R-STATZ W A'l'ER' DmPuorDt Aer, 1918] 
(33 ror.l96&) 
• • • • • 
4. (1) • • • • • Conatitu-
tiOIl at 
(2) The Tribunal shall consist of one person only nominated in Tribunal. 
this behalf by the Chief Justice of India from among persons who are, 
or have been, Judges of the Supreme Court or are Judges of a High 
Court. 
• • • • • 
t. (1) • • • • • 
(4) Subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, the 
Tribunal may, by order, regulate its practice and procedure. 
Powers 
of Tribu-
nal. 
10. The presiding officer of a Tribunal and the assessors shall be Allow-
entitled to receive such remuneration, allowances or fees as may be anees or 
prescribed. fees for 
presid-
• • • • • 
13. (1) • • • • • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
• • • • • 
7 
ing offt-
cer of 
Tribunal 
and al-
1.IOrB. 
Power 
to make 
rules. 

-
8 
(d) The remuneration, allowances or fees payable te the 
preaidillg oftlcer of a Tribunal and assessors; 
• • • • • 
(3) .All rules made under this section shall, as soon as practIcable 
after they are made, be laid for not less than fourteen days before 
both Houses of Parliament, and shall be subject to such modifications 
as Parliament may make during the session in which they are so 
laid. 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 • 
.r • • f • 
(Dr. K. L. Rao, 
Minister of Irrigation and POfIJer) 
. ... 