· 10K SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
l'RE AIR (PllliTBNTTON .ri.llJ"u 00NTROL O}' POLLUTION) AME!"I'niIiENT 
BILL, 1937 
(To be/Ar.::. introducec. in :Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 4, j.nt\i": ma.rgLn::-ll ~L8ad':'n,:c ta proposed section 22.A.,-
r.ca ~l "PEl !"Son s" 
2. P:tFIe 5, l.i.1H~ 1 2,-
for llar.l.Y ·"-l.uthurity," re:ld "au tho ri ty," . 
OJ:li t II:l. n d " 
5. Page 9, lin~ 25,-
for "~trr~;ars Ol~!! ren.d "3.'i.rears of" 
6. Page 12, linA 6,-
for "2 .... .. .. * *" ----
read "2. L'1 th:L J Act, 'IDless the context 
~t~8rwiso requlres,-" 
7 • Pag(~ 1 <1., lin e 3 from bottom,-
In "J1ollusioJn I, ~ "pclluticn" 
8. P').gc 15, in t~le marginal he[.!.a.ing to section 22,-
')mit "0 th or" --
9. pa.g') 16, in t :'18 marginal hea.ding- to section 37 ( 1 ) ,-
for "section 21(3)" r(~rJ.d "section 21(5)" 
1!l. Pa.ge 17, in the r.l::i.ri-:;irlC:l.l.hea.d.ing to section 43,-
for "GoY!grlizance" ~ "Cognizance" 
NEW DELHI; 

.LOK S~.GEA 
CORRIGENDA 
THE AIR (PIU~r{:::;NT[OiJ Al;'J i~:',)Tr::n.U,L 01.' POLLU'LiJX) AHE!illlI1ENT 
B H!.L, 19:37 
(Tu telAe intr~ducGd in 10k S~bha) 
, • Pag e 4, in t:, I~ r.J1rg Llnl ~v::a(En:.,- t) pr opo sed S 8ction 22A",-
rcrid "p;) r3'Jn s" 
2. r~ge 5, line 12,-
.3 • P:1,:-,e 5, Lin e 1 3 , -
for read , "au tho ri ty," 
5. P~ge 9, lin8 2S,-
for ":trr~arc: or" read ":nre::lrs of" 
6. P"'l~~~! 1 2 , lin \:,> 6,-
for I' 2. ... .. if. 
* *" ---- , ~ 
:-ead "2. L'1 tt_i ~1 Act, 11..11183 c tr.e context 
7. ragA 1J, line 3 from bott~rn,-
r)!o.i t -
f:)r 
, 
.~ 
"pollu.tion" 
"~Gct~on ~1(7\" rr.~~"j -.. '''''' ...L C_'-,J "section 21(5)" 
HI. Pace 17, in t ~lC m·'l.rgil',':~2.. t.e:.:::.linp: to Liection 43,-
~ tIc . " ,.J "CO,L.m -i z".Y'lce II .: or . OEgt1l.ZC1n cr:: ~ >"...~ .......... 
NEW DELHI; 

As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON" 
Bill No. 64 of 1887 
THE AIR (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1987 
A 
." . BILL 
-
to amend the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollu.tion) Act, 1981. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in. the Thirty-eighth Ye9r ' of the 
Republic of India as folloWs:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Air (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Amendment Act 198'7. . , 
(2) It shall come into farce on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the OfticialGazette, appoint; and different dates 
may be appointed fer different States and for different provisions of 
this Act. 
Short 
title 
and 
com-
Jr.cnce. 
ment. ., 
2. In section 2 of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, Amend-
14 e! 1 •. 1. TO 1981 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) ,- ment of 
section 2. 
(i) in clause (a), after the words "gaseous substance", the 
brackets and words "(in~luding noise)" shall be inserted; 
(ii) in clause (g) for the word!; "Central Board for the Preven~ 
tion and Control of Water Pollution"" the words "Central Pollution 
Control Board" shall be substituted; 

Substitu-
tion of n.w 
sections (or 
sections 3 
and 4. 
Central 
P(\ll~ 
tlon 
Control. 
Soard .. 
State 
Pollu· 
tion 
Control 
Boards 
. consti· 
tuted 
under 
section 4, 
of .~ct 
8 of 1974 
lobe 
State 
~oards 
under 
thUI 
Ad. 
Amend-
mentot 
section S. 
Amend· 
ment of 
lIKtioll 7. 
(iii) for clause (m), the tollowing clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
.... 
'(m) "occupier", in relation to any factory or premises, 
means the person who has control over the affairs of the factory 
or the premises, and includes, in relation to any substance, the 5 
person in possession of the substance;'; 
(iv) in clause (0), in sub-clause (i), for the words "State 
Board for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution", ttle 
words "State Pollution Control Board" shall be substituted. 
3. For sections 3 and 4 of the principal Act, the following sections 10 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"3: The Central Pollution Control Board constituted undll!r 
section 3 of the Water (Prevention and,Control ot Pollution) Ad, 
1974, shall, without prejudice to the exercise and perfoqnance of Us 801 lIM. 
powers and functions under that Act. exercise the powers and per- 15 
form the functions of the Central Pollution Control Boa.rd for the 
prevention and control of air pollution under this Act. 
4. In any State in which the Water (Prevention and Control 
of Pollution) Act. 1974, is in force and lfue State Government has 
constituted for that State a State Pollution Control Board under sec- 20 
tion 4 of that Act, such State Board shall be deemed to be the State 
Board for the PreventIon and Control of Air Pollution constituted 
under section 5 of this Act, and accordingly that State Pollution Cont-
rol Board shall without,prejudice to the exercise and performance of 
its powers and functions under that Act, exercise the powers and ~r- 115 
form the furtctions of the State Board for the Prevention and Cont-
rol of Air Pollution under this Act." 
-
4. In lection 5 ot the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "State Board for the Pre.-
vention and Control of Water Pollution", the words "State Pollution 30 
Control Board" shall be substituted; . . , 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for clause (1), the following clause 
shall be substituted, I'!amely:-
"(f) a full-time member-secretary having such quallilcatioDS, 
knowledge and experience of scientific, engineering o~ manage-
ment aspects of pollution control as may be prescribed, to be 35 
appointed by the State Government: ". 
s.. In sub-section (6) of section 7 ot the principal Act. the WOrdl "but 
not for more than two terlDl" .hall be omitted. 

5 
10 
a 
Amend-
mentof 
e. In ,ection 14 of the princl.Pal Act, for 8Ub-lection (J), the following 
lub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
section 
,I (2) The member-secretary of a State Board, whether i!onstitu .. 14. 
ted under thiB Act or. not, shall exercise such powers and pedorm 
such duties as may be prescribed, or as may. from time to time. be 
delegated to him by the State Board or its Chairman.". 
7. In sub-section (2) of ,section 16 of the principal Act, after clause Amend-
ment of (d). the following clause shal.l be inserted. namely:- sec-
t< (dd) perform such of, the funbtions of any State Board as may tion 16. 
b~ specified in an order made under sub-section (2) of section 18;", 
8. Section 18 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-,/" Amend-
section (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered ... the mentof 
fonowing sub-sections shall be inserted, namely: - section 
18. 
"(2) . Where the Central Government is of the opinion that any 
State Board has defaulted in complying with any direc-
tions given by the Central Board under sub-section (1) and as a result 
of sueh default a grave emergency' has arisen and it is necessary 
or expedient so to do in the public interest, it may. by order. direct 
the Central Board to perform any of the functions of the State 
Board in relation to such area, for such period and for such pur-
poses. as may be specified in the order. , 4-
(3) Where the Central Board performs any of the functions of the 
State Board in pursuance of' a direction under sub-section (2), the 
expenses. if any. incurred by the Central Board with respect to the 
performance of such functions may, if the State Board is empowered 
• to recover such expenses, be recovered by the Central Board with 
interest (at such reasonable rate as the Central Government may. by 
, i 
. order. fix) from the date when a demand for such expenses is made 
until it is paid from the person Or persons concerned as aPrears of 
land revenue or of public ~emand. 
(4) For the removal of c1oubts. it is hereby declared that any 
directions to perfonn the functions of any State Board given under 
sub-section (2) in respect of any arcq would not preelude the Stale 
Board from performing such functions ii, !\ny other area in the State 
or any of its other functions in that area .... ' 
9. In section 21 of the principal Act.- Amend-
(i) for sub-section (1), the, following. 'sub-section shall be ment of 
substituted, namely: --.: section 
"(1) Subject to the' provisions of this section, no person n. 
shall, without the previous consent of the State Board, esta-
blish or operate any industrial -plant in an air pollution control 
area: 
Provided that a person operating any industrial' plant in any 
air pollution ~ontrol alrea immediately before the commencement 
of section 9 of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Amend-
ment Act, 1987. for which no consent was necessary prior to such 
commencement, may continue to do so for a period of three months 
from such commencement or, if he has made an application for 
such consent within the sl1id period of three months. till the dh,· 
posal Of ~ lUoh appllcat:ioD.nj 

Amend-
ment 01. 
section 
22. 
Insertion 
of new 
section. 
22A. 
power. 
Board 
to make 
applica-
tion to 
court for 
restrain-
in8 person 
from 
c:auIiD& 
air poUu-
'tion. 
4 
(ii) in the proviso to sub--section (I): the word. "f~r 1Ih. pur-
pose of any ind~try specified in the Schedule" shall be omitted., 
,(iii) in sub-section (4),-
(a) for the words "either grant or refuse, for reasons to 
be recorded in the order, the consent applied for". the words 5' 
"atld for reasons to be recorded in the order, grant the consent 
applied for subject to such conditions and for such period as may 
be specified in the order, or refuse such consent" shall be sub-
stituted;, . 
(b) the following provisos shall be inserted at the end, 10 
namely:.-
"Provided that it shall be open to the State Board 
to cancel such conserit before, the expiry of the period for 
which it is granted or refuse further consent after such 
expiry if the conditions subject to which such consent has 15 
been gran ted are not fulfilled: 
Provided further that before a consent h. been can· 
celled or a further consent has been refused under the first 
proviso, a reasonable opportunity of being heard shall lie 
given to the person concerned."; 20 
(iv) in the first proviso to sub-section (5), the words "for the 
purpose of any industry specified in the Schedule'" shall be omitted; 
10· In section 22 of the principal Act, the words "carrying on any 
industry specified in the Schedule or" shall he ' omitted. 
11, After section 22 of the principal Act, the following section shan 25 
be ~rted, namely:-
"~ (1) Where it is apprehended by a Board that emission of 
any air pollutant, in excess of the standards laid down by the State 
Board under clause (g) of sub-section (1) of section 17, is likely to 
occur by reason of any person operating an industrial plant or ptber- 30 
wise in any air pollution control area, the Board may make an appli-
cation to a court, no~ inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or 
a Judicial Magistrate of the first class for restraining such person 
from enrltting such air pollutant. 
. (2) On receipt of the application under sub.sectiGn (1) • the 
court may maKe such order as It deems !t. 35 
(3) Where under sub-section (2) • the court makes an order 
restraining, any person from discharging or causing or permitting to 
be disc'larged the emtssion of any air pollutant. it ' may, in that 
order,- ' 
(4) direct such person to desist from taking such action 40 
as is likely to callse emission; 
(b) authorise the Board, if the direction under clause (4) 
is 'not complied with' by the person to whom such direction is 
iSsued. to implement the direction in' such manner as may be 4 
specified by the court. 5 
(4) All expenses incurred by the Board in implementing the 
. directions of the court under, clause (b) of sub-section (I) rhall 

be recoverable from the person concerned as arrears of land reven~ 
or of public demand.". 
12. In se.ction 23 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the ~rds Amend-
"air pollution control" shall be omitted. ment of 
~t:ion 
23. 
5 13. In section 24 of the principal Act, in: su1Hection (2), the words Amend. 
mentof 
secti~n 
24. 
10 
IS 
20 
"carrying on any industry specified in the Schedule and every person" 
shall be omitted. . 
14. In Chapter IV of the principal Act, after section 31, the follow- Insertion 
ing section shall be inserted, namely:- 01 new 
section 
I 
"3lA. Notwithstanding anything contained in any .ther l&w. 
but subject to the provisions of this Act, a Board may, in :the exercise 
any of its powers and performance of its functions under this Act, issue 
any. directions in writing to any person, officer or any authority, and 
such person, officer or authority shall be bound to comply' with 
such directions. 
Erplanation.-For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby dec-
lared that the power to issue directions under this section includes 
the power to direct-
(a) the closure, prohibition or regulation of any industry, 
operation or process; or 
(b) the stoppage or regulation of supply of electricity, water 
or any other service.". 
15. In the proviso to section 32, and in sub-section (3) of section 33 
and in section 49 of the principal Act, for the words "State Board for the 
Prevention and Control of Water Pollution" wherever they occur, the , 
3lA. 
Power to 
give 
direc-
tiQllll. 
Amend· 
mentol 
sections 
2S words, "State Pollution Control Board" shall ~ substituted. 32, ~3 and 
49. 
30 
16. After section 33 of the principal Act, the following section shall Insertion 
be inserted, namely:- of new 
"33A. A Board may. with the consent of, or in accordance 
with the t;erms of any general or special authority given to it by, 
th\ Central Goverlll'llent or, as the case may be, the s~te Govern-
ment, borrow ·money from any source by way of loans or issue of 
bonds, debentures Or such' other ,instruments, as it may deem fit, for 
discharging all or any of its functions under this Act.". 
section 
,33A. 
Borrow-
~ 
power. 
of Board. 
'17. For section 35 of the prinCipal Act, the following section shall Substitu-
35 be substituted, naInely: - tion of 
new sec-
tion for 
!ltCtion 
35. 
"35. (1) The Central Board shan, during each financial year, Annual 
prepare, in such form as may be prescribed, an annual report giving report. 
full account of its activities under this Act ciuring the previous 
financial year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central 
Government wfthin four· months from the last date of the prev1eus 

SubsU· 
_tiono f 
new 
section 
for sec-
t10n B7. 
Failure 
to com-
ply with 
the pro-
visioll& 
of sec· 
tion 21 
or sec-
tion22 
or with 
the 
direc· 
tions 
isSUed 
under 
section 
31A. 
Amend-
mentof 
sectioD 
38. 
Substi-
tuticmof 
neWsec:-
tion tor 
sectiOn 
39. 
Penalty 
for con· 
traveD. 
tiOnof 
certain 
.provi· 
slousof 
the Act. 
-. 
• 
tlnancial year and that Government'whall CBUIIe every such repor1 
to be laid before both Houses of Parliament within nine month. of 
the last date of the previous finanCial year. 
(2) Every State Board shall, during each financial year, pre. 5 
pare, in such form as may be prescribed, an annual report giving 
full account of its activities under this Act during the previous 
financial year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the State 
Government Wiithin fOur months frolfl the last date of the previous 
financial ye~r and that -Government shall cause every such report 
to be laid before the State Legislature within a period of nine 10 
months from the last date of the previous financial year.". 
18. For section 37 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
slIQstituted, namely:-
"37. (1) Whoever fails to comply with the provisions of seetion 
21 or Iilection 22 or directions issued under section 31A, shall. in res- 15 
peet of each such failure, be punishable with imprisonment fOr • 
term which shall not be less than one year and six monthil but 
which may extend to six years and with fine, and in case the failure 
continues, with an additional fine whi~h may extend to five thousand 
rupees for every day during which such failure continul"S after the 20 
conviction for the first such failure. 
(2) If the failure referred to in sub-section (1) continues be-
yond a period of one year after the. date of conviction, the offender 
shall be punishabl~ with imprisonment for a term which shall not 
be less than two years but which may extend to seven years and 
with fine.". 
19. In section 38 of the principal Act, for the words "five hundred 
rupees". the words "ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted. 
20. For section 39 of the principal Aci. the following section shall be 
25 
substituted, namely: - . 30 
"39. Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or 
any order or direction issued there under. for which no penalty has 
been elsewhere provided in this Act. shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with 
fine which may extemd to' ten thousand rupees Or with both" and in 3S 
the case- of continuing contravetltion, .with an additional fine which 
may extend to ftve thousand rupees for. every day during which 
such contravention continlles after conviction for the first such . 
contravention. " 

5 
10 
15 
20 
3° 
I. 
!1. For section 43 of the principal Act, the followbg section snall be 
."bitituted, namely:-
. ~ 
Substi-
tution of 
new 
section· 
for 
sect.ion 
43 . 
"43. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Cogni'-
Act except on a complaint made by- '·zanceof 
(a) a Board or any officer authorised in this behalf by 
it; or 
(b) any pp,rson who has given notice of not less than sixty 
days, in the manner prescribed, of the alleged offence and of his 
intention to make a complaint to the Board or officer authorised 
as aforesaid, 
and no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judi-
cial Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable 
under this Act. 
(2) Where a complaint has been made under clause (b) of sub-
section (1), the Board shall, on demand by such person, ,make avail-
able the relevant reports in its possession to that person: 
Provided that the Board may refuge to make any such report 
available to such· person if the same is, in its opinion, against the 
public interest.". 
22. Section 50 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
23. In section 53 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1). for clause 
(f), the following clauses shall be substituted. namely:-
"(f) the form in Which and the time within which the budget 
of the Central Board may be prepared and forwarded to the Central 
Government under section 34; 
(if) the fOrIXl in which the annual report of the Central Board 
may be prepared under section 35;". 
24. In section 54 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-aection (2) ,-
ofteuces. 
Omis-
lion of 
section 
SO. 
Amend.. 
ment of 
!leCtion S3. 
Amend-
ment of 
aedion 
(i) clause (a) shall be renumbered as clause .(aa), and before ... 
clause (aa) as so renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
35 
"(a.) the qualifications, knowledge ~d e'XPeri~ce of 
scientific, engineering or management aspects of pollution 
control required for appointment as member-secretary of a 
State Board constituted under the Actj"j 
(ii) for clause (w), the following clauses shall be substi-' 
I tuted, namely:-
"(w) the form in which and the time within which 
the budget of Ute State Board may be prepared and forwMd. 
-" to the State Govwnn'lent undw section 3'j 
•• 

(ww) the form in which the annual report of the State 
Board may be prepared under section 35;"; 
(iii) after clause (x), the following c18lUse shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(xx) the manner in which notice of intention to make 
a complaint shall be given under section 43;". 5 
(b) in sub-section (3). for the words, brackets anci letter "in claitse 
(a) ", the words, brackets and letters "in clause (00)" shall be substituted. 
25. The Schedule to the principal Act shall be omitted. ]0 
Omis· 
sion of 
tJIe 
Schedule .. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 was enacted 
Wider article 253 of the Constitution to implement the decisions taften at 
the United Nations Conference on HUman Environment held at Stock-
holm in June, 1972 in which India participated. 
2. The Air Act is implemented by the Central and State .Governments 
and the Central and State Boards. Over the past few years, the imple-
menting agencies have experienced some administrative and practical 
difficulties in effectively implementing the provisions of this Act and 
have brought these to the notice of Government. The ways and means 
to remove these difficulties have been thoroughly examined in consulta-
tion with the concerned Central Government departments, the State 
Governments and the Central and State Boards. Taking into account the 
views expressed, Government have decided to make certain amend-
ments to the Act in order to remove such difficulties. 
3. The Bill, inter alia, s~ks to make the following amendments in 
the Act, namely: - ' 
(i) The Central Board is proposed to be empowered to exercise 
the powers and perform the functions of a State Board in specific 
situations, particularly when a State Board fails to act and comply 
with the directions issued by the Central Board. It is also proposed to 
;recover the cost of the exercise of such powers and the performance 
of such functions by the Central Board from the person or persons 
conCerned, if the State Board is empowered to recover such costs 
under the provisions of the Act, as arrears or land revenue or of 
public demand. 
(ii) It is proposed to make it obligatory on the part of a person 
to obtain the consent of the relevant Board even while establishing 
an industrial plant. 
(iii) It is proposed to empower the Boards to obtain information 
rega.rding discharge of pollution in excess of specified standards by 
the industries operating even outside the air pollution control areas. 
(iti) In order to prevent effectively air pollution, the punishments 
provided in the Act are proposed to be made stricter. 
(v) In order to elicit public cooperation, it is proposed that any 
person should be able to complain to the courts regarding violations 
of the prOvisions of the Act after giving a notice of sixty days to the 
Board or the officer authorised in this behalf. 
(vi) It is proposed to omit the Schedule to the Act so as to make 
the Act applicable to aU the industries causing air pollution. 
(vii) It is proposed to empower the Boards to give directions to 
any person, oftlcer or authority including the pOWEU' to direct closure 

10 
or regulation of offending establishment or stoppage or regulation of 
supply of services such as, water and electricity. 
(viii) It is propoSed to empower the Boards to approach courts 
to pass orders restraining any person from causing air pollution. 
(i.1:) For increasing the financial resources of the Boards, it ill 
proposed to empower them to raise monies by means of obtaining 108118 
and issue of debentures. : 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; BHAJAN LAL. 
The 15th July, 1987. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 24 of the Bill seeks to amend section 54 to empower the 
State Government to prescribe qualifications, knowledge and experience 
of scienti1ic, engineering or management aspects Of the pollution control 
for appointment of a full-time member-secretary Of the State Board 
under clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 5 and it further empowers 
the State Government to provide for the manner in which the notice 
of intention to make a complaint shall be given under new section 43 
as substituted by the Bill. 
2. These matters pertain to the procedure, form or administrative de-
taU. As such, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
n 

Definl-
tiona. 
Central 
Board 
for the 
PreVeJl-
tionand 
Control 
of Air 
Pollu-
tion. 
EXTRACTS FROM THE AIR (PRIMI:NTION AND CONTROL 01' PoLLUTION) 
.Act, 1981 
(14 ~ 1981) 
• • • • • 
• * • • • 
(a,) "air pollutant" means any solid, liquid or gaseous substance 
present in the atmospher~ in such concentration as may be or tend 
to 'be injurious to human beings or other living creatures or plants ~ 
property or environment; I 
* * • • • 
(g) "Central Board" means the Central Board for the Preven-
tion and Control of Water Pollution constituted under section 3 of 
the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974; 6 of 1974. 
• * • • • 
(m) "occupier", in relation to any factory or premises, means 
the person who has control over the affairs of the factory or the pre-
mises and where the said affairs are entrusted to a managing agent, 
such agent shall' be deemed to be the occupier of the factory or the, 
premises; 
• * • * • 
(0) "State Board" means,-
(i) in relation to a State in which the Water (Prevention 
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, is in force and the State e of 1974. 
Government bas constituted for that State a State Board for the 
Prevention and Control of Water Pollution under section 4 of 
that Act, the said State Board; and 
* * * • 
CHAPTER II 
CENTRAL AND STATE BoARDS FOR THE PREvENTION AND CONTROL 
OF AIR POLLUTION 
3. The Central Board for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollu-
tion constituted under section 3 of the Water (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 1974, shall, without prejudice to the exere!se and per- tI of 197 .. , 
fonnance of its powers and functions under that Aet, exere1se the 
powers and perform the functions of the Central Board for the Preven-
tion and Control of Air Pollution under this Act, 
12 

6 of 1974. 
6 of 1974. 
• 13 
4. In any State in which the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollu-
tion) Act, 1974, is in force and the State Government has constituted for 
that State a State Board for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollu-
tion under section 4 of that Act, sUtCh State Board shall be deemed to be 
the State Board for the Prevention and Control of Air Pollution consti-
tuted under section 5 of this Act and accordingly that State Board for the 
Prevention and Contr!ll of Water Pollution shall, without prejudice to 
the e."(ercise and performance of its powers and functions under that Act, 
exercise the powers and perfo~m the functions of the State Board for the 
prevention and Control of Air Pollution under this Act. 
5. (1) In any State in which the Water (Prevention and Control at 
Pollution) Act, 1974, is not in force, or that Act is in force but the State 
Government has not constituted a State Board for the Prevention and 
Control of Water Pollution under that Act, the State Government shall, 
with effect from such date as it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint, constitute a State Board for the Prevention and Control of 
Air Pollution under such name as may be specified in the notification, 
to exercise the powers conferred on, and perform the functions assigned 
to, that Board under this Act. I 
(2) A State Board constituted under this Act shall consist of the 
follOwing members, namely:-
'" • '" '" • 
(f> a full-time member-secretary having practical experience in 
respect of matters relating to environmental protection and having 
administrative ~perience, to be appoin"ted by the State Government: 
'" . '" '" '" 
7.(1) '" '" • '" '" 
(6) A member of a State Board constituted under this Act shall be 
eligible for re-nomination but not for more than two terms. 
'" • '" '" • 
14. (1) '" • '" • '" 
(2) The member-secretary of a State Board, whether constituted 
under this Act or not, shall exercise such powers and perform such duties 
as may be prescribed. 
'" '" • '" '" 
!t. (1) Su1:iject to the prQvisions of this section, no person shall, with-
out the previ01A8 consent of the State Board, operate any industri.al plant 
for the purpose of aay in~1!ry specifted in th~ Schedule in an aIr pollu-
tion cOntrol area. 
State 
Boards 
for the 
Preven-
tion~ 
Control 
of water 
Pollu-
tion to be 
State 
Boards 
for the 
Preven-
tionand 
Control 
of Air 
Pollu-
tion. 
Consti-
tutionof 
State 
Boards. 
Terms 
and 
conditions 
of 
gervree 
ofmem-
bers. 
Member-
secretary 
and 
officers 
and 
other 
employees 
of Stato 
Boards. 
E.estric-
tionson 
use of 
certain 
indl$-
trial 
plants. 

14 
(2) An application for consent of the State Board under sub-section 
(1) shalL be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed and shall be 
made in the prescribed fonn and shall contain the particulars of the in-
dustrial plant and such other particulars as may be prescribed: 
Provided that where any person, immediately before the declaration 
Of any area as an air pollution control area, operates in such area any in-
dustrial plant for the purpose of any industry specified in the Schedule, 
such person shall make the application under this sub-section within such 
period (being not less than three months from the date of such declara-
tion) as may be prescribed and where such person makes such application, 
he shall be deemed to be operating such industrial plant with the consent 
of the State Board until the consent applied for has been refused . 
• * • • • 
(4) Within a period of four months after the receipt of the application 
for consent referred to in sub-section (1), the State Board shall, by order 
in writing, either grant Or refuse, for reasons tQ be recorded in the order, 
the consent applied for. 
(5) Every person to whom consent has been granted by the State 
Board under sub-section (4), shall comply with the following condi~ 
tions, namely:-
(i) the control equipment of such specifications as the State 
Board may approve in this behalf shall be installed and operated 
in the premises where the industry is carried on or proposed to be 
carried on; 
(ii) the existing control eqUipment, if any, shall be altered or 
replaced in accordance with the directions of the Sta~ Board; 
(iii) the control equipment referred to in clause (i) or clause 
(ii) shall be ~pt at all times in good running condition; 
(iv) chimney, wherever necessary, of such specifications, as the 
State Board may approve in this behalf shall be erected or re-
erected in such premises; 
(v) such other conditions as the State Board may specify in 
this ~half; and 
(vi) the conditions referred to in clauses (i), (ti) and (iv) shall 
be complied with within such period as the State Board may specify 
in this behalf: 
Provided that in the case of a person operating any industrial plant 
for the purpose of any industry spiecifted in the Schedule in an air pollu-
tion control area immediately before the date of declaration of lueh 
area as an air pollusion control area, the period so specified shall not 
be less than six months: 
• • • • • 

6 of I"". 
e of 1874. 
15 
22. No ptU"son carrying on any industry specified in the Schedule 
or operating any industrial plant, in .any air pcllution control area shall 
discharge or caU8e or permit to be discharged the emission of any air 
pollutant in excess of the standards laid down by the State Board 
under clause (g) of sub-'section (1,) of section 17. 
" 
23. (1) Where in any air pollution control area the emission of any 
air pollution into the atmosphere in excess of the standards laid down 
by the State Board occurs or is apprehended to occur due to accident 
or other unforeseen act ,or event, the person in charge of the premises 
from where such emission occurs or is apprehended to occur shall forth-
with intimate the fact ot such occurrence or the apprehension of such 
occurrance to the State Board and to such authorities or agencies as 
may be prescribed. ~ 
• • • • • 
U. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Every person carrying on any industry specified in the Sche-
dule and every person operating any control equipment or any indus-
trial plant, in an air pollution control area shall be bound to render all 
assistance to the person empowered by the State Board under sub-
section (1) for carrying out the functIons under that sub-sectiO'l1 and 
if he fails to do so without any reasonable cause or excuse, he shall be 
guilty of an oft~nce under this Act. 
• • • • • 
32. The Central Government m~y, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, make in each financial year such 
contributions to the State Boards as it may think necessary to enable 
the State Boards to perform their functions under this Act: 
PrOvided that nothing in this section shall apply to any State Board 
for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution constituted under 
section .. of the Water (prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1974, 
which is empowered. by that Act to expend money from its fund'there-
under also for performing its tunctioI19, under any law fOr the time 
being in force relating to the prevention, control or abatement of air 
pollution. 
33. (1) • • • • • 
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to any State Board tor the 
Prevention and Control of Water Pollution constituted under section 4 
of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, which is 
PenoJa 
carryinl 
on indus-
try, etc .• 
not to 
allow 
/ 
other 
emission 
of 
airpollu-
tantain 
excess 
of the 
stand-
ardslaid 
down by 
the State 
Board. 
Furnish-
ingof 
informa-
tion to 
State 
Board 
and 
other. 
agencies 
incer-
tain 
cases. 
Power of 
entry 
and 
inspec-
ton. 
Contribu-
tionsby 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Fund of 
Board. 

Annual 
report. 
Failure 
to com-
ply with 
the pro-
visions of 
section 
21 (3) or 
section 
22 or 
with 
order 
or direc-
tions 
issued 
under 
the Act. 
Penal-
ties for 
eertain 
acts. 
11 
empowered by that Act to expend money from its fund thereunder also 
for performing its functions, under any law for the ti~ being in force 
relating to the prevention, control .or abatement of air pollution . 
• ... • • • 
35. (1) The Central Board shall, during each financial year, prepare, 
in such form and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report 
giving full account of its activities under this Act during the previous 
financial year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central 
Government and that Go"ernment shall cause every such report to be 
laid before both Houses of Parliament within six months of the date on 
which it is received by that Government. 
(2) Every State Board shall, during each financial year, prepare, in 
such form Jind at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report giv-
ing full account of its activities under this Act during the previous 
fi"!1ancial year and copies ther~of shall be forwarded to the State Gov-
ernment and that Government shall cause every such report to be 
laid before the State Legislature within a period of nine months of the 
date on which it is received by that Government. 
• • • • • 
37. (1) Whoever fails to comply with the provisions of sub-section 
(5) of section 21 or section 22 or with any order or direction given 
under this Act shall, in respect of each such . failure, be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or 
with fine which may extend to ten thousa:ld rupees, or with both, and 
in case the failure continues, with an additional :fine which may extend 
to one hundred rupees for every day during which such failure con. 
tir.ues after the conviction for the first such failure. 
(2) If the failure referred to in sub-section (1) continues beyond 
a period of one year after the date of conviction. the offender shall be 
punishable· with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months. 
38. Whoev~r-
(a) destroys, pulls down, removes, injures or defaces any pil-
lar. post or stake fixed in the ground or any notice or other ~atter 
put up, inscribed or placed, by or under the authority of the 
Board, or 
(b) obstructs any person acting under the orders ()r directions 
of the Board from exercising his powers and P,erforming his func-
I tions under this Act, or 

(c) damages any works or property belonging to the Board, or 
(d) fails to furnish to the Board or any officer or other emplo-
l yee of the Board any 1nformation required by the Board or such 
. officer or other employee for the purpo~ of this Act, or 
(e) fails to intimate the occurrence of the emission of air pol-
lutants into the atmosphere in excess of the standards laid down 
by the State Board and other prescribed authorities or agencies 85 
required under sub-section (1) of section 23, or 
(f) in giving any ipformation which he is required tQ give 
un~,r this Act, makes a sta~ement which is false ~ any material 
partic.ular, or 
(g) for the purpose of obtaining any consent 'under section 21, 
. I 
makes a statement which is false in any material particular, 
~ . . 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months or with tine which may extend to five hundred rupees 
or with both. 
39. Whoever contravenes any of the provislons of this Act, for 
which no penalty has ~ elsewhere provided in this Act, shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupee~ and 
in the case of continuing contravention, with an additional fine which 
may 'extend to one hundred rupees for every day during which such 
eontravention continues after conviction for the first such· contraven-
tion.. 
• • • • • 
43. No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act 
except on a complaiht made by, or With the previous sanc.tion in writ-
ing of, the State Board, and no court inferior to. that of a Metropolitan 
::Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try any 
offence punishable under this Act. 
• • • • • 
50. (1) The Central G<>vemment may, of its own mQPon or. on the 
recommendation of a Board, by notification in the Official Gazette, add 
to or omit from, the Schedule any industry or alter any industry and 
thereupon the Schedule shall be deemed to be amended accordingly. 
(2) Every notification made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament . 
• • • • 
53. (1) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Cen-
tral Board l by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules in respect 
of the following matters, namely:-
• • • • 
(f) the form in which and the time within which the budget and 
the annual report of the Central Board may be prepareCl and. for-
warded to the Central Go~mment under sections 34 and 35; 
• • • • 
Penalty 
for con-
travention 
of certain 
provision 
ot ~be Act. 
Congnl-
zance ot 
otfepces. 
Power to 
amend the 
Scbedule. 
. Power of 
Central 
Govern-
ment 
to make 
rules. 

Jft 
R (1) • • • • • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing pbtver, sUch rules may provide'f6r aU or ~y of~he ~lto"ing 
matters,n'amely:~ , , . 
(a) the terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and 
other members' (other than the member~ecretary) of the State 
Board constituted under this Act under lulHection (7) of seCtion 7; 
• • • • • 
(w) t~ fonn in which and the time within which the budget 
and annual report of the State Board may be prepared and forward· 
ed to the State Government under iections 34 and 35; 
• , '. ,r" 
• • • • • • 
THE SCHEDULE 
• (See sections 21, 22, 24 ~ 50) 
1. Asbestos and asbestos products industries. 
2. Cement and cement produC'bs incJusmes. 
3. Ceramic and ceramic products industries. 
4. ChelJPcal and aIped industries. I 
5. Coal and ligni~ b~s~ chemical industri't8. 
6. Engineering indu.tries. 
7. Ferrous metallur~cal industries. 
8. Fertilizer indl.lstries. 
9. Foundries. 
10. FOOd and agriculltura1 industries. 
11. Mining industry. 
12- Non-ferrous metallurgical industries. 
13. Ores/mineral processing induspies including beneficiation, pelle-
i.z.tlon, etc. 
14. Power (coal, petroleum and their products) generating plants 
and boiJ,erplanti, .. 
15. Paper and pulp (including p.aP,er pro~ucts) ,indllStrles. 
16. Textile proce~ing' industry (made wholly or in part at, cotton). 
17. Petroleum refineries. 
18. Petroleum products and petro-chemical industries. 
• 19. Plants for recpvery' from and disI,X>sal of wastes. 
20. Incinerators. 
Power of 
sWc Oovo-
t'1UIlOD.tto 
mako 
l'ulQ. 
" 

, 
LOK SABRA 
• 
A. 
BILL 
to amend the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981. 
• 
(Shri Bha;an Lal, Minist'er oj Environment and Forel".) 