Hili No. 64 01 19$3 
THE PRESS (OBJECTIONABLE MATTER) AME 
BILL, 1953 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THE PEoPLE) 
A 
BILL 
to amend tlJ.e Press (Objectionable Matter) Act; 1951. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Short title.-This Act may be called the Press (Objectionable 
Matter) Amendment Act, 1953. 
2. Amendment of section 1, Act LVI of 1951.-In section 1 of the 
Press (Objectionable Matter) Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to as S 
:the principal Act), in sub-section (3), for the words "two years" the 
words "four years" shall be substituted. 
3. Amendment of section 2: Act LVI of 1951.-In section 2 of the 
principal Act, in clause (k), the following words shall be inserted 
at the end, namely: - 10 
"or any news-sheet which does not contain the name of the 
printer and the publisher." 
4. Amendment of section 20, Act LVI of 1951.-In section 20 ot 
the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (3), for the words "a list of persons", the IS 
words "a list for the entire State of persons" shall be sub-
stituted; 
(b) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(4A) In any inquiry under this section, it is the .duty 20 
CIf the jury to decide whether any newspaper, news-sheet. 
book or other document placed before it contains any 
objectionable matter and it is the duty of the Sessions Judge 
to decide whether there are sufficient grounds for making an 
order for the demanding of securit3C CIr for directing any 25 
security which has been deposited or any part thereof to be 

2 
forfeited to the Government or for directing further secu-
rity to be deposited." 
5. Amendment of section 23, Act LVI of 1951.-ln section 23 of 
the principal Act, for the words and figures "Any person against 
5 whom an order is passed by a Sessions Judge under section 4, section 
5, section 7 or secticm 8 may, within sixty days of the date of such 
order, prefer an appeal to the High Court," the following shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"The competent authority or any other person aggrieved by 
10 an order passed by a SessiO'lls Judge under section 4, section 5~ 
section 7 or section 8 may, within sixty day~ of the date of such 
order, prefer an appeal to the High Court,". 
6. Amendment of section 29, Act LVI of 1951.-ln section 29 of 
the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the words "in the territories to-
IS which this Act extends" shall be inserted at the end. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
~ ~. . 
The Press (Objectiopable Matter) Act is due to expire on the 31st 
January, 1954. In view of the fact that the Press Commission will, 
among other things, examine the existIng Press legislation arid-make 
recommendations relating thereto, it is proposed to defer a detailed 
examination of the issues involved until after the Press Commission's 
recommendations have been received. At the same tin:l.e, Govern-
ment feel that it would be undesirable to allow the Act to lapse. The 
Bill seeks to extend the life of the Act by two years. Opportunity 
is being taken to make certain minor amendments at the same time. 
NEW DELIfi; K. N. KATJU. 
T.he 10th December, 1~53. 
• 
3 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE PRESS (OBJECTIONABLE MATTER) ACT, 1951 (LVI OF 
1951). 
... ... ... ... ... ... 
, 1. Short title, extent and commencement.-(1) This Act may be 
called the Press (Objectionable Matter) Act, 1951. 
... . . . . . 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gmtte, appoint and shall 
remain in force for a period of t.wo years from the date of its 
commencement. 
... ... . . . . 
2. DeflnltloDs.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise re-
quires,-
... ... ... ... . . 
(k) "unauthorised news-sheet" means any news-sheet in respect 
of which security has been required under th:s Act but has not been 
furnished as required; 
... ... ... ... ... ... 
20. Jury.-(i) If in any inquiry before a Sessions Judge under 
this Act, the respondent claims to have the matter detennined with 
the aid of a jury, the provisions hereinafter contained shall apply. 
• ... ... ... ... II< 
(3) Such officer as may be appointed by the State Government in 
this bel}alf shall prepare and make out in alphabetical order a list 
of persons residing within the State who by reason of their journalis-
tic experience or of their connection with printing presses or news-
pap.ers or of their experience in public affairs are"'qualified to serve 
as Jurors. . 
... ... ... ... • ... 
23. Ap~l to High Court against orders of Sessions Judges.-Any 
person against whom an order is passed by a Sessions Judge under 
section 4, section 5, section 7, or section 8 may, within sixty days 
of the date of such order, prefer an appeal to the High Court, and 
upon such appeal, the High Court may pass such orders as it deems 
fit confirming, varying or reversing the order appealed from and 
may pass such consequential or incidental orders as may be necessary . 
... ... ... • • ... 
29. Issue of search warrants In certain cases.-(l) Where any 
press is, or any copies of any newspaper, news-sheet, book or other 
document are, declared forfeited to Government under this Act, the 
State .Government may direct a Magistrate to issue a warrant em-
powering any police officer, not below the rank of sub-inspector, to 
seize and detam any property ordered to be forfeited and to enter 
upon and search for such property in any premises-
... ... • ... ... ... 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), 
where any newspaper, news-sheet, book or other docuinent is 
declared forfeited to Government, it shall be lawful for any police 
officer to seize the same wherever found. 
• • • • • • 
4 
• 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
-
---
A 
BILL 
to amend the Press (Ob~ctionable Matter) Act:. 1951. 
(Shri Kailas Nath Katju, 
Minister for Home Affairs) 
GIPD-LAD-8H M of 1..-14.12:53-1,750 