AS INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

10 ॥1 ॥३

Bill No. 64 of 1998

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998
By
Suet K.L. Suara, M.P.
A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.
it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1998, Shor title.

2. In article 239AA of the Constitution, in sub-clause(a) of clause (3), the words Amendment ol
matters with respect to Entries 1, 2 and 18 of the State List and Entries 64, 65 and article 239AA,
that List in so far as they relate to said Entries 1, 2 and 18” shall be omitted.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Constitution (Sixty-Ninth Amendment) Act, 1991 inserted a new Article
to provide for a Legislative Assembly and a Council of Ministers for the Union Territory of
Delhi which was renamed as the National Capital Territory of Delhi. Vide clause (3) of the
said article, the Legislative Assembly has been empowered to make laws for the whole or
any part of the National Capital Territory with respect to any of the matters enumerated in
the State List or in the Concurrent List except matters with respect to Entries 1 (public:
order), 2 (police) and 18 (Land) of the State List.

It is felt that matters like public order, police and land can be better looked after by the
Legislative Assembly, the Council of Ministers and the Delhi Administration. Experience
shows that there is no particular advantage in retaining these functions with the Central
Government. In fact, dual control, as exists at present, results in lack of accountability of
the administration to the people.

The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objective.

New Dewi; K.L. SHARMA
June 3, 1998.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* क्र *

| = +.

(a) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislative Assembly shall
power to make laws for the whole or any part of the National Capital ‘Territory with

110 any of the matters enumerated in the State List or in the Concurrent List in so far
ny such matter is applicable to Union Territories except matiers with respect to Entries

18 of the State List and Entries 64, 65 and 66 of that List in so far as they relate to
id Entries 1, 2 and 18.

* * &

Special provi-
stons with re
spect to Delfi


MGIP(PLU)MAND—939LS—z2-6-1998

LOK SABHA

A
RI

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri K.L. Sharma, M.P.)