Of· • 
• --- ~'3j-
::-, • . - BUI No. M of ll1i 
THE COAL MINESLABOUR.WELFARE FUND BILL, 1965 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PREJ.IVINARY 
CLAUSU 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions.' 
:. . < ~ ., 
CHAPI'ER II 
TID COAL MINES LABOUR WELl'AU I'UND TRUST 
3. Eltabllahment of Coal Mines I..bour Welfare Fund Trust. 
". Management. 
• 5. Board of Trustees. 
6. Dtaqualiftcation for office of trustee. 
7. Removal and resignation of trusteea. 
8. Meetings of Board 
9. Offtcers and other employees of Trust. 
10. Functions of Trust. 
11. Constitution of Standing Committee. 
12. Powers of Standing Committee. 
13. :Member of Board or of Standing Committee not to take part ill 
~ easel. 
1"- Supeneuion of Board and standing Committee. 

-(li) 
• 
CHAPTER HI 
FINABCJLAc_cOttNTS_~ AUD~ 
15. Imposition and collection of duty. 
16. Payr,nent ot proceeds of the duty to Trust. 
17. Constitution of Fund. 
18. Expenditure from Fund. 
U.. Provisions regarding housing accommodation. 
20. Submiujon of programme of activities and financial estimates. 
21. Accounts and audit. 
22. Annual Report. 
23. Financial estimatle, audited accounts and llBIlual report to be 
placed before Parliament. 
CHAPTER IV 
, . 
MISCELLANEOUS 
CLAusa 
24. Power of Central Government to give directions. 
25. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate' acts or proceedings of Board, 
etc. 
28. Powers of OfIleers. 
27. Protecti()IW of action' taken under thi ... Act. 
28. Exemption from income-tax. 
• 29. Power to make rules. 
30. Power of Trust to make regulation.; 
31. Repeals and savings. 

, 
'Af'IrB'COAL'M!NBS LABOUR WELFARE 'FUND1ULL, 1965 
A 
BILL 
,-to, ...,...-. ,onG i:Ot'&IoUc:lcJte ·the law Telating io .,he ji:nancing of 
~ltqr tP"'li'matin9 the welfaTe of labouT .employed if& the 
coalo-tRi"iftg. li~1r1I • 
. ,Bz it ~ac~,r.):ay ,Parll __ ment,in the Sixteenth Year of the Republic 
.CdIDcUa •• .fQ\!OW8: - . 
. , It. 
CHAPTER I 
;PipaJ'MINUY 
S 1. (/) This Act maybe called the Coal Mines Labour Welfare Short 
Fund Act,.l965. :!~t ' 
.. ~) lIt, ~t.ds to th~ ~hole C!f ln~a .except the State of Jammu IDe! com-
'.(1 ~srunir. ,. mane ... : .. ,,:....... . , . ment 
. (3) It ~:CAQl~~o'r~Ol:C;e OD s~ch AAte as the Central Govern- . 
It) ment may, by noti8cation in the omelal Gazette, appOint. 

.. -
oJlWlDl. 
tM& 
~. In this Act, ~eII the context otherwise requirel,-
____ (:Io.::CI:L)_·-=·B::.:oard~ tt means.Jhe-.-Boarcl.oLtruatees. constituted under 
section I5j 
Establish. 
mmtof 
Coal 
I4laeI 
Labour 
Welfare 
J'und 
Trust. 
(b) "Commissioner" means the Coal Mines Labour Welfare 
CoJDJDiu1oner appointed under section 9j 5 
(e) "Fund" means the Coal Mine. Labour HoUllng and 
General Welfare Fund coDltituted under HCtion 17; 
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under WI 
Act; 
(e) "Standing Committee" means the Standing Committee 10 
constituted under section 11; 
(I) "Trust" means the Coal Mines Labour Welfare Fund 
Trust established under section 3; 
(g) "truStee" means a trustee appointed or nominated under 
lection 5; 15 
(h) "year" means the financial year. 
CHAPTER II 
r Tm: COAL MINBS LABOUR WBLI'ARJ: FUND TRUST 
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification In the 
Oftlcial Gazette and with effect from auch date .s may be 8peCi8ed 20 
therein, establish for the purposes of' this Act a Corporation kDOWD 
as the Coal Mines Labour Welfare Fund Trust. 
(2) The Trust shall be a body corporate with the name afo~d, 
having perpetual succession and a common aeal with power;lritbject 
to the pr'C?visions of this Ad, to acquire, hold and dispose of property 25 
and to contract and may, by that name, sue and be IUed .. 
(3) '.J:he head oiBce of the Trust shall be at DbaDbad(,r atOsuch 
oother place as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Oftlcial Gazette, specify. 
(4) The Trust may establish local ofllces, branches or agencies at 30 
other places in India. ~ 
Kua,e. 4. The general luperintendence, direction and m,anagement of 
.... the a1!airs and business of the Trust shall vest in a Board of ~eea 
which may exercise all such powers and do all such act. an~ thin .. 
as may be exercised or done by the Trust unci.- this Act. 0 35 
. oj! 

" 
-'.- ~. 
3 -'-., 
S. (1) The Board of trustees shall consist of the following trus- Board of 
tees, ~~ely:-- ~ , 
(4) the Minister for Labour in the Central Government, ez-
otfi,cio, who shall be the Chairman; 
(b) an oftlcial of the Ministry of the Central Government 
dealing with labour and employment, appointed by the Central 
,Government, who shall be the Vice-Chairman; 
(c) an official of the Ministry of the Central Government 
dealing with finanCe, appointed by the Central Government; 
10 (d) four other officials appointed by the Central Govern-
ment to represent that Government and such of the Stab! 
Governments as the Central Government may specify; 
(e) six persons representing employers to be nominattti by 
the Central Government in consultation with such organil8tiona 
15, of employers as may be recognised for the purpose by that 
Government; 
(I) six persons representing employees to be nominated by 
the Central Government in consultation with such organisations 
of employees as'may be specified by that Government; • 
(g) a woman nominated' by the Central Government jf no 
woman has been nominated undelt clause (1); 
(h) two mining engineers to be nominated by the Central 
Government to represent mine managers. 
(2) The term of ofIice of, and the manner of mUD. casual vean· 
25 des amoac, the trustees of the Tru.9t, other than the ChainnaD, uuI 
dae otlier terms and conditions of appomtment or nomination·oI meh 
trustees (ineludml al'owaDces payable fOl" atltendin. meetiap of. the 
-Board or the Standin. Committee) shall be such u"ftlay he prelC1'ibed. '.-
., I. A person shall be disqualified for being appointed or nominated DiJqua1~ 
-30 all, and for being, a trustee- ftcatian 
(a) jf he is an omcer or other employee of the Trust; or 
(b) if he IS, or at any time bas been, adjudicated insolvent" 
or bas suspended payment of his debts or has compounded with 
his creditors; or 
foro&e 
of tr'uItee. 

'.. ~ .. 
Removal 
IDCl h-
.{lIlation 
of 
tnlatees. 
Meetin.s 
of Board. 
4 . . 
.(c) if he is of unsound mind and stands 10 declared by • 
competent court; or 
• (d) if he is or has been convicted- of any offence which, in the 
- opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude. 
7. (1) The Central Government ,may remove from office any ~ 
trusteewh~ 
(a) is or has become subject to any of the disqualifications 
mentioned in section 6; or 
(b) is absent without leave of the Board of trustees from 
three consecutive meeti~gs thereof without cause sUtBcient;~.fn 10 
the opinion of the Board, to exonerate his absence; or 
(c) ceases to represent the interest to represent which he 
was nominated. 
(2) A trustee may resign his oftlce by giving notice thereof in 
wi'!ting to the Central Government and on such resignation bem, 15 
:; accept-ed, he shall be deemed to have vacated -his olice. 
8. (1) The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard' to the transaction of busi-
ness at its meetings (including the quorum at meetings) u mar 1te 
pr~vided by regulations made by the Trust u~der this Act. act 
(2) The Chairman of, the Board or, if for--any reason he -is -unabl ... 
to attend any meeting, the Vice-Chairman thereof shall preside at 
the meeting. 
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board 
shall be decided by a majority of votes of the trustees present and:&$ 
'voting and, in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairman or, in 
his absence, the Vice-Chairman shall have and exercise a second or 
casting vote. 
Oftlcers -9. (1) The Central Government shaU, after consultation .with •• ~-
and other .uDi0ll. P.tlblic Service CODVDissiOll, appoint a ~n -flO ,be ·the. Coal 30 
employees .Mines Labour WeUare- Commissioner who shall be the chief ez~. 
of Trust. .cdBcer of ~e Trust and shall- be subject to t1ae l'8Ilenl coatrol ... 
1 .':"' •. 
: ""'-, 
, r - • 
superintendence of the Board. 
,(2) The Central Government may, ,after consultationw'ith the 
Union Public Service Commission, abo appoint as many otherolleen ·a5 
whose maximum monthly salary is not less than one thousand ru,.., 
as it may consider necessary to assist ,the Commissioner in the dis.. 
charge of his duties. 
(3) Subject to such ,rules as may be made by the Central Govern-
,ment in this behalf, the Trust may appoint such -other oftleen ad .fo 
employees as it considers necessary for the eflieieDt,pedonnaDee el. 
Its fuD.eftons. 

S 
~ - , 
,(4) Th. metbod. of appointment, the conditions of service and 
t~ scales of pay of the officers and . other employees of the Trust 
___________ Ib_all~,--________________________ _ 
~ 
\ 
.... 
"~o.­
of~ 
(4) as respect the Commissioner, and the other omcers re-
S ferred to in sub-section (2), be such as may be prescribed; 
(b)' as respects the other oftlcers and employees, be such as 
may be determined by regulations made by the Trust under this 
Act: 1 
j 
Provided that all od1cers and other employees appointed under 32 of 1847.1 
10 the Coal Mines Labour Fund Act, 19.7, and holdWg;oftice immediately I 
,before the date referred to in sub-6eCtion (1) of section 3 shall be 1 
deemed to have been appointed as officers and employees of the Trust j 
with effect from that date and every such officer~and employee shall .. ;,~, ~ 
hold'hiB oftlce by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon J'". ! 
JS the same terms and conditions and the same rights anq privileges al ';, .. :., ~ 
to pension, leave, provident fund and other matters as he would have .; •. " ~ 
, held .the same if this Act had not been passed, and shall contintw to ~ 
do 80 unless and until his employment is terminated or until such J 
. te.ure, remuneration and terms ond conditions are altered by the 
20,Trust with the approval of the Central Government: 
. ,Pro.ided further that such" tenure, remuneratiov 'and terms and 
conditions of sel'Vice shall not be' altered to the disadvan tage of' any 
luch officer' or employee. 
10: (1) It shall be the duty of the Trust to promote, under the 
25 gen.eral direction and control of the Central Government, the welfare 
of labour employed in the coal .. mining industry by such measures as 
it thinks fit. , 
'S 
(2} Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-
lection (1), the measures referred to therein may relate to-
(i) the improvemen~ of public health andpnitation, the pre-
vention: of disease, the provision of medical facilities and the. 
improvement of existing medical facilities, including the pro-. 
vision and maintenance of dispensary services in collieries the 
ownerl of which do not receive grants-in-aid under section 18; 
(ii)' the provision of water supplies, and facilities for wash-
ing, and the improvement of existing supplies and facilities; 
(iii)' th. provision and improvement of educational fac11i-
tla; , 

(i!.') . the improvement of standards of lMng, includinl 
nutrition, amelioration of social conditions and the provision of 
------ recreational facilities; 
€outitu-
tioaol 
Btaudin, 
Commit-
tee. 
Powers 
ot 
Standinc 
Commit-
tee. 
(!.') the provision of transport to and from work. 
(!.'i) the erection, maintenance and repair of housing 5 
a~mmodation for labour employed in the coal-mining induatry 
and the provision of services and facilities connected therewith; 
...... 
(!.'ii) the preparation of schemes and acquisition of land for 
the purposes referred to in clause (!.'i); 
(!.'iii) such other matters as may be prescribed. 
11. (1) A Standing Committee shall be constituted from among 
the members of the Board consisting of-
(a.) the Vice-Chairman of the Board, who shall be the Chair-
man; 
(b) the trustee referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (1) 15 
of section 5; , . 
(c) any two of ~hft trustees referred to in clau.e (d) of sub-
section (1) of section 5, appointed by the Central Government; 
(d) three trustees each, from among the trustees referred 
to in clause (e) and clause (I) of sub-section (1) of section 5,20 
nominated by the Central Government. 
(2) The Standing Committee shall meet at such times and places 
and shaU observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction 
... ..~. 
of business at its meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as 
may be provided -by regulations made by the Trust in this behalf. ~5 
12. (1) Subject to the general control, superintendence and 
direction of the Board, the Standing Committee shall administer the 
aifairs of the Trust and may exercise any of the powers and perform 
any of the functions of the Trust. . 
(2) The Standing Committee shall submit for the: consideration 30 
and decision of the Board all such cases and matters as may be speci-
tied in the regulations made by the Trust in this behalf. 
(3) The Standing Committee may, in. its discretion, submit an)t 
other case or matter for the decision of the Board. 

.... ',' .II· ......... -~ :~ •.•• 
, .......... .;~tIr!'!' 1 
',:~ . .. 
11. A member of the Board of the S~dlnl Committee who ihmiMr of 
1w aD1' ~ or lndlreet pec~ary interest in any matter ~ "IP Boud 01' 
-~~~~ ... tlOD .• t .. a meetmgof the ~oard ~. the .·Stand1~1 Co~- :. s: 
rnt~ee . slWl, as lOOn as possible after relevant circumatance. have mitt. 
, co~, to his knowledge, disclose the nature of the interest at such DOt to 
m~tfng and the disclosure shall be recorded in the minutes of the take part 
Board or, u the ease may be, of the Standing Committee, ~ th~ in CII'taiD 
upon the member shall not take any part in any deliberation of the CaMI. 
. Board or the Standing Committee with respeet to that matter. 
10 H. (1) If, in the opinion of the Central Government, the Board::-:--
or the St.indtng Committee penistently makes default in performinl Bou'cl 
the. duties imposed on it by or under this Act or abUleS ita pow~r8, 8n4 _ 
tPatGo",mment mey, by notification in the OfticialGazette, super- Stand,,,, 
~18de ~1il. Board, or in the case of the Standing Committee, aupenede Cammlt-
1$ in consultation with the Board, the Standing Committee: tee. 
Provided that, before issuing the notification under this 8Ub-seC-
tiQll,the Central Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to 
the Board or the Standing Cominittee, as the case may be, to Ihow 
cauae why, it should not be superseded and shall coriliderthe expla .. 
~ p,tiollB ,end objections, if any, of the Board or the Standing Com .. 
mittee, as' tqe cue may be. . . 
I 
(2) Upon the publication of a notiScatioD' under .ub-section (1) 
IUperseding the Board or the Standing Committee, aU the memben 
of the Board or the Standing Co~ittee, as the case may be, Ihall, 
a, as from the date of such publication, be deemed to have vacated their 
ofllces. 
(3) When the Standing Committee has been superseded; a new 
Standing Committee shall be immediately constituted in accordance 
with lecticm 11. . . 
30 ,.(4). WJ&en the Board has been superseded, the Central Govern- -
ment may-
IS 
(cz) immediately reconstitute the Board in· accordance with 
aection 5 and may constitute a new Standin, Co~ttee under 
aection 11; 
(b) in Its dilcretion, appoint such agency, forsucm period u 
it may think fit, to exercise the powen and perform the functions 
of the Board and .• uch agency shall be competent to exercfle all 
. , Ui. ~w'en and perform all the funCtions Of the Board. 
, 

-- . 
~.~ ( 
~ ,I. . ';: . 
, ;, t . ~ 
t ~ • .;. 
, 'lmpOsttton 
ADdeO!-
lectionof 
dut7. 
1 
• 
, (5) The Central Government shall cause a full report of aD1 
.~ action taken under this section and tJ!e_ circumstances leading to, such 
action to be laid before Parliament at th9 earliest opportUnity and 
In any case not later than four months from the date of the notifica· 
tion supel'8fi!ding the Board or the Standini Committee, u the ~ue , 
ma1 b.. : 
• 
CHAPTERm 
FmAlfCl:, ACCOtnn'S AND A"ODl'1' 
15. (1) There shall be levied and collected as a eel! fC'r t).e pur. 
'Poses of this'"1tct 'a duty of excfae on all coal and coke despatched from 10 
collieries in the territori9S to which this Act extends at such rate 
,Dot lesa than twenty-flve plise and not more than fttty pa!e-per 
toDlle, ,U ma.y ,from time to time be fixed ~y the Central Govern-
ment by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette: 
Provided that 'the Ce~tral Government may, by notification In the I, 
•. ,qm.~~ Gazet~e. ~emp.t from liability to the duty. any ,apeclJled 
class or clus93 of coal or coke. 
(2) The duty levied under sub-section (1) shall, subject to and 
'In accordance with rules made in this bebalf, be collected by such 
agencies and in .uch manner as may be prescribed. 20 
Payment 18 •. The proceeds of the duty levied under sectiOIl 15 shAll flnt be 
of pro- , Credited to ~e ConsoUdated Fund of India and the Central GOVN"D-
eeedsth d Oft ment may, ifParUamen. t by appropriatioD made by law in this bebalf e u y . 
to Truat. .~, p~yides, pay to the Trust, such proceeds, after dcductiq the 
Ccmstitu. 
tlon of 
"unci. 
expenses of collection, for beine utilised for the purposes of tbJ. Act. 2S 
17. ,(I) There shall be constituted by the Trust a Fund to be called 
the Coal Mines Labour Housing and General Welfare Fund. 
, (2J The Fund shall be apportioned wider two sepuate accounts 
to be called the Housing Account of the Fund and the General WeUare 
Account of th«t Fund in- such manner as the Central Government 30 
may, from ume to time, by notification in the Officlal Gazette deter-
mine: 
Provided that there shall at all times be eredited-
(0) to the Housing Account of the Fund not lell than eight 
p~~, and !~ 
(b) to' the General Welfare Account of the Fund not more 
than twenty-eight paise, 
ottt of the dutY coUec:ted under th1s Act on every tonne of coal or 
~' __ I 
It. _ •• , l .. I 

, 
(3) Tb~ aha11 allO be credit!d to the General Welfare Account 
of the Fund any other mone,.. received by the Trust towards IUch 
.~t., ----~~r_-----
. ·(4) 11lere IhaU also be credited to the HOUIin, Aceount of the 
$ Fund- . , 
! I',. 'a) aD, .... nb made thereto " the Central GovemJDeat· 
·alt.l'. due appropriation made .y ParHament b,. Isw In this 
WaaIf; 
(b) rents, If any, realised from housinl accoD1lQodation con-
10 Itructed out of such account; 
(c) any other moneys received by the Trust towards the ~; 
, Housing Account. • 
18. (I) The cost of admfnistering the Fund and the saJ."~ . ~nd BxpaaclJ • 
• ~Q.wan~, if any, of the C.ommissioner and other oftlcen and staff ture trom 
1$ appointed to supervise or carry out the measures ftnanced from the FwuL 
Fund shall be defrayed out of the Fund and shall be apportioned 
b~~e~~ and ~ebited to the Hous~g Account anti the General Wel-
~e Account In such manner as may be prescribed. 
(Z) The Trust may, out of the General Welfare Account of the 
ao Fund, pay annually ~ants-in-aid to such of the colliery owners al 
m~fntain to the satisfaction of the CommfsCJloner dispensary services 
.of the prescrlbed'itandardfor the beneftt of labour employed In .their 
coIlferie!, so however that the altl0unt .payable as grant-In-aid to the 
owner of a colliery shall not exceed-
a$ (i) the amount of the duty Rt the rate rtf fOUl" paIse per ton~e 
recov~red in resoect of coal or cr.ke d4!Spatched from the colliery 
les.s the proportionate cost of recovery, or 
(il) the amount anent by the owner of the colliery In the 
maintenance of the dispensary service as determined by the 
30 Commissioner, 
whichever II less: 
Provided that where a colltery owner has, In th'e o~h,lon of the 
Commimoner, mqfntafned dtpt)~nB"ry s~rvfce of a standartl hf~her 
than the prescribed standard for the benefit. of labcur emploved In 
3S his colliery, then, the rate of the duty referred to in clause (0 may 
extend up to six paise per tonne: 
Provided further that no nant-ln-aJd shall be payable In re!1)eCt 
of dispensary service maintained bv the owner of a collierv ff the 
amount spent thereon as determined by the Commissioner is less than 
40 rupees eighty per mensem. 
(3) The balance of the moneys In the General Welfare Account 
of ,~1:1' F:1md ·lhaU be .""lied by the Boat"dto meet !Xl)f!ndftute fn~ 
curred In CODD~tiOD with .~ 1VhlcJs ~ In the oplDiOD of the 

• 'w ~'.~ . 
10 
BOard 'll~ or expedient to promote the welfare of labour 
empl~,.ed In the coal-mtnin, industry . 
. , (4) Without pre;tUdicrto-the-generaUty-or-.u});;aect!oD --(3)-;-1:Iut-
m6bey& 'in the General Welfare' Account of the Fund may be ut1l1Hd 
to defray- '" , 
(eI) the COlt of 'measures for the benefit of labour employed 
in the coal-mining industry undertaken in pursuance of the pr0-
visions of clau~ (i) to (v) of sub-section (2) of aectiolt 19; 
(b) the' grant to a State' Government, a local authority or 
the owner, agent or manager of a co8I mine of money in -aid of 10 
any scheme approved by the Trust for any purppae for which 
moneys in the General "., elfare Account of the Fund may be 
utiliHc:l; 
(c) the allowances, if any, of the members of the Board and 
the St'andihg Committee;, IS 
(d) any other expenditure which the Trust directs to be 
defrayed out of the moneys in the General Welfare Aecountof 
the Fund. ' 
(5) The moneys in, the Housing Account of the Fund shall be, 
appUed by the Board to defray- 30 
(4), the cost of measures for the benefit of labour ,mployecl 
in..the coal-mining iDd.ustry undertaken in purawmce of the 
provisions of clauses (vi) and {vii) of sub-section (2) of sec .. 
tion 10; 
(b) 'the' grant to' a State Government, a local 'authority-'or 25 
the owner, agent or manager of a coal mine of 'moneyin aid, of 
'any aeheme approved by the Trust for any purpose for which 
mcmeysin'the Housing Account of the Fund may be utilised; 
(c) any other expenditure which the Trust direCts to be 
defr~ed out of the moneys in the Ho~g Aceount of the 30 
Fund. 
(6) The Board may invest moneys in the FUnd in securifles of 
the Gov'enirrient of India or, with- the previous awroval of the 
Central Government, in other securities. 
(1) The Board will have power to decide whether any particUlar 35 
exPenditure is or is not debitable to the Housing Account or to the 
General Welfare Account of the Fund. 
Provisions 19. (1) The occupation by any person of any housing accommoda-
rel.~ tion pro~ded out of the Housing Account of the Fund shan be iub-
boUlina jed to compUance by that person at a~l times with such conditioDi 4. 
~O- relatin«' to his occupation of such accommodation- u may be prea-
4a ou. cribed by regulations .made by the Trust in this be~lf. ' 

II 
(Il ~ore IIDY penon oecuptes any IUch' accommodation, he aha1l 
be furnlahed with a copy of the conditions referred to In sub-aect1on 
'(1), and if halO, delirea,-the-l8iclcondltions~tbe.ned QYel'_toJUm _" __ 
In a language which he understandB; and the .Board 'shall cause to be 
, ppbUIhed in such manner u It thinks beet adapted for informlJll the 
pez:IOQI ccmcemed 'any changes which may, from time to time, be 
made in the said conditions. 
(a) Hj in the opinion of the Board, any person In occupation 01 
any . auch accommodation falla or ceases to comply with any of the 
10 C!ODditions referred to in sub-section (1), it may, by notice In writiDg. 
NCiuke him to vacate the accommodation on or before such date, Dot 
being ~ess than thirty days after the senice of the Dotice, U may 
. be specified in the notice; and the occupation Qf such accommodation 
by such penon or any dependent of his after the date sO sP8clfted 
I, shan be unlawful, and such person or dependent may be evicted 
accordingly by due process of law from such accommodation. 
(4) There shan be ~ayable in respect of the occupation of any 
I11cb accommodation as aforesaid rent at such rate u may be pres.-
cribed by regulations made by the Trust in this. behalf. 
20 Provided that the Board may reinlt, subject to compHance at all 
times with the conditioDII -referred to in sub-seciion (1), either the 
whole or any part of such rent: 
Provided further that where, in the case of any person who is by 
~ue of .. remission under the first proviso paying either DO rent or 
2, a reduced rent. the Board has reason to believe that such person haa 
contravened any of the said conditions, it may by notice In writing 
require such person to pay, .with effect on and after the expiry of 
seven days fro~ the service of'the notice, rent for the accommodation 
occupied by him at the full prescribed rate. 
30 (5) All rent payable in respect of the occupation of th~ accom-
modation as aforesaid, nether at the full prescribed rate or at a 
lesser rate, shall be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue. 
ZOo (1) The Trust shall, before the commencement of each y-.r, 
prepare a statement of programme of its activities during the forth-Subml" 
35 coming year u well as a ftnancial estimate in respect thereof. Ii_ of 
--- pro.. 
(2) Th~ statement and the ftnancial estimate prepared under sub- II'8JDDIe 
section (1) shall, not less than three months before the commence- of actlvl 
mentol each year, be submitted for approval to the Central ti= 
Government. ett1mate 

-'-' 
Account. 
and audit. 
12 
(!) The statement and the financial estimate of the Trust mal' •. 
. !'lth the . approval of the Central Government. be reviled by the 
Trust. 
(4) No sum. shall be expended by or on behalf of the Trust UD-
less the expenditure is covered by a specific provision in the financial S 
estimate approved by the Central Government.' 
ZI. (1) The Trust shall maintain proper accounts and other rele-
vant records and prepare the statement of accounts including the 
proftt and loss account and the balance-sheet in such form as may be ' 
prescribed by the Central Government in consultatioDwith the 10 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
. . 
(2) The accounts of the Trust shall be audited by the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India at such intervals as may be prescribed 
by him and any expenditure incurred in connections with such audit 
shall be payable by the Trust to the Comptroller and Auditor General 1$ 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor General of India and any 
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts 
of the Trust shall have the same rights and prlvileges and authority 
in ~onnection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor General 
. has in connection with audit of Government accounts. and In parti- 20 
cular, shall have the right to d~mand the production of books, 
accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and 
inspect .any of the oftlces of the Trusl 
Annual 
Report. 
Financial 
estimate. 
audited 
account. 
and annual 
report to 
be placed 
before 
Parlla-
~ 
(4) The accounts of the Trust as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India or any other person appointed by him in 25 
this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government. 
Zz. The Trust shall submit to the Central Government aD 
annual report of its work and activities. 
23. The annual report, the audited accounts of the Fund and the 30 
financial estimate as approved by the Central Government shall be 
placed before Parliament and published in the OfBcial Gazette. 

i3 
CHAPTER IV 
MIsca.LAlool1I 
- , , 
Ie. The Central Govemment may a:ve directions to the Trust U Power at 
to the c&rryinl into execution of this Act and the Trust shall comply Central 
5 with .uch directiODl.. Govern-.. . mentto 
live ciirec-
. tiODL 
25. (1) No act or proceeding of the Trust or the Standing Com- V.cancl .. 
mittee shall be invalid by reason only of the existence of any vacancy etc., Dot to 
in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board or the Standini invalldate 
C mmItt ... .,.."0·. acts or o ee-.- . • proceed-
10 (2)N~ act done by any person acting in good faith as a member iDJI of 
of the Board or of the Standing Committee ,shall be deemed to be Doucf, 
inv~d by reason only 01 his disqualification for being appointed as, etc. 
~r for being a member of such, Board or the Standing Committee. 
28. (1) Any person appoin~ed under .ection 9 shall be deemed to Powers of 
15 be a public servant within the lQeaning of IeCtion 21 of the Indian Oftlcen. 
o of 18eo. Penal Code. 
a 011881. 
• 
(2) The Commissioner or any officer authorised by him in this 
behalf may, with such assistance if any as he. thinks fit, enter at all 
reasonable. times any place which he considers it necessary to enter 
20 for the .. purpose of supervising or carrying out the measures ftnanceti 
from the Fund and may do therein anything necessary for the pro-
per discharge of his duties. . 
27. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie ag~t the Trust or Protectloa 
any member of the Boarel or the Standing Committee or any officer of action 
25 or other employee of the Trust or any other person authorised by the taken 
Trust or the Board or the Standing Committee or the Commissioner =~ 
to discharge any functions under this Act for any loss or damage' 
caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done 
or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act. 
.30 28. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, Exemp. 
1961 or in any other enactment for the time-being in force relating to tion hom 
h in ft • th income. income-tax: or any ot er tax on come, pro ts or gams, e Tru3t tax. 
shall not be liable to pay income-tax or any other tax in respect of 
any incoJ;lle, profits or gains derived by it from any lource. 
35 %I. (1) The Central Government may, by notiftoation In the Power to 
Official Gazette, and subject to the condition of previous publication, mulste r ... make rules to carry into effect the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
rules made under this .section may' provide for-.' "-" (rt . •• • 
40. . . .(i) the manner in 'Which. the duty levied under 1Ub-tec-

tion (l) of section 15 shall be collected, the penona who .hall be 
_--=I1=a1:ale to make the payments. the making of ~dI, ""'tutons 
and recoftries and the deduction of a percental. of the reaUr.a-
tiona to cover the cost of collection; 
(ii) the term of office of, and the manner of flU in, casual • 
vacancies amoDg, the trustees, the allowances, if any, payable to 
them and the other terms and conditions of their appointment or 
Domination; 
<iii) the form of the annual stat8JJ!l8Dt of accounts and the 
balance-aheet to be prepared by the Trust; 10 
(it7) the apportionment between the HOusing Account and 
the General Welfare Account of the Fund of the expenditure on 
the adminiwtration of the Fund and on the salaries and al1a.ances 
of ·Commiutoner and other oftlcera and employ .. of the Trultj 
(t7) the standard of dispensary service to be provided by 1$ 
owners of collieries under suh-section (2) of section 18 and the 
inspection and IUperviaion of the dispensaries and other places at 
which such -mcea are provided; 
(t7i) the application by owners of collieries for granta-in-
aid, the authority to whom and the ~er in which such app11- 20 
cations shall be made and the particulars to· be spee11led in IUclt 
applicatioD8; 
(t7ii) the maDner in which dispensary aervice may be pr0-
vided by the ~t; 
(wi) the conditions governing the grant. of money from the 2$ 
GeDeralWelfare Account and the Housing Account of the Fund 
to a State Government, a local authority or the owner, agent or 
manager of a coal mine; 
(iz) the methods of appointment, the conditions of service, 
the scales of pay and the duties and functions of the Commis- JO 
siODer and the other offtcera referred to in mb-section (2) of 
sectiOD 9; 
(z) the furnishing ,by owners, ageMs or managers of coal 
mines of statistical or other infonnation, and the punishment by 
11M not exceeding two hundred rupeei for failure to comply with 3S 
the requirements of any rulea made under this clause; 
(%I) any other matter which is to be or may be "prescribed 
or provided for by rules ~der this Act. 
(3) Every rule made by .the Central Government under thiI 
section aball be laid as loon as ·may be after it is made, before each' ~ 
House of ParUament while it 18 in. aeaslon for a total period of tbirtJ' 
daJa wblch may be oomprilecl 1D OD.· .... OD or 1D twO· IUCf*lIft 

I~ 
lelaiona, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is 80 laid 
OJ' the _Ion immediately following, both HoU&el agree in ~m~a~Jd~n,.I, __ ~_ 
any modiflcatlon in the rule or both Housei-igree that·the rule should 
not be made, the rule shall thereafter have eftect onl1 in such modified 
5 form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 10, however, that any , 
8uch· modiflcatlon or annulment shall be without prejudice to the' 
validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
30. (J) The Trust may, with the pr6viOUl aanatlon of the Central Power of 
Goveniment, by notification in the O1Bclal Gazette, make regulations :::. 
10 not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, to pro- rtCUla-
vide· for all the matters lor which provision is neceaary or expedi.mt tioaI. 
for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Ac~. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
such regulations may provide .for-
(a) the methods of recruitment, the conditions of service, the 
Bcales of pay and the duties and conduct of the oftlcem and em':' 
ployees of the Trust, other than .the Commissioner and the 011-
cers referred to in sub-section (2) of section 9; . 
(b) the financial and administrative powers of the Board, 
the Standing Committee, the Commissioner and other oftlcera.of 
the Trust; • 
(c) the tiines and places at which the meetings of the Board 
and the Standing Committee' shan be held and the procedure to 
be followed thereat; 
(d) the conditions relating to occupation of housing accom-
modation provided out of the Housing Account of the Fund and 
the rate of rent for such accommodation; 
(e) generally, the eftlclent conduct of the affairs of. tbIt . 
Trust . . 
30 (3) The Central Government may, by notiflcation in the OfBclal 
Gazette, rescind any regulation wliich it has sanctioned and there-
upon such regulation shall cease to have effect. 
8201194'1. 31. (1) The Coal Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1947 is hereby Repeal. 
repealed. aDd 
A.ViDIII. 
3' (2) All moneys and other property and all rights and interests, of 
whatever kind, owned by, vested in, used, enjoyed or posaesaed by, or 
held in trust by or for the Coal Mines Labour Housing and General 
Welfare Fund constituted under the Coal Mines Labour Welfare 
3201 IN'1. Fund Act, 1947 and the Housing Board eonstituted under the iaict Act 
15> u well as all UabWties leplly IUbsiItint aaam.t the I'uIld or the aid 

d~ 
Houslnl Board &hall pall to the Trust with. effect from the date 
-referred to m. lub-aection (1) of section 3 (hereinafter referred to .. 
the laid date). 
(3) Any proceedings taken by the Central Government or the 
BonliD, Board under the Coal Mines Labour Welfare Fund·Act, 1947, s 32 Of 1M?, 
before the said date may be continued by the Trust after the said 
date. 
• 
(4) Untn action in that behalf 11 otherwise taken under the 
corresponding provisions of this Act or the rules and regulations made 
thereunder, all action taken or anythl""1 done under the provislODI 10 
of the Coal Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1947, shall, unless U of 1047. 
Inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to hav~ been 
taken or done under the corresponding provisions of this Act and· the 
rules and regulations made thereunder. 
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the IS 
proviaiona contained in aub-1Jectlons (2) to (4) inclusive shall be 
without prejudice to ttle general application of section 6 of the 
General Clauses Act, 1897. 10 el18l7. 
(6) If any difRculty arises in giving effect to the provisions ot thls 
Act, the Central Gov~t may by order make such provision zo 
or give IUch direction not inconsistent with the provisions of th1t Act, 
as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of 
. removing the cWBculty. 

STATEMENT 01' OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Coal Mines Labour weIfare-J'und-~t,-1947, was enacted with.-
a view to makfng better provialon for ftnmcinl measures for promot-
fng the welfare -of labour employed in the coal-mining industry. The 
Act provides for the levy of a duty of excise on all coal and coke des--
patch~ from collieries at such rate not exceeding eight annal per ton 
u may from time to time be fixed by the Central-OoYemment. The 
proceeds of the duty are credited to a Fund called the Coal Mines 
Labour Housing and General Welfare Fund and apportioned under 
two separate accounts called the General Welfare Account and the 
Housing Account. While the-GeDi:t .. l"Welfare Account Is operated 
directly by the Central GOvernment, the Housing Account is operated 
by a body corporate called the Coal Mines Labour Houaln. Boarcl COD-
ltituted under aectfon ~ of the Act. -
2. The working of the Act haa shown that there are obvious advan-
tages .in makfng the Ceal Mines Labour Welfare l'und Organisation a. 
a whole, a body corporate under the statute. The Organisation has 
now an annual Incom~ of about Rs. 4 croree. It is accordingly pr0-
posed to establish a corporation known as the Coal Mines La-bour WeI. 
fare Fund Trust which will be responaible, under the general c:Urec-
tion and control of the Central Government, for promotion of the 
welfare of labour employed In the cqlll-mfnfng Industry. This Cor-
poration Will function through a Board of Trustees consisting of 
twenty-two members representing the Government, the employers 
and the ~~ ~loled in th~ coal·mln to" tpdUltQ" .. 
3: For giving effect to the above object, it is proposed to replace 
the Act by a new legislation. Provision has also been made in the 
legislation for payment of enhanced grants-In-aid to caUtery owners 
who maintain dispensary services of· a standard higher than the pres-
cribed minimum, and also for the transfer Of existing' employees to 
the Corporation. 
4. The Bill exempts income, profits or gains of the Trust from the 
liability to Income-tax. 
• . 5. Subject to the mocUftcations mentioned above, the provf8fODS of 
. the Bill are broadly on the lfnes of the provisions of the existing Act, 
Including the imposition of duty of excfIe on coal and cob despatched 
from coWer!. -
I). SANJIVAYYA. 
" I, ... 

PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION--.uNDER-AR'rICLE-l-17 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION or INDIA· 
[Copy of letter No. l/l/64-MII, dated the 22nd September, 1965 
from Shri D. Sanjiva"a, Minister of Labour and Employment to the 
Secretary, Lok Sabha.] . y. " 
Th~ President, having been informed of the subject matter of 
the proposed Bill to 'amend and consolidate the law relating to the 
ftnancIDg of measures fot...-Ptomoting the welfare of labour employed 
in the coal mining industry has, in pursuance of clause (1) of article 
117, read with suh-clause (a> of clause 1 of article 110, clause (3) of 
article 117 and clause (1) of article 274 of the Constitution of India, 
recommend to Lok Sabha the introduction and consideration of the 
BilL . 
"\ 
• • 
',' .. *' . ~ ..... ~ • -. '"' .-y 
. 18· 

---' -MEMI.alUl.ORANDuKBEGARDlNG'DELEGATED LBGISLATION 
Clause 29 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying into effect the purposes of the Act. Matters in 
respect of which sw:h rules may be made are specified in that clause. 
They iAter CIlia relate to the 'collection of the duty and the c:leterm1-
nation of the cost of SUC'h COllection, the terms and conditions of 
appointment or nomination of the Trustees, maintenance of annual 
statement of accounts, the standard of dispensary services to be pro-
vided by the OWM"S, of collieries, the payment of grant&-fn-ald from 
the Fund, and the DIlDner in which dispensary services may be pro-
vided by the Trust. The acope of clause 29 is thus llmlted to matten 
of procedure or detail Moreover, the rules shall be subject to the 
~t1ny of Parliament. 
2. Clause 30 of the Bill empowers the Trust to make regulatlold 
not inconsistent with the Act and the rules made· thereunder for the 
purpose of giving effect to the provlslons of the Act. The mattan 
which may be provided for, by regulations relate to procedural or 
administrative details. ' 
3. The delegation of legislative power is tbua of a normal character. 
, 
. ·0 c~ 

A 
BILL 
to am end and consolidate the law relating to the· financing of 
measurestfor promoting tIle \\"elfare Of· labour employed in 
the coal-mining industry. 
• 
" 
Shri D. SatiiwyyQ" 
(Minilur of LabtnD- & B~) 