U'of 1.28. 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABIrA 
Bill No .. 64 of 1_ 
......... e.M-. 
THE TRADE UNIONS (AMENDMEN1') BILL, 1982 
A 
BILL 
furtheT to amend the Trade Unions Act, 1926. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-third Year of the 
Republic of. India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Trade Unions (Amendment) Act, Short 
1982. title ani 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In the Trade Unions Act, 1926 (hereinafter referred to as the prin-
cipal Act), in the long title and in the preamble, after the words 
"registration of Trade UniOD$", the worda ", verification of the member-
10 ship of the Trade Unions so registered" shall be inserted. 
com. 
mence-
menl 
Amend_ 
ment of 
long title 
and pre-
amble. 
3. In section 2 of the principal Act, after clause (h), the following Amend_ 
1 ~~ cause shall be inserted, namely: - section 2. 
'(i) "Trade Union clispute" means any dispute-
(a) between one Trade Union and another; or 
15 (b) between one Or more members or office-bearers of a 
Trade Union and the Trade Union (whether also with any of 
the other members or office-bearers of the Trade Union or not) 
relating to its registration, administration or management of its 
affairs, including the appointment of the members of the execu-
20 tive or othel' oftic~bearers of the Trade Union, the validity of 
any such appointment, the area of operation of the Trade Union, 
verificatioq. of membership and any other matter arising out of 
the rul~s of the Trade Union, but excluding matters involving 
determination of issues as to the title to, or ownership of, any 
building or other property or any funds.'. 

Amend-
ment of 
sectinn 4. 
Amend-
ment of 
.-:tion8. 
Amend-
mut ot 
eection 10. 
Insertion 
of new 
lection 
llA. 
Re-regis-
tration 
of a 
Trade 
Union. 
4. In section 4 of the Qrincipal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "Any seven or more mem-
bers of a Trade Union may", the words, brackets, figure and letter 
"Any number of members of a Trade Union, being not less than the 
minimum number as determined i'n accordance with the provisions 5 
of sub-section (1 A) , may" shall be substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (1), the following su b-section shall be 
inserted, namely:- . 
"(lA) The minimum number of members of a Trade Union 
who may apply under sub-section (1) shall be- 10 
(a) where such Trade Union is a Trade Union of work-
men which is not a federation of Trade Unions,-
(i) if the aggregate of the number of workmen who 
are members of such Trade Unio:1 and the number of 
workmen eligible to be members of such Trade Union 15 
is one hundred or less, ten; 
(ii) if such aggregate is more than one hundred, 
such number as is equal to ten per cent. of such wor)c-
men, or one hundred, whichever is less; 
(b) in any other ease, seven. 20 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, the workmen 
who are eligible to be members of a Trade Union shall be all such 
workmen employed in the industry or industries with which the 
Trade ·Union is connected as are, in accordance with the rules of the 
Trade Union, eligible to be admitted as members of such Trade 25 
Union .... 
i. In section 8 of the principal Act, after the words "register the 
Trade Union", the words ", within a period of sixty days from the date 
of such compliance," shall be inserted. 
6. In section 10 of the principal Act,- 30 
(a) in clause (b), the word "or" shall be inserted at the end; 
(b) before the proviso, the following clause shall be insttrted, 
namely:-
"(c) if the Registrar is satisfied that the Trade Union has 
callen for, or participated in, any illegal strike: "; 5 3. 
(c) after the proviso, the 'following Explanation shall be in-
serted, namely:-
<Exptanation.-For the purposes of this section, "illegal 
strike" has the meaning assigned to it in section 24 of the In-
dustrial Disputes Act, 1947.'. 40 14 of IN'I. 
7. After section 11 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
'IllA. A Trade Union whose certificate of registration lias been 
cancelled may .apply {or re-registration to the Registrar after the 
expiry of a period of six months from the date of such cancellation: 45 
Provided that where such cancellation is on the ground that such 
Trade Union has failed to comply with any of the requirements 
provided by or under this Act, it shall not be re-l"egistered until it 
haa complied with such requirement.". 

a 
8. In section 21A of the principal Act,- Amend-
(4) in sub-section (1), after clause (ii) , the following clause ment at section shall be inserted, namely: - 21A, 
14 of 1947. 5 
"(iii) he has been convicted of any offence under the Indus-
trial Disputes Act, 1947."; 
14 ol19~. 
5 of 1908. 
10 
('b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section 5hall be in-
serted, namely:-'-:' 
" (4) Any member of the executive or other office-bearer 
of a registered Trade Union who, before the commencement of 
the Trade Unions (Amendment) Act, 1982, has been convicted 
of any offence under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, shall, on 
the date of such commencement, cease to be such member or 
office-bearer. ". 
9. In section 22 of the principal Act, in the opening paragraph, for Amend. 
I 5 the words "Not less than one-half", the words "Not less than three- ment of 
fourths" shall be substituted. section 22-
10. In section 28 of the prinCipal Act, after sub-section (4), the follow- Amend. 
ing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- ment of 
section 28. 
"(5) The Registrar shall send to the State Government and 
20 the Central Government or any authority specified in this behalf 
by the State Government ()[" the Central Government, a statement 
containing such information with respect to registered Trade 
Unions within suc.h time as may be prescribed.". 
11. In Chapter III of the principal Act, after section 28, the follow- InsertiOD 
2') ing s.ections shall be inserted, namely: - at new 
sectiona 
35 
• 28A,28B 
and 28C. 
"28A. (1) The Registrar shall have the power to verify the Power at 
membership of registered Trade Unions and matters connected Regi.trar 
therewith· in such manner as may be prescribed and shall send a to verity 
report about such membership to the State Gov~nment and the member-ship of Central Government. Trade 
(2) For the purpos~ of exercising the powers conferred by Unions, 
sub-section (1), the Registrar shall follow such procedure as may etc. 
be prescribed and shall also have the same powers as are vested 
in a Civil Court under thd Code of Civil Procedure, 1938, for com-
peUing the production of documents or other connected materials. 
28B. (1) Where any Trade Union dispute exists or is appre-
hended and the parties to the disp:Jte agree to -refer the dispute to 
arbitration, they may, by a written agreement (hereinafter referred 
to as the arbitration agreement), refer the dispute to arbitration 
and the reference shall be to such person or persons as an arbitrator 
or arbitrators as may be specified in the arbitration agreement. 
Voluntary 
reference 
of Tratie 
Union 
disputes 
to arbi-
tration. 
45 
(2) Where an arbitration agreement provides for reference of 
the dispute to an even number of arbitrators. the agreement shall 
provide for the appointment of another p~rson as umpire who shaH 
enter upon the reference, if the arbitrators are equal1y divided in 
their opinion, and the award of the umpire shall pr<:!vail and shall 
be deemed to be the award of the arbitrators for the purpo!.es of 
this section. 

Reference
ofTrade
Union
disputes
toRegis-
trar.
(3) An arbitrationagreementshallbeinsuchfarmandshallbe
signedbythepartiestheretoinsuchmannerasmaybeprescribed.
(4) A capyofthearbitrationagreementshallbefarwardedto
theappropriateGovernment'andthatGovernmentshall,withinone
monthfromthedateofthereceiptofsuchcapy,publishthesame5
intheOfficialGazette.
(5)Thearbitratorat'arbitratorsshallinvestigatethedisputeand
submittotheappropriateGovernmenttheawardsignedby the
arbitratororallthearbitrators,asthecasemaybe.
(6) Everyawardmadeunderthissectionshall,withina period10
ofthirtydaysfromthedateofitsreceiptbytheappropriateGov-
ernment,bepublishedinsuchmannerasthatGovernmentthinksfit.
(7~An awardpublishedundersub-section(6) shallbefinal'and
shallnotbecalledinquestionbyanyCourtinanymannerwhatso-
ever. IS
(8) NothingintheArbitrationAct,1940, shallapplytoarbi- 10 of19404
trationsunderthissection,
28C. (1) WheretheappropriateGovernmentisofopinionthat
anyTradeUniondisputeexistsoris apprehended,itmay,atany
timebyorderinwriting,referthedisputetotheRegistrarfarad-20
judication.
(2) Subjecttoanyregulationsthatmaybemadeinthisbehalf,
theRegistrarshall,inadjudgingthedisputereferredtohimunder
sub-section(1),followsuchprocedureashe"thinksfit.
(3) Whereinanorderreferringa TradeUniondisputetathe25
Registrarunderthissection,theappropriateGovernmenthasspeci-
fiedthepointsofdisputeforadjudication,theRegistrarshallconfine
hisjurisdictiontothosepointsandmattersincidentalthereto.
(4)WhereaTradeUniondisputehaspeenreferredtotheRe-
gistrarfaradjudication,heshallholdtheproceedingsexpeditiously30
andshall,assaonasitispracticableontheconclusionthereofsubmit. ,hisawardtotheappropriateGavernment.
(5) TheawardoftheRegistrarshallbeinwritingandshallbe
signedbytheRegistrar.
(6) EveryawardofaRegistrarshall,withina periodofthirty35
day.sfromthedateofitsreceiptbytheappropriateGovernment,be
publishedinsuchmannerasthatGavernmentthinksfit.
(7) Subjecttotheprovisionsofsub-section(8),theawardpub-
lishedundersub-section(6) shallbefinalandshallnotbecalledin
questionbyanyCourtinanymannerwhatsoever,
40
(8) Any personaggrievedbytheawardoftheRegistrarunder
sub-section(4)may,withinsuchperiodasmaybeprescribed,prefer
anappealtotheCourt-referredtoinsection11 andtheprovisions
ofthatsectionshan,safar.asmaybe,applytoappealspreferred
underthissection,
45
(9) Withoutprejudicetotheprovisionsof sub-section(1),
wherethepartiestoa TradeUniondisputeapplyintheprescribed
manner,whetherjointlyorseparately,forareferenceofthedispute
totheRegistrar,theappropriateGovernmentshallmaketherefer-
enceaccordingly. 50


(10) Theprovisionsofsub-section(2) andsub-sections(4)to(6)
shall,sofarasmaybe,applytoareferencemadeundersub-section
(9).
(11) An awardmadebyaRegistrarinareferencemadetohim
5 undersub-section(9) shallbefinalandshallnotbecalledinquestion
byanyCourtinanymannerwhatsoever.".
12.In sub-section(2) ofsection29 oftheQrincipalAct,-
(a) inclause(d) theword"and"occurringattheendshallbe
omitted;
(b) clause(e) shallbere-letteredasclause(i) thereofand
beforeclause(i) assore-lettered,thefollowingclausesshallbe
inserted,namely:-
"( e)theinformationwithrespecttoregisteredTradeUnion
andthetimewithinwhichsuchinformationmaybesentunder
sub-section(5)' ofsection28;
(f)theprocedurethatmaybefollowedbytheRegistrarin-
(i.)verifyingthemembershipofregisteredTradeUnions
undersection28A, or
(ii)theadjudicationofanydisputereferredto him
undersection28C;
(g) thefermofanarbitrationagreement,themannerin
whichitmaybesigned.bythepartiestheretoandthepowers
ofthearbitrator,arbitratorsorumpirespecifiedinthearbitra-
tionagreement;
(h) themannerinwhichpartiestoa TradeUniondispute
mayapplyforadjudicationofthedisputetotheRegistrarunder
sub-section(9) ofsection28C.".
10
20
13. In ChapterIV oftheprincipalAct,aftersection30, thefollowing
sectionshallbeinserted,namely:-
35
"30A. (1) Everyregulationmadebythe CentralGovernment
underthisActshallbelaid,'assoonasmay beafteritismade,
beforeeachHome ofParliament,whileitisinsessionfora total
periodofthirtydays,whichmaybecomprisedinonesessionorin
twoormoresuccessivesessions,andif,beforetheexpiryofthe
sessionimmediatelyfollowingthesessionorthesuccessivesessions
aforesaid,bothHousesagreeinmaking~nymodificationin the
regulationorbothHousesagreethattheregulationshouldnotbe
made,theregulati.onshallthereafterhaveeffectonlyin such
modifiedformorbeofnoeffect,asthecasemaybe;so,however,
thatanysuchmodificationorannulmentshallbewithoutprejudice
tothevalidityofanythingpreviouslydoneunderthatregulation.
(2) EveryregulationmadebytheStateGovernmentunder
thisActshallbelaid,assoonasmaybeafteritismade,beforethe
StateLegislature.".
45 14.Insection31 oftheprincipalAct.-
(a) insub-section(1),-
(i)intheopeningparagraph,forthewords"fiverupees",
atboththeplaceswheretheyoccur,thewords"twenty-five
rupees"shallbesubstituted;
Amend-
mentof
section29
Insertion
ofnew
section
30A.
Regula;
tionsto
be laid
before
Parlia-
mentand
State
Legisla-
tures
Amend-
mentof
section31.


Amend-
ment ot 
section 33. 
6 
(it) in the proviso, for the words "fifty rupees", the words 
"five hundred rupees" shall be substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(3) Any person who contravenes any of the orders, of the 5 
Registrar for verification of the membership of a registered Trade 
Union under section 28A shall be punishable with fine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees.". 
15. In section 33 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words 
"Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class", the words IO 
"Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class" shall 
be substituted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Trade Unions Act, 1926, provides for the registration of trade 
unions and for m~tters connected therewith. The need for amending 
some of the provisions of the Act has been under consideration for quite 
some time. The National Commission on Labour also maqe a comprehen-
sive rt!view of the Act and recommended certain measures for checking 
multiplicity in the formation of trade unions, streamlining the proce-
dure for registration, cancellation and re-registration of trade unions, 
setting up of a machinery for the resolution of trade union disputes, 
including intra-union rivalries, etc .. These matters were discussed at 
various forums. In the light of these discussions, it is proposed to make 
the following amendments in the Act, namely:-
(i) To reduce multiplicity of uniow, it is proposed to change the 
existin~ provision of enabling any seven workmen to form a trade 
union by providing for a minimum qualifying membership of 10% 
of workmen (subject to a minimum of ten) employed in the establish-
ment or industry where the Trade Union is proposed to function or 
hundred workmen, whichever is less, for the registration of +.rade 
unions. 
(iii) There is at present no machinery or procedure for the reso-
lution of trade union disputes arising from inter-union and intra-
union rivalries. It is proposed to define the expression "trade union 
dispute" and to make provision for resolving such disputes through 
voluntary arbitration, or by empowering the appropriate Govern-
ment and the parties to the dispute to refer it to the Registrar of 
Trade Unions for adjudication. 
(iii) The Act does not lay down any time-limit for registration 
of trade unions. It is proposed to provide for a period of sixty 
days for the registration of trade unions by the Registrar after a11 
the formalities have been completed by the trade unions. It is 
also proposed to provide that a trade union who$e certificate of 
registration has been cancelled would be eligible for re-registration 
only after the expiry of a period of six months from the date of 
cancellation of registration, sUbjeCt to certain conditions being 
fulfilled by the trade union. 
(iv) Under the existing provisions of the Act, 50% of the office-
bearers in the executive of a registered trade union shall qe persons 
actually engaged or employed in an industry with wJUch the trade 
union is connected. It is proposed to enhance this limit to 75% &0 
as to promote development of internal leadership. 
(v) It is proposed to empower the Registrars of trade unions to 
verify the membership of registered trade unions and connected 
matters and report the matter to the State and Central Governments. 
(vii) Penalties specified in the Act for the contravention of its 
provisions are proposed to be enhanced. 
2. The Bill seeb to achieve the above objects and to provide for 
certain other minor changes in the Act. 
NEW DELm; 
The 6th February, 1982. BHAGWAT JHA AZAD.· 
7 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to amend section 28 of the Trade Unions 
Act 1926 so as to insert a new sub-section (5) which empowers the , . , 
Registrar of Trade Unions to send to the State Government and the 
Central Government or any authority specified by the State Govern-
ment or the Central Government a statement containing such infor-
mation with respect to registered Trane Unions within such time as may 
be prescribed by regulations under the Act. . 
Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to insert three new sections 2BA, 28B and 
28C in the Act which provide for the verification of membership of 
Trade Unions, voluntary reference of Trade Union disputes to arbitra-
tion and references of such Trade Union disputes to Registrar of Trade 
Unions respectively. Under the proposed new section 28A, the Regis-
trar shall have the power to verify the membership of registered Trade 
Unions and matters connected therewith in such manner as may be 
prescribed by regulations and, for this purpose, the Registrar shall 
kllow such procedure as may be prescribed by regulations. The new 
section 28B, which empowers the parties to a Trade Union dispute to 
agree to refer such dispute to arbitration, requires such arbitration 
agreement to be in such form and to be signed by the parties in such 
manner as may be prescribed by regulations. New section 28C empowers 
the Registr-ar to follow such procedure as he thinks fit in adjudging the 
dilaputes referred to him. The procedure that may be followed by the 
Registrar will be subject to such regulations as may be made in this 
behalf. It has also been provided that any person aggrieved by the 
award of the Registrar in a reference may appeal to the Court referred 
to in section 11 of the Act within such period as may be prescribed by 
regulations. The parties to a Trade Union dispute are also entitled to 
apply jointly or separately 'in th~ manner prescribed by regulations for 
adjudication of the dispute by the Registrar. 
Section 29 of the Act empowers the appropriate Government to 
make regulations for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions 
of the Act. Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to amend the said section 29 of 
the Act to empower the appropriate Government to make regulaticlns 
to provide for the above matters. 
The delegation of legislative power under the aforementioned. pro-
visions. relates to matters of procedure or administrative detail. Hence, 
the delegation of legislative power i~ normal in character. 

,ANNEXURE , , 
') ~cTs J'IOM 7ID Tun. UNIONS ,Acr, ~_ 
, , .'. '. ".' 
(16 or 1926) 
I'fl 
'.' 
'" • • • • 
An Act to providp. for the registration of Trade Unions and in certain 
respects t&"'<i8flnt the law relating" .to regiatered TracIe tTDiOQ 
WHi:Ri:As it is eXPedient to provide for 'the regiBtratiolidt Trade 
Unions and in certain respects to define the law relating 'to registetW. 
Trade Unions; It is hereby enacted as follows:-
III 
• '" • • 
2. In this Act "the appropriate Government" means, in relation to Deftni-
Trade Unions whose objects are not confined to one State,the Central ticms. 
Government, and in relation to other Trade Unions, the State Govern-
ment, &nd, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,-
'" '" • '" '" 
Provided that this Act shall not affect-
(i) any agreement between partners as to their own business; 
(ii) any agreement between an employer and those employed 
by him as to such employmentj or 
(iii) any agreement in consideration of the sale of the goodwill. 
of a business or of instruction in any profession, trade or handicraft. 
• • • '" '" 
.t. (1) Any seven or more members of a Trade Union may, by subs-
cribing their names to the rules of the Trade Union and by otherwise 
complying with the provisions of this Act with respect to registration, 
apply for registration of the Trade Union under this Act. 
'" '" '" • '" 
Mode of 
reliatra-
tion. 
8. The Registrar, on being satisfied that the Trade Union has complied Reliitra-
with all the requirements of this Act in regard to registration, shal1 tlon. 
register the Trade Union by entering in a register, to be maintained 1n 
such 'form as may be prescribed, the particulars relating to the Trade 
Union contained in thE" statement accompanying the application for 
registration. 
• '" • • • 
to. A certificate of registration of a Trade Union may be withdrawn 
or cancelled by the Registrar- ' 
• • • • . " 
(b) if the Registrar is satisfied that the certificate has been 
obtained by fraud or mistake, or that the Tnl~ Union has ceased 
to exist or has wilfuUy and after notice from ttu~ Jlegistrar colltr(l-
I) 
Cancella-
tion of 
re,IiJtra-
tion. 
' .. 

• 
Diaqualifi-
cations 
of 
office-
bearers 
of 
Trade 
Unions. 
Propor.-
tion 
of 
offtce-
bearers 
to be 
connected 
with 
the 
industry. 
Power 
to 
make 
regula-
tions. 
Failure 
to 
au'bINt 
returns. 
Coeni-
zanceof 
o:Irencea. 
10 
vened any provision of this Act or allowed any rule to continue in 
force which is inconsistent with any such provision, or has rescinded 
any rule providing for any matter provision for which is required 
by section 6: 
~ovided that not less than two mPJIths' &>revious notice in writing 
specifying the grounci on which it is proposed to withdravv or cancel the 
-certificate shall be giv~n by the Registrar to the 'l'tade' Union before the 
certificate is withdrawn or canceiiedotherwise than on the application 
of the Trade Union. 
• • • • • 
21A. -(I) N-,ws«m ...-u 'be :diJquaWied·bIi' ,~ ahoMD .. ,~. for 
beiQg, a- me~ ~ the executive or any ~ther oftlce-bearer of _. regis-
ter~ TJ'ade Uaion if-
• • • • • 
22. Not less than one..hal1 of the total number of the office-bearers ot 
every l'egistered Trade Unlbtl shall be pertlOhs actually dP.d or 
employed in an indu!try with 1Vh1ch the 'n'ade union is cohheeted: 
Provided that the appropriate GGvernment may, by special or general 
order, declare that the provtsiOns of this eection shall Mt apply to any 
Trade Union or clua of Trade Unions specified in the order. 
• • • • • 
21. (1)' • • • • • 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, hamely:-
... ... • ... ... 
(d) the conditions subject to whi<:h inspection of documents 
kept by Registrars shall be allowed and the fees which shall be 
chargeable in respect of such inB;lections; and 
• • • • ... 
31. (1) If default il made on the part of any reliltered Trade Union 
in living any notice or aendinJ any 8\a~ment or other tlocument as 
reqUired by or UDder any provision of th1B Ad, every oftke-bearer or 
other perlOll boWld by the nle8 of the Trade UDion to live 01" &end the 
same, or, if there is no su<:h oftice-bearer or person, every member of the 
executive of the Trade Union, shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to five rupees and, in the ease of a contfl'luing default, with an 
additicmal fine which may exteAd to Bve rupees for each week aft« the 
first during which the default continues: 
Provided that the aggregate fine shall not exceed fifty rupees . 
• ... • • • 
•. (~) No aoW1 illt.rlor to that of a Prelldtl\Oy Magiltrate or a 
I&flattatet of the tltst .... hAll try afty ofttnoe un_ tbfI Ailt. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Trade Unions Act, 1926. 
(Shri Bh4gwat Jh4 Azad, 
MitaUteto of State C1f the 
Ministry C1f Lalioor.) 