Bill No. 64 of 2022
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE  
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Shri Rahul Shewale, M.P.
a
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) 
Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and  
commencement.
As introduced in Lok Sabha
5

      2. In section 62 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, in  
sub-section (1), the following proviso and Explanation thereto shall be inserted, 
namely:—
“Provided that a person, who is residing on any public land for less than 
one year from the qualifying date, immediately preceding the election, 
for preparation or revision of electoral rolls, shall not be entitled to vote 
at such election from the Constituency falling in that public land.
Explanation.— In this sub-section, in the proviso, ‘public land 
includes land in the vicinity of public road, highways, railway tracks, 
Government buildings, forests, defence land, etc.”.
2
10
Amendment of 
section 62.
5
43 of 1951

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our country is the largest democratic country in the world. It is the 
responsibility of the Election Commission to conduct fair, free and clean 
elections. Sometimes political parties and candidates motivate poor people 
living illegally on public land or in unauthorized occupation of public land to 
vote in their favour by getting them issued voter card, aadhaar card, etc. just 
before the election.  
To stop this rigging, there is a dire need to prevent such illegal resident of 
public land to vote in any election if their stay in such public land is less than 
one year from the time the last revision of electoral roll was conducted and 
subsequent election. 
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi; RAHUL SHEWALE
17 January, 2022.
3

ANNEXURE
Extract from the Representation of the People Act, 1951
* * * * *   *
62. (1) No person who is not, and except as expressly provided by this 
Act, every person who is, for the time being entered in the electoral roll of by 
any constituency shall be entitled to vote in that constituency. 
(2) No person shall vote at an election in any constituency if he is subject 
to any of the disqualifications referred to in section 16 of the Representation of 
the People Act, 1950. 
(3) No person shall vote at a general election in more than one constituency 
of the same class, and if a person votes in more than one such constituency, his 
votes in all such constituencies shall be void. 
(4) No person shall at any election vote in the same constituency more 
than once, notwithstanding that his name may have been registered in the 
electoral roll for that constituency more than once, and if he does so vote, all 
his votes in that constituency shall be void.
(5) No person shall vote at any election if he is confined in a prison, 
whether under a sentence of imprisonment or transportation or otherwise, or is 
in the lawful custody of the police: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a person subjected 
to preventive detention under any law for the time being in force. 
(6) Nothing contained in sub-sections ( 3) and (4) shall apply to a person 
who has been authorised to vote as proxy for an elector under this Act in so far 
as he votes as a proxy for such elector. 
* * * * *   *
4
Right to vote

LOK SABHA
 
a
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
 
(Shri Rahul Shewale,  M.P .)