AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA
ON 20-4-2000

Bill No. 64 of 2000

THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDERS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

By
‘SHR! MADHAB RAJBANGSHI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Orders, 1950.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
=

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Orders (Amendment) — Shorttitle.
2000.

2, In the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, in Part If, Amendmentof’
, entries 10 to 14 shall be renumbered as entries 11 to 15 respectively, and before the Schedule,
Ji as so renumbered, the entry “10. Koch-Rajbangshi” shali be inserted.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Koch-Rajbengshi are indigenous kirat tribals of north-eastern India known as
Koch and Mech who organised themselves under the command of 12 tribal leaders headed
by one Haria even before Hiuyen Chang visited india and repulsed the attacks of aliens and
founded the Koch dynasty in the early part of the fifteenth century. King Naranarayan with
the assistance of his brother Chilarai conquered almost all the feudal rulers and built con-
glomerate of other tribals. The rulers protected their farmers and their families who were
peaceloving, shy, backward and confined to their habitats. Though the Koch-Rajbangshi are
indigenous of ancient Kamrupa whose domain spread to Terai Nepal, Eastern Bihar, South-
em Tripura and Upper Assam, they continued to remain weak, backward, primitive, isolated
tribal and tillers of the soil.

The Koch-Rajbangshi prince surrendered his Part C State Kochbihar in 1950. Though
Koch and Rajbangshis tribes of West Bengal and Tripura were scheduled as “Castes”, the
tribes of Assam and Meghalaya were left unrecognised.

The Koch-Rajbangshis of Assam are agitating since 1967 and making persistent
demand for enlistment of their tribe in the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950.
They meet the criteria that fit into any tribal ethnic community of Eastern India.

A section of the Koch-Rajbangshis have given up old customs and practices and got
initiated to Sanatan school of Hindu religion, but their culture remains that ancient. The
State Legislative Assembly of Assam in 1994 and 1995, has passed unanimously resolutions
to recommend to the Government of India that the Koch-Rajbangshis of Assam State be
enlisted as a scheduled tribe. The Koches tribes of Meghalaya were enlisted after the Union
Government received a unanimous resolution of the Meghalaya State Assembly without any
debate.

‘The Registrar General of India in his report to the State Government has estimated the
number of Koch-Rajbangshis to be under sixteen lakhs only in the whole State. On being
enlisted as Scheduled Tribes, they can never upset the tribal demographic structure of
Assam. It has, therefore, become imperative that the Koch-Rajbangshis of the State of Assam
be enlisted in the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Orders, 1950.

Hence this Bill.

‘New DELHI; MADHAB RAJBANGSHI
March 16, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to include the Koch-Rajbangshis of Assam in the Constitution
(Scheduled Tribes) Order as a Scheduled Tribe. This shall invelve only a nominal recurring
and non-recurring expenditure for the benefits to be provided to the eligible persons of this
tribe, under various existing schemes, but the expenditure likely to be required will not be
large and no extra budgetary provision may be necessary for the Ministry of Tribal Affairs.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED Tepes) Orper, 1950

(0.0. 22)
. . .
‘The Schedule
. . .
Part Il. — Assam
* . .
10. Any Mizo (Lushai) Tribes
* * *
14, Syntheng
7 * * *


LOK SABHA.

A

BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Orders, 1950,

(Shri Madhab Rajbangshi: M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—340LS—20.4.2000.