Bill No. 64-F of 2009
THE METRO RAILWAYS (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2009
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK  SABHA ON 6TH  AUGUST, 2009
 RAJYA SABHA ON 7TH  AUGUST,  2009)
ASSENTED TO
ON 26TH AUG., 2009
ACT NO. 34 OF 2009

1
THE METRO RAILWAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
further to amend the Metro Railways (Construction of Works) Act, 1978 and to amend
the Delhi Metro Railway (Operation and Maintenance) Act, 2002.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Metro Railways (Amendment) Act, 2009.
(2) It shall  come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 64-F of  2009

2
CHAPTER  II
AMENDMENT TO THE METRO RAILW AYS (CONSTRUCTION OF WORKS) ACT, 1978
2.  In the Metro Railways (Construction of Works) Act, 1978 (hereafter in this Chapter
referred to as the Metro Railways Act), in section 1, in sub-section ( 3), for the portion
beginning with the words “such other metropolitan city” and ending with the words “to that
city accordingly”, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“the National Capital Region, such other metropolitan city and metropolitan
area, after consultation with the State Government, and with effect from such date as
may be specified in that notification and thereupon the provisions of this Act shall
apply to the National Capital Region, such metropolitan city or metropolitan area
accordingly.”.
3. In the Metro Railways Act, for the words “metropolitan city” occurring in clause (h)
of sub-section (1) of section 2, clause ( c) of sub-section (1) of section 4 and clause ( a) of
sub-section (1) of section 32, the words “metropolitan city, metropolitan area and the National
Capital Region” shall be substituted.
4. In section 2 of the Metro Railways Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ha) “metropolitan area” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause
(c) of article 243P of the Constitution;’;
(ii) after clause (o), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(oa) “National Capital Region” means the National Capital Region as
defined in clause (f) of section 2 of the National Capital Region Planning Board
Act, 1985;'.
CHAPTER  III
A
MENDMENT TO THE DELHI METRO RAILW AY (OPERA TION AND MAINTENANCE) ACT, 2002
5. Throughout the Delhi Metro Railway (Operation and Maintenance) Act, 2002
(hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Delhi Metro Railway Act), for the words
“metropolitan city of Delhi” wherever they occur, the words “the National Capital Region,
metropolitan city and metropolitan area” shall be substituted.
6. In section 1 of the Delhi Metro Railway Act, for sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2), the
following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) This Act may be called the Metro Railways (Operation and Maintenance)
Act, 2002.
(2) It extends in the first instance to the National Capital Region and the Central
Government may, by notification, after consultation with the State Government, extend
this Act to such other metropolitan area and metropolitan city, except the metropolitan
Amendment of
section 1.
Substitution of
words
"metropolitan
city" by words
"metropolitan
city,
metropolitan
area and
National
Capital
Region".
Amendment of
section 2.
Substitution of
references to
"metropolitan
city of Delhi"
by references
to "National
Capital Region
and any other
metropolitan
area".
Amendment of
section 1.
33 of 1978.
2 of 1985.
60 of 2002.

3
city of Calcutta, and with effect from such date as may be specified in that notification
and thereupon the provisions of this Act shall apply to that metropolitan area or
metropolitan city accordingly.”.
 7. In section 2 of the Delhi Metro Railway Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) for clause (a), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(a) “Central Government”, in relation to technical planning and safety of
metro railways, means the Ministry of the Government of India dealing with
Railways;
(aa) “Claims Commissioner” means a Claims Commissioner appointed
under section 48;’;
(ii) for clause (h), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(h) ‘‘metropolitan area” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (c)
of article 243P of the Constitution;
(ha) “metropolitan city” means the metropolitan city of Bombay, Calcutta,
Delhi or Madras;’;
(iii) after clause (k), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ka) “National Capital Region” means the National Capital Region as
defined in clause (f) of section 2 of the National Capital Region Planning Board
Act, 1985;’.
8. In section 6 of the Delhi Metro Railway Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (b), the
following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ba) develop any metro railway land for commercial use;
(bb) provide for carriage of passengers by integrated transport services or any
other mode of transport;”.
9. Section 7 of the Delhi Metro Railway Act shall be renumbered as sub-section ( 1)
thereof and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(2) The Commissioner shall function under the administrative control of the
Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety appointed under section 5 of the Railways Act,
1989.”.
10. For section 12 of the Delhi Metro Railway Act, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—
“12. The Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety shall, for each financial year,
prepare in such form, and within such time, as may be prescribed, an annual report
giving a full account of the activities of the Commissioners during the financial year
immediately preceding the financial year in which such report is prepared and forward
copies thereof to the Central Government.”.
11. In section 13 of the Delhi Metro Railway Act, for the word "Commissioner", the
words “Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety” shall be substituted.
12. In section 23 of the Delhi Metro Railway Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the words
“Hindi and English”, the words "Hindi, English and official language of the State in which
such station is located" shall be substituted.
13. In section 26 of the Delhi Metro Railway Act, in sub-section ( 1), the words “a
small” shall be omitted.
2 of 1985.
Amendment of
section 6.
Amendment of
section 7.
Substitution of
new section for
section 12.
Annual report.
24 of 1989.
Amendment of
section 13.
Amendment of
section 23.
Amendment of
section 26.
Amendment of
section 2.

4
14. In section 34 of the Delhi Metro Railway Act, for sub-section ( 4), the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(4) The Central Government and the State Government shall nominate one
member each to the Fare Fixation Committee:
Provided that a person who is or has been an Additional Secretary to the
Government of India or holds or has held an equivalent post in the Central Government
or the State Government shall be qualified to be nominated as a member.”.
15. In section 38 of the Delhi Metro Railway Act, in sub-section ( 2), for the words
“Government of the National Capital Territory of Delhi”, the words "State Government" shall
be substituted.
16. In section 85 of the Delhi Metro Railway Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "Government of the National Capital Territory
of Delhi", the words "State Government" shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words “Government of the National Capital Territory
of Delhi in the Delhi Gazette”, the words “State Government” shall be substituted.
Amendment of
section 38.
Amendment of
section 85.
Amendment of
section 34.

A
BILL
further to amend the Metro Railways (Construction of Works) Act, 1978 and to amend
the Delhi Metro Railway (Operation and Maintenance) Act, 2002.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
GMGIPMRND—3854RS(S5)—31-08-2009.