10 JN 1008

AS INTRODUCED IN Lok Sania

Bill No. 67 of 1998
al

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998
By
‘Sur K.C. Konpatant, M.P,
A
BILL
farther to amend the Constitution of India.
enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as

This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1998,
In article 80 of the Constitution, —

for clause (3), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(@) The members to be nominated by the President under sub-clause (a) of

Short title,

Amendment of
article 80.


2

clause (1) shall consist of persons having special knowledge or practic!
in respect of such matters as the following, namely:—

Literature, education, science, medicine, law, finance, ayviculture, engin
industry, environment, art and social service.";

(ri) in clause (4), for the word

“elected members", the words "elected m
and the nominated member" shall be substituted.”


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

intention behind the framers of the Constitution in making provision for
ination by the President to the Council of States was to ensure that experts in various
ields who are not able to get themselves elected to the Council of States to enter the
neil of States and contribute their expert knowledge for the benefit of the country

However, at present only persons belonging (0 limited fields can become members:
Council of States. It is proposed to widen the scope of such disciplines so that President
given a wide choice to choose persons for nomination to members of Council of States.

Al present, the representatives of each State in the Council of States are clected by
elected members of the Legislative Assembly of the State. The nominated member to
Legislative Assembly has no power to participate in the election of the representatives
of the State in the Council of States. Once a member is nominated to the Legislative
bly, he or she should get all the rights, powers. and privileges just like other members
the Legislative Assembly. Therefore, in order to enable nominated member also to
icipate in the election of members to the Council of States, it is proposed to amend the
stitution.

New Dew; K.C, KONDAIAH
12, 1998.


Composition of
the Council of
States.

ANNEXURE
. EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * कब्र ge *
80. (1) The Council of States—shall consist of —

(a) twelve members to be nominated by the President in accordance with the
of clause (3); and

(b) not more than two hundred and thirty-cight representatives of the States [and
Union territories],

(2) The allocation of seats in the Council of States to be filled by representatives of t
States [and of the Union territories] shall be in accordance with the provisions in
behalf contained in the Fourth Schedule.

(3) The members to be nominated by the President under sub-clause (a) of clause
shall consist of persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect.
such matters as the following, namely:—

Literature, science, art and social service,

(4) The representatives of each State in the Council of States shall be elected by
elected members of the Legislative Assembly of the State in accordance with the sysi
of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote.

(5) The representatives of the [Union territories} in the Council of States shall
chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law prescribe.

* * * *



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri K.C. Kondaiah, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—~941LS—22-6-1998,