1
Short title.
THE  NATIONAL HIGHWAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
By
DR. MAHENDRASINH P. CHAUHAN, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the National Highways Act, 1956.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the National Highways ( Amendment) Act, 2012.
2.  For section 5 of the National Highways Act, 1956, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—
"5. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall be the responsibility of
the State Government—
(i) to develop, maintain and repair from time to time the portion of the national
highways situated in that State subject to such conditions, if any, as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify;
(ii) to provide and maintain public utility services such as drinking water
facilities, toilets, urinals equipped with flush system and public telephone booths on
national highways at such places within the State, as it may deem appropriate;
Substitution
of new
section for
section 5.
Responsibility
for
development,
maintenance
and repairing
of national
highways and
provision of
certain
facilities, etc.
48 of 1956.
Bill No. 64 of  2012
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
(iii) to provide ambulance services on national highways at such strategic
locations within the State, as it may deem appropriate, for the purpose of facilitating
immediate medical assistance to the victims of road accidents; and
(iv) to provide tow away services to any destination for accidental or breakdown
vehicles on national highways situated within the State.
(2) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
in this behalf by law, provide requisite funds to the State Governments for the purposes
of this section.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The National Highways and roads are not only essential for commuting from one place
to another but in fact they are the lifelines of our economy. Most of essential commodities
and industrial products are transported from one place to another through road transport.
Thus roads and road transport system is an important cog in the wheel of our economy. But
unfortunately the national highways and other such roads are in a pitiable condition. Potholes
are visible everywhere which damage vehicles plying on them. Driving vehicles on such
damaged roads lead to more consumption and wastage of fuel, which is already a scarce
commodity, not only in our country but throughout the world. Thus, it is necessary to
maintain and repair the highways and roads periodically to keep them in good condition.
It has also been observed that victims of road accidents, particularly on national
highways, do not get timely medical assistance. If adequate ambulance service is provided
on highways, victims can be shifted to the nearest medical centre or hospital in time and
hence precious lives can be saved. Similarly, vehicles breaking down on roads cause traffic
disruptions if they are not removed on time. In order to tow away such vehicles, crane
service is necessary. Further, the public utility services like toilets, telephone booths, ATM,
etc. have also become a necessity to be provided on roads and highways.
The National Highways Act, 1956 was enacted with a view to provide for the declaration
of certain highways to be national highways and for matters connected therewith. However,
there is no mention of certain facilities like drinking water, toilets, urinals, public telephone
booths to be provided by the Government on national highways in this Act. Moreover, the
State Government concerned should also play a role of partner in development, maintenance
and repairing of national highways. Therefore, the Bill seeks to amend the National Highways
Act, 1956 with a view to achieve aforesaid objectives.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MAHENDRASINH  P.  CHAUHAN
April 13, 2012
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for providing of certain facilities like drinking water,
toilets, urinals, public telephone booths on national highways including development,
maintenance and repairing of national highways. It also provides that the Central Government
shall provide requisite funds to the State Governments for the purpose of providing aforesaid
facilities on national highways. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crore is
likely to involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved as non-recurring expenditure.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS ACT, 1956
(ACT NO. 48 OF 1956)
* * * * * * *
5. It shall be the responsibility of the Central Government to develop and maintain in
proper repair all national highways, but the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, direct that any function in relation to the development or maintenance of any
national highway shall, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the
notification, also be exercisable by the Government of the State within which the national
highway is situated or by any officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government or
to the State Government.
* * * * * * *
Responsibility
for
development
and
maintenance
of national
highways.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the National Highways Act, 1956.
————
(Dr. Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1577LS(S3)—16-07-2012.