1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE HEALTH INSURANCE SCHEME BILL, 2017
By
SHRI ASHWINI KUMAR CHOUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for framing of a comprehensive health insurance scheme in the country
and for matters connected therewith
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Health Insurance Scheme Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  64 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Corporation" means the Health Insurance Corporation of India established
under section 3;
(b) "doctor" means a physician practicing in any recognised system of medicine;
(c) "family" means husband, wife, minor sons and daughters, dependent brother,
sister and parents;
(d) "hospital" means any clinic, dispensary, medical first-aid centre, hospital,
nursing home, medical consultancy centre, indoor treatment centre or a research centre,
where patients are treated and includes a place where medical consultation is offered
to a patient;
(e) "medicine" means any drug or medicine, whether used internally or
exterenally, or any life saving support system or any medicine required for physical
and mental well being and includes all systems of medicine;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under the Act; and
(g) "treatment" means consultation, prescription, any investigation leading to
diagnosis of disease, any type of treatment provided by any hospital and includes
replacement of human organs and any treatment for physical and mental well being of
the patient.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Corporation to be known as Health Insurance Corporation of India for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
(2) The Corporation shall consist of—
(i) a Chairperson;
(ii) one representative of the Union Ministry of Finance, as member;
(iii) one representative of the Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, as
member;
(iv) one representative of the Life Insurance Corporation of India established
under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, as member;
(v) one representative of medical profession, as member;
(vi) one representative of banking service, as member;
(vii) one representative of distinguished social workers, as member; and
(viii) one representative of legal profession, as member,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The headquarter of the Corporation shall be at New Delhi.
(4) The Corporation may set up regional offices at every State capital and at such
other places as it may deem fit.
(5) The Corporation shall set up a branch office in every city having a population of
more than one million and in every district:
Provided that the Corporation may set up more than one branch in a district keeping
in view the population and requirement of that district.
(6) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson and members of the Corporation shall be such as may be prescribed.
Definitions.
Establishment
of Health
Insurance
Corporation
of India.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
31 of 1956.

3
4. (1) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and other
employees, as it may deem appropriate, for efficient functioning of the Corporation.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of officers and other employees of the Corporation shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. The Corporation shall frame an insurance scheme for providing medical and health
care to all citizens of the country.
6. Every family shall be given an identity card, containing the details of more members
of the family who shall be entitled to benefits under this Act including specialized treatment
and such other particulars as may be prescribed.
7. (1) Every family shall pay such amount as premium as may be prescribed to avail the
benefits under this Act.
(2) While fixing the premium under sub-section (1), the following factors shall be taken
into consideration, namely:—
(i) the number of members in the family;
(ii) the annual income of the family;
(iii) any previous history of disease or any medical problem to any member of
the family; and
(iv) the number of average visits to a hospital during the previous year.
8. The premium shall be payable at,—
(i) any branch of the Corporation; or
(ii) the nearest commercial or cooperative bank; or
(iii) mobile outlets of the Corporation; or
(iv) such other place as may be fixed by the Corporation.
9. No family shall be entitled to benefits under this Act unless the full amount of
premium has been paid.
10. Every family shall be entitled to the following benefits, namely:—
(a) treatment from any hospital or a doctor; and
(b) medicine from any medical shop:
Provided that the Corporation may, allow a person for specialised treatment
on payment of such further permium, as it may determine.
11. Subject to the provisions of this Act, a person availing of the benefits under this
Act shall not be required to pay any extra money, other than the premium, for treatment or
cost of medicines or services availed in a hospital.
12. Any hospital or doctor or a medical shop shall make an application to the nearest
office of the Corporation for reimbursement of expenses in connection with the treatment or
for the cost of medicines, in such manner as may be prescribed.
13. The Corporation shall, as soon as possible, but not later than ten days from the
date of receipt of an application under section 12, make the payment to the hospital, doctor
or medical shop, as the case may be.
Appointment
of officers
and
employees to
the
Corporation.
Formation of
Insurance
Scheme.
Issuing of
Identity
Cards.
Payment of
premium.
Places for
payment for
premium.
Non-
availability of
benefits for
non-payment
of premium.
Benefits.
No payment
for treatment
of medicines or
other services.
Reimbursement
of
expenditure
for
treatment.
medicine, etc.
Time limit
for making
payment by
Corporation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

4
14. Whoever violates the provisions of section 13 shall be punished with a fine of
rupees one thousand.
15. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything contrary
contained in any other law for the time being in force.
16. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Punishment.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In our country, millions of people are living below poverty line and without any
proper medical and healthcare. Medical care in our country is not upto the standard. Only
very few people have access to good and specialized treatment.
Though number of hospitals have increased over the years, yet they are not adequate
to meet healthcare needs of the increasing population. With the scarce resources available,
the Government cannot take upon itself to provide best healthcare to its citizens.
At present, some insurance companies provide for health insurance. However, such
schemes are not comprehensive in nature and cover only a small section of society and are
limited to a few diseases only. Moreover, insurance companies are not exclusively connected
with health insurance.
Therefore, it is proposed to set up an insurance corporation exclusively for providing
best healthcare to citizens. The beneficiaries will be required to make payment of premium
depending upon number of members in the family, income, etc. However, they will be
entitled to comprehensive healthcare.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; ASHWINI KUMAR CHOUBEY
March 7, 2017.
5

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Health Insurance Corporation of
India. It further provides for setting up of regional offices and branches of the Corporation.
It also provides for appointment of Chairperson and members of the Corporation who shall
manage the Corporation. Clause 4 provides for appointment of the officers and employees of
the Corporation. Clause 6 provides for issuance of identity cards to beneficiaries. Clause 10
provides for free treatment and medicines to beneficiaries. Clause 13 provides that the
Corporation shall reimburse the expenditure to hospitals, doctors and medical shops in
connection with the treatment of patients. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore would be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for framing of a comprehensive health insurance scheme in the country and
for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—5287LS(S3)—27-03-2017.