1
THE PERSONS LIVING IN COASTAL ZONE (REHABILITATION
AND WELFARE) BILL, 2011
By
DR.  SANJEEV GANESH NAIK,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for setting up of an Authority for rehabilitation and welfare of persons living
in coastal zone and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act  may be called the Persons Living in Coastal Zone  (Rehabilitation and
Welfare) Act, 2011.
(2)  It shall apply to the persons living in coastal zone in the States of West Bengal,
Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, Goa, Maharashtra, Gujarat and
Union territories of Pondicherry, Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
Short title,
application
and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 64 of  2011
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "Authority" means the National Authority for Welfare of Persons Living in
Coastal Zone set up under section 3;
(ii) "coastal zone" means the land area from high tide line to five hundred metres
on the landward side along the sea front; and
(iii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall set up an Authority to be known as the National
Authority for Rehabilitation of Persons Living in Coastal Zone.
(2) The Authority shall consist of,—
(a) the Union Minister of Environment and Forests, who shall be its Chairperson,
ex-officio;
(b) twelve members representing each of the coastal States/Union territories to
be nominated by the Central Government in consultation with the concerned State
Governments;
(c) twelve members representing the persons living in each of the coastal zone
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
members of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(4) The Authority shall have its headquarter at Mumbai in the State of Maharashtra.
(5) The Authority shall establish its office in every coastal State and Union territory.
(6) The Central Government shall provide to the Authority such number of officers
and other employees, as it thinks fit for the purposes of this Act.
4. (1) The Authority shall promote and provide, such measures as it thinks fit, for the
rehabilitation and welfare of persons living in coastal zone.
(2) The Authority shall provide to the persons living in coastal zone the following
facilities, namely:—
(i) alternate sources of livelihood;
(ii) dwelling units at alternate sites;
(iii) free educational facilities to the dependent children; and
(iv) healthcare facilities free of cost.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament in this
behalf by law, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
6. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force, regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
7. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order to give such directions, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of such difficulty.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
Functions of
the Authority.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Definitions.
Setting up of
National
Authority for
Rehabilitation
of Persons
Living in
Coastal Zone.
Savings.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Central Government has declared coastal stretches as Coastal Regulation Zone in
the coastal States of India in order to conserve and protect coastal stretches and its unique
environment. However, the problems of fishing communities and persons living in coastal
regions have not been addressed properly to ensure their livelihood security. No approval
for new construction or repair of existing dwelling units is given to persons living in coastal
stretches. Lakhs of inhabitants are residing in Coastal Regulatory Zone (Types I, II and III)
in Mumbai alone and several lakh persons may be residing in other coastal areas of the
country. Many of the houses are in dilapidated condition and any natural calamity such as
tsunami could result in heavy loss of lives and property. Since the regulation is in force, the
houses which require urgent repairs cannot be rebuilt. Lakhs of people are suffering. There
is a dire need to protect our coastal areas from all aspects, including environment and
security, but the need to rehabilitate the affected persons living in coastal zone also cannot
be underestimated.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SANJEEV GANESH NAIK
August 2, 2011.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of the National Authority for the welfare of
persons living in coastal zone. It further provides for salary and allowances payable to the
members of the National Authority. Clause 4 provides for certain welfare measures to the
people living in coastal zone. Clause 5 provides for payment of funds to the Authority by the
Central Government.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees two thousand
crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—1300LS(S3)—25-08-2011.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for setting up of an Authority for rehabilitation and welfare of persons living in
coastal zone and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik, M.P.)