As introduced in Lok Sabha
 
BillBill  NoNo. 64 . 64 ofof    20242024
THE ASHA WORKERS (REGULARIZATION OF SERVICE AND 
OTHER BENEFITS) BILL, 2024
By
Shri N. K. Premachandran,  M.P.
a
BILL
to provide for regularization of the services of ASHA workers and conferring the  
status of permanent employee of the Government and for  
matters connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India 
as  follows :—
1. (1) This Act may be called the ASHA Workers (Regularisation of Service and 
Other Benefits) Act, 2024.
(2) It extends to the Union territories only.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “ASHA worker” means accredited social health activist working as 
community health worker instituted by the Government of India, Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare as a part of National Health Mission; and 
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
take steps to regularize the services of ASHA workers and confer the status 
of Group “C” employees of the Government on such ASHA workers who are 
serving in National Health Mission immediately before the commencement of 
this Act.
(2) Every ASHA worker whose service has been regularized shall be entitled 
to such tenure, terms and conditions of service including remuneration, leave, 
provident fund, retirement and other terminal benefits as are available to 
Group “C” employees of the Central Government.
4. The Central Government shall take steps to provide accommodation to 
all ASHA workers within the vicinity of their workplace.
5. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for 
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after expiry of two years 
from the date of commencement of this Act.
6. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any 
other law for the time being in force.
7. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes 
of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive session aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Definitions.
Regularization 
of services of 
ASHA workers.
Accommodation 
to ASHA 
workers.
Power to 
remove 
difficulty.
Provisions of 
the Act to be 
in addition to 
other laws.
Power to make 
rules

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
ASHA workers the accredited social health activists are working under 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare as part of National Health Mission 
contributing remarkable service in Health sector. The ASHA workers working as 
link between Health Department and Common man so as to create awareness and 
promote health activities in the country.  The contribution of ASHA workers is 
helpful to improve the health standard of the country. The ASHA workers are good 
promoters of various schemes of the Central Government and State Government and 
ensuring the health of common man. The duties and service rendered by the ASHA 
workers are very important for the protection of the health. The ASHA workers 
do not have job security and the honorarium given to them are not sufficient for 
meet their immediate requirement.  This may adversely affect the working of the 
integrated child development scheme.  
The ASHA workers are one of the main link between Government and general 
public. They are helping the Government for the effective implementation of health 
programmes. Considering the importance of their duties and service, it is highly 
necessary to protect their service and welfare. 
Hence this Bill.
   New Delhi;                                                    N. K. PREMACHANDRAN  
July 8, 2024.
 
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides the regularization of service of ASHA workers and 
confer the status, wages and welfare not less than the status, wages and welfare of 
Group “C” employees of the Central Government.  Clause 4 provides for provision 
of accommodation to ASHA workers. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring 
expenditure of about rupees three thousand crore per annum is likely to be incurred 
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore is also likely 
to be involved.
 
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purpose of the Bill.  As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, 
the delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character.
 
5

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
 
to provide for regularization of the services of ASHA workers and conferring the  
status of permanent employee of the Government and for  
matters connected therewith.
(Shri N.K. Premachandran, M.P .) 