1
THE WELFARE OF HOMELESS PERSONS LIVING NEAR
RAILWAY TRACKS, RAILWAY YARDS AND
RAILWAY LAND BILL, 2019
By
SHRI AJAY MISRA 'TENI', M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for welfare and rehabilitation measures to be undertaken by Central
Government for the homeless citizens living near railway tracks, railway yards
and railway land in metropolitan cities and other urban areas and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Welfare of Homeless Persons Living Near Railway
Tracks, Railway Yards and Railway Land Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Bill No.  64 of 2019
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "persons living near railway tracks" include persons living near railway
tracks or bridges or yards or under over-bridges or at any public place and land of the
railway in metros and urban areas;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) "railway" means the Union Ministry of  Railways.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within one year of the commencement of this Act,
in consultation with State Governments and Union territory Administrations, formulate a
National Policy for the welfare of  homeless persons living near railway tracks, which shall be
uniformly implemented across the country.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the National Policy
may provide for—
(a) recognition of the right of the persons living near railway tracks to keep
living near railway tracks without any hindrance or interference from police or civic
authorities till alternative shelter is made available to them;
(b) rehabilitation of persons living near railway tracks on the land of railway,
wherever possible;
(c) humanitarian approach towards homelessness and   acute poverty of persons
living near railway tracks;
(d) construction of sufficient number of night shelters with basic facilities at
conspicuous places;
(e) provision of necessary healthcare with free checkup including diagnostic
services and medicines through mobile dispensaries;
(f) provision of potable water;
(g) facility of mobile toilets or Sulabh Shauchalya, wherever possible, with
facility of bathing;
(h) provision of medical facilities for pregnant women living near railway tracks;
(i) provision of two time meal for persons living in night shelters at minimum
cost;
(j) free distribution of mosquito nets and provision of ambulance facility to
protect them from malaria, dengue and other vector borne diseases;
(k) free education to the children of persons living near railway tracks including
provision of free books, uniform, stationery, shoes, hostel facility and other educational
material and vocational training and career counselling for the  development of such
children;
(l) necessary assistance in cash or in kind and advice and skill development for
self-employment of persons living near railway tracks;
(m) rehabilitation of persons engaged in begging in a time bound manner; and
(n) such other measures as may be necessary for the purposes of this Act.
(3) It shall be the duty of appropriate Government to implement welfare measures in
such manner as may be prescribed.
Definitions.
Formulation
of National
Policy for the
welfare of
homeless
persons living
near the
railway
tracks.
45
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
4. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
5. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty and
the appropriate Government shall be guided on questions of policy by such directions and
instructions as may be given by the Central Government:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the date of
commencement of this Act.
6. (1) The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything incosistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
(2) The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
7. (1) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
Funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
A large part of our population is living near railway tracks, yards, below the railway
bridges and on the land of railways. Whereas railway needs its own land to meet its increasing
demand, the persons living near railway tracks and yards are compelled to live there due to
poverty and non-availability of dwelling units for homeless persons. Most of the persons
living in illegal settlements in these places are struggling with poverty, starvation and
unemployment and lack of facilities of water, health and education. As a result, the number of
sick persons are increasing due to adverse effect of unhygienic conditions on their health.
These persons are being drawn towards crime due to insecurity and unemployment and lack
of proper permanent settlement. And this affects the society at large.
Therefore, it is necessary that the Government rehabilitates these homeless persons
living on the land of Railways and if it is not possible, rehabilitate them at some other
convenient places. It has also to be ensured that they are not removed from their places till
any alternate arrangement  is made for their rehabilitation. Moreover, health, education,
drinking water and employment should also be provided to them.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; AJAY MISRA 'TENI'
June  10, 2019.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for formulation of national policy for the welfare of
homeless persons living near the railway tracks, which shall include, inter alia,
rehabilitation of persons living near railway tracks on the land of railway, wherever possible,
construction of sufficient number of night shelters with basic facilities, provision of
necessary healthcare with free checkup including diagnostic services and medicines
through mobile dispensaries, facility of mobile toilets, two time meals, distribution of mosquito
nets, free educational facilities to the children and financial assistance to these persons.
Clause 4 provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite funds to the State
Governments for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of
rupees five thousand crore will be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees ten thousand crore is also likely to
be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for welfare and rehabilitation measures to be undertaken by Central
Government for the homeless citizens living near railway tracks, railway yards
and railway land in metropolitan cities and other urban areas and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto
————
(Shri Ajay Misra 'Teni', M.P .)
MGIPMRND—426LS(S3)—18.06.2019.