THE REGIONAL RURAL BANKS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
further to amend the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Regional Rural Banks (Amendment) Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act.
2. In the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),
in section 3, in sub-section (3), in clause (c),—
(i) the words "during the first five years of its functioning," shall be omitted;
(ii) the proviso shall be omitted.
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 3.
21 of 1976.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 64 of  2013
5

2
3. In section 5 of the principal Act,—
(a) for the words, "five crores of rupees divided into five lakhs", the words
"five hundred crores of rupees divided into five crores" shall be substituted;
(b) in the proviso, for the words "twenty-five lakhs of rupees", the words
"one crore of rupees" shall be substituted.
4. In section 6 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "twenty-five lakhs of rupees or exceed one
crore of rupees", the words "one crore of rupees" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that in case the Regional Rural Bank raise its capital from
sources other than the Central Government or the State Government or the
Sponsor Bank, the shareholding of the Central Government and the Sponsor
Bank shall not be less than fifty-one per cent.:
Provided further that the Central Government shall consult the concerned
State Government if the level of shareholding in the Regional Rural Bank of
such State Government is reduced below fifteen per cent.";
(c) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(2A) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Sponsor
Bank and the State Government, by notification, either raise or reduce the limit
of shareholding of the Central Government, the State Government or the Sponsor
Bank specified in sub-section (2):
Provided that the Central Government shall consult the concerned State
Government before reducing the limit of shareholding of such State
Government.";
(d) in sub-section ( 3), after the words, brackets and figure "as is specified in
sub-section (2)", the words,  brackets, figure and letter, "or as the case may be notified
by the Central Government under sub-section (2A)" shall be inserted.
5. In section 9 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i )  in clause (a), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that no person shall be nominated as a director, if he is already
a director in any other Regional Rural Bank;";
  (ii )  after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(f ) such number of directors elected by the shareholders other than the
directors nominated by the Central Government, the State Government, the Sponsor
Bank and other institutions owned or controlled by the Central Government or the
State Government, whose names are entered in the register of shareholders of the
Regional Rural Bank at least ninety days before the date of the meeting in which
the election of directors takes place on the following basis, namely:—
(i) where the total amount of equity share capital issued to such
shareholders is ten per cent., or less of the total issued equity capital, one
director shall be elected;
(ii) where the total amount of equity share capital issued to such
shareholders is more than ten per cent., but less than twenty-five per
cent., of the total issued equity capital, two directors shall be elected;
Amendment
of section 5.
Amendment
of section 6.
Amendment of
section 9.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(iii) where the total amount of equity share capital issued to such
shareholders is twenty-five per cent., or more of the total issued equity
capital, three directors shall be elected.".
6. For section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"10. A director nominated under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 9 shall
hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government and for such term, not
exceeding two  years, from the date on which  he assumes office, as the Central
Government may specify at the time of his nomination and shall be eligible for
re-nomination:
Provided that no such director shall hold office either continuously or
intermittently for a period exceeding four years.".
7.  In section 19 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the figures, letters and
words "31st day of December",  the figures, letters and words "31st day of March" shall be
substituted.
Substitution of
new section
for section 10.
Amendment of
section 19.
Term of
office of
director.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 provides for the incorporation, regulation and
winding-up of Regional Rural Banks. The said Act was amended from time to time and the
last amendment was in the year 2005.
2. In view of growing business of the Regional Rural Banks and expansion of their role
in both qualitative as well as quantitative terms in extending banking services in rural areas,
a need was felt to amend the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 to strengthen their capital base
and improve their overall capabilities.
3. The Regional Rural Banks (Amendment) Bill, 2013, inter alia,  seeks to make
amendments to the said Act in respect of the following, namely:—
(a) to provide for the managerial and financial assistance from Sponsor  Banks
to be continued beyond the first five years of functioning of the Regional Rural
Banks;
(b) to provide for the authorised capital of each Regional Rural Bank to be
enhanced from five crore rupees to five hundred crore rupees;
(c) to provide for the issued capital of each Regional Rural Bank to be not less
than one crore rupees;
(d) to make provisions for  raising capital by Regional Rural Banks from sources
other than the Central Government, the State Government and the Sponsor Bank
subject to the condition that in no event the combined shareholding of the Central
Government and the Sponsor Bank shall be less than fifty one per cent.. The State
Government concerned shall be consulted  if its shareholding is reduced below fifteen
per cent. and  the Central Government  may raise or reduce the shareholding of the
Central Government, State Government concerned  and the Sponsor Bank, by
notification, with prior consultation with the  State Government concerned;
(e) to make provisions for shareholders to elect directors in view of the proposed
provisions for raising private capital by Regional Rural Banks from sources other than
the Central Government, the State Government and the Sponsor Bank;
(f) to provide for the term of the Directors appointed by the Central Government
on the Board of Directors of the Regional Rural Banks under clause (a) of sub-section
(1) of section 9 to be fixed for a period not exceeding two years and eligibility for
re-nomination, and; the combined tenure of the Central Government nominated Director
on the Board of one or more Regional Rural Bank, either separately or continuously,
shall not exceed four years;
(g) to bring uniformity in accounting year, i.e. the date of closure of accounts
from "31
st day of December" to "31st day of March".
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
P.  CHIDAMBARAM
NEW DELHI;
The 9th  March,  2013
————
PRESIDENT'S  RECOMMENDATION  UNDER  ARTICLE  117  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION
OF  INDIA
[Copy of  letter D.O. No. 7/9/2011-RRB, dated 19 March, 2013 from Shri P. Chidambaram,
Minister of Finance to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]
The  President, having been infromed of the subject matter of the Regional Rural Banks
(Amendment) Bill, 2013, has recommended the introduction of the Bill in Lok Sabha under
clause (1) of article 117 of the Constitution of India.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (a) of clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend section 5 of the Act so as to
increase the authorised capital of each Regional Rural Bank from five crores of rupees to five
hundred crores of rupees. Sub-clause (b) of clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend the proviso so
as to provide that the authorised capital of any Regional Rural Bank shall not be reduced
below one crore of rupees. Sub-clause (a) of clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section
(1) of section 6 of the Act so as to provide that the issued capital of each Regional Rural Bank
shall not be less than one crore of rupees. Sub-clause (b) of clause 4 of the Bill seeks to insert
provisos to sub-section ( 2) of the aforesaid section 6 so as to provide that in case the
Regional Rural Bank raises its capital from sources other than the Central Government or the
State Government or the Sponsor Bank, the combined shareholding of the Central Government
and the Sponsor Bank shall not be less than fifty-one per cent.,  and that the
Central Government shall consult the concerned State Government, if the level of share-
holding in the Regional Rural Bank of such State Government, is reduced below fifteen per
cent.,  Sub-clause ( c) of clause 4 of the Bill seeks to insert a sub-section (2A) after sub-
section ( 2) of the said section 6 so as to provide that the Central Government may, in
consultation with the Sponsor Bank and the State Government, by notification, either raise
or reduce the limit of shareholding of the Central Government, the State Government or the
Sponsor Bank specified in sub-section ( 2) and the Central Government shall consult the
concerned State Government before reducing the limit of shareholding of such State
Government.
2. While there is no immediate expenditure involved on account of the proposed Bill, in
future, the Central Government being fifty per cent., shareholder of the Regional Rural Banks,
may be called upon to contribute its share, as and when the share capital of the Regional
Rural Banks is enhanced, and accordingly, there will be an additional non-recurring expenditure
to be met out of the Consolidated Fund of India. It is, however, not possible at this stage to
estimate the quantum of such expenditure.
3. The Bill, if enacted, will not involve any other expenditure of a recurring or
non-recurring nature.
5

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  REGIONAL  RURAL  BANKS  ACT,  1976
(21 OF 1976)
* * * * *
CHAPTER  II
INCORPORATION AND CAPITAL OF REGIONAL RURAL BANKS
3. (1) * * * * *
(3) It shall be the duty of the Sponsor Bank to aid and assist the Regional Rural Bank,
sponsored by it, by—
* * * * *
(c) providing such managerial and financial assistance to such Regional Rural
Bank during the first five years of its functioning, as may be mutually agreed upon
between the sponsor Bank and the Regional Rural Bank:
Provided that the Central Government may, either on its own motion or on the
recommendation of the National Bank, extend the said period of five years by such
further period, not exceeding five years at a time, subject to such conditions as it may
deem fit to impose.
* * * * *
5. The authorised capital of each Regional Rural Bank shall be five crores of rupees
divided into five lakhs of fully paid-up shares of one hundred rupees each:
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the National Bank
and the Sponsor Bank, increase or reduce such authorised capital; so, however, that the
authorised capital shall not be reduced below twenty-five lakhs of rupees, and the shares
shall be, in all cases, fully paid-up shares of one hundred rupees each.
6. (1) The issued capital of each Regional Rural Bank shall, in the first instance, be
such as may be fixed by the Central Government in this behalf, but it shall in no case be less
than twenty-five lakhs of rupees or exceed one crore of rupees.
(2) Of the capital issued by a Regional Rural Bank under sub-section (1), fifty per cent.,
shall be subscribed by the Central Government; fifteen per cent., by the concerned State
Government and thirty-five per cent., by the  Sponsor Bank.
(3) The Board may, after consultation with the National Bank, the concerned State
Government and the Sponsor Bank and with the prior approval of the Central Government,
from time to time, increase  the issued capital of the Regional Rural Bank; and, where additional
capital is issued, such capital shall also be subscribed in the same proportion as is specified
in sub-section (2).
* * * * *
10. A director (other than the Chairman) shall hold office for such period not exceeding
two years, from the date when he assumes office, as the authority nominating him may
specify at the time when the nomination is made, and may, on the expiry of the said period,
continue to hold office until his successor has been nominated and shall also be eligible for
re-nomination.
* * * * *
6
Establishment
and
incorporation
of Regional
Rural Banks.
Authorised
capital.
Issued capital.
Term of
office of
director.

7
CHAPTER V
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
19. (1) Every Regional Rural Bank shall cause its books to be closed and balanced as
on the 31st day of December or such other date in each year as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify and shall appoint with the approval of the
Central Government auditors for the audit of its accounts:
Provided that with a view to facilitating the transition from one period of accounting to
another period of accounting under this sub-section, the Central Government may, by order
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions as it considers necessary or expedient
for the closing and balancing of, or for other matters relating to, the books in respect of the
concerned years.
* * * * *
Closure of
accounts.

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976.
—————
(Shri P . Chidambaram, Minister of Finance)
GMGIPMRND—68LS—10.04.2013.