10

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
= FBEC anny

THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004

By
‘Suzi Pawan KuMAR BANSAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:— के

1. This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment)
Act, 2004.

2. Section 12 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act) shall be numbered as sub-section (1) thereof and
after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-section shall be in-
serted, namely:—

" (2) Where the Legislative Assembly or, as the case may be, the
electoral college of a State or of a Union territory, is not in existence when
a member of the Council of States representing that State or the Union
territory retires on the expiration of his term of office, a notification for the

Short title

Amendment of
section 12,


Amendment of
section 154,

2
Purpose of filling that seat shall be issued within a fortnight from the date
the Legislative Assembly o the electoral college, as the case may be, is
duly constituted.".
3. In section 154 of the principal Act,—

(i) in sub-section (1), after the words “a casual vacancy”, the words
“or elected in an election held in pursuance of notification under sub-
section (2) of section 12" shall be inserted;

(ii) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—

"(4) A member chosen to fill a vacancy in an election held in
pursuance of a notification under sub-section (2) of section 12,
shall retire on the completion of the term that would have begun as.
if the Legislative Assembly or the electoral college, as the case may
be, existed on the date of occurrence of the vacancy and elections
held in pursuance of notification under sub-section (1) of
section 12:

Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply to mem-
bers elected before the commencement of the Representation of the People
¢ idment) Act, 2004, but the President may, after consultation with the

ion Commission, make by order such provisions as he thinks necessary to
ensure that after the expiry of their present term, one-third members retire on
second day of April in every second year thereafter."


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The concept of one-third members of Rajya Sabha retiring every two years
is, over the years, losing its relevance as it has been seen that when a member
retires on completion of his six year term, the concerned Legislative Assembly or
the electoral college is not in existence and when the same is constituted, elec-
tion is held for six years term beginning thereafter. Consequently cases arise
where due to this reason, election to the Council of States from a State may be
held for all or most of the seats irregularly or even after six years in one lot. This
is contrary to the basic concept of holding biennial elections. It is necessary to
restore and maintain this stipulation without affecting the rights of sitting
members of the Council of States.

This Bill seeks to achieve this objective.

‘New DeLat; PAWAN KUMAR BANSAL
July 29, 2004.


Notification for
biennial election
to the Council.

Term of Office of
members of the
Council of States,

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE 28008 ACT, 1951
(43 oF 1951)

. . . . . . .

12. For the purpose of filling the seats of members of the Council of
States retiring on the expiration of their term of office the President shall, by one
or more notifications published in the Gazette of India on such date or dates as
may be recommended by the Election Commission, call upon the elected mem-
bers of Legislative Assembly or, as the case may be, the members of the electoral
college, of each State concerned to elect Members in accordance with the provi-
sions of this Act and of the rules and orders made thereunder:

Provided that no notification under this section shall be issued more than
three months prior to the date on which the term of office of the retiring members
is due to expire.

* * . . . * .

154. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (2A), the term of
office of a member of the Council of States, other than a member chosen to fill a
casual vacancy, shall be six years.

(2) Upon the first constitution of the Council of States the President shall,
after consultation with the Election Commission, make by order such provision
as he thinks fit for curtailing the term of office of some of the members then
chosen in order that, as nearly as may be, one-third of the members holding
seats of each class shall retire in every second year thereafter.

(2A) In order that, as nearly as may be, one-third of the members may retire
on the second day of April, 1958, and on the expiration of every second year
thereafter, the President shall, as soon as may be after the commencement of the
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, after consultation with the
Election Commission, make by order such provisions as he thinks fit in regard
to the terms of office of the members elected under sub-section (2) of section
147.

(3) Amember chosen to fill a casual vacancy shall be chosen to serve for
the remainder of his predecessor's term of office.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.

(Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal, M.P)

MGIPMRND—2360LS—17-09-2004.