1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
By
SHRI J.P. AGARWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first  Year of the Republic of  India  as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2010.
2. For article 48A of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted,
namely:—
"48A. The State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment so as
to ensure a pollution-free environment for its citizens and to safeguard the forests
and wildlife of the country and constitute such enforcement agencies as it considers
necessary for implementing the provisions of this article.".
Explanation.— For the purpose of this article, the expression "environment"
means water, both surface and underground, air and land including the surface of the
earth, sub-soil and forests (the flora and fauna) and the inter-relationship which
exists between water, air and land and human beings, other living creatures, plants,
micro-organisms and property exclusive of mere amenities.".
Short title.
Protection
and improve-
ment of
environment
and safeguard-
ing of forests
and wildlife.
Substitution of
new article for
article 48A.
Bill No.  64 of 2010
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is a vast country with a huge population. Although, there is a provision in the
Constitution for protection of environment, yet this remains a neglected area. Today,
environment has been polluted to such an extent that half of our population is being affected
as  a result. Although, Government has taken many steps to protect the environment, yet the
efforts are to be supplemented by voluntary organisations and individuals.
The environment is polluted blatantly by many agencies and there is virtually no
check on it. It is the duty of  the Government to secure for the citizens a pollution free
environment. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Constitution to provide for a pollution-
free environment and to constitute enforcement agencies for checking environmental
pollution.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; J.P.  AGARWAL
April 19, 2010
2

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the constitution of enforcement agencies for
safeguarding forests and wildlife of the country. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure
of rupees thirty crore will be incurred per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
PART-IV
DIRECTIVE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATE  POLICY
* * * * * *
"48A. The State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment and to
safeguard the forests and wildlife of the country.
* * * * * *
Protection
and
improvement
of
environment
and
safeguarding
of forests and
wildlife.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri  J.P .  Agarwal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2618LS(S4)—30-05-2010.