AS INTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 64 of 2021
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
By
DR. MOHAMMAD  JAWED, M.P.
A
BILL
further to  amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment)  Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Section 124A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 shall be omitted.
5
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Omission of
section 124A.
45 of 1860.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Section 124A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, which defines and provides
punishment for sedition, has been under constant criticism for a long time by the
society which includes, but not limited to, advocates, former judges, elected
representatives, bureaucrats and others, because of its constant misuse. The
authorities, to suppress the voice of dissent, used this provision to sometimes
silence the legitimate and meaningful voices and concerns of the society which may
not lead to disaffection or war against the nation.
Freedom of speech and expression as mentioned in article 19 of the Constitution
is an intrinsic and the most important right of all. The exceptions to freedom of
speech and expression should be used in a reasonable, fair, and just manner in order
to protect the rule of law and principles of freedom of speech and expression and
not to curb the concerns of the society raised through legitimate ways.
Sedition, as we know, was an amendment introduced to the Indian Penal Code
imported from the English legal system in 1870. It was brought to curb the voices
of dissent and to control the freedom of speech and expression of the individuals.
This provision was brought to suppress the voices of criticism of East India
Company and became the tool to terrorize and illegitimate harassment of the Indian
people. Bal Gangadhar Tilak, Annie Besant, Jogendra Chandra Bose and Mahatma
Gandhi were amongst the first prominent figures to be charged with sedition. The
provision of sedition was first misused against Shri Bal Gangadhar Tilak. Shri Tilak
was charged under sedition before the Bombay High Court, in Queen Empress vs.
Bal Gangadhar Tilak (1897).
In United Kingdom, with the enactment of the Human Rights Act, 1998, the
existence of sedition was started to be considered in contravention of the tenets
of the law. While abolishing sedition as offence in 2009, the then, Minister of Justice
of the United Kingdom, said “the existence of these obsolete offences in the
country had been used as justification by other countries for the retention of similar
laws which have been actively used to suppress political dissent and restrict press
freedom”. Finally, the sedition law was deleted by section 73 of the Coroners and
Justice Act, 2009.
With the vehement opposition in the Constituent Assembly, the word “sedition”
does not find a place in our Constitution.
Punjab High Court in Tara Singh Gopi Chand vs. The State declared section
124A of the Indian Penal Code unconstitutional as it contravenes the right of
freedom of speech and expression guaranteed under article 19(1)(a) of the
Constitution observing that – “a law of sedition thought necessary during a period
of foreign rule has become inappropriate by the very nature of the change which
has come about”.
The basic tenet which attracts section 124A is the use of violence in continuation
of the use of words, spoken or written, against the Government, but any other
legitimate criticism or concerns raised cannot be the ground to attract sedition as
it would be improper to interpret it in such a way.
2

But, in the case of Ram Nandan vs. State of Uttar Pradesh, the Court quoted
Pt. Jawaharlal Nehru, who while introducing the first Constitution (Amendment) Bill,
1951, referred to sedition and stated, “Now so far as I am concerned that particular
Section is highly objectionable and obnoxious and it should have no place both for
practical and historical reasons, if you like, in any body of laws that we might pass.
The sooner we get rid of it the better. We might deal with that matter in other ways,
in more limited ways, as every other country does but that particular thing, as it
is, should have no place, because all of us have had enough experience of it in a
variety of ways and apart from the logic of the situation, our urges are against it”.
In the case of Union of India & Ors. vs. The Motion Picture Association & Ors.,
etc., the Supreme Court observed: “free speech is the foundation of a democratic
society. A free exchange of ideas, dissemination of information without restraints,
dissemination of knowledge, airing of differing view points, debating and forming
one shown views and expressing them, are the basic indicia of a free society”.
In Kedar Nath Singh vs. State of Bihar it is been held while upholding section
124A that “Such a legislation has, on the one hand, fully to protect and guarantee
the freedom of speech and expression, which is the sine qua non of a democratic
form of Government that our Constitution has established.”.
Though section 124A was upheld in Kedar Nath Singh case but with the
development and change of times, it is been experienced that this section has rather
been abused than being used for the protection of the State from violence.
Such a section should not be in the statute books of Indian democracy, this
provision rather being the protector, has been used as the means to curtail and curb
the freedom of speech and expression. Therefore, section 124A has no place in the
law books of the nation where speech and expression is the soul of the democracy.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to omit section 124A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
Hence this Bill.
  N EW D ELHI;
February 24, 2021.
    MOHAMMAD JAWED
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * * * *
124A. Whoever by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible
representation, or otherwise, brings or attempts to bring into hatred or contempt,
or excites or attempts to excite disaffection towards, the Government established by
law in India, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, to which fine may be
added, or with imprisonment which may extend to three years, to which fine may
be added, or with fine.
Explanation 1.— The expression “disaffection” includes disloyalty and all
feelings of enmity.
Explanation 2.— Comments expressing disapprobation of the measures of the
Government with a view to obtain their alteration by lawful means, without exciting
or attempting to excite hatred, contempt or disaffection, do not constitute an offence
under this section.
Explanation 3.— Comments expressing disapprobation of the administrative or
other action of the Government without exciting or attempting to excite hatred,
contempt or disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this section.
* * * * * * *
4
Sedition.

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
(Dr. Mohammad Jawed, M.P.)