As IxtRopuceD IN Lox Sasha

8 DEC 2006

Bill No. 64 of 2006 No. 64 of 2006

THE BEEDI WORKERS WELFARE BILL, 2006
By
SHRIMATI Javaprapa, MP.
A

BILL
to provide for measures for welfare of beedi workers and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic‘of India as
follows:—

1. (7) ThiseAct may be called the Beedi Workers Welfare Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

5 (3) It shall come into force atonce.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(i) “appropriate Govérnment” means a State Government or the CentrafGovern-
ment, as the cas® may be;

(ii) “beedi” means beedi or cigar rolled out of tobacco leaves;
10 (iii) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under the Act; and

(iv) “workers” means any person involved in rolling of tobacco, leaves for
making beedis or cigars.

Short title,
extent amd
‘vommencement.

Definitions.


Beedi
Workers
Welfare Fund.

Functions of
the Board.

Central
Government
to set up
hospitals.

Workers to be
entitled for
assured
minimum
wage.
Penalty.

Power to
make rules.

2
3. 0) The Central Government shall set up a fund to be known as Beedi Workers
Welfare Fund. ©

(2) The Fund shall consist of contributions from Central Government, the State
Governments and owners of beedi factories in such ratio as may be prescribed.

(3) The Fund shall be administered by a Board, consisting of —
(a) one Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government;

(b) one representative of each State Government where beedi making is a major
occupation;

(e) two representatives of workers to be nominated in such manner as may be
prescribed; and

(d) one representative of owners of beedi factories.
4. (1) The Board shall determine the purposes for which the.Fund shall be utilized.

(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (72, the Fund shall be utHized for the
following purposes:—

(i) free education, including higher education, for the children of workers;

(ii) payment of old age pension after a worker has attained the age of sixty, years
or is unable to perform his work on account of incapacity, whichever occurring earlier;

(iii) free housigg facilities for beedi workers;
(iv) payment of compensation in case of death or accident or physical disability
due to occupational reasons; and
69 payment of disability assistance in case any worker is disabled due to any
reason while employed in‘any beedi factory.
5. (7) The Central Government shall set up super specidjity hospitals at different
locations in the country to cater to beedi workers and their families.

(2) The appropriate Government shall make available land free of cost to the Central
Government for the purposes of sub-section (1).

(3) Every werker and his family shall be entitled to free treatment in the hospitals set
up under sub-section (7).

6, Every worker shall be entitled to such assured minimum wage as may be fixed by the
appropriate Government, irrespective of the number of beedi rolled by him.

7. If any employer does not comply with the provisions of sections 3 or 6, he shall be
punished with a fine which may extend to rupees fifty thousand.

8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.

20

25

30



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The beedi workers in the country face a lot of problems. They are not given minimum
wages. They are not provided with adequate and proper health care system or housing
facilities. They liven pathetic condition. The rolling of beedis affects their health very badly
and they become prone to lung diseases. Since they are not in a position to afford education
for their children, their children remain uneducated and are forced to be employed in rollmg
beedis. After retirement or physical incapacity of the workers, they are left to fend for
themselves and there is no social security for them.

In view of this, it is proposed to provide for certain welfare measures for beedi workers.
Hence this Bill.

New Deu; JAYAPRADA
July 25,2006.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a Beedi Workers Welfare Fund. Clause 5
Provides for setting up of super speciality hospitals for beedi workers. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve
a recutring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crere per annum.

A ndn-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGHSLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Gove:
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate
legislative power is of a normal character.

rmment to make rules for carrying out
to matters of detail only, the delegation of


LOK SABHA

A

BLL
to provide for measures for welfare of ‘beedi workers and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shrimati Jayaprada, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—1958LS(S-3)—07.08.2006.