THE DELIU (CONTROL OF BUILDING 
" OPERATIONS) BILL, 1955 
(As lNTltODUCBD ~N LOK SABRA) 

x of IB91. 
DiU No. '5 of 1955. 
THE DELHI (CONTROL OF BUILDING OPERATIONS) 
BILL, 1955 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the control of building operations in Delhi. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows :-
1. (1) This "Act may be cailed the Delhi (Control of 
Operations) Act, 1955. 
Building Short title, 
extent, com-
mencement 
and dura-
tion. S (2) It extends to the whole- of the State of Delhi. -
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 22nd day 
of October, 1955, and s~all cease to have effect on the 1st day of 
January, 1957, except as respects things done or omitted to be done 
before such cesser of operation of this Act, and section 6 of the 
10 General Clauses Act, 1897, shall apply upon such cesser of opera-
tion as if it had then been repealed by a Central Act. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) 'amenity' includes roads, water supply, street lighting, 
drainage, sewerage, public parks and any other convenience 
IS which the Authority constituted under section 3 may, by notifi-
cation in the Official Gazette, specify to be an amenity for the 
purposes of this Act; 
(b) 'building' means any structure or erection or part of 
a structure or erection which is intended to be useO for residen-
20 tiaI, commercial, industrial or other purposes, whether in actual 
use or not; 
(c) 'controlled area' means any area in respect of which a 
declaration has been made under section 4; 
(d) 'Delhi' except where it occurs in the expression 'State 
2S of... Delhi', means such area in the State of Delhi as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify; 
(e) 'development', with its grammatical variations and 
cognate expressions, means the carrying out of building, 
engineering, mining or other operations in, on, over or under 
30 land or the making of any material change in any buildings or 
land; , 
Definitions. 

... 
2 
(f) 'prescribed' means prescribed by regulations made 
under this Act;" 
(g) 'to erect' in relation to any building has the same mean-
ing as the expression 'to erect or re-erect' in clause (5) of 
section 3 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911. 
r;:o pelhi 3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after 
Pro':.1t:i't the commencement of this Act, constitwte for t11.e purposes of 
Authority. this Act an authority to be called the Delhi Development 
Provisional Authority (hereafter in this Act referred to as the 
Authority). . 
(2) The Authority shall consist of the following members, 
namely:- I 
(a) the Chief Commissioner of the State of Delhi, ex-officio, 
who shall be the Chairman of the Authority; 
Punjab Act 
5 III of 1911. 
10 
(b) three representatives of the Central Government to be IS 
nominated by that Government, one from the Ministry of 
Finance, one from the Ministry of Health and one from the-
Ministry of Works, HOusing and Supply; 
(c) two representatives of the Delhi State Government to 
be nominated by that Government; 20 
Cd) the President of the New Delhi Municipal Committee. 
e.r-c:Iffi.cio; 
(e) the President of the Delhi Municipal Committee, 
e:r-oJ1icio ; 
(f) the Chairman of the Delhi Improvement Trust, 25 
ez-ofJicio; 
(3) The number of members necessary to form a quorum and 
the procedure to be followed by the Authority in the conduct of its 
business shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(4) The. functions of the Authority may be exercised notwith- 3G 
standing any vacancy therein. 
(5) The Chairman of the Delhi Improvement Trust besides being 
a member of the Authority shall also be the Secretary thereof; and 
the Central Government spall provide the Authority with' such 
cLerical and other staff as that Government considers necessary. 3' 
(6) All action taken by the Authority shall be expressed to be 
taken in -the name of the Authority; and orders and other instru-
ments made and executed in. the name of the Authority shall be 
authenticated in such manner as may be prescribed and the validity 
of an order or instrument which is so authenticated shall .not be 40 
called in question on the ground that it is not an order or instrument 
made or executed by the Authority. 

3 
4. If, in the Qpinion of the Authority, any area within Delhi Declaratiaa 
requires to be controlled under this Act with a view to the of controUed 
preVlention of bad laying out of land; haphazard erection of bUildings area. 
or growth of sub-standard colonies or with a view to the develop-
'JIlent and expansion of Delhi according to proper planning, it may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, declare the area to be a 
controlled area. • 
5. The Authority may, .by notification in the Official Gazette, issue Power 'to 
in relation to any controlled area such directions as may be con- i~lue ~ 
10 sidered necessary regarding anyone or more of the following =-:3 rel-
matters, namely:- controlled 
(a) the division of any site into plots for the erection of 
buildings and the manner in which such plots may be allotted 
to intending purchasers or lessees; 
15 (b) the allotment or reservation of land for roads, open 
spaoes, gardens, recreation grounds, schools, markets and other 
public purposes; 
(c) the development of any site into a townshDp or colony 
and the restrictions and conditions subject to which such develop-
20 ment may be undertaken or carried out; 
30 
35 
(d) the enection of buildings on any site and the restrictions 
and conditions in regard to the open spaces to be maintained in 
or around buildings and the height and character of buildings; 
(e) the alignment of buildings ·on any site; 
(f) the architectural features Qf the elevation or frontage 
of any building to be erected on any site; 
(g) the number of residential buildings which may be 
.rected on any site; 
(h) the amenities to be provided in relation to any site or 
buildings on such site whether before or after the erection of 
buildings and the person or authority by whom such amenities 
are to be provided; 
(i) the prohibition or restrictions regarding erection of shops, 
workshops, warehouses or factories or buildings of a specified: 
architectural feature or buildings designed for particular pur-
poses in any locality; 
. (j) the maintenance of walls, fences, hedges or any other 
structural or architectural construction and the height at whieh 
they shall. be maintained: 
(k) the restrictions regarding the use of any site for pur-
poses other than the erection of buildings; 
area •• 

4 
(l) any other matter which is necessary for the. proper 
planning of any controlled area and for preventing buildings 
being erected haphazardly in such area. 
Control of 6. No person shall undertake or carry out the development of 
develo~m~nt any site in any controlled area or erect any building or make dt 5 and bUlldmg '. . operations extend any excavation ot: layout any means of access to a road In 
in controlled such area except in accordance with the directions, if any, issued 
areas. under section 5 and with the previous permission of the Authority 
in writing. 
Applicatio.l 7. (1) Every person desiring to obtain the permission referred 10 
~i~l.~rmi8. to in section 6 shall make an application in writing to the Authority 
in such form and containing such information as may be prescribed 
Powers of 
(JUry on 
buildinas or 
land 
in respect of the development, building, excavation or means of 
access to which the application relates. 
(2) On receipt of such application the Authority, after making 15 
such enquiry as it considers necessary in relation to any direction 
which may have been issued under section 5 or in relation to any 
other matter, shall, by order in writing, eith~r grant the permission, 
subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order 
or refuse to grant such permission. 20 
(3) Where permission is refused, the grounds of such refusal shall 
be communicated to the applicant in the prescribed manner. 
8. The Authority may authorise any person to enter into or upon 
any site or building with or .without assistants or workmen for the 
p~ose of- 25 
(a) making any enquiry, inspection, measurement or survey 
or taking levels of such site or buildings; 
(b) examining works under construction or ascertaining the 
course of sewers or drains; 
(e) ascertaining whether any site is being or has 'been 30 
developed or any building is being or has been erected in con-
travention of any direction issued under section 5 or without 
the permission referred to in section 6 or in contravention of 
any condition subject to which such permission has been 
granted: 35 
Provided that no entry shall be made except between the hours 
of sun-rise and sun-set and without giving not less than twenty-
four hotH's written notice to the occupier, or if there be no occupier, 
to .tbe o~r of the building or land. 
Pcoaltiel. 9. (1) Any person who undertakes or carries out the develop- 40 
ment of any site or erects any building or makes or' extends any 
excavation or lays out any means of access to a road in contraven-
tion of any direction issued under section 5 or without the permission 

5 
referred to in section 6 or in contravention of any condition 
subject to which such permission has been grant,ed shall be punish-
able with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees and in 
the case of a continuing offence, with a further fine which may 
S extend to five hundred rupees for every day during which such 
offence continues after conviction for the first commission of the • 
offence: 
(2) Any person who obstructs the entry of a person authorised 
under section 8 to enter into or upon any building or land or molests 
10 such person after such entry shall be punishable with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees. 
(3) If the person committing an offence under this Act is 
a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, 
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the con-
15 duct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render 
any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act 
20 if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge 
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of 
such offence. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), 
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
25 company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with 
the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on 
the part of, any director or manager, secretary or other officer of 
the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer 
shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable 
30 to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
35 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) 'company' means a body corporate and includes a firm 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) 'director' in relation to a firm means a partner in the 
firm. 
10. Where the erection of any building has been commenced or Order of 
. b· ·ed h bit d . t t· f ny demolition IS emg carrI on or as een comp e e m con raven Ion 0 a of buildings 
direction issued under section 5 or without the permission referred in certain 
to in section 6 or in contravention of any condition subject to which cases. 
40 such permission has been granted, the Authority may, in addition 
to any prosecution that may be instituted under this Act, 
make an order directing that such erection shall be demolished by 
the owner thereof within su!h period not exceeding two months as 

Jurisdiction 
of COl:rts. 
6 
may be specified in the order, and on the failure of the owner to 
comply with the order the Authority may itself cause the erection 
to be demolished and the expenses of such demolition shall be 
recoverable from the owner in the same manner as an arrear of 
land revenue: 
Provided that no such order shall be made unless the owner 
has been given an opportunity of being heard. 
11. No court inferior to that of a magistrate of the first class shall 
try an offence punishable under this Act. 
5 
Previo\'s 12. No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act 10 
s~nc~onhof shall be instituted except with the previous sanction of the Au-
~i~ oru~fficer thority or an officer authorised by the Authority in this behalf. 
authorised 
by it for 
prosecution. 
Magistrate's 
{':lWer to 
Impose 
enhanced 
penalties. 
Power to 
delegate. 
Orders 
grantkg or 
refusing 
permission 
to be final. 
13. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 32 of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1898, it shall be lawful for any court of a 
magistrate of the first class to pass any sentence authorised by 15 
this Act, in excess of its powers under the said section. 
14. The Authority may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act may 
also be exercised in such cases and subject to such conditions, if 
any, as may be specified in the notification, by such officer as may 20 
be mentioned therein. . 
15. Any order made under sub-E.:'!ction (2) of section 7 refusing 
. or granting any permission shall be final and shall not be questioned 
in any court : 
Provided that where the power exercisable under sub-section (2) 25 
of section 7 has been delegated to any officer referred to in section 
14, an-y person aggrieved by an ord~r of such officer may, within 
thirty days from the date of such order, prefer an appeal to the 
Authority; and the order of the Authority on appeal shall be final 
and shall not be questioned in any court. 30 
Protection 16. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against of action -taken ;n any persop for anything which is in good faith done or intended to 
good faith. be done under this Act or the regulations made thereunder. 
Bpft'e~. of of 17. The 'provisions of this Act shall have effect notwitlr-
rovlslons d' h" . h ' the Act in- stan 109 anyt 109 lOconsIstent t erewlth contained in any other 3S 
consistent law 
with other • 
laWs. 
Sa "ings. 18. Nothing in this Act shall apply to-
(a) the carrying' out of works for the maintenance, 
improvement or other alteration of any building, being works 
which affect only the interior of the building or which do not 40 
materially affect the external appearance of the building j 
• 
vor 
1898• 

10 
• 20 
(b) the carrying out by any local authority in the State of 
Delhi or the Delhi Improvement Trust or any Department of 
the Central Government or of the Delhi State Government of 
any works for the purpose of inspecting, repairing, or renew-
ing any sewers, mains. pipes, cables or other apparatus, in-
cluding the breaking open of any street or other land for that 
purpose; 
(c) the erection of a building, not being a dwelling house if 
such building is required for the purposes subservient to agri-
culture; 
(d) the erection of buildings upon land included in the in-
habited site of any village as defined in revenue records; 
(e) the .erection of a place of worship or a tomb or cenotaph 
or of a wall enclosing a graveyard, place of worsh~p, cenotaph 
or samadhi, on land which at the commencement of this Act 
is occupied by or for the purposes of such place of worship, 
tomb, cenotaph, graveyard or samadhi; 
(f) excavations (including wells) made in the ordinary course 
d agricultural operations; 
(g) the construction of unmetalled road intended to give' 
access to land solely for agricultural purposes. 
19. (1) The Authority, with the previous approval of the Central :~;~~_ 
Government, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regu- lations. 
lations to carry out the pur'poses of this Act: 
25 Provided that the Central Government may make the first regu-
lations under this section and any regulation so made may be altered 
or rescinded by the Authority in exercise of the powers conferred 
by this section. 
(2) In particular and without prejudjce to the generality of the 
30 foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:-
35 
(a) the summoning and holding of meetings of the 
Authority, the time and place where such meetings are to be 
beld, the procedure to be followed by the Authority, the conduct 
of all business to be transacted by the Authority and the number 
of members necessary to form a quorum; 
(b) the manner of auth.entication of orders and other ins-
truments of the Authority; 
(c) the form in which an application under sub-section (1) 
40 of section 7 shall be made and the information to be furnished 
in such application; 
(d) the regulation of the laying out of means of access to 
roads; 

Repeal of 
Ordinance 
5 of 1955. 
8 
(e) the principles under which applications for permission 
under this Act may be granted; 
(f) the officers to whom powers may be delegated under 
section 14; 
(g) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed. S 
(3) All regulations made under this Act shall, as soon as 
may be after they are made, be laid before both Houses of Parlia-
ment. 
20. The Delhi (Control of Building Operations) Ordinance, 1955 
is hereby repealed. 
10 

STATEMENT OF'OBJEcTS AND REASONS 
With a view to the speedy and efficient handling of the land 
and housing problem in Delhi, it is proposed that there should be 
a single Authority to deal with the planning and dev~lo(pment of 
the urban area of Delhi instead of the' existing multiple auth~ri­
ties operating in the field. The constitution of- such an Authority 
is, however, likely to take some time as the legislation for the 
purpose will be an involved one. Meanwhile, large number of 
buildings were being put up in a haphazard way in and around 
Delhi and none of ·the existing authorities had necessary legal 
powers to check, control or regulate th&e building activities. As 
such large scale and haphazard construction would give rise to 
additional slums in the Capital which would ultimately constitute a 
potential danger to the health of the citizens and spoil the archi-
tectural layout of the city, the Delhi (Control of Building Opera-
tions) Ordinance. 1955 (5 of 1955) was promulgated on the 22nd 
October, 1955. Under the provisions of this Ordinance the Delhi 
Development Provisional Authority has been constituted to prevent 
haphazard construction. The present Bill seeks to enact the pro-
visions of the said Ordinance as an Act of Parliament. 
AMRIT KAUR. .. , 
NEW DELHI; 
The 25th .November, 1955. 
9 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill involves expenditure to the Central Government on 
account of the staff and contingencies of the Delhi Development 
Provisional Authority,· the constitution of which is provided for 
UDder Clause30f the Bill. According to the present rough esti--
~ates, the expenditure from the Consolidated Fund on account of 
the Bill is not expected to exceed Rs. 1,17,000/- during the year 
1955-56 and Rs. 5 lakhs during the year 1956-57. 
TO 

• 
EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED 
_ LEGISLATION 
In Clause 19 of the Bill, it is proposed -to delegate to the Delhi 
Development Provisional Authority the powers to make regulations 
to carry out the pur.poses of the Bill. The powers proposed to be 
delegated to the Authority relate to the various items connected 
with the day-to-day administration of the Authority only and do 
not involve any important matters of policy. All local bodies are 
generally vested with such powers. For Administrative conveni-
ence and with a view not to make the Bill unnecessarily cumber-
some, it is proposed to leave the framing of regulations to the 
Authority itself. The delegation of legislative powers is of a normal 
type. 
II 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the control of building operations in Delhi.· 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 of the 
Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the con-
sideration of the Bill. 
(Rajkwnari Amrit Kaur, 
Minister of Health.) 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 