As INTRODUCED IN LOKSAoBRA Ol'r 
Bill No. 65 of 19R2 .. _--_ .... ,._---
TIlE DRUGS AND COSMETICS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1982 
r -
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
BE it enacted by Parliament In the Thirty-third Year of the Republic 
of Indi'B as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be C'Blled the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) 
Act, 1982. 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint . 
• of 184(1. 2. In the Drug .. and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (hereinafter referred to as 
10 
the principal Act),-
(a) for the words and brackets' "Ayurvedic (including Siddha) 
or Unani", wherever they occur, the words "Ayurvedic, 5iddha or 
Unani" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words and brackets "Ayurvedic (including Siddha) 
and Unani", wherever they occur, the word!S "Ayurvedic, ~iddha 8nri 
Unan!" !Shall ~ substituted, 
Short 
title and 
com-
mence-
ment. 
Substitu-
tion of 
certain 
expres-
sions 
by new 
expr. 
slons, 

Amend-
ment of 
MCtJon 3. 
2 
3, In section 3 of the principal Act~­
(4) in clause (a) ,-
(i) for the words ICdisease in human beings, mentioned in, 
and processed and manufactured", the words "disease or disorder 
in human beings or animals, and' ~anufactured" shall be substi- 5 
tuted; 
(ii) for the words and brackets "Ayurvedic • (including 
Siddha) and Unani (Tibb) systems of medicine", the words 
"Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Tibb systems of medicine" shall 
be substituted; 10 
(b) in clause (00), in s1,lb-clause (i), for the words "Ayurved!c 
nnd Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board", the words "Ayurvedic, 
Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board" shall be' sub-
~M~; : 
(c) in clause (aaa), the words ", but does not include soap" 15 
shall be omitted; 
(d) in clause (b) ,-
(1) for sub-clause (i), the following sub-clause shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(i) all medicines for internal or external use of human 
20 
beings or animals and all substances intended to be used 
for or in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of 
any disease or disorder in human beings or animals, including 
preparations applied on human body for the purpose of 25 
repelling insects like mosquitoes;"; 
(2) after sub-clause (ii) , the following sub-clauses shall be 
inserted, namely:-
,I (iii) all substances intended for use as components of 
a drug lncluding empty gelatin capsules; and 
(iv) such devices intended for internal or external use 30 
in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention' of 
disease or disorder in human beings or animals, as may be 
specified from time to time by the Central Government by 
notification in the Official Gazette, after consultation with. 
the Board'''' 35 , , 
(e) in clause (1), for the words "sale and distribution", the words 
"sale or distribution" shall be substituted; 
(f) for clause (h), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
I (h) "pa~ent or proprietary me~cine" means,- 40 
(i) in relation to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Uriani Tibb 
systems of medicine all formulations confaining only such 
ingredients mentioned in the formulae described in the 
authoritative books of Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani Tibb 
systems of medicine specified in the First Schedule, but does 45 
not include a medicine wbich is administered by parenteral 

10K SAffiA • 
to 
THE DRUGS Af"JDCOS1'1ETICS (AMENDHENT) BILL, 1982 
L-To be/As introduced in 10k Sahha 7 
1 • P ag~ e, line .30,-
.m "rlcti tious" mad "rieti tious" 
2. Page 10, - . 
~ line 37, ~-
"Dr, unless ~e alleged offence is suC'b that 
the defeat maY ,be" 
3. Page 12, in the IDargirla;l heading to section 27,-
fill: "sales," read "sale," 
4. Page 16, lines 5 and 6,_ 
!su:. ''Pharmacopia'' uaa. "Pharmacopoeia" 
5. Page 18, lirie 32,-
for "33. ED." ~ "33EED." 
NE~1 DELHI; 
APril "10, 198~2~---,~-:--~ 
V~saltha 10, 1904 (Saka) 

10 
• 
route and also a fonnulation included in the authoritative 
books as specified in clause (a); 
• 
(ii) in relation to any ot~er systems of medicine, a 
drug which is a remedy or prescription presented in a form 
ready for internal or external administration of human 
beings or animals and which is not included in the edition 
of the Indian Phannacopoeia for the time being or any other 
Pharmacopoeia authorised in this behalf by the Central 
Government after consultation with the Drugs Technical 
Advisory Board constituted under section 5;'. 
4. . For the heading under Chapter III, the following heading sltall be 
substituted, namely:-
"IMPORT or DRUGS AND COSMETI'CS". 
5. For section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
15 8ub~tituted namely:-
"9. For the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed to 
be misbranded-
(a) if it is so coloured, coated, powdered or polished that 
damage is concealed or if it is made to appear of better or 
~o greater therapeutic value than it really is; or 
(b) if it is not labelled in the prescribed manner; or 
(c) if its label or container or anything accompanying the 
drug bears any statement, design or device which makes any 
false claim for the drug or which is false or misleading in any 
part icular.". 25 
6. For sections 9A and 9B of the principal Act, the following sections 
.hall be substituted, namely:-
"9A. For the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed 
to be adulterated,-
(a) if it consists, in whole or in part, of any filthy, putrid or 
decomposed substance; or 
(b) if it has been prepared, packed or s,red under in-
sanitary conditions whereby it may have been contaminated 
with filth or whereby ~t may have been rendered injurioUs to 
35 health; or -" /" 'al,f 
Substitu-
tionof 
new 
headinl 
tor 
headin, 
under 
Chapter 
ut 
Subltitu-
tion 
of new 
.ectien 
tor 
.ectfon 
9. 
Misbrand-
ed clrUlL 
Substitu-
tion of 
new II 
.ectlona 
gA, 9B, 9C 
and 9D. 
for 
sectiona 
9A, 
and 
liB. 
Adultera-
ted 
drull. 

Spurious 
drugs. 
Misbran-
ded 
cosmetics. 
Spurious 
cosmetica. 
• 
(c) if its container is composed in whole or in part, ot anY 
poisonous or deleterious sl,lbstance which may render the con-
tents injurious to health; or 
(d) i~ it bears or contains, for purposes of colouring only, 
Ii colour other than one which is prescribed; or 5 . 
(e) if it contains any harmful or toxic substance which may 
render it injurious to health; or 
(f) if any substanqe has been mixed therewith 80 as to reduce 
its qualiiy or streng.th. 
9B. For the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed to to 
be spuriou~ , 
(a) if it is imported under a name which belongs to another 
drug; or 
(b) if it is an imitation of, or is a substitute for, another 
drug or resembles another· drug in a manner likely to deceive 15 
or bears upon it or upon its label or container the name of an-
other drug unless it is plainly and conspicuously marked so '88 
to reveal its true character and its lack of identity with such 
other drug; or 
(c) if the label or container bears the name of an individual iO 
or company purporting to be the manufacturer of the drug, 
which individual or company is fictitious or does not exist; or 
(d) if it has ~n substituted wholly or in part by another 
drug or substance; or 
(e) if it purports to be ttl.:! product of a manufacturer of i5 
whom it is not, truly a product. 
9C. For the purposes of this Chapter, a cosmetic shall be deemed 
to be misbranded-
(a) if it contains a colour which is not prescribed; or 
(b) if it is not labelled in the prescribed manner; or 
(c) if the lahel or container or anything accompanying the 
cosmetic bears any statement which is false or misleading in any 
particular. . 
9D. For the purposes of this Chapter, a cosmetic shall be deemed 
to be spurious,- 55 
(a) if it is imported under a name which belongs to another 
cosmetic; or 
(0) if it is an imitation of, or is a substitute for another cos-,. " 
metic or resembles another cosmetic in a manner likely to . 
deceive or bears upon it or upon its label or container the name 40 
of another cosmetic, unless it is plainly and conspicuoUSly 
marked so as to reveal its true charaCter and it, lack of idenUQ' 
with SUCk~ other cosmet1c~ or 

5 
i 
(c) 1f the label or container bears the name of an individual 
or a company purporting to be the manufacturer of the 
cO'.imetic which indivldual or company is fictitious or does not 
exist; or 
(d) if it purports to be the product of a manufacturer of 
whom it is not truly a product.". 
7. In section 10 of the -principal Act,- Amend-
ment of 
(a) in clause (b), for the words "or misbranded cosmetic", the section 
words "or misbranded or spurious cosmetic" shall be substituted; 10. 
10 (b) in clause (bb), for the word "adulterated", the worda 
''adulterated or spurious" shall be substitutedj 
(c) in clause (d), for the words "the true formula or list of 
ingredients contained in it, in a manner readily intelligible to the 
members of the medical profession", the words "the true formula 
15 or list of active ingredients contained in it together with the quan-
tities thereof" shall be substituted; 
lZO 
lZ5 
35 
45 
(d) the Exptanation shall be omitted. 
8. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Insertion 
inserted, namely: _ of new 
section 
"lOA. Without prejudice to any other provision contained in this 
Ch'apter, if the Central Government is satisfied that the use of any 
drug or cosmetic is likely to involve any risk to human beings or 
animals or that any drug does not have the therapeutic value claimed 
for it or contains ingredients and in such quantity for which there is 
no therapeutic justification and that in the public interest it is neces-
sary or expedient so to do then, that Government may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, prohibit the import of such drug or cos-
metic.". 
t. In section 12 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "after consultation with 
the Board", the words "after consultation with or on the recommen-
dEltion of the Board" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2),-
(i) in clause (a), for the words "and prescribe the form and 
conditions of such Jicences, the authority empowered to issue 
the same, and the fees payable therefor", the words "and pres-
cribe the form and conditions of such licences, the authority 
empowered to issue the same I the fees payable therefor and 
provide for the cancellation, or suspension of such licence in any 
ease where any provision of this Chapter Or the rules made 
thereunder is contravened or any of the conditions subject to 
which the licence is issued is not complied with" shall be subs-
tituted; 
(ii) in clause (cc), for the word, figur8 and letter; 
"section 9B", the word, figure and letter "section 9A" shall 
be subGtituted; 
lOA. 
Power of 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
prohibit 
importdf 
dru;' 
aDd 
cosmetics 
in public 
interest. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
section 
12, 

SubstItu-
tion of 
neW 
sect_ 
fdr 
section 
11. 
Amend-
ment of 
lectlon HI. 
,.' 
(iii) in clause (k), after the words "of imported drugs or 
cOsmetics", the words "including the use of packing material 
which comes into direct contact with the drugs" shall be inser-ted.. , 
10. For section 13 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 5 
substituted, namely:-
"13. (1) Whoever himself or by any other person on his behalf 
imports,-
(a) any drug deemed to be adulterateCl under section 9A 
or deemed to be a spurious drug under section 9B or any spurious 10 
cosmetic referred to in section 9D or any cosmetic of the nature 
referred to in clause (ee) of section 11) shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and a 
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees; 
(b) any drug or cosmetic other than 8 drug or cosmetie 15 
referred to in clause (a), the import of which is prohibited under 
section 10, or any rule made under this Chapter, shall be punish-
able with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, 
Or with both; 20 
(c) any drug or cosmetic in contravention of the provisions 
of any notification issued u~der section lOA, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years 
and with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with 
both. 25 
(2) Whoever having been convicted of an oifence,-
(a) under c1ause (a) or clause (c) of sub-section (1), ill 
again convicted of an offence under that clause, shall be punish-
able with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five 
years and with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, 30 
or with both; . 
(b) under clause (b) o£ sub-section (1), is again convicted 
of an offence under that clause, shall be punishable with im-
prisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with 
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 35 
(3) The punishment provided by this section shall be in addition 
to any penalty to Which the offender may be liable under the pro-
visions of section· 11.". 
11. In section 15 df the principal Act, for the words "of a Presidency 
Magistrate or of a Magistrate of the first class", the words "of a Metro- 40 
politan Magistrate or of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class" shaD 
be substituted 

5 
10 
., 
12. In the heading under Chapter IV, for the word "DRUGS", the words 
"DRUGS AND COSMETICS" shall be substituted. 
13. For sections 17, 17A and 17B of the principal Act, the following 
sections shall be substituted, namely:-
"17. For the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed to 
be misbranded,- . 
(a) if it is so coloured, coated, powdered or polished that 
damage is concealed or if it is made to appear of bettel.' or greater 
, therapeutic value than it really is; or 
(b) if it is not labelled in the prescribed manner; or 
(c) jf its label or container or anything accompanying the 
drug bears any statement, design or device which makes any 
false claim for the drug or which is false or misleading in any 
particular. 
Amend-
ment of 
beading 
under 
Chapter 
IV. 
Subslitu-
tion of 
new 
sections 
for 
sections 
17,17A 
and 1m. 
Misbran-
ded 
drup. 
15 17A. For the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed Adultera-
to be adulterated,-- ted 
druis. 
(a) if it comists in whole or in part, of any filthy, putrid or 
decomposed substance; or 
(b) if it has been prepared, packed or stored under' in-
20 sanitary conditions whereby it may have been contaminated 
with filth or whereby it may have been rendered injurious to 
health; or 
(c) jf its container is composed, in whole or in part, of any 
poisonous or deleterious substance which may render the con-
25 tents injurious to health; or 
(d) if it bears or contains, for purposes of colouring only, a 
colour other than one which is prescribed; or 
(e) if it contains any harmful or toxic substance which 
may render it injurious to health; or 
30 (f) if any substance has been mixed therewith so as to reduce 
its quality or strength. 
17B. For, the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed to Spurioutl 
be .. ..: drugs. sp ........ ous,-
(a) if it is manufactured under a name which belongs to 
35 another drug; or 
(b) if it is an imitation of, or is a substitute for, another drug 
or resembles another drug in a manner likely to deceive or 
bears upon it or upoa its label or container the name of another 

Misbran-
dedcos-
lIletics. 
Spurious 
cosmetics. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
18. 
8 
drug unless it is plainly and conspicuously marked so as to 
reveal its true character and its lack of identity with such other 
drug; or 
(c) if the label or container bears the name of an individual 
or company purporting to be the manufacturer of the drug, 5 
which individual or company is fictitious or does not exist; or 
(d) if it has been substituted wholly or in part by another 
drug or substance; or 
(e) if it purports to be the product of a manufacturer of 
whom it is not truly a product. 10 
17C. For the purposes of this Chapter, a cosmetic shall be deemed 
to be misbranded,-
. (4) if it contains a colour which is not prescribed; or 
(b) jf it is not labelled in the prescribed manner; or 
(c) if the label or container or anything accompanying the 15 
cosmetic bears any f;tatement which is false or misleading in any 
particular. 
17D. For the purposes of this Chapter, a cosmetic shall be deemed 
to be spurious,-
(4) if it is manufactured uncler a name which belongs to 20 
another cosmetic; or 
(b) if it is an imitation of, or a substitute for, another cosme-
tic or resembles another cosmetic in a manner likely to deceive 
or bears upon it or upon its label or container the name of an-
other cosmetic unless it is plainly and conspicuously marked ~o 25 
as to reveal its true character and its lack of identity with such 
other cosmetic; or 
(c) if the label or container bears the name of an individual 
or a company purporting to be the manufacturer of the cosmetic 
which individual or company is fictitious or does not· exist; or 30 
(d) if it purports to be the product of a manufacturer of 
whom it is not truly a product." 
14. In section 18 of the principal Act,-
(a) in clause (4) ,-
(i) in the opening portion, for the words "manufacture for 35 
sale, or sell, Pr stock or exhibit for sale,", the words "manufac-
ture for sale or for distribution, or sell, or stock or exhibit or 
offer for sale," shall be substituted; 
(ii) for sub-clauses (i), (ii) and (iia), the fonowfng-sub-
clauses shall be ·15ubstituted, namely:- 4.0 
"(i) any drug which is not of a standard quality, or is 
misbranded, adulterated or spurious; 
• 

5 
10 
(ii) any cosmetic which is not of a standard qua!tty .. 
Is misbranded or spurious;"; 
(iii) in sub-clause (iii), for the words "the true formula or 
11st of ingredients contained in it in a manner readily intelligible 
to the members of the medical profession", the words "the true 
formula or list of active ingredients contained in it together 
with the quantities thereof" shall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (b), for 'the words "sell, or stock or exhibit for 
sale,", the words "sell, or stock or exhibit or offer for sale," shall be 
IUbstituted; 
(c) in clause (c) ,-
(i) for the words "manufacture for sale, or sell, or atock or 
exhibit for sale,", the words "manufacture for sale or for dis-
tribution, or sell, or stOck or exhibit or 01feto for sale," shall be 
15 substituted; 
20 
(ii) in the second proviso, fur the words "manufactl.re fer 
sale, sale", the words "manufacture for sale or for distribu-
tion, sale, stocking or exhibiting or offering for sale" shall be 
substituted; 
(iti) the Explaftattoft. shall be omitted. 
15. After section 18A of the pr'incipal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"ISB. Every person holding a licence under clause (c) of section 
18 shall keep and maintain such recorsis, registers and other 
documents as may be prescribed and shall furnish to any officer or 
authority exercising any power or discharging any function under 
this Act such information as is required by such offi.cer or authority 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.". 
IuertloD 
of new I 
section 
laB. 
Malnten-
ance of 
records 
BDd 
turnUh-
inI of 
informa-
tion, 
16. In section 19 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in the opening ,Amend-
30 ,..tion, for the wotd "adulterated", the words. "adulterated or spurious" ~~~:~ •. 
shall be substituted. -
17. In section 20 of the princi,pal Act, after sub-section (3), the follow-
ing sub"section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(4) No person who has any financial interest in the import, 
SJ manufacture or sale of drugs or cesmetics shall be appointed to be a 
Government Anal1.yst und!er sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of 
this section.". 
Amend-
ment of 
section 20. 
18. In section 21 of 'the principal. Act, in su~on (4), after the Amend-
words "such authority", the words ", haviog the prescribed qualiftca- met 01 
40 tion'·, shall be inserted. aectiOftIL 

AaIDd-
aent of 
.u0ll22. 
10 
19. In section 22 of the principal Act,-
(1) in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) for clauses (a), (b) and (c), the following clauses shall 
be substituted, namely: - i 
"(a) inspect,- 5 
(i) any premises wherein any- drug or cosmetic II 
being manufactured and the. means employed lfor s18DcI-
ardising and testing the drug or cosmetic; 
(ii) any premises wherein any drug or cosmetic II 
being sold, or stocked or exhibited or offered for saJe. 10 
or distributed; 
(b) take samples of any drug or cosmetic,-
(i) which is being manufactured or being sold or 
is stocked or exhibited or offered tor sale, or is being 
distributed; 15 
(ii) from any person who is in the course of con-
veying, deliv~ring or preparing to deliver such drug or 
cosmetic to a purchaser or a consignee; 
(c) at all reasonable times, with such assistance, if any, 
as he considers necessary ,- 110 
(i) search any person, who, he has reason to 
believe, has secreted about his person, any drug or cos-
metic in respect of which an offence under this Chapter 
has been, or is being, committed; or 
(ii) enter and search any place in which he baa 25 
reason to believe that an offence under this Ch~ter hu 
been, or is being committed; or 
(iii) stop and search any vehicle, vessel or other 
cosveyance which, he has reason to 'believe, is being 
used for carrying any drug or cosmetic in respect of 30 
which an offence under this Chapter has beeh, or 11 
being, committed, 
and order in writing the person in possession of the drug or 
cosmetic in respect of which the oifenf"e has been, or fs 
being, committed, not to dispose of any stock of such drug 35 
or cosmetic for a specified period not exceeding twenty days, 
or cosmetic for a specified period not exceeding twenty days, 
removed by the possessor of the drug or cosmetic, seize the 
stock of such drug or cosmetic and any substance or article 
by means of which the offence has been, or is being, com- 40 
mitted or which may be employed tor the commlssion of 
sueh offence;"; 
(b) in clause (cc), for the words, brackets and letter "In 
any plac~ mentioned in clause (c) If, the words, brackets and 
letter "with any person, or in any place, vehicle, vessel-or other 45 
eonveyance referred to in clause (c)" shall be substituted; 

II of 1818. 
lofl." .. 
5 
10 
11 
'(e) after clause (cc), the following clafISe shall be inserted, 
Dlmely:- .... 
"(eca) require any person to produce any record, regis-
ter, or other document relating to the manufacture for sale 
or for distribution or for stocking or for exhibition for sale 
or for offer for sale or for distribution of any drug. or 
cosmetic in respect of which he has reason to believe that 
an offence under this Chapter has been, or is being, 
committed;"; 
(2) in sub-section (2) ,-
(a.) for the words and ftgures "the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1898", the words and figures "the Code of Criminal 
ProcedW'e, 1973" shall be substituted; 
(0) for the word and figures "section 98", the word and 
15 figures "section 94" shall be substituted; 
(3) after sub-section (2), the 'following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
II (2A) Every record, register or other document seized 
under clause (cc) or proci.uced under clause (cca) shall be 
20 returned to the person, from whom they were seized or who 
produce the same, within a period of twenty days of the date of 
such seizure ot' production, as the caSe may be, after 
copies thereof or extracts therefrom certified by that person, in 
such manner as may be prescribed, have been taken."; 
25 (4) in sub-section (3), after the words "under this Chapter,", 
the words, brackets, letters and ftgure "or refuses to produce any 
record, register or other document when so required under clause 
(cca) of sub-section (1);' shall be inserted. 
29. In section 23 of the principal Act, in clause (b) of sub-section Amend .. 
30 (5) and in sub-section (6), for the words "a Magistrate", the words "a ment of 
Judicial Magistrate" shall be substituted. section 21. 
55 
21. After section 26 of the principal Act, the following section shall lDsertion 
be inserted, namely: - of new 
IleCtion 
"26A. Without prejudice to any other provision contained in 
thil Chapter, if the Central Government is satisfied, fhat the use of 
any drug or cosmetic i"l likely to involve any risk to human beings 
or animals or that any drug does not have the therapeutic value 
claimed or purported to be claimed for it or contains ingredients 
and in such quantity for which there is no therapeutic justification 
and that in the public interest it is necessary or expedient so to do, 
then, that Government may, by notification in -the Official Gazette, 
prohibit the manufacture, sale' or distribution of such drug or cos-
metic .... ; ..... 
28A. 
Power of 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
prohibJt 
manu-
facture, 
etc., of 
dru, 
Ind· 
.-Detlc: 
ta 
pubUl 
Ia""". 

Subltltu .. 
tion of 
new 
lections 
for 
sections 
2'1 and 
2'7A. 
Penalt:v 
for 
manufac-
ture, 
sales, 
etc. of 
cirupin 
contra-
vention 01 
this 
Chapter. 
12 
%2. For sections 27 and 27A of the principal Act, the following 
sections shall be substituted, namely:-
"27. Whoever, himself or by any other person on his behalf, 
manufactures for sale or for distribution, or sells, or stocks or exhi-
. bits or offers for sale or distributes,- 5 
(/I.) any drug deemed to be adulterated under section 17A 
or spurious under section 17B or which when used by any 
.person for or in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation, or preven-
tion of any d.hiease· or disorder is likely to cause his death or is 
likely to cause such harm on his body as would amount to 10 
grievous hurt within the meaning of section 320 o'f the Indian 
Penal Code, solely on account of such drug being adulterated or 45 of 1880. 
spurious or not of standard quality, as the case may be, shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which &hall not be 
less than five years but which may ext~rid to a term of life and 15 
with fine which shall not be less than ten thoU1l8nd rupees; 
(b) any drug-
(i) deemed 10 be adulterated. under section l'rA, but 
not being a drug referred to in clause (0), or 
(ii) without a valid licence as required under clause 20 
(c) of section 18, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term. which shall 
not be less than one year but which may extend to three years 
and with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees: 
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special 25 
reasons to be recorded in the judgment impose a sentence of 
imprisonment for a term of less than one year and of fine of leas 
than five thousand rupees; • 
(c) any drug deemed to be spurious under section 17B, but 
not being a drug referred to in clause (a) shall be punishable 30 
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three 
yeanl but which may extend to five years and with fine Which 
shall not be less than five thousand rupees: 
PrOVided that the Court may, for any adequate and special 
reasons, to be recorded in the judgment, impose a sentence of 35 
imprieonment .for a tenn of less than three years but not less 
than one year; 
(b) any drug, other than a drug referred to in clause (a) or 
clause (b) or clause (c), in contravention of- any other provision 
of this Chapter or any rule made thereunder, shall be punish. 40 
able with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
one year but which may extend to tWQ years and With ~~; 

5 
10 
15 
Provided that the Court may for any adequate and special 
reasons to be rec(lrded in the judgment impose a sentence of 
imprisonment for a term of less than one year. 
27A. Whoever himself or by any other person on his behalf 
manufactures for sale or for distribution, or sells, or stocks or exhi-
bi~ or offers for sale-
(i) any cosmetic deemed to be spurioUs under section 17C 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years and with fine; 
(ii) any cosmetic other than a cosmetic referred to in 
clause (i) above in contravention of any provisions of this 
Chapter or any rule made thereunder shall be punishable with 
imprisonment far a term which may extend to one year or with 
fine which may extend to one thoU6al1d rupees or with both.". 
23. In section 28 !,f the principal Act,-
(a) after the word, figures and letter "section 18A", the words 
and figures "or section 24" shall be inserted; 
(b) for the words "five hundred rupees", the words "one 
thousand rupees" shall be substituted. 
Penalt, 
for 
manufac-
ture, 
sale, etc., 
of ca.-
meticain 
contra-
vention 
of this 
Chapter. 
AmeDd-
!Dent of· 
section 28. 
20 24. After section 28 of the principal Act, the following sections shall Insertion 
of De'If' 
seeUcma 
28A'" 
28B. 
35 
be inserted, namely:-
"28A. Whoever without reasonable cause or eJreuse, contra-
venes the provisions of section l8B shall be punishable with im-
prisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both. 
Penalty 
for not 
keepin, 
docu-
ments, 
etc., and 
for ·non-
disclo-
sure of 
informa-
tion. 
28B. Whoever himself or by any other person on his behalf Peaalt,-
manufactures or sells or distributes any drug or cosmetic in contra- tOr 
vention of the provisions of any notification issued under section 26A. manufac-
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend ture, etc., 
to three years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to of drugs 
five thousand rupees.". :et~- in 
centraveI1-
tion ot 
HCtion 
2BA. 
25. In section 30 of the prinCipal Act,-
(a) for Bub-section (1), the following 
substituted, namely:-
Amend-
sub-section shall be ment ot 
section 
30 • 
.. (1) Whoever having been convicted of an offence,-
(a) under clause (b) of section 27 is again convicted 
of an ~dfence under that clause, shall I;)e punishable with 

• 
Amend-
ment of 
N(:tion 
112. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
32A. 
imprisonment for a 'term which shall not be less than two 
years but which may extend to six years and with tine 
which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees: 
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and 
special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a 5 
sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than two years 
and of fine of Jess than ten thousand rupees; 
(b) under clause (c) of section '}f{, is again convkted of 
an offence under that clause shall be punishable with im-
prisonment for a term which shall not be less than six years 10 
but which may extend to ten years and with fine which 
shall not be less than ten thousand rupees; 
(c) under clause (d) of section 27, is again convicted 
of an offence under that claus~ shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less tlian two 15 
years but which may extend to four years or with fine which 
shall not be less than five thousand rupees, or with both;"; 
(b) in sub-section (IA), for the words "one thousand rupeel", 
the words "two thousand rupees" shall be substituted. 
8. In section 31 of the principal Act,-
(1) in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) for clause (i), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(i) manufacture of any drug deemed to be miSbranded 
under section 17, adulterated under section 17A or spurious 25 
under section 17B; or"; 
(b) in clause (ii) , for the words "manufacture for sale, or 
sale, or stocking or exhibiting for sale,", the words "manufacture 
for sale, or for distribution, sale, or stocking or exhibiting or 
offering 'for sale," shall be substituted; 30 
(2) in sub-section (2), for the words "misbranded or adulterated 
drug, or misbranded cosmetic," the words "misbranded, adulterated 
or spurious drug or misbranded or spurious cosmeti<:," shall be 
substituted. 
27. In section 32 of the principal Act. in sub-section (2), for the 35 
words "a Presidency Magistrate or of' a Magistrate of the first class", the 
, words "a Metropolitan Magistrate or of a Judicial Magistrate of the first 
class" shall be substituted. 
28. In section 32A of the principal Act, for the words, brackets and 
figures "in sub·section (1) of section 351 of the Code of Criminal Proce- 40 lot1898. 
dure, 1898", the words, brackets and figures "in sub-sections (1), (2) and 3ar 197"-
(3) of section 319 of the Code «;It Criminal Procedure, 1973" shall be 
substituted. 
• 

5 
10 
15 
20 
so 
35 
45 
t,5 
29. I~ section 33 of the principal Act,- Amen4. 
d "afte sult· 'th ment of (a) in sub-section (1), for the wor s r con atlon Wl section 
the Board" the words "after consultation willi; or on the recommen- 3S. 
I 
dation of, the Board" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2) I"":"' 
(1) in clause (dd), for the word, tigures and letter "section 
17B", the word, figures' and letter "section 17A" shall be substi-
tuted; 
(2) in clause (e),-
(i) for the words "for the manufacture for sale", the 
words "for the manufacture for sale or for diBtribution'" 
shall be substituted; 
(ii) after the words "authority empowered to issue the 
same", the words ", the qualifications of such authority" 
shall be inserted; 
(iii) the words "and provide for the cancellatiOn or 
suspension of such licences in any case where any provision 
Of this Chapter or the rules made thereunder is contravened 
or any of the conditions subject to which they are issued is 
not complied with" shall be inserted at the end; 
(~ after clause (e), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:-
" (ee) prescribe the records, registers or other documents 
to be kept and maintained under section lSB; 
(eea) prescribe the fees for the inspection (for. the 
purposes of grant or renewal of licences) of premise" 
wherein any. drug or cosmetic is being or is proposed to be 
manufactured; 
(eeb) prescribe the'manner in which copies are to be 
certified under sub-section (2A) of section 22;"; 
(4) in clause (i), after the words "other containers of 
drugs or cosmetics", the words "including the use of packing 
material which comes into direct contact with the drugs" shall 
be inserted; 
(5) in clause (n), after the words "of Inspectors", the words 
"and the qualifications of the authority to which such Inspectors 
shall be subordinate" shall be inserted. 
30. In section 33C of the principal Act,- AmeDd· 
mtDt of 
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "Ayurvedie aDd Unani HCticm 
DftIp Teclmical Advisory Boarcf", the words "Ayurvedie, Siddha nc. 
and Unani Drugs Teehnieal Advisory Board" shall be substituted; 
(b) in 8ub-eection (2) ,-
(i) for clause (iii)., the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
'.(iii) the principal ofticer dealing with Indian systems 
of medicine m the Ministry of Health, ex-officiO;"; 

r6 
(ii) for clause (vii.i) , the following clause shall be substi-
tuted namely:-
"(viii) four persons to be nomiDatecl by the Central 
Government, .two from amGDgst the members of tbe Ayur-
veda Pharmacopia Committee, one from amongst the mem- 5 
bers of the UlliIlIli 'PhalJn8.Gopia Cqa.b~1Iee Imd one erom 
amoapt the memlters of t'he Siddha PhannlU:opoeia Com-
mittee;"; 
(iii) for clauses (xi) and (xii), the following clauses shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"(.r~~ OIIle teacher ;m GUD,apadam to be nominated It, 
tII\e Central Governmtat; 
(.ria) three persons, one each to represent the Ayur-
vedic, Siddha and. Un~ drug iI¥lustry, to be nominated by 
10 
tbe Central Government; 15 
'rii.i) three persons, one eaell from· ....,ng the practi-
tioners of Ayurvedic,Siddha and Unani Tibb systems of 
medicine to be nominated by tbe Central Government.". 
Substitu- 31. For sections 33D and 3lE of the principal Act, the following sec-
tion of tkms shall be substituted, namely:- •• 20 
Dew 
eec:Uona 
for 
sections 
S3D and 
33& 
The 
Ayur-
vedic, 
Siddha 
and 
Unani 
Drugs 
Consul-
tative 
Commit-
tee. 1'" 
MIbNald. 
eel c:IWIs. 
"33D. (1) The Central Government may constitute an Advisory 
Committee to be called the Ayurveciic, Siddha and Un ani, Drucs 
Consultativo Committee to advise the Central Government, the State 
Governments and tbe Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unanl Drugs Tecbnical 
Advisory Board on 9.ny matter for the purPOSe of securing unifor- 25 
mity throughout India in the administratiOn of this Act in so far as 
it relates to Ayurvedic, Siddba or UnaDoi drugs. 
(2) The Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Dn'lS Consultative 
CollUDittee shall consist of :two persons to be nominated by the 
Central Govt:rnment as representatives of that Government and not 30 
more than one representative of each state to be nominated by the 
State Government concerned. 
(3) The Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative 
Committee shall meet when required to do so by the Central Gov-
ernment and shall regulate its own procedure. 35 
33E. For the purposes of this Chapter, an Ayurvedic, Siddha or 
Unani drug shall be deemed to be misbranded-
(a) if' it is so coloured, coated, powdered or polished that 
damage is concealed, or if it is made to appear of better or 
greater therapeutic value than it really is; or 40 
(b) if it is not labelled in the prescribed manner; or 
(c) if its label or container or anything accompanying the 
drilg bears any statement, design or device which makes ... 

l' 
false claim for the drug or which Is false or misleading in any 
particular. ' 
33EE. For the purpoSes of this Chapter, an Ayurvedic, Siddha Multer .. 
or TJnani drug shall be deemed to be adulterated,- ted mil. 
5 (a) if it consists, in whole or in part, of any filthy, putrid 
or decomposed substance; or 
(b) if it has been prepared, Plicked or stored under iJisani-
tary conditions whereby it may have been contaminated. with 
filth or whereby it may have been rendered injurious to 
10 health; or ' 
(c) if its container is composed, in whole or in part, of any 
poisonous or deleterious substaI\ce which may render the con-
:tents injurious to health; or 
(d) if it bears or contains, for PUl'f?Oses of colourint; only, 
15 a colour other than one which is prescribed; or 
20 
(e) if it contains any harmful or toxic aubstance which 
may. render it injurious to health; or 
(1) if any substance has been mixed therewith so as to 
reduce its quality or strength. 
Ezplanation ....... For the purpose of clause (a), a drug shall 
not be deemed to consist, in whole or in part, of any decomposed 
substance only by reason of the fact that such decomposed 
substance is the result of any natural decomposition of the drug: 
Provided that such decomposition is not due to any negli-
gence ,on the part of the manufacturer of the drug or the dealer 
thereof and that it dees not render the drug injurious to, health. 
33EEA. For the purposes of this Chapter, an Ayurvedic, Sidtlha Spurioua 
or Unani drug shall be deemed to be spurious- drup. 
(4) if it is solei, or offered or exhibited for sale, under a name 
30 . which belo:ngs to another drug; or 
(b) if it is an imitation of, or is a substitute for, another 
drug or resembles another drug in a manner likely to deceive, 
or bears upon it or upon its label or container 'the name of 
another drug, unless it is plainly and conspicuously marked so 
35 as to reveal its true character and its lack of identity with such 
other drug; or 
(c) if the label or container bears the name of an individual 
or company pult>Orting to be the manufacturer of the drug, 
which ftldividual or Company is fictitious or doe;s not exist; or 
(d) if it bas been substituted wholly or in part by any 
other drug or substance: or 
(e) if it purports to be the product of a !nanufacturer dt 
whom it 18 not truly a product. 

Be,ula-
tion of 
manufac-
tun 'lor 
_)eof 
AyurYe-
dic, Sid-
dha ed 
UDaDi 
drup. 
Prohibi-
tion of 
manu-
facture 
and sale 
of cer-
tain 
Ayur-
vedic. 
Siddha 
and Una-
nJ drulB, 
Power 
of Cen-
tral Gov_ 
ernment 
to prohi-
bit IDUlU-
facture, 
etc., of 
A.yvrVe-
die, Sid-
dha or 
Unani 
drQ,p 
in pub-
lic Inter-
en. 
r ,"" 18 ., 
33EEB. No person shall manufacture for sale or for distri'6ution 
any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unant drug excep.t in acoordance with 
such standards, if any, as may be prescribed in relation to that drug. 
! 
33EEC. From such date as the State GovernmaDt may, by 
notification in the OfRcial Gazette, specify in this behalf, no perscm, 5 
either by himself or by any other person on his behalf, shall-
(a) manufacture for sale or for distribution-
(i) any misbranded, adulterated or spur.ious Ayurvedic: 
Siddha or Unani drug; . 
(ii) any patent or proprietary medicine, unless there is 10 
displ1lyed in thepresc:!ribed manner on the label or con-
tainer thoceof the true list of aU the ingredients contained 
in it; and 
(iii). any Ayunredic, Siddha or Unani .drug in contra-
vention of any of the provisions of this Chapter or any rule 15 
made thereunder; 
(b) sell, stock or ,exhibit or offer for aale 1»" distribute any 
Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug which haa been manufactured 
in eontravention of any of the provisioIl1l of this Act, or. any rule 
made ther.eunder; 20 
(c) manufacture for sale or for distribution, any Ayur-
vedic, Siddha Or Unani drug, except under,ana in accordance 
with the conditions of, a licence issued for such purpose under 
this Chapter by the prescribed' authority: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to !:I 5 
-V didyas and H1i1cims who manufacture Ayurvedic, Siddha or 
Unani drug for the use of their own patients: 
Provided further that nothing in this section shall apply to 
the manufacture, subject to theprellC~ condltions, of smaI1 
quantities of any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug for the go 
purpose of examination, test or analysis. . 
33. ED. Without pre:jud.ice to any other proviaion -eontained in 
this Chapter, if the Central Government is satisfied on .the basis of 
any evidence or other material available before it that the use of 
any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug is likely to inwalve any risk 35 
to human beings or animals or that any such drug does not haye the 
therapeutic. value claimed or purported to be -claimed for it and that 
in the public interest it is necessary or eKpedient 80 to do then, that 
·Government may,by notification in the 0ftIclal~, prohibit 
the manufacture, sale or distribution of such t\rug.". 

5 
10 
20 
, 
3°' 
• 
-~ 
n 
35 
[l 
~' ·1 
f:] . 
:~ 
32. m section 33F of the principal Act, after sub-lection . (2), the 
followinl sub-section shall be i1'Iserted, namely:-
"(3) No person who has any financial interest in· the manu-
facture or sale of any drug shall be appointed to be a Government 
Analyst under this section.". 
Amend. 
ment of 
lection 
13F. 
33. For sections 33-1 and 33J of the principal Act, the following sec- Sublti-
tions shall be substituted, namely:- tutlon of 
new aec:. 
tiona for 
.ections 
33-1 and 
W. 
"31-1. WAoever himself or by any other person on his behalf-
(1) manufactures for sale or for distribution,-
peDlllty 
for manu-
facture. 
sale, etc., 
of Ayur-
vedic. 
Si(\dha 
(a) any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug-
(i) deepied to be adulterated under section 33EE, or 
(ii) without a valid licence as required under clause 
(c) of section 33EEC, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one year and with fine which shall not be less 
than two thousand rupees; 
(b) any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug deemed to be 
spUtious under section 33EEA, shall be punishable with im-
prisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year 
but which mat' extend to three years and with fine which 
shall not be less than five thousand rupees: 
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and 
special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a 
sentem!e of imprisonment for a term of less ·than one year 
and of fine of less than five thousand rupees; or 
(2) contravenes any other provisions o~ this Chapter or 
of section 24 as appUed by section 33H or any rule made under 
thia Chapter, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three montha and with fifte which shall 
not he less than five hundred rupees. 
39J. Whoever having been convicted of an offence,-
(a) under clause ,(a) of sub-section (1) of section 33-1 is 
again cenvicteo. of an o1faBce under that clause, shaH be punish-
able with imprisonment for a term. which may extend to two 
years and with fine which shall not be less than two thousand 
rupeee; 
(b) under· clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 33-1 is 
again convicted of an offence under that clause, shall be punish-
able with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
two. years but which may extend to six years and with fin. 
which shall not be less ~han five thousand rupees: • 
or :unani 
drUg in 
contra· 
vention 
of tb1J 
Chapter. 
Penalty 
for sub-
sequent 
otrences. 

Amend-
ment of 
sectlon 
UN. 
20 
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special 
reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose ."1!!'llteDce of 
imprisonment for a term of less than two years and of fine of 
. less than five thousand rupees; 
(c) under sub-section (2) of section 3;J-I is again convicted 5 
of an offence under that sub-section, shall be punishable. with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and 
with fine which shall not be less than one thousand rupees.". 
34. In section 33M of the principal Act,-
(0) in sub-section (1), the words, brackets, figures and letter 10 
"with the previous sanction of tht' authority specified under sub-
section (4) of section 33G" shall be inserted at the end; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "of a Presidency Magls-
trate or of a Magistrate of the first class", the words "of a Metr0-
politan Magistrate or of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class" shall I!, 
be substituted. 
35. In section 33N ot the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), in the opening portion, for the words 
Clafter consultation with the Board", the words "after consultation 
with, or on the recommendation of, the Board" shall be substituted; 120 
(b) in sub-section (2) ,-
(1) in clause (e) ,-
(i) after the words "or Unani r\rugs,'\ the words "and 
for sale df processed Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drUgs," 
shall be inserted; 
(ii) the words· Cland provide for the cancellation or 
suspension of such licences. in any case where any provision 
of this Chapter or rules made .thereunder is contravened or 
any of the conditions subject to which they are issued is not 
125 
complied with" shall be inserted at the end; go 
(2) for clause (f), the following clause shall be substituteil, 
namely:- . 
U (f) prescribe the conditions to be observed in the 
~cldng of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs including the 
use of packing material which comes into direct contact with 35 
the drugs, regulate the mode of labelling packed drugs and 
prescribe the matters which shall or shall not be included 
in. such labels;"; 
. (S) after clause (g), the follOwing clauses shan be inserted, 
name1y:- f; I 40 
II (gg) prescribe under clause (d) of section 33EE the 
colour or colours which an Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani 
drug may beRr or contain for purposes of colouring; 
(gga) prescribe the standards for Ayurvedic, Sfddha or 
Unani dru,n; under ~ectioJl 33EEB:". 45 

50t 1898. 
tof 19'14. 
5 
10 
20 
36. After section 34A of the principal Act, the following section shall lnHr-
be inserted, namely: _ Uon of 
new nc-
tion 
34AA. 
"34M. Any Inspector exercising powers under this Act or the Penalty 
rules made thereunder, who,- for vex-
atious 
(a) without reasonable ground of Susplclon searches 
place, vehicle, vesae! or other conveyance; or 
search any or 1181-
(0) vexatiously and unnecessarily searches any person; or 
(c) vexatiously and unnecessarily seizes any drug or cos-
metic, or any substance or article, or any record, register, docu-
ment or other material object; or 
(d) commits, ns such Inspector, any other act, to the injury 
of any person without having reason to believe that such act is 
required for the execution of his duty, 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees." . .. 
37. In section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the 
words. 
"it shall be lawful for the Court before which the conviction takes place 
to cause", the words "the Court before which the conviction takes place 
shall, on application made to it by the In:!(,)ector, cause" shall be sub-
stituted. 
38. In section 36 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words and figures lithe Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1898", the words and figures lithe Code of Criminal Procedure, 19'13" 
shall be substituted; 
(0) for the words "any Presidency Magistrate or any Magis-
zure. 
Amend-
ment of 
sectiOQ· 
U. 
AmeQd-
met of 
IICt10n 
38. 
25 trate of the first class", the words "any Metropolitan Magistrate or 
any J.udicial Magistrate of the first class" shall be substituted. 
39. After section 36 of the principal Act, the following section sball IDIer-
be inserted, namely:- tJon Of new IJ8C.o 
tlon IIA. 
2 ot 19J4. 30 
"36A. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Crimi-
nal Procedure, 1973, all offences under this Act, purrlshaole with 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years, other than an 
offe,nce under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 33-1, shall be 
tried in a summary way by a .Tudicial Magistrate of the first class 
specially empowereci. in this behalf by the State Government or by 
a Metropolitan Magistrate ann the provisions of sections 262 to 265 
(both inclusive) of the said Code shall, as far as may be, apply to 
such trial: 
CertaJn 
offeDceI 
to be trl-
ed BUm-
marllY. 
35 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
38. 
Amend:-
ment of 
Firat 
Sche-
dule. f 
Tr~ 
toIT pro-
vtsion. 
Provided that, in the case of any conviction in a sun:unary trial 
under this section, it shall be lawful for the Macis~ to pas& a 
8~tence of imprisonment for a term not eXt:eeding one year: 
Provided further that when at the commencement of, or in the 
course of, a summary trial under this section it ap~ars to the 
Magistrate that the nature of the case is such that a sentence of 5 
imprisonment for a term exceeding one year may have to be passed 
or tl:aat it is, for any other reaIOll, undesirable to try the case sum-
marily, the Magistrate shall, after hearing the parties, record an 
order to that effect and thereafter recall any witness who has been 
eDDlined and ~d to hear or rehear the ease in the manner 10 
provided by the said Code.". 
.. In section 3S of the principal Act, for the words "and if before 
the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the successive sessions 
aforesaid", the words "and if, before the expiry of tlie session irmne-
diately follOwing the session or the successi~e sessions aforesaid" shaD 15 
be substituted. 
fl. In the. First Schedule to the prin~t,-
(a) for the heading "A.-AYURVEDIC (INCLUDING SmDRA) sYS'l'EM", 
the heading "A.-AYURVEDIC AND SIDDHA SYSTEMS" shall be substituted; !ZO 
('b) for the heading ,iB.-UNANI (TIBB) SYSTEM" the heading 
"B.-UNAtfI TIn SYSTEK" shall be substituted. 
42. (1) Until the constitution of the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani 
Drugs Technical Advisory Board in accordance with the provisions of 
the princi?al Act, as arn,ended by this Act, the Ayurvedic . and Unani 125 
Drugs Technical Advisory Board constituted in accordance with the pro-
visions of the principal Act and functioning immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the AyurvecUc, Siddha 
and Unani Drugs Technical Mvisory Board ccmstituteo. in accerdance 
with the provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act and.;) 
shall continue to function as if this Act had not been passed. "" 
·p.t 
(2) On the constitution of the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs 
Technical Advisory Board in accordance with the r.n'Ovisions of the 
principal Act, as amended by this Act, every person nominated as a mem- . 
ber of the Ayurvedic and. Unani Drugs Technical AdviMryBoard, in ~ 
accordance with the provisions of the principal Act, ani holdine oftice ;)J 
as such member immediately before such constitution shall be deemed 
to have vacated his office .. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, r~tes the import into, manu-
facture, distribution and sale of drugs and. cosmetics in the country. 
The problems of adulteration of drugs and also of production of spurious 
andsu)).standar.d drugs are posing serious threat to the health of the 
community. It is, therefore, considered neeessary to amend the Drugs 
and CoImetiaJ Act, so as to impose more stringent penalties on the anti-
social elements indulging in the man~acture or sale elf aduUerated or 
spurious drugs or drugs not of standard quality which are likely 
to caus~ neath or grievous hurt to the user. This owortunity is 
also being availed of to incorporate certain other provisions on the other 
aspects of effective control on the manufacture, distribution, sale of rtrugs 
aDdo08metics on the basil of experience gained in the working of the 
Act. 
2. Some of the important proposals envisaged are set out below:-
(1) (a-) Widening of the definition of the expression 'cosmetics' 
so as to bring within its scope 'toilet soaps' in order to exercise con-
trol over such soaps which may contain harmful ingredients like 
hexachlorophene [vide clause ,3 (c) ] ; 
(b) The definition of the expression 'drug' to be expanded to 
eJilable control being eRrcised over the components df drugs includ-
ing empty gelatine capsules and also devices which are intended for 
internal or external use in the dia,gnosis Ol' treatment of diseases in 
human beings or animals [vide clause 3 (d)]; 
(c) Widening of the scope of the expression 'patent or pro-
prietary medicble' so as to include patent or proprietary mediclnes 
which relate to Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani Tibb q.tems of medi-
cines but not including such medicines as are administered by 
puenteral (i.e. by means of injections) route [vide clause 3(1)]. 
-- (2) Incorporation of a new provision for the purpose of defining 
oertein terms like 'spurious drugs' and 'spurious cosmetics' and 
making of suita'ble consequential amendments 'In. the definitions cif 
other expressions like 'misbranded drugs', 'adulterated drugs' and 
'misbranded cosmetics'. Analogous provisions of a Uke nature are 
also to be included in reipect of drugs relating to AYUrVeda, Siddha 
or Unani Tibb systems of medicines [vide clauses 6, 13 and 31], 
(3) NeW ,-provisicms to be imorporated to empower the Central 
Government ~ prohibIt import or manufaetl.ure of dl'Uil and 
cosmetics in the public interest where that Goveroment is satisfted 
that the use of any dmg or cosmetic is likely to involve any risk 
to human beings or animals or where the d.ru&' does not have any 
theraJ:?6utic justification [vide clauses 8 and 21]. 
(4) Insertion CYf a mandatOry provision so as to make it obli-
,atory for any person who is a holder of a licence to maintain sueh 

records, registers and other documents as may be prescribed and 
to produce them to the concerned authority if and when required 
[vide clause 15]. 
(5) Provision to empower the Inspector to stop and search any 
vehicle, vessel or other conveyance which be has reason to believe 
is being useci for carrying any drug or cosmetic in respect of which , 
an o1fence under the Act is bt!ing committed [vide clause 191. 
(6) Enhancement of the quantum of punishment for offences 
relating to the manufa<:ture or sale of adulterated, spurious drugs 
or drugs not of a standard quality which are l.ikely toC8uae death 
or grievous hurt to the user. Penalties provided in respect of other 
offences are to be revised on a more rational basis. 
(a) The proposed scale of punishment in respect of the 
first offence shall be as set out below [vide clause 22]: 
(i) imprisonment for not less than fiVe years which may 
extend to life and with fine of not less than rupees teD 
thousand for the manufacture and sale of adulterated or 
spurioUs cirugs or drugs not of standard quality which are 
likely to cause death or harm on the I.:>Btient's body as would 
amount to grievous hurt; 
(ii) imprisonment 'for not less than one year which 
may extend to three years and fine of not less than rupees 
five thousand for manufacture and s~ of any adulterated 
drug or manufacture and sale of drugs without a valid 
licence; 
(iii) imprisonment for three years which may extend to 
five years and with fine of not less than rupees five 'thousand 
for manufacture or sale of spurious drugs; 
(iv) imprisonment for other offences shan be not less 
than one year which may extend to two years and with fine. 
(b) The proposed scale of punishment for subsequent 
offences shall be as set out below [vide clause 25J-
(i) imprisonment for not less than two years which may 
extend. to six years and with.fine of not less than rupees ten 
thousand for manufacture and sale of any adulterated drul 
or manuf~cture and sale of drugs without a valid licence; 
r 
<ii) imprisonment for not less ?tan six years which may 
extend to ten years 'Bnd with fine of not less than rupees 
ten thousand for manufacture and sale of a spurious drug; 
(iii) imprisonment for a term for not less than two 
years which may extend to tour years and with fine of not 
less than rupees one thousand or with both for other 
offences . 
. (7) Provision to be made in section sac to give representations 
to . experts in the Ayurved.ic, Siddha and Vnani jyslems of medicines 
on the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory 
Board [vide clause 30]. 

!:I5 
(8) Another proposal relates to the constitution of an Advilory 
Committee to be called Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs CoIllUl-
tative Committee to advise the Central Government, the State 
Governments and the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Techni-
cal Advisory Board on any matter intended to secure unifonnity 
throughout India in the administration of the Act. The Committee 
ahall consist of two persons to be nominated by the CentralGevvn· 
ment and one each by the State Governments [uicle elaUie 31]. 
(9) Punishments for manufacture, sale, etc. of Ayurvedic, 
Siddha or Unani drugs in contravention of the provisions of the 
Act are sought to be enhanced [vide clause 33]. 
(a.) The proposed scale cif punishments for the ftm oft'ence 
shall be as set out below-
(i) imprisonment up to one year or with 1lne of not _ 
than rupees one thousand for the manufactijre of adnl"" 
ed, Ayurvedic, Siddba and Unani drugs or its manuf:ac_ 
without a valid licence; 
(ii) imprisomnent for one year which may extend to 
three yeaM and flne of not less than rupees five thouaand 
for the manufacture of spurious, Ayurvedic, SkMha .p 
Unani drugs; 
(iii) imprisonment for three moaths and ftne of aotlell 
than. rupees five thousand for other offeoces. 
(0) The proposed scale 01 punishment for SUbsequent 
offences shall be as set out below-
(i.) imprisonment for a tenn which may extend to two 
years and with fine of not less than rupees two thoUSlJlll fbi' 
otfences of manufacturing, sale or distribution of any 
Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug; 
(ii) imPx:isonment for two years which may extend to 
six years and with fine of not less than rupees five thousaDd 
for manufacturing Cif. any spurious Ayurvedic, Siddha or 
Unani drug or sale thereof; 
(iii) imprisonment for six months and with fine of 
rupees one thousand for other offences. 
(10) A new prOvision to be made to provide for summary trial 
in case of offences where the penalty is not more than three yeuw 
imprisonment [vide clause 39]. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. The above apvt, the 
other amendments sought to be eftecte~ are of a general or consequential 
nature. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 2~ April, 1982. B. SHANKARANAND. 

FINANCIAL MEMORAND'U14 
,;,;. . "J ~ . 
.. .. ClaUse 30 of the Bin contemplates the broad basing of the Ayurvedlc 
and Uriani .Drugs Technical Advisory Board. It is proposed that the 
Central Government will nominate the Experts in accordance with the 
JY1evant provisions of the Bill. Their travelling and odai~y allpwance 
for attending the meetings of the Board will have to be met. 
, 2. .. Clause 31 of the Bill provides that Central Government may 
constitute an Advisory Committee to be called the Ay~rvedic, Siddha . 
anq. Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board on any matter intending to 
Secure uniformity throughout India in the administration of this Act in 
sO tar·'aS it relates to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani Drugs. Further the 
!Sm ·contemplates that Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drug Consultative 
Committee shall consist of two persons to be nominatea by the Gentral 
Gov~ent as representatives of the Government and not more than 
one, representative of each State to be nominated by the State Govern-
ment concerned. Xhe TA and ·DA of the Central Government nomineel 
will have to be met . 
.... · .. 8. A recurring expenditure of about Rs. 1,00,000/- (Rupees one lakh) 
on both counts as well as in salary of staff appointed to serve these Com-
mittees is estimated to be incurred. 
~; ' .. ,., . 
4. No other provisions of the Bill involve any other expenditure of 
~~llI'ingor non .. recurring nature 'trom out of the Consolidated Fund of 
~, 
'- ~ '," 
..... 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to amend section 12 of the principal Act, 
to empower the Central Government to provide for the cancellation, 
or suspension of licences in cases where any· provisions of Chapter ill 
of the Act or the rules made thereunder are contravened or any of' the 
conditions subject- to which the licence is issued, is not complied with. 
The clause further empowers the Central Government to frame rules 
tor prescribing the conditions to be observed in the use of packing 
material which comes into direct contact with the drugs, 
2. Clause 29 of t~ Bill proposes to amend section 33 of the principal 
Act and empowers the Central Government to frame rules, inter aZi4, 
for prescribing qualifications of the authority. empowered to issue tile 
licence, providing for the cancel1atior .. or suspension of lIcences in- cases 
where any provision of Chapter IV of the principal Act or the rules 
made thereunder are contravened or any of the conditions subject to 
which they are issued, are not complied with, prescribing the recorda, 
register or other documents to be kept and maintained under section 
18B, prescribing the fees for the inspection of premises jor the purpose. 
of grant or renewal of licences and the manner in which copies are to 
be certified under sub-section (2A) of section 22. 
3. Clause 35 of the Bill amends section 33N of the principal Act and 
empowers the Central Governu1ent to frame rules, i'l}ter alia, to cancel 
or suspend licences in cases where any of the provisions of Chapter IVA 
or rules made thereunder are contravened or any of the conditions 
lubject to which the licences are issued are not complied with, to 
prescribe the conditions to be observed in the packing of Ayurvedic, 
Siddha and Unani drugs including the use of packing material which 
comes into direct contact with the drugs, to prescribe the colour or 
colours which Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug may contain for purposes' 
of colouring under clause (d) of section 33EE and to prescribe the 
standards lor Ayurvedic, Siddha or Un.an:i drugS under section 33EEB, 
~. The matters with respect to which the rules may be'made are 
Inatters of procedure or detail. The delegation of legislative power w, 
therefore, of a normal character. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS ACT, 1940 
(23 OF 1940) 
.. • • • .. 
3. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
conteXi;-
(c) "Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drug" includes all 
mediCines intended for internal or external use for or in the diag-
nosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of disease in hwnan 
beings, mentioned in, and processed and mal1ufactured exclusively 
1h accordance with the formulae described in, the authoritative 
bOoks of Ayurvedic (including Siddha) and Unani (Tibb) systems 
~t:riled1cine, specified in the First Schedule; 
(aa.) "the Board" means-
(i) lin relation to Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani 
drug, the Ayurvedic and Unani Drugs Technicaf Advisory 
Board constituted wader section 33C; and 
• • • • .. 
(4aa) "cosmetic" means any article intended to be rubbed, 
poured, sprinkled or sprayed on, or introduced into, Or otherwise 
applied to, the human body or any part thereof for cleansing, beauti-
fying, promoting attractiveness, or altering the appearance, and 
includes any article intended fur use as a component of cosmet2ic, 
but does not include soap; 
(b) "drug" includes-
(i) all medicines for internal or external USe of human 
bem.gs or animals and all substances intended to be used for or 
ta u.e dlagBesis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of disease 
in human beings or animals; and 
• .. • • • 
~f) "manufacture" in relation to any drug or cosmetic includes 
any process or part of a process fur making, altering, ornamenting, 
ftrlishing, packing, labelling, breaking up or otherwise treating or 
a~opting any drug or cosmetic with a view to its sale and distribu-
tion but does not include the compounding or dispensing of any 
drug, or the packing of any drug or cosmetic, in the ordinary c;:ourse 
of retail business; and "to manufacture" shall be construed accord-
ingly; 
.. • • • • 
(h) "patent or proprietary medicin!" means a drug which is a 
remedy or prescription presented in a form ready for internal or 
. external administration of human beings or animals and which lis not 
included in the edition of the Indian pharmacopoeia for the time 
being or in any other pharmacopoeia authorised in this behalf by tbe 
Central Government after consultation with the Board; 
• • • .. .. 
18 

• ... 
.!! 29 
CHAPTER ill 
iMPoRT OF DRUGS 
• '" • 
9. For the purposes of this Chapter a drug shall be deemed to be mis-
branded-
(a.) if it is an imitation of, Or sUbstitute for, or resembles in a 
manner likely to deceive, another drug, or bears upon it or upon its 
label or container the name of another drug, unless it is plainly and 
conspicuously marked so as to reveal its true character and its lack 
of identity with such other drug; or 
(b) if it purports to be the product of a place or country of 
which it is not truly a product; or 
(c) if it is imported under a name which belong. to another 
drug; or 
(d) if it is so coloured, coated, powdered or polished that damrgo 
Is concealed, or if it is made to appear of better or greater thera-
peutic value than it really is; or 
(e) if jt :is not labelled in the prescribed manner; or 
(f) if its label or container or anything accompanying the c:Iru& 
bears any statement, design or device which makes any false claim 
for the drug or which is false or misleading in any particular; or 
(g) if the label or container bears the name of an individual or 
company purporting to be the manufacturer or producer of the cinIg, 
which individual or company is fictitious or does not exist 
. 
9A. For the purposes of this Chapter, a cosmetic shall be deemed to 
be misbranded-
(a) if it is an imitation of, or a substitute for, or resembles in a 
manner likely to deceive, another cosmetic; or 
(b) if it purports to be the product of a place or COWltry at 
which it is not truly a product; or 
(c) li.f it contains a colour which is I?-ot prescribed; Or 
(d) if it is imported under a name which belongs to another 
cosmetic; or 
(e) if it is not labelled in the prescribed manner; or . 
(f) if its label or container bears the name of an individual or 
company purporting to be the manufacturer or producer 01 .. 
cosmetic which individual or company is fictitious or dOet not exMt; 
or 
(g) it the label or container bears any statement whWh • taJM 
or misleading il). any particular. 
9B. FOl1 the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed tQ be 
tdulterated-
(a) if it consists, in whole or in part, of any filthy, putrid or 
decomposed substance; or 
MilbnD-
ded 
cosme-
tica. 
AduJ1e 
rated 
drup. 

Prohibi-
tion of 
import 
of cer-
taiD 
dru,. Or 
cosme. 
tics. 
Power ". 
of CaD-
tral Clov. 
ernment 
to make 
,J'U1ea. 
30 
(b) !if it has been prepared, packed or stored under insanitary: 
conditions whereby it may have been contaminated with filth or 
whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health; or 
(c) if its container is composed, in whole or in part, of any 
poisonous or deleterious substance which may render the contents 
injurious to health; or 
(d) if it bears or contains, for purposes of colouring only, a 
colour other than one which is prescribed; or 
(e) if any substance has been-
(i) mixed Or packed therewith so as to reduce its quality or 
strength; or 
(ii) substituted wholly or in part therefor. 
Ezplanation.-For the purpose of clause (a), a drug shall not be 
deemed to consist, in whole or in part, of any decomposed substance only 
by reason of the fact that such decomposed substance is the result of 
any natural. decomposition of the drug within the period, if any. specified 
on the label of the drug within which the drug is to be used: 
Proyided that such decomposition is not due to any negligence, on the 
part of the manufacturer of the drug or the importer or the dealer 
thereof and that it does not render the drug injurious to health. 
10. From such date as may be fixed by the Central Government by 
notification in the Official Gazette in this behalf,' no person shall 
impo~ . - .... ~ 
I, , . 
• • • • • 
(b) any misbranded drug or misbranded cosmetic; 
(bb) any adulterated drug; 
• • • • • 
(d) any patent or proprietary medicine, unless there -is dis-
played in the prescribed manner on the label or container thereot 
the true fonnula or list of ingredients contained in it, in a manner 
readily intelligible to the members of the medical ·profession; 
• • • • • 
Exp14714tion.-The formula or list ·of ingredients mentioned in clause 
(cI) -shall be deemed to be true and a sufficient compliance with that 
lUb-clause if, Without disclosing a full and detailed recipe of the ingre-
dients, it indicates correctly all potent or poisonous substances contabled 
therein together wi.th an approximate statement of ~e composition of 
the medicine. 
• • • • • 
12. (1) The Central Government may, after consultation with the 
Board and after previous publication by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of 
thII Chapter; 

31 
Provided that consultation with the Board may be dispensed with if 
the Central Government is of opinion that circumstances have ariIen' 
which render it necessary to make rules without such consultation, but 
in such a case the Board shall be consulted. withi'l six months of the 
making of the rules and the Central Government shall take into con-
.ideration any suggestions which the Board may make in relation to the 
amendment of the said rules. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may-" 
(a) specify the drugs or classes of drugs or cosmetics or classes 
of cosmetics for the import of which a licence is required, and pres-
cribe the form and conditions of such licences, the authority empower-
ed to issue the same, and the fees payable therefor; 
'" '" '" '" • 
(k) prescribe the conditions to be observed in the packing !n 
bottles, packages or other containers, of imported drugs or cosmetics; 
'" '" '" '" '" 
13. (1) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Chapter or Oflen-
ot any rule made thereunder shall, in addition to any penalty to wh;fch ees. 
he may be liable under the provil:don of section 11, be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine which may 
extend to five htmdred rupees, or With both. 
(2) Whoever, havinq been convicted under sub-section (1), is again 
'convicted under that sub-section shall, in addition to any penalty as 
aforesaid, be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to two 
years, or with fine which maY' extend to one thousand rupees, or with 
both. 
'" '" '" '" • 
.' 15. No Court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or of a 
Magistrate of the first class !'Ihall try an offence pUnishable under sectiOR 
13. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANUFACTURE, SALE AND DISTRIBUTION' OP' DRUGS 
• • '" • • 
17. For the purposes of tbtIs Clmpter a: drug shall be deemed to be 
misbranded-
(a) if! it is an imitation of, ~r sub!';titute for. Or req~mbles in a 
manner likelv to decefw~, another drug, or bears upon it or upon Us 
label or cont~iner the name of another dru~, unless it is plainly and 
conspicuously marked so as to reveal. its true chuacter and its mck 
of identity with such other drug; or 
(b) if it purports to be the product of a place or country of 
which it is not truly a product; or 
(e) if it is sold. or offered or exposed for s81e. under R name 
which belongs to another drug; or 
.~~.!' ,. 
MJabran-
decl 
druJI. 

Misbran-
ded 
cosme. 
tiel. 
Ad ... · 
erate4 
druII. 
• '. i' ' 
32 
(d) if it is so coloured, coated, powdered or POl.ishe4 t. that 
damage is concealed, or if it is made to appear of better or .. -
therapeutic value th:.m it. really is; or 
(e) it it is not 1abe'led in the prescribed manner; or 
(1) if its label or container or anything accompanying the drug 
bears any statement, design or device which makes any false cJ8IiID 
for the drug or which is false or· misleading in any particular; or 
(g) if the label or container bears the name of an individual 
or company purporting to be the manufacturer or producer of the 
drug, which individual ~r company is fictitious or does not exist. 
1'1A. For the purposes of this Chapter, a cosmetic shall be deemed to 
be misbranded- . 
(a) if it is an imitation of, or a sub~titute for, or resembles in a 
manner likely to deceive, another cosmet!.e; or 
(b) it it purports to be the product of a place or country of 
which it is not truly a product; or 
(e) if it contains a colour which is not prescribed; or 
(d) if it is sold, or offered or exposed for sale, under a name 
which belongs to another cosmetic; or 
(e) if it is not labelled in the prescribed mannerj or 
(j) if its label or container bears the name ,of an indivi(lual or 
company purporting to be the manufacturer or producer ot the' 
cosmetic which individual or company it; fictitious or does not exist; 
or 
. (g) if the label or container bears any statement which is falae 
or misleading in any partieular. 
178. For the purposes of this Chapter a drug shall be deemed to be 
adulterated-
(a) if it consists, in whole or in part, of any ftlthy, putrid or 
decomposed substance; or 
(b) if it has been prepared, packed or stored under insanitary 
conditions wherebv it may have been contaminated with filth or 
whereby it may h~ve bee~ rendered injurious to health; or 
"(c) if its container is composed, in whole or in part, t1f aIt1 
poisonous or deleterious subRtance which may render the contents 
injuriouR to health; or 
(d) if it bear'~ or cont'3in~, for purposes of co\ouring OIIlly, a 
colour other than one which is nrescribed; or 
(e) U any subst.a~ce has been-
'(i) mixed or packed therewith so as to reduce its quality or 
strength; .or 
(li) suh!'ltituted wholly <'1r in Pl'lrt tnel'efor. 

, ..... _ ....... -.. -,. ... 
:i3 
E~.-!'or the purpose of clause (a.), & drug shall not be 
deemed to coDldst, in whole or in part, of any decomposed substance only 
by l'OI8&n of the fact that such decomposed substance is the ~ qf ~ 
natUral'decoinpOiftion of the drug wlthin the period, if any, ~. on 
the 'label of the drug Within which the drug is to be used: 
Provided that such decomposition is not due to any negligence on the 
part of the manufacturer of the drug or the dealer thereof and that it 
doeinot nmder the drug injurious to health. 
18. From such date as may be fixed by the State Government by noti-
ftcation !in the Oftkial Gazette in this behalf, no person s:ull himself or 
by any otbe:r person on his behalf-
(a.) manufacture for sale, or sell, or stock or exhibit for sale, or 
distribute-
(i) any drug or cosmetic which is not of standard quality; 
(ii) any misbranded drug or misbranded cosmetic; 
(iia) any adulterated drug; 
(iii) any patent or proprietary medicine, unless there is 
diSplayed tn the prescribed manner on the label or . cOntainer 
theteOi the true formula or list of ingrMients contained Jh it 
iii it manner ~adily inteWgilble to the members of the mediCal 
profeBS1ott; 
• • • • • 
(b) sell, or ~tock or exhibit for sale, or dis~b~tc any. d.ru8. or 
c:08UietiC whiCh has been impOrted Or man~ in ~~tra~­
liOn of aDy of the provisions of this Act or any rute made there-
Under; 
(c) manufacture for sale, or sell, or stock or exhibit for sale, or 
dtstrlbrite any drug or cosmetic, except under, and !in accordance 
. With tbe conditions of, a Ucence issued for such purpose under this 
'Chapter: 
• • • ... • 
Provided further that the Central Government may, after consulta-
tion with . the Board, ~y notification in the, O1Jlcfal :Q~te'"l*'IWt, 
BUbje,cl to any conditions spEd1led in the notification, ~ ~~~ 
for i8le, sale Or cUSt.r1bution of any drug or class of drugs not being of 
ata.iidard quality. 
E:z:plan.a.tiOn.-The formula or list of ingredients mentioned in sub-
clauIe (iii) of clause (a) ahall be deemed to be true and a s~ com-
pliance with that 8Ub-clause lit, without disclosing a full· and . de~ 
recipe ot the ~ts, it indicates correctly all the potentor~ 
substances contained therein together with an approximate state~ at 
the composition of the medicine. 
... ... ... ... • 
1 •. (1) • • • ... • 
(2) For the purposes of section 18 a drug shall not be dee~d to be 
misbranded or adulterated or to be below standard quality. nor shill a 
coiDieite be' deemed to be misbranded or to be below standard quality 
only bj .. reason' of the faet that- . 
• • • • • 
ProhibJ-
tion of 
manufac_ 
ture ad 
sal. of 
eerta1a 
druIa 
and co. 
metieB. 
PIe.,. 

U. (1) • • • • 
(4) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a pUblic servant within the 
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, and shall be ofticially 
subordinate to such authority as the Government appointing him may 
specify in this behalf. 
zz. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 23 and of any rules made 
by the Central Government in this behalf, an Inspector may. Within the 
local limits of the area for which he is appointed,-
(0) inspect any premises wherein any drug or cosmetic is being 
manufactured and in the case of sera, vaccines and any other drug 
. prescribed in this behalf, the plant and process of manufacture and 
the means employed for standardizing and testing the drug; 
(b) take samples of any drug or cosmetic which is being manu-
factured, or being sold or is stocked or exhibited for sale, or is being 
distributed; 
(c) enter and search at all reasonable times, with such assis-
tants, if any, as he considers necessary, any place in which he has 
reason to believe that an offence under this Chapter has been or is 
being committed and order in writing the person in possession of 
any drug or cosmetic in respect of which the offence has been or is 
beb:ig committed, not to dispose of any stock of such drug or cos-
metic for a specified period not exceeding twenty days, or, lmless 
the alleged offence is such that the defect may be removed ~y the 
possessor of thp drug or cosmetic, seize the stock of such drug or 
co~tics; 
(cc) examine any record., register, document or any other 
material object found in any place mentioned in clause (c), and seize 
the same if he bas reason to believe that it may furnish evidence of 
the commission of an offence punishable under this Act or the rules 
made thereunder; 
• • • • • 
450t 1880. 
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 shall, so &I of I ... 
far as may be, apply to any search or seizure under this Chapter as they 
apply to any search or seizure made under the authority of a warrant 
blsued under section 98 of the said Code. 
(3) If any person wilfully obstructs an Inspector in the exercise of 
the powers conferred upon him by or under this Chapter, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with 
fine, or with both. 
ZI. (1) • • • • • 
(5) Where an Inspector takes any action under clause (c) of 88C!tioD 
22,-
III 
'" • • • 
(b) it he seizes the stock of the drug or cosmetic, he shall U 
IOQID. 81 may be inform a Magistrate ad take his orders u to the 
euatody thereof; 
• • '" • • 

35 
(6) Where an Inspector seizes any record, register, document or any 
other material object under clause (ce) of sub-section (1) of section 22. 
he shall, as soon as may be, inform a Magistnte and take his orders .. 
to the custody thereof. 
• • • • 
rI. Whoever himself or by any other person on his behalf manufac-
tures for sale, sells, stocks or exhibits for sale or distributes-
(II) any drug-
(i) deemed to be misbranded under clause (a), clause (b), 
clause (e), clause (d), clause (f) or clause (g) of section 17 or 
adulterated under section 17B; or 
(ii) without a valid licence as required under clause (c) of 
section 18, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a tenn which shall not 
be less than one year but which may extend to ten years and shall 
also be liable to fine: 
Provided that the Court may, for any special reasons to be 
recorded in writing, impose a sentence of imprisonment of len than 
one year; 
(b) any drug other than a drug referred to in clause (a) In 
contravention of any of the provisions of this Chapter or any rule 
made thereunder shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
%7 A. Whoever himself or by any other person on his behalf manu-
factures for sale, sells, stocks or exhibits for sale, or distribute. any 
cosmetic in contravention of any of the provisions of this Chapter or 
any rule made thereunder, shall be punishable with impr:lsorunent tor a 
term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to 
five hundred rupees, or with both. 
28. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 18A shall be punish-
able with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or 
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
• • • • 
• (l) Whoever, havlni been convicted of an otrenee-
(a) under clause (a) of section 1:1 is again convicted ot aD 
offence under that clause, shall be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which shall not be less than two years but which may qteD.d 
to ten years and shall also be liable to fine: 
Provided that the Court may, for any special reason. to be 
Peoalt7 
for muau.. 
facture, 
ale, 
etc .. of 
druta III 
contra· 
ventiOD 
of this 
Chapter. 
PeDal. 
for ...... 
facture, 
•• le, 
ete.of 
co.me-
tl~ In 
contra-
nntioD 
of tbII 
ChqtIr. 
Penalty 
for nOD-
d1ae1oIUre 
of the 
nam.of 
theJDlDU-o 
~, 
eta. 
P.wt, 
tor~ 
MIl_t 
~ . 
record~ in writing, impose a aentence of lesa than two yean; ~ ' . .:.. 

,. 
~ 
IIUIICe of ; 
36 
(b) under clause (b) of section 27, is again COIlvicted of an 
offence uniier thatc1'8use shall be punishable with Unpriso~t 'for 
a term which may extend to ten years, or with fine or with both. 
(1A) Whoever, having been convicted of an. offence under section 'rTA 
Is ~in convicted under that section, shall be punishable with Un'prison -
Jriehtfot a term which 'may extend to two years, Or with flne whlcll may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
• • • • • 
31: (1) Where any person has been convicted under this Chapter for 
con.ttavening any such 'provision of this Chapter or any rule made there-
under as may be specified by rule made in this behalf, the stock of the 
dttlg 'or cosmetic in respect of which the contravention has been made 
shall be liable to confiscation and if such contravention is in respect of-
(i) manufacture of any drug deemed .to be misbranded under 
clause (A), clause (b), clause (c), clause (d). c~use (f) or clause 
(g) of section 17 or adulterated under section 17B; or 
(ii) manufacture for sale, or sale, or stocking or exhibiting for 
.ale, or distribution of any drug without a valid licence 88 requJrecl 
under clause (C) of section 18, 
-e1im}RmltntB or machinery used in such manufacture, sale or distrl-
. ; . b1lt1On::ll!l4any ret!ePtacl~, 'paCbges or coverings in which SUch drug !s 
contatftM ~ and the· anim.aIS, veMcles, vetIe1s or other conveyatlces Used 1a 
carrying such drug shall also be liable to conftJcation. 
'(I) ~ut preJudite to the proviStorla contained in sub4edt1on (J), 
~ 'the eourt is 'satiSfled, on fhe appUc'iltion of an Ii1speetor or other-
wae-84 . after such' . Inquiry as may' be nece8S8ry that the drug or 008-
IiI8tI~ 111 .!1bt of standard quality or is a misbranded or adulterated drag, 
or misbranded cosmetic, such drug or, as the cue may be, such cosmetic 
shall be liable to confiscation. ' 
• • • • • 
• • • • 
o1renc:et" ,<2) No Court ;n.foril)r to t'1at of a Presidency Magistrate or of a 
I·· .. · .. 
~II' •... : ... 
... t. 
~: . 
Power 
of Ceo-
tN1 dav-
e'l'DSMnt 
to make 
Nla. 
.Malrls~!"te o! the fir::;t c'.as5 shall try an offence pUnishable under this 
chapter. ., . '"'I nlo~ . '1 
• • • • • 
3ZA.. Where, 'r't ,,"v b'1., during the trial of any offence under th!a 
Chapter alleged to have been committed by any person, not being the 
manufacturer of a drug or cosmetic or his agent for the distribution 
thereof, the Court is satisfied, on the evidence adduced before ft, that 
such' manufacturer or agent is also concerned in that offence, then, the 
Court may, notwithstanding anythin~ contained fn sub-sectlon ~ of 
section 351 of the Code of Crimhml Procedure, 1898, proceed against him' I of l_ 
as though a ~tion had been instituted against hbn under section 
12. . Ir 'I :", I 
33. (1) The Central Government may after consultation with the 
Board and after previous publication by notification in. ~~ OftlclaJ 
". G82I!tte; make rules for the purpost! of aztVing et!eot "to die prcMJfona of 
this' 8dlpter: '. !"' 

17 
PtMfdl!d fhat OI)DJQ1tation \VIta the Board may be &.pense<!- with 
if the Cthtral ~. iI' of opIDIcm. tUt cbwmstanaea Rave 
~ wb1eh 1'IIldH it n.e1lllDy to .... rules without INCh CODIUlta-
tion, but in such a case the Board shan be ooDSulted wltbin sis months 
ot the making ot *he rules ad the Central Government shall take into 
eonsideration any IliGeitions which the Board· may make ~ relation to 
tJI6 ~t Of _ 8a14 rolett. 
(2) WJthout prejudice to the generality of the "foregoing Power such 
Id1eI maY- • 
• • • • • 
(e) preaet.tbe the fo~ of Uoences tor the manufactu~e for sale, 
for the sale anlt fot the d1atribution of drUgs or any s;>ecified drug 
or claI· of c:IrugI or of COIID8ttcs or any specifieiooametic or class 
of OOCletiQlt the form of application for such licencu, the oonditions 
subject to which such l:lcences may be issued, the authority em-
powered to issue the same and the fees payable therefor; 
• • • • • 
(i) prescribe the conditions to be observed in the packing in 
bo.tt1~., p,.~ and other containers of drut(s or cosmet1cs, and 
proh11ilt the sale, stOC&g or exh1bftlon for sale, or dfstribiutfGD of 
dnqpr Q1' CCIIIIlet.fes pacDd in contra:ventiOll f1f suGh eonctitiODl; 
• • • • • 
(ti) presertbe the poWers and duties of Inspectors and ipectfy 
the doNp, or classaa of drup or ~~ or classes of cosmetics in 
re~a~on to w'bich and the conclitioll5, 1imi~tiOns or ~rlction. 
~bject to which, such powers and duties may be exercised or per-
formed; 
• • • • 
33C. (1) The Central Government shall, by notiftcation in the Oftlcial 
Gazette and with effect from such date as may be spec1fled therein, con-
stitute a Board (to be called the Ayurvedic ana Unanf Drops Technical 
Advisory Board) to advise the Central Government and the State Gov-
'~,nti em 'technieal matters ariSing out of tbls Chapter and to carry 
out ~he other functions assigned to it .by this Chapter. 
(2) The Board shall consist of the followin, memben, name1y:-
• • • • • 
(iii) the adviser in indigenou~ systems of mediCine, Ministry ef 
Health, ex otficio; 
• • • • • 
(viii) two persons to be nominated by the Central Government 
from. among members of the Central Council of Ayurvedtc Research; 
• • • • • 
(zi) two persons, one each to represent the Ayurvedic (includ-
ing. Siddha) and l:1nani drug industry, to be nominated by the Central 
Government; 
"(:rii) two perrons,c:me each frc;tn among the practitioners of 
A~ (ine1udfRg .ddtJa) and· tTniAf .,.taM of mecfteJne, to IJe 
nomJnated by the Central Government 
• • • • • 
~ 
die ID4 
UDIUIl 
:. 
erd·Abt· 
«JrY 
..... 

Prohibi. 
tion of 
manufac-
ture for 
sale of 
Ayurve-
die (inc-
luding 
Siddha) 
and 
unant 
drup. 
Restrlc-
tion OD 
sale, etc., 
of Ayur. 
vedic (In. 
cludln, 
Siddha) 
and 
Unani 
drup. 
Peaalt7 
for 
manu. 
facture, 
sale, etc. 
ofAyur_ 
vedic (lD-
cludin. 
Slddha) 
anI! 
UnaDi 
drU,1 1ft 
contra-
vention 
of thl. 
Chapter. 
Penalty 
for 
subse-
quent 
otrClLll!l. 
. S· 
330. From such date as may be fixed by the State Government by 
notification in the Official Gazette in thiS behalf, no person shall himaelf 
or by any other person on his behalf, manufacture for sale any Ayurvec:lic 
(including Siddha) or Unani drug,-
(a) except under prescribed hygienic conditions; 
(b) except under the supervision of a person having the pres-
cribed qualifications; . 
. 
(c) except under and in accordance with the conditions of a 
licence issued for such purpose under this ChaQter; 
(d) unless the raw materials used in the preparation of such 
drug are genuine and are properly identified; 
(e) unless such drug is labelled with the tnie Ust of aU tho 
ingredients contained in it and with such other particulars 88 may 
be prescribed; and 
(f) in contravention of any of the provisions of this Chapter or 
any rule made thereunder: 
Provided that nothing in th;s section shall apply to Vaidyas and 
Hakims who manufacture such drugs for the use of their own patients: 
Provided further that nothing in clauses (4), (b) and (e) shall apply 
to the manufacture, subject to prescribed conditions. of small quantities 
of any such drug for the purpose of examinatfon,test or analysis. 
33£. From such date as milY be fixed by the State Government by 
notiflcation in the omclal Gazette in this behalf. no person sh:tll··himself 
or by any other person on his behalf, Fell, or stock or exhibit for sale, or 
distribute, any Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani dru~ other than 
that manufactured by a manufacturer licensed under this Chapter. 
• • " • " 
331. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 33D or section 33E 
or section 24 as applied bv section 33H or any rule made under this 
Chapter shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupeel, or with both. 
3U. Wh«?evel', having been con~cted of an offence under 8eetion 33D 
or section 33E is again convicted of an offence under the said section 
shall be punishable with Imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
lix montha, or with flnewhich may extend to one thoUiandrupees, or 
with both. 
• " •• • • 

S9 
13M. (1) No prosecution' und8r this Chapter shall be inatituted 
except by an Inspector. ,."" 
(2) No Court ~ior to that of a Presidency Magiatrate or of a 
Magistrate of the first class shall try an oftence punishable under this 
Chapter. " 
, UN. (1) The Central Government" may, after consultation with the 
Board and atter previous publication by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for the purpose of giving e1fect to the provisions of 
this Chapter: 
Provided that consultation with the Board may be dispensed with it 
the Central Government is of opinion that circumstances have arisen 
which render it necessary to make rules without such consultation, but in 
such a case, the Board shall be consulted within six months of the mat-
ing of the rules and the Central Government shall take into CODSidera-
tion any suggestions which the Board may make in relation to tlJe 
amendment of the said rules. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may-
• • • • • 
(e) prescribe the forms of licences for the manufacture for sale 
of Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs, the form of appli-
cation for such licences, the conditions subject to which such 
licences may be issued, the authority empowered to tssue the same 
and the fees payable therefor; 
(f) regulate the mode of labelling packed Ayurvedic (including 
S1ddha) or Unani drugs and prescribe the matters which shall or 
ahall not be included in such labels; 
• • • • • 
35. (1) If any person is convicted of an offence under this Act, it shall 
be lawful fOr the Court before which the conviction takes place to cause 
the oftender's name, place of residence, the oftence of which he has been 
convicted and the penalty which has been inflicted upon him, to be 
pUblJahed at the expense of such person in such newspapers or in such 
other manner as the CoUrt may direct. 
• • • • • 
31. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898 it shall be lawful for any Presidency Magistrate 
or any Magistrate of the first class to pass any sentence authorized. by 
this Act in excess of his powers under the said Code. 
• • • • • 
38. Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be 
after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session for 
a total period of th:irty days which may be comprised in one session or in 
two or more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in 
which it is so laid or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that 
any such modiftcation or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
ftlSdity of anythin.a previously done under that rule. 
Conp. 
zance of 
offences. 
Power of 
Central 
Govern. 
mentto 
make 
rules. 
Publica· 
tlon of 
sentences 
passed 
under 
thla Act. 
Malia-
trate'. 
power to 
Impose 
enhanced 
penal· 
ties. 
Ru1ea to 
belalci 
before 
Parlia-
ment. 

• 
• 
40 
~:~;-~~ 
[See section 3(4)]' 
;A..;;.;.A.!:ocftiaC (tt.a.tn)DiG S:I:iaP) ~ 
• • • 
• • • 
• 
• 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
(Shri B. ShankMClMnd, 
MiftWter 01 Health cmd Fmn.i&tI 
WelffIN.) 