30 of 
1952. 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON' 
, 1 
Bill No. 85 of 1980 
THE REQUISITIONING AND ACQUISITION OF 
IMMOVABLE PROPERTY (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 19BO .. 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable 
Property Act. 1952. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-· .... I!' 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Short 
Immovable Property (Amendment) Act, 1980. title and com-
5 (2) This Act, except section 4 thereof, shall be deemed to have come mence-
into force on the 7th day of March, 1980. ment. 
Z. In section 6 of the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Amend-
Property Act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as 'the principal Act), in sub- ment of 
section (lA), for the words "ten years", wherever they occur, the words section 8. 
10 "fifteen years" shall be substituted. 
IS 
20 
3. In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2A) ,-
(4) in clause (4), for sub-clause (ii), the following 8Ub-Clause 
shall be !!ubstituted, namely:-
"(ii) ~ondly with effect from the expiry of ft •• years, and 
thirdly with effect from the expiry of ten years, from sueh eomr-
mencement;"; 
(b) in clause (b), for sub-clau'Ie (ii) , the following sub-clause 
shall be substituted, namely:- . 
'I(ii) secondly with effect from the date of expiry of five 
year!!. and thirdly with effect from the date of expiry of ten years, 
Amend-
mentot 
section 8. 

Amend-
mentof 
section 
22. 
Repeal 
and 
saving. 
" 
2 
from the date on which the revision made under IUb-cw..e (i) 
takes ef!eet;"; 
(c) for C'lause (c), the followinc clause sbaII be substituted, 
namely:-
.. (c) in any other case,-
(i) first with effed from the date of expiry of five yean 
from the date on which possession of such property has been 
surrendered or delivered to, or taken by, the competent 
authority under sedioa 4, and 
5 
(ii) secondly with effect from the date of expiry of five 10 
years from the date on which the revision ~ sub-clause 
(i) takes effect.". 
4. In section 22 of the principal Act. for sub-section (3), the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
"(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as IS 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is 
in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in· one ·.esslon or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before 
the. e¥piry of the session immediately following. tbesession· or the 
suceessive sessions aforesaid,. both Houses agree ,jn making any modi- 20 
fication in the rule or both HousesaiCee that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity 
of~thitlgpreviously done under this Act.". 25 
5. (1) The Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property 
(Amendme'ftt) Ordinance, 1980, is hereby TeQe81ed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, sMIl be deem-
ed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as -amended by 30 
~ Act. 
1 of 1980. 

STATEMENT OF OaJECTS AND REASONS 
. According to the. provisions of the Req':lisitioning anO Acqu~ition of 
Immovable Pr9perty Act, 1952 as these existed immeciiately before the 
amendment of th~ Act by Ordinance No, 1 of 1980, all' tope prOPeJ!tl~, 
which were requisitioned prior to the amendnu:nt of 'the aforesaid Act 
in 1970, were required to be released from requisition or acquired by the 
10th of March, 1980. However, it was found that a large number of 
t~ese properties ·are required to be retained by the ,MiJlist.ry of·Def·~nce 
or by the Miniatry of Works and Housing and otl1~r' Minisuie.~· beyond 
10th March, 1980, for Qublicpurposes. In the case 01 Ministry of Defence, 
theirdiftlculties in either releasing or acquiring the requisitioned . pro-
petrt~which include :lMd are mainly due to strategic reasoU ·an4 lack, 
of funds. for acquiring the land. Now a phased programme ·ior aaqW;Rg 
these l properties within a period of three to five years is uncier contem. 
plation·of that Ministry. Similarly, in the case of. Ministry of WOrks·and 
Housiag, the. need to continu.e the properties under· requisition· beyond 
the aforesaid date stems from the utter inadequacy of office pccommoda-
tion for various Ministries/Departments. It was, therefore, decided to 
extend the maximum period for -which .:?topel"ties could be lJ'etained under 
requisition by. apeliM'of,five years. 
2. The amendment made in the parent Act in 1975 provided for re-
vision of recurring part of compensation in respect of' pr~ei'ties which 
were under requisition for a period of five years or more preceding the 
commencement of the aforesaid amendment. In order to avoid hardship 
to the owners whose Qroperties are under requisition it VIas considered 
necessary to provide for one more revision of the above referred to part 
of the compensation. 
3 I!l the- oircumstanees stated above, the Act was amellded through the 
RfK4uisltio1:'.ing andc Acquisition of Immovable Property (Amendment) 
0tdinance" 1980' (l·of 1980),. so'as to extend the period for·whioh the pro-
perties coUld i Ibe retained under requisition by five years and to provide 
for. one-more reviaioIl'Jof the ~eauITing part/of oompensation. 
4. This Bill see~ to replQce the af·:>resaid Ordinance with a minor 
modification seeking' to substitute sub-section (3) of section 22 of the 
Act by the provision recommended by the Cofnmittee on Subordinate 
Legislation in relation to the laying of rules before Parliament. 
N~ Dl!!tm; P. C. SETHI. 
'l'he llth'Ma.ich,.1980. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION,UNnm ARTICLE 117 OF THE. 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 19016(Z)I79-Pol. IV, dated the 14th March, 1980 
from ~hri P. C. Sethi, Minister of Works and Housing to the Secretary, 
Lok Sabha.] 
Thl' President, having been infonned of the subject matter of the 
Requb:itioning & Acquisition of Immovable Property (Amendment) Bill, 
1980. ha~ recommended to Lok Sabha the consideration of the Bill under 
article 117 (3) of the Constitution. ' 
3 

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to make certain amendments to 6ub-section 
(lA) of section 6 of the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable 
Pr~rty Act, 1952, for extending the maximum period for which pro-
perties may be retained under requisition by a furtherperiod of five 
years. 
2. The aforesaid amendment will involve an additional expenditure in 
case of properties retained under requisition for the whole or any part 
of the additional period of five years, because compensation by way of 
recurring payment towards rent will have to be paid during such period. 
It is not possible to estimate accurately the quantum of eXQenditure to-
wards payment of compensation a~ it will depend on the number of 
properties which may be retained under requisition during the extended 
period. However, the annual liability (towards payment of compensation 
for requisitioned properties) under the Act may be of the order of Rs. 180 
lakhs. 
3. In section 8 of the princ~?Bl Act, sub-sections (2.A) and (2B) were 
in.<,ertP.d by the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property 
(Amendment) Act, 1975, to provide for revision of the amount of com-
pensation, quinquennially. According to these provisions, the smount of 
compensation payable for properties under requisition is to be revised 
in the manner indicated therein. The extension of the period of reten-
tion of properties under requisition will result in another quinquennial 
revision of the cOrrv.:?ensation and provision for such a revision has been 
made in clause 3 of. the Bill. These provisions will involve an additional 
expenditure of a r~urring nature. It is not possible to estimate such 
additional recurring exp.:!nditure because the revised rates will be fixed 
by the competent a1.1thority keeping in view the circumstances prevailing 
at the time of such revision. The amount of expenditure will also depend 
upon the periods for which different prCQerties may be retained and it is 
not possible to estimate at this stage as how long it would be necessary 
to keep different properties under requisition. However, it is estimated 
that the annual additional liability on account of revision of recurring part 
of C'Omper.sation may be well over one crore rupees. The land under re-
quisition is mainly held by the Ministry of Defence who propose to ac-
quire a large I;>ortion of it over the next five years. It is estimated that 
the non-recurring liability on this account may be between 10 and 15 
crore rupees. With the derequisitioning of the existing 1>uUdings and 
acquisition of land and buildings as planned by the Government, the 
annual compensation payable· will come down. 
·4 
, 

MF~()MNDUM R.EdARbI:l(G MODIFICATION CON'rAINm IN 'l'Im 
BILL TO REPLACE THE REQUISITIONING AND ACQUISITION OF 
IMMOVABLE PROPERTY (AiMENDMENT) ORDINANCE, 1980. 
Section 22 of the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Pro-
perty Act, 1952 (30 of 1952) provides for the power to make rules and 
sub-section (3) thereof makes provision· for laying of rules before Parlia-
ment. An opportunity has been taken to substitute the said sub-section 
(3) by a new provision which has been recommended by the Committee 
on Subordinate Legislation. Clause 4 of the Bill reflecta the aforeHid 
modification. The Bill does not involve any other deviation from the 
Ordinance. 
~ .. • 

Release 
from 
requisi-
tioning. 
Prinei-
pIts and 
method 
of deter-
mining 
compen-
sation. 
EXTRACTS FROM THE RIlQUISITIONING AND ACQuISmoN OF IMMOV Am..: 
PaoPEIl1'Y Al:r, ltD2 
• • • • • 
6. U) • • • • • 
,(tA)~:NU""itimtaliding'aRythJngtcoRtained in 'sub-Netion' (1), the 'Om-
trill Government shall ·release-·f·rom requi'Sition,-'-
(a) any property requisitioned or deemed to be requisitioned 
under this Act before the commencement of the Requisitioning and 
Acquisition of Immovable Property (Amendment) Act, 1970, on or 
before the expiry of a period of ten years from such commencement; 
(b) any property requisitioned under this Act after such com-
mencemen t, on or before the eXQiry of a period of ten years from the 
date on which possession ot such property was surrendoered or deli-
vered to, or taken by, the competent authority under section 4, 
unless such property is acquired under section 7 within the period of ten 
years afox:esaid. 
• • • * • 
8. (1) • • • • • 
(2A) The recurring payment, referred to in clause (a) of sub-section 
(2), in respect of any prCQerty shall, unless the property is sooner re-
leased from requisition under section 6 or acquired under section 7, be 
revised in accordance with the provisions of sul>-iiection (2B)-
(a) in a case where such property has been subject to requisition 
under this Act for the period of five years or a longer period im-
mediately preceding the commencement of the Requisitioning and 
Acquisition of Immovable Property (Amendment) Act, 1975-
* * • * • 
(ii) again with effect from the expiry of five years from such 
commencement; 
(b) in a case where such property has been subject to requisi-
tion under this Act immediately before such commencement for a 
period shorter then five years and the maximwn period within wbicb 
such property shall, in accordance with the provisions of sub-sec-
tion (lA) of section 6, be released from requisition or acquired, ex-
tends beyond five years from such-commencement,-
• • • • • 
(ii) again with effect from tlil! date of expiry of a period of 
five years from the date on which the revision made under sub-
clause (i) takes effect; 
1 of 1970. 

? 
(c) in any other case, with effect from the date of expiry of five 
years from the date on which possession of such property has been 
surrendered or delivered to, or taken by, the competent authority 
under section 4. 
• • • • • 
22. (1) • • • • • 
(3) All rules made under the provisions of this Act shall be laid, a8 
soon as may be, before Parliament. 
• • • • • 
Power 
tomue 
Rules, 

LOK SABHA 
* 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable 
Property Act, 1952. 
'(SAri P. C. Sethi, Minute" c>t Workl cmd Houring) 