Als INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
: ~: :} ,,-. ; 
BiIl.Net,;. ut.lttI 
THE KERALA STATE LEGISLATURE (DELEGATION 
OF POWERS) BILL, 1964 
Ii 
BILL 
tQ cont er 91l the President the, power of the Legis14ture of the 
State 01 Kerala. to make laws. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year of the 
Repq:blie of India as follows: .... 
I. This Act may~be 'caUedthe Kerala' .State Leplature· (Dele-- Short 
satton of Powers) ACt; '1964;· , ,' .. :, >- _:. . Utl .. 
5 Z. In this Act, "Proclamation" means the Proclamation issued on ])dDiUOIl. 
the 10th day of September, 1964, by the President under clause 
(1) of article 356 of the Constitution. 
3. (1) The power of the Legislature of the State of ,Kerala to Coafer. 
snake laws, which has been deelared by the Proelamatien te be seat oa 
[0 exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament, is hereby eon- ::a. rrllt-
ferred on the President. t: po~er 
of the 
(2) In the exercise of the said power, the President may, from State 
time to time whether Parliament is or is not in session, enact as a Lelisla-
President's Act a Bill containing such provisions as he considers :~:e to 
J5 necessary: laws. 
Provided that before enacting any such Act, the President shall, 
whenever he considers it practicable to do so, consult a committee 
constituted for the purpose consisting of all the members of the 
House of the People and the Council of States woo for the time 
~o being ft.JJ th~ seat~ alJ9'tted to the State Qf Kerala in th~ two Houses, 

(j) Every Act ~nacted by the President under sub-section (2) 
shall, as soon as may be after enactment, be laid before each House 
of Parliament. 
(4) Either House of Parliament may, by resolution passed within 
seven days from the date on which the Act has been laid before it , 
under sub-section (3), direct any modiftcations to be made in the 
Act, and, if the modifications are agreed to by the other House of 
Pa'r1i'am~nt during the session in which the Act has been so laid 
before it or the session succeeding, such modifications shall be given 
e1fect to by the President by enacting an amending Act under sub- 10 
s~tion " (2) : ", 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall affect the validity 
of the Act or of any action taken thereunder before it is so amended. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the Proclamation of the President, dated the 10th Septem-
ber, 1964, the powers of the Legislature of the Kerala State are now 
exercisable by or undel' the authority of Parliament. Such legisla-
tive measures as may be necessary for the State can be taken up by 
Parliament only by postponing its business; and even then, it is likely 
that Parliament may not have time to deal with all legislative mea-
sures for the State. It is, therefore, proposed that Parliament should, 
in accordance with the provisions of sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of 
article 357 of the Constitution, confer by law on the President the 
powers of the Legislature of the State of Kerala to make laws for 
the State. The present Bill is intended to give effect to this proposal. 
NIlW DELHI; GULZARILAL NANDA. 
The 17th September, 1964. 
" : I' 

LOKSABM 
A 
BILL 
to confer on the President the power of the Legi~turo ot 
the St4ltc ofKerala to ~-laWS. 
(Shri Gulsarilal Nanda, 
Minister of Home AjJairs.) 