BIlL No. '5 of 1213 
THE GOVERNMENT OF PART eSTATES 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1953 
[As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE] 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Government of Part C States Act, 1951. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
I. Shprt title and commencement.-(l) This Act may be called 
the Government of Part C States (Amendment) Act, 1953. 
(2) Section 7 shall come into force on the 1st day of April, 1954, 
but the remaining provisions of this Act shall come into force at 5 
once. 
2. Amendment of section 17, Act XLIX of 1951.-Section 17 of 
the Government of Part C States Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to 
as the principal Act) shall be renumbered as sub-sec1ion (1) thereof 10 
and-
(a) to sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the words "or of 
any law made in pursuance of that article" shall be added; 
(b) after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following 
sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:-
, "(2) If any question arises as to whether a member of 15 
the Legislative Assembly of a State has become disqualified 
for being such a member under the provisions of sub-
section (1), the question shall be referred for the decisiO'Il 
of the President and his decision shall be final. 
, -(3) Before giving any decision on any such question, the 20 
President shaH obtain the opinion of the Election Com-
mission and shall act according to such opinion." 

5 
10 
3. Insertion of new section 21A in Act XLIX of 1I51.-After 
section 21 of the principal Act, the following section shall be in-
serted, namely:-
"21A. Exemption of propeTt'll of the Union from. Sta.te 
taxation.-The property of the Union shall, save in so far al 
Parliament may by law otherwise provide, be exempted from 
all taxes imposed by a State or by any authority within a State: 
Provic;led that nothing in this section shall, until Parliament 
by law otherwise provides, prevent any authority within a State 
from levying any tax CIn any propf!rty of the Union to which 
such property was immediately before the commencement of 
the Constitution liable or treated as liable, 80 long as that tax 
continues to be levied in that State." 
4. Amendment of section 22, Act XLIX of 195t.-To the ExpLa-
15 nation to section 22 of the principal Act, the following shall be added, 
namely:-
20 
30 
35 
45 
"or any law made before the 1st day of April, 1952, in re-
lation to any matter with respect to which the Legislative 
Assembly of the State has power to make laws." 
5. Amendment of section 28, Act XLIX of 1951.-In section 28 
of the principal Act, after clause (b) of sub-section (3), the fallowing 
clause shall be inserted, namely:-
H(bb) the charges payable in respect of loans advanced to 
the State from the Consolidated Fund of India _ including in-
terest, sinking fund charges and redemption charges, and other 
expenditure connected therewith;". 
6. Insertion of new section 33A in Act XLIX of 1951.-After 
section 33 elf the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- . . 
"33A. Language· to be used for Acts, Bms, etc.-Notwith-
standing anything contained in section 33, until Parliament by 
law otherwise provides, the authoritative texts-
(a) of all Bills to be introduced or amen4ments thereto 
to be moved in the Legislative Assembly of a State, . 
(b) df all Acts paSised by the Legislative Assembly of a 
State, and 
(c) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued 
under any law made by the Legislative Assembly of a State, 
shall be in the English language: 
Provided that where the Legislative Assembly of a State 
has prescribed any ianguage other than the English language for 
use in Bills introduced in, or Acts passed by, the Legislative 
Assembly of the State or in any order, rule, regulation or bye-
law issued under any law made by the Legislative Assembly of 
the State, a translation of the same in the English language 
published under the authority of the Chief Commissioner in the 
Official Gazette shall be deemed to be the authoritative text .. 
thereof in the English language." 

7. Amendment of section 39, Act XLIX of U.5l.-In section 39 of 
1he principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall 
he substituted, namely:-
'(1) As from the 1st day of April, 1954, in the case of any of 
the States of Ajmer, Bhopal, Coorg, Delhi, Himachal Pradesh 5 
find Vindhya Pradesh, and as from such date as may be appointed 
;n this behalf by the Central Government by notification in the 
Official Gazette in the case of any other State, all revenues re-
ceived in that State by the Government of India or the Chief 
Commissioner in relation to any matter with respect td which 10. 
the Legislative Assembly of that State has power to make laws, 
and all grants made and all loans advanced to that State from 
the Consolidated Fund of India and all moneys received by that 
State in repayment of loans shall fonn one cdnsolidated fund to 
be entitled "the Consolidated Fund of the State".' 15 
8. Insertion of new s.ections 39A and 398 in Act XLIX of 1151.-
Aftl"r section 39 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:-· 
"39A. Contingency' Fund of the State.-( 1) There shall be • 
established a Cdntingency Fund in the nature of imprest to be 20 
entitled "the Contingency Fund of the State" into which shall 
be paid from and out of the Consolidated Fund of the State such 
sum as the President may, by order, determine; and the said 
Fund shall be held by the Chief Commissioner to enable advances 
to be made by him out of such Fund. 
(2) No advances shall be made out cJf the Contingency Fu,nd 
of the State except for the purposes of meeting unforeseen ex-
penditure pending authorisation of such expenditure by the 
Legislative Assembly of the State under appropriations made by 
law. 
(3) The Chief Commissioner may make rules regulating all 
matters connected with or ancillary to the custody of, the pay-
ment of moneys into, and the withdrawal of moneys from, the 
Contingency Fund of the State. ' 
30 
:i9B. A"Udit reports.-The reports of the Comptroller and 35 
Auditor-General of India relating td the accounts of a State 
where a Legislative Assembly has been established under section 
3 shall be submitted to the Chief Commissioner, who shall cause 
them to be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State." 
-

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Government of Part C States Act, 1951, was enacted on the· 
6th September 1951. The operative provisions of the Act regarding· 
the setting up of Legislative Assemblies and Councils of Ministers 
in some of the' Part C States were brought into force in March, 1952. 
In the light of the experience gained in the working of the Govern-
ment of Part C States Act, 1951, in the States of Ajmer, Bhopal, 
Coorg, Delhi, Himachal Pradesh and Vindhya Pradesh, it has been 
found necessary to amend the Act in order to make pro\l'tsfOn in 
respect of the following among other matters:-
(a) machinery for deciding questions of disqualification of 
members of State Legislative Assemblies; 
(b) exemption of the property of the Union from taxation by 
the Governments of Part C States; 
(c) the language in which Bills may be introduced in, or passed 
by, the State Legislative Assemblies; 
(d) establishment of a Contingency Fund·for each State; and. 
(e) presentation of the reports of the Comptroner and Auditor-
General of India relating to the accounts of the Part C 
States to the State Legislative Assemblies. 
in addition, representations have been made tbat the Act ddes 
not enable the State Legislative Assemblies to amend laws made 
for the States by Parliament prior to 1st April, 1952 in regard to sub-
jects included in the 'State List'. 
The present Bill seeks to amend the principal Act to provide for 
all these matters. 
NEW DELHI; K. N. KATJU .. 
The 9th December, 1953. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF PART C STATES ACT, 1951 (XLIX 
OF 1951) 
• • • • 
17. Disqualifications for Membership.-A person shall be dis-
qualified for being chosen as. and for being, a member of the Legis-
lative Assembly of a State, if he is fdr the time being disqualified 
for being chosen as, and for being, a member of either House of 
Parliament under any of the provisions of article 102 . 
• • * • 
22. Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and Laws 
made by the Legislative Assembly of a State.-If any provision of a 
Law made by the Legislative Assembly of a State is repugnant to 
any provision of a law made by Parliament, then the law made by 
Parliament, whether passed before or after the law made by the 
Legislative Assembly of the State, shall prevail and the law made by 
the Legislative Assembly of the State shall. to the extent of the 
repugnancy, be void, 
E~planation .. :-For the purposes of this section, the expression 
"law made by Parliament" shall not include any law which pro-
vides for the extension to the State of any law in force in any other 
part of the territory of India. 
• * • • 
39. Consolidated Fund of the State.-(l) As from the first day 
of April, 1952, in the case of any of the States of Ajmer, Bhopal. 
Coorg, Delhi, Himachal Pradesh and Vindhya Pradesh, and as from 
such date as may be appClinted in this behalf by the Central Govern· 
ment by notification in the Official Gazette in the case of any other 
State, all revenues received in that State by the Government of 
India or the Chief Commissioner in relation to any matter with res-
pect to which the Legislative Assembly of that State has power to 
make laws, and all grants made from the Consolidated Fund of 
India to that State shall form one consolidated fund to be entitled 
"the Consolidated Fund of the State". 
(2) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of a State shall be 
appropriated except in accordance with, and for the purposes and in 
the manner provided in, this Act: 
Provided that the balance standing at any time at the credit of 
the Consolidated Fund of a State shall not be less than such amdUnt 
as the President may by order specify. 
(3) The custody of the Consolidated Fund of a State, the payment 
of moneys into such Fund. the withdrawal of moneys therefrom and 
all other matters cdnnected with or ancillary to those matters ~hall 
be regulated by rules made by the Chief Commissioner with the 
approval of the President. 
• • • • 
5 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Government of Part C States Act, 1951. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (1) of article II7 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to the House of 
the People the introduction of the Bill, 
, M. N. KAUL, . 
(Shri Kailas Nath Katju, 
Minister for States) 
Secretary. 