DiU No. 6$ of 19$4 
THE. SECURITIES CONTRACTS (REGULATION) 
. BILL, 1954 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to prevent undesi'l'able tranSactions in securities by regulating the 
business of dealing therein, by prohibiting options and by pro-
viding for certain other matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by PaFliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
PRELIMINARY 
1. St,ort title, extent and commeneement.-(J) This Act may be 
-called -the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1954. , 
(2) It extends to the wb.ole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force, on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
z. DeftD.ltlons.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise 
"l"equires,- I Ie 
(a) 'contract' means a contract for or relating to the purchase 
or sale of securities; 
(b) 'GDvernment security' means a security, created and 
issued, wbether before or after the commencement of this Act, by 
the Central Government or a State Government for the pur- '15 
pose of raising a public loan and having one of the forms specified 
in clause (2) of section 2 of the Publjc Debt Act, 1944 (XVIII of 
1944); 
(c) 'member' means a member of a recognised stock exchange; 
(d) 'option in securities' means a contract for the purchase 20 
'Or sale of a right to buy or sell, or a right to buy and sell. 
'securities in future, and includes a teji, a mandi, a teji mandi, 
.a galli, a put, a call or a put and call in securities; 

:I 
(e) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this. 
Act; , 
(f) 'recognised stock exchange' means a stock exchange-
which is for the time being recognised by the Central Govern-
ment under section 6; 
(g) 'rules', with reference to the rules relating in general t() 
the constitution and management of a stock exchange, includes,. 
in the case of a stock exchange which is an incorporated asso-
ciation, iJs memorandum and articles of association; 
10 (h) 'securities' include-
IS 
.30 
(i) shares, scrips, stocks, bonds, debentures, debenture 
stock or other marketable securities of a like nafure in or of 
any incorporated company or other body corporate; 
(ii) Government securities; and 
(iii) rights or interests in securities; 
(i) 'spot delivery contract' means a contract which .provide~ 
for the actual delivery of securities and the pa~ent of a price 
therefor either immediately or within a period of three days 
after the date of the contract, the actual period taken for the 
despatch of the securities Ot the remittance of money therefor 
through the post be:ng excluded from the computation of the 
period of three days aroresaid if the parties to the contract d() 
not reside in the same town or locality; 
(j). 'stock exchange' means any body of individuals, whether 
incorporated or not, constituted for the purpose of nssisting, 
regulating or controlling the business "of buying, selling or 
de'aling in securities. 
RECOGNISED STOCK EXCHANGES 
3. Application for recognition of stock exchanges.-(l) Any stock 
exchange, which is desirous of being recognised for the purposes of 
. this Act, may make 'an application in the prescribed manner to the 
Central Government. 
(2) Every application under sub-section (2) shall contain such 
particulars as may be prescribed, and shall be accompanied by a copy 
35 of the bye-laws of the stock exchange for the regulation and control 
of contracts and also a copy of the rules relating in general to the 
constitution of the stock exchange, and in paTticular, to-
• 
45 
(a) the gO'\lerning body of such stock exchange, its consti-
tut:on and powers of management and the manner in which its 
business is to be transacted; , 
(b) the powers and duties of the office bearers of the stock 
exchange; . 
(c) the admission into the stock exchange of various classes 
01 members, the qualifications for membership, and the exclu-
sion, suspension, expUlsion and reo-admission of members there-
from or thereinto; 
(d) the registration of partnerships as members of the stock 
exchange and the nomination and appointment of authorised 
representatives and clerks by the stock exchange. 

3 
4. Grant of recognlttOD to stock exehanges.-(l) If the Central 
Government is satisfied, after making such inquiry as may be neces-
sary in this behalf and after obtaining such further information, 
if any, as it may require,-
(a) that the rules and bye-laws of a stock exchange apply- S 
tng for registrat~on are in conformity with such conditions as 
.may have been prescribed with a view to ensure fair dealing 
and to protect investors; 
(b) that the stock exchange is willing to comply with any 
such conditions as the Central Government, after consultation 10 
with the governing body of ~!le stock exchange and having 
regard to the area served by the stock exchange and its standing 
and the nat~re of the securities dealt with by it, may impose 
for the purpose of carrying out the objects of this Act; and 
(c) that it would be in the interest of the trade and also in 15 
the public interest to grant recognition to the stock exchange: 
it may grant recognition to the stock exchange subject to the con-
ditions imposed upon it as aforesaid and in such form as may be 
prescribed. ' 
(2) The conditions which the Central Government may prescribe 20 
under clause (a) of sub-section (1) for the grant of recognition to 
the stock exchanges may include, among other matters, conditions 
relating to,-
(i) the qualifications for mem'bership of stock exchanges; 
(ii) the manner in which contracts shall be entered into and 2$ 
enforced ,as between members; 
(iii) the representation of the Central Government by its 
nominees on the stock exchanges; and 
(iv) the maintenance of accounts of members aRd their 
periodical audit by chartered accountants to ensure the solvency 30 
of members. 
(3) Every grant of recognition to a stock exchange under this 
section shall be published in the Gazette of Inaia and also in the 
Official Gazette of the State in which the principal office of the 
stock exchange is situate, and such recognition shall have effect al 3S 
from the date of its publication in the Gazette of India. 
(4) No application for the grant of recognition shall be refused 
except after giving an opportunity to the stock exchange concerned 
to be heard in the matter; and the reasons for such refusal shall 
be communicated to the stock exchange in writing. 40 
(5) "No rules of a recognised stock exchange relating to any of the 
matters specified in sub-section (2) of section 3 shall be amended 
except with the approval of the Central Government. 
S.Withdrawal of recognltlon.-If the Central Government is of 
opinion that the recognition granted to a stock exchange und~r the ,4$ 
provisions of this Act should, in the \Dterest of the trade or In the 
public interest be withdrawn, the Central Government may, serve 
on the governing body of the stock exchange a written notice 

4 
that the Central Government is considering the withdrawal· of the 
recognition for the reasons stated in the notice, and after giving an 
opportunity to the governing body to show cause why the recognition 
should not be withdrawn, and after taking into account the representa-
.S tions, if any, made by the body whether orally or in writing, the 
Central Government may withdraw, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, the recognition granted to the stock exchange: 
Provided that no such withdrawal shall affect the validity of any 
contract entered into or made before the date of the notification, 
10 and the Central Government may, after consultation with the stock 
exchange, make such provision as it deems fit in the notification 
of withdrawal or in any subsequent notification similarly published 
for the due performance of any contracts outstanding on that date. 
6. Power 01 Central Government to call lor periodical returns 
1$ or dlrect inquiries to be made.-( 1) Every recognised stock exchange 
shall furnish to the Central Government such periodical returns 
relating to its affairs as may be prescribed. 
(2) Every recognised stock exchange and every member thereof 
shall maintain and preserve for such periods not exceeding five 
20 years such accounts, correspondence, memoranda, papers, books and 
other records as the Central Government, after consultation with 
the stock exchange concerned, may prescribe in the interest of 
the trade or in the public interest, and such accounts, correspon-
dence, memoranda, papers, books and other records shall be subject 
2S to inspection at all reasonable times· by the Central Government. 
30 
35 
(3). Without prejudice to the provisions contained in_ sub-sections 
(1) and (2), the Central Government, if it is satisfied that it is in the 
interest of the trade or in the public interest" so to do, may, by 
order in writing,-
(a) call upon a recognised stoCk exchange to furnish in 
writiftg such infonnation or explanation relating to its affairs 
or the affairs of any of its members in relation to the atock 
exchange as the Central Government may require; or 
(b) direct the governing body of such stock exchange to 
make an inq\ftry in the prescribed manner in relation to 
its affairs or the affairs of any of its members in 
relation to the stock exchange and submit a report 
of the result of such inquiry to the Central Government within 
such time as may be specified in the order, or, in the alternative, 
direct the inquiry to be made and the report to be submitted 
by one or more persons appointed by the Central Governmeat 
in this behalf. 
(4) Where an inquiry in relation to the affairs of a recognised 
stock exchange or the affairs of any of its members in relation to the 
45 stock exchange has been undertaken under sub-section (3),-
(a) every director, manager, secretary or ofher officer of 
such stock exchange; 
(b) every member of such stock exchange; 
(e) if the member of the stock exchange is a firm, every 
50 partner, manager, secretary or other ofticer of the finn; and . 

• 5 
(d) every other penon or body of persons who has had 
dealings in the course of business with any of the persons men-
tioned in clauses (a), (b) and (c); 
shall be bound to produce before the authority making the inquiry 
all such books, accounts, correspondence and other documents in: S 
his custody or power relating to or having a bearing on the subject-
matter of such inquiry and also to furnish the authorities within 
such time as may be specified with any such statement or informa-
tion relating thereto as may be required of him. 
7. Annual reports to be fumlshed to Central Goverameot by 10 
stock exchaages.-Every recognised stock exchaIlie shall furnish 
the Central Government with a copy of the annual report, and such 
annual report shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed. 
S. Power of Central Govel'lllDellt to direct rules to be made or to 
make rules.-(l) Where, after consultation with the governing bodies IS 
of stock exchanges generally or with the governing body of any 
. stock exchange in particular, the Central Government is of opinion 
that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by order in writing 
together with a statement of the reasons therefor, direct recognised 
stock exchanges generally or any recognised stock exchange in :ao 
particular, as the case may be, to make any rules or to amend any 
rules already made in respect of all or any of the matters specified 
in sub-section (2) of section 3 within a period of six months from 
the date of the order. 
(2) If any recognised stock exchange fails or neglects to comply 2$ 
with any oreier made under sub-section (1) within the period specified 
therein, the Central Government may make the rules for, or amend 
the rules made by, the recognised stock exchange, either in the 
form proposed in the order or with such modifications thereof as 
may be agreed to between the stock exchange and the Central 30 
Government. 
(3) Where in pW'Suance of this section any rules have been made 
or amended, the rules so made or amended shall be published in 
the Gazette of India and also in the Official Gazette or Gazettes 
of the State or States in which the principal office or offices of the 3' 
recognised stock exchange or exchanges is or are situate, and, on 
the publication thereof in the Gazette of India, the rules so made 
or amended shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary con-
tained in the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913), or in any 
other law for the time being in force, have effect as if they had 40 
been made or amended by the recognised stock exchange or stock 
exchanges, as the case may be. 
9. Power of recognised stock exchanges to make bye-Iaws.-( 1) 
Any recognised stock exchange may, subject to the previous approval 
of ~e Central Government, make 'bye-laws for the regulation and 45 
control of contracts. 
(2) In particular, aJ1d wi,thoot prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such bye-laws may provide for-
(a) the 'openins and closiDc of markets and the regulation 
of the hours ,oftraqe; . . ~ 

s 
10 
35 
6 
(b) a clearing house for the periodical settlement of con-
tracts and Jdifferences thereunder, the delivery of and payment 
for securities, the passing on of delivery orders and the regula-
tion and maintenance of such clearing house; 
(c) the regulation or prohibition of blank transfers; 
(d) the number and classes of contracts in respect of which 
settlements shall be made or differences paid through the 
clearing house; 
(e) the regulation, or prohibition of budlas or carry-over 
facilities; 
(f) the fixing, altering or postpq,p.1ng of days for settlements; 
(g) the determination and declaration of market rates, 
Including the opening, closing, highest and lowest rates for 
securities; 
(h) the terms, conditions and incidents of contracts, includ-
ing the prescription of margin requirements, if any, and con-
ditions relating thereto, and_ the forms of contracts in writing; 
(i) the regulation of the entering into, making, performance, 
rescission and termination, of contracts, including contracts 
between members or between a member and his constituent or 
between a member and a person who is not a member, and the 
consequences of default or insolvency on the part of a seller or 
buyer or intermediary, the consequences of a ,breach or omission 
by a seller or buyer, and the responsibility of members who 
are not parties to such contracts; -
(j) the regulation of taravani business including the placing 
of limitations thereon; 
(k) the listing of securities on the stock exchange, the inclu-
sion of any security for the purpose of dealings and the sus-
pension or withdrawal of any such securities, arid the suspen-
sion or prohibition of trading in any specified securities; 
(1) the method and procedure for the settlement of claims 
or disputes, including settlement by arbitration; 
(m) the levy and recovery of fees, fines and penalties; 
(n) the regulation of the course of business between parties 
to contracts in any capacity; 
(0) the fixing of a scale of brokerage and other charges; 
(p) the making, comparing, settling and closing of oargains; 
(q) the emergencies in trade which may arise and the 
exercise of powers in such emergencies, inCluding the pow~r to 
fix maximum and minimum prices for securities; 
(r) the regulation of dealings by members for their own 
account;, . 
(8) the liII)itations on the volume of trade done by any 
45 individual member in exceptional circ~stances; 

7 
(t) the obligation of members to supply such information 
or explanation and to produce such documents relating to the 
business as the governing body may require. 
(3) The bye-laws made under this section may-
(a) specify the bye-laws the contravention of which shall $ 
make a contract entered into otherwise than in accQrdance with 
the bye-laws void under sub-section (1) of section 14; 
(b) provide that the contravention of any of the bye-laws 
:shall render the member concerned liable to one or more of the 
following .punishments, namely.:- 10 
(i) fine; 
(ii) expulsion from membership; 
(iii) suspension from membership for a specified period; 
(iv) any other penalty of a like nature not involving the 
payment of money. 15 
(4) Any bye-laws made under this section shall be subject to such 
~onditions in regard to previous publication as may be prescribed, 
and, when approved by the Central Government, shall be published 
in the Gazette of India and also in the Official Gazette of the State 
in which ,the principal office of the recognised stock exchange is 20 
situate, and shall have effect as from the date of its publication in 
'the Gazette of India: 
Provided that if the Central Government is satisfied in any 
-case that in the interest of the trade or in the public interest 
any bye-law should be made immediately, it may, by order in writing 25 
-specifying the reasons- therefor. dispense with the condition of pre-
vious ·publication. 
10. Power of Central Government to make or amend bye-laws of 
recognised stock exchanges.-(l) The Central Government may, 
-either on a request in writing received by it in this behalf from 30 
the governing body of a recognised stock exchange or on its own 
motion, if it is satisfied after consultation with the governing body 
of the stock exchange that it is necessary or expedient so to do and 
.-after recording its reasons for so doing, make bye-laws lor all or 
'any of the matters specified in section 9 or amend any bye-laws 3' 
made by such stock exchange under that section. 
(2) Where in pursuance of this section any bYe-laws have been 
made or amended, the bye-laws so made or amended shall be pub-
lished in the Gazette of India and also in the Official 
'Gazette of the State in which the principal office of the recognise.d 40 
stock exchange is situate, and on the publication. thereof in Hie 
'Gazette of India, the bye-laws so made or amended shall have ·e~ect 
·as if they had been made or amended by the recognised stocK 
exchange concerned. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this s~ction, where the 45 
governing body of a recognised stock exchange obJects to any bye-
laws made or amended under this section by the Central Government 

8 
on its own motion, it may, within six months of the publication there-
of in the Gazette of India ul'lder sub-section (2), af~ly to the Central 
Government for revision thereof, and the Cel'ltra Government may,-
after giving an opportunity to the governing body of the stock: 
, exchange to be beard in the matter, revise the bye-laws so made or 
amended, and where any bye-laws so made or amended are revised-
as a result of any action taken under this sub-section, the bye-laws 
so revised shall be published and shall become effective as provided 
in sub-section (2). 
10 (4) The making or the amendment or revision of any bye-laws 
under this section shall -in all cases be subject to the condition of_ 
previous publication: 
Provided that if the Central Government is satisfied in any case-
that in the interest of the trade ~r in the public interest any bye-
I, laws should be made, amended or revised immediately, it may, by 
order in writing specifying the reasons therefor, dispense with the 
condition of previous publication. -
11. Power of Central Government to supelSede PftI'DInr body of 
a reeopised steck excbaDp.-(l) Without prejudice to any other-
20 powers vested in the Central Government under this Act, where the-
Central Government is of opinion that the governing body of any 
recognised stock exchange should .be superseded, then, notwithstand-· 
ing anything contained in any other law for the time being in force .. 
the Central Government may serve on the governing body a written 
2S notice that the Central Government is considering the supersession of-
the governing body for the reasons specified in the notice and after-
giving an opportunity to the governing body to show cause why it 
should not be superseded and after taking into account the represen-
tations made by the body, whether orally or in writing, it may, by 
30 notification in the Official Gazette, declare the governing body of 
such stock exchange to be superseded, and may appoint any person 
or persons to exercise and perform all the powers and duties of the-
governing body, and, where more persons than one are appointed. 
may appoint one of such persons to -be the chairman and anotheF to-
a, be the vice-chairman thereof. 
(2) On the publication of a notification in the Official Gazette under 
sub-section (1), the following consequences shall ensue, namely:-
(a) the members of the governing body which has been super-
seded shall, as from the date of the notification of supersession. 
40 cease to hold office as such members; 
(b) the person or persons appointed under sub-section (1). 
-may exercise and perform all the powers and duties of the govern-
ing body which has been superseded; 
(c) all such property of the recognised stock exchange as the-
person or peI'sons appOinted under sub--section (1) may, by order-
4S in writing, specify in this behalf as being necessary for the purpose-
of enabling him or them to carry on the business of the stock 
exchange, shall vest in such person or persons. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary conta~ed in any law 
50 or the rules or bye-laws of the recognised stock exchange the govern-
in,s& body of which is supet"Seded under sub-section (1), the persOl' or-

9 
pe~ns appointed under that sub-section shall hold office for sucn 
period as may be specified in the notification published under that 
s~b-sect~on, ~nd the Central Government may from time to time, by 
lIke notificatIon, vary such period. 
(4) On th~ determinatio~ of. th~ period of office of any person or 5 
persons app~lnted und~ thiS section,. the recognised stock exchange 
shall forthWIth reconstItute a govermng body in accordance with its rules: . 
Provided that until a governing body is so reconstituted, the 
person or persons appointed under sub-section (1) shall continue to I~ 
exercise and perform their powers and duties. 
(5) On the reconstitution of a governing body under sub-section 
(4), all the property of the recognised stock exchange which has vest-
ed in, or was in the possession of, the person or persons appointed 
under sub-section (1) shall vest or revest, as the case may be, in the 15 
governing body so reconstituted. 
l!. Power to suspend. basiBess of recoplsed stock excbanges.-If 
tor the purpose of meeting any emergency which has arisen in the 
trade the Central Government considers it expedient so to do, it may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, for reasons to be set out there- » 
in, direct a recognised stock exchange to suspend_such of its business 
for such period not exceeding seven days and subject to such condi-
tions as may be specified in the l.totification, and, if, in the opinion 
of the Central Government, the interest of the trade or the public 
interest requires that the period should be extended, may, by like 25 
notification extend the said period from time to time: 
Provided that where the period of suspension is to be extended 
beyond the first period, no notification extending the period of sus-
pension shall be issued unless the governing body of the recognised 
association has been given an opportunity of being heard in the ~()t 
matter. 
CONTRACTS AND OPTIONS IN SECtplmES 
13. Contracts In noWled areas SIegal In certaiB circumstances.-If 
the Central Government is satisfied, having regard to the nature or 
the volume of transactio~s in securities in any State or area, that it 35 
is necessary so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare this section to apply to such State or area, and thereupon 
every contract in such State or area which is entered into after the 
date of the notification otherwise than between members of a recog-
nised stock exchange or through or with such member shall be illegal. 4() 
14. Contracts in notifted areas fA) be void in certain cJrcu~ces.­
(1) Any contract entered into in any State or area speCIfied In the 
notification under section 13 which is in contravention of any. of the 
bye-laws specified in that behalf under clause (a) of sub-sectIon (3) 
of section 9 shan be void- 45 
(i) as respects the rights of any member of th~ recognised 
stock exchange who has entered into such contract lD contraven-
tion of any such bye-law, and also 

., 
10 
(~i) as resp.e~ts the :rights of any. other person who has 
knowmgly partlclpated m the transactIon entailing such contra-vention. 
, 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be construed to affect the right 
of any person other than a member of the recognised stock exchange 
to enforce any suc,h contract or to recover any sum under or in respect 
~f such c~mtract If sue? person had no l¢owledge that the transac-
tion was m contravention of any of the bye-laws specified in clause 
(a) of sub-section (3) of section 9. 
10 15. Members may not ad as prinelpals In certain elrcumstanees.-
No member of a recognised stock exchange shall in respect of any 
securities enter into anr contract as a principal with any person 
other than a member 0 a recognised stock exchange, unless he has 
secured the consent or authority of such person and discloses in the 
.$ note, memorandum or agreement of sale or purchase that he is acting 
as a principal: 
Provided that where the member has secured the consent or 
authority of -such person otherwise th~n in writing he shall secure 
written confirmation by such person of such consent or authority 
20 within three days from the date of the contract: 
Provided further that no such written consent or authority of 
such person shall be necessary for closing out any outstanding con-
tract entered into by such person in accordance with the bye-laws, 
if the member discloses in the note, memorandum or agreement 
2$ of sale or purchase in respect of such closing out that he is acting as 
a principal. 
16. Exclusion of spot delivery contracts trom sections 13, If and 
15.-Nothing contained in sections 13, 14 and 15 shall apply to spot 
delivery contracts. 
30 17. Power to prohibit contracts in certain cases.-(1) If the Central 
Government is of op~on that it is necessary to prevent undesirable 
speculation in specified securities in any State or area, it may, after 
consultation with the recognised stock exchanges, if any, in the State 
or area, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that no 
3, person in the State or area specified in the notification shall, save with 
the permission of the Central Government, enter into any contract 
for the sale or purchase of any security specified in the notification 
except to the extent and in the manner, if any, specified therein. 
(2) All contracts in contravention of the provisions of sub-section 
40 (1) entered into after the date of the notification issued thereunder 
shall be illegal. 
18. Ucenslng of dealers In securities generaUy.-(1) Subject to the 
provisions of sub-section (3) and to the other provisions contained in 
this Act, no person shall carry on or purport to carry on the business 
4' of dealing in securities in any State or an~a with respect to which 
this section may be made applicable by the Central Government by 
notification. in the Official .Gazette, except under the authority of a 
licence granted by the Central Government in this behalf. 

II 
(2) No- notification under sub-section (1) shall be issued with 
respect t.o any State or area unless the_ Central Government is satis-
fi~d, ~avIng regard to the manner .in .whic~ securities are being dealt 
~lth In such_State or area, that It IS ~eslrable or expedient in the 
Interest of the trade or in the public interest that such dealings should , 
,be regula ted by a system of licensing. 
· (3~ The re~t.rictions imposed by sub-section (1) in relation to deal-
Ings 10 secuntle& shall not apply to the doing of anything by or on 
,behalf of,-
(a) a member of any recognised stock exchange; or 14) 
(b) the Reserve Bank of India or any local authority or any 
corporation set up under the authority of a Central Act a State 
Act or a Provincial Act; or ' 
(c) any exempted dealer; or 
(d) any person acting in the capacity of a trustee; or I' 
(e) any other person who has effected any transaction with 
or through the agency of any such person as is referred to in 
clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d). 
19. Prohibition of options In securltles.-Notwithstanding anything 
-contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being' in force, 20 
,all options in securities entered into after such date as may be 
'specified in this behalf by the Central Government, ,by notification in 
the Official Gazette, shall be illegal. 
(2) Any option in securities which has been entered into before 
the date of the notification under sub-section (1) and which remains 2, 
to be performed, whether wholly or in part, after the said date, shall, 
to that extent, become void. 
LISTING OF SECURITIES BY PuBLIC COMPANIES 
20. Power to compel listing of securities by' publle companles.-
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 30 
being in force, if the Central Goverpment is of opinion, having regard 
t9 the nature of the securities issued by any public company as defin-
, ed in the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VIII of 1913) or to the dealings 
in them, that it is necessary or expedient in the interest of th~ trade 
or in the public interest so to do, it may require the company, af~er 35 
giving it an opportunity of being heard in the matter, to comply w~th 
''Such requirements as may ,be prescribed with!:espect to the liStlOg 
· of its securities on any recognised stock exchange. 
21. RIght of appeal against refusal by stock exchanges to list 
· securities of public eompamrs. Where a recognised stock exchange 40 
,acting in pursuance of any power given to it by its bye-laws, refuses 
to list the securities of any public company, the company shall be 
.. entitled to be furnished with the reasons for such refusal, and may 
appeal against the decision of the recognised stock exchange tc? ~he 
"Central Gavernment, and the Central Government may, after 81VlOg 45 
· the stock exchange an opportunity of being heard, vary or set aside 

la 
the decision of the recognised stock exchange, and when it does B0-
the stock exchange shall be bound to act in confonnity with the-
orders of the Central Government. 
PENALTIES AND PROCEDuRE 
5 22. Penalty for contraventioa of eertaIa proYblou of Acl-(l)t 
Any person who,-
(a) without reasonable excuse (the burden of proving 
which shall be on him) fails to comply with any requisition made 
under sub-section _ (4) of section 6; or 
Ie (b) enters into any contract in contravention of any of the-
provisions contained in section 13 or section 15 or section 17; or-
(c) contravenes the provisions contained in sub-section (1) of" 
section 18; or" 
(d) enters into any option in securities in contravention of the-
I, provisions contained in section 19, -
shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for 'a lerm 
which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both, 
(2) Any person who fails to comply with the orders of the Central 
Government under section 20 or section 21 shall on conviction be 
ao punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees. 
23. Ofteaees by OOIIlpauJes.-(1) Where an offence has been com-
mitted by a company, every person who, at the time when the offence 
was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company 
for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the com-
a, pany, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence, and shall be liable 
to be proceeded against and Runished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render 
any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he-
proves that the offence was committed withQut his knowledge or that. 
30 he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such 
offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
an offence under this Act has been committted by a company and it 
is proved that the oJlence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any gross negligence on the part 
3' of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company J-
such director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, 
shall also be deemed to be guilty' of that offence and shall be liable-
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
I a) 'company' means any body corporate and includes a firm 
or other association o£ individuals, and 
(b) 'director', in relation to a firm. means a partner in the 
firm. 
H. eeri.ta oareMeI to be eopla.ble.-Notwithltanding 'anything 
45 contained in' the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898) .. 

13 
;any offence punishable under sub-section (1) of ~ection 22 shall be 
<teemed to be a cognizable offence within the meaning of that Code. 
25. J1U'bJdIetloa to try otrences UDder this Act.-No court inferior 
to that of a presidency magistrate or a magistrate of the first class 
.shall take cognizance of or try any offence punishable under this Act , 
.and no such court shall take cognizance of any such offence excepi 
with the previous sanction of the Gentral Government. 
MISCELLANEOUS 
26. Title to cUvidends.-It shall be lawful for the holder of any 
:securi~y whose name appears on ~h~ books of the company issuing 10 
the saId security to receIve any dIvIdend or bonus or to be entitled 
to any other right declared by the company in respect thereof for 
.any year, notwithstanding that the said security has already been 
transferred by him for consideration, unless the transferee who claims 
the dividend, bonus or other right lodges the security and all other 15 
-documents relating to the transfer which may be required by the 
company with the company for being registered in his name at least 
fifteen days before the company closes its register of members for 
the year: 
Provided that, where the company refuses to -register the transfer ao 
'Of the security in the name of the transferee, nothing contained in 
this section shall affect the right of the transferee to enforce against 
the transferor or any other person his rights, if any, in relation to the 
transfer. 
2'7. Power to exempt.-The Central Govet.:nment may, by notifica- 2, 
tion in the Official Gazette, exempt, subject to such conditions and in 
:such circumstances as may be specified in the notification, any class 
-of dealers in securities whose main business is something other than 
the business of dealing in securities or any class of contracts from the 
·operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act. 30 
28. Protectlon of action taken In good falth.-No suit, prosecution 
·or other legal proceeding whatsoever shall lie in any court against 
the governing body or any member, office bearer or servant of any 
recognised stock exchange or against any person or persons appointed 
under sub-section (1) of section I} for anything which is in good faith 3' 
-done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rules 
-or bye-laws made thereunder. 
29. Power to make rules.-(l) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of 
-carrying into effect the objects of this Act. 40 
(2). In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
:£pregoing power, such rules may provide for,-
(a) the manner in which applications may be made, .the parti-
culars which they should contain and the levy of a fee m respect, 
of such applications; 4' 
(b) the manner in which any inquiry for the p~ryose of .re-
cognizing any stock exchange may be made, the condItIons whIch 

10 
20 
14 
may be imposed for the grant of such recognition. including con-
ditions as to the admission of members if the stock exchange con-
cerned is to be the only recognised stock exchange in the area '. 
and the form in which such recognition shall be granted; , 
(c) the particulars which should be contained ~n the periodical 
returns and annual reports to be furnished to the Central Govern-
ment; 
(d) the documents which should be maintained and preserved 
under section 6 and the periods for which they should be pre-
served; 
(e) the manner in which any inquiry by the governing body 
of a stock exchange shall be made under section 6; 
(f) the manner in which the bye-laws to ·be made or amend-
ed under this Act shall before being so made or amended be pub-
lished for cdticism; 
(g) the manner in which applications may be made by deaJers 
in securities for licences under section 18. the fee payable in 
respect thereof and the period of such licences, the conditions 
subject to which licences may be granted, including conditions 
relating to the forms which may be used in making contracts, the 
documents to be maintained by licensed dealers and the furnish-
ing of periodical information to such authority as may be specified 
and the revocation of licences for breach of conditions; 
(h) the requirements which shall ,be complied with by public 
companies for the purpose of getting their securities listed on any 
stock exchange; and 
(i) any other matter which is to be 0: may be prescribed. 
(3) Any rules made under this section shall be subject to the con-
dition of previous publication and shall, as soon as may be, after 
30 their publication in the Official Gazette, be laid before both Houses 
of Parliament" 
30. Repeal-The Bombay Securities Contracts Control Act, 1925 
(Bombay Act VIII of 1925) is hereby repealed, 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of this Bill is to provide for the regulation of stock 
exchanges, and of transactions in securities dealt in on them with a 
view to preventing undesirable speculation in them. The Bill also 
seeks to regulate the buying and selling of securities outside the-
limits of stock exchanges, through the licensing of security dealers. 
2. The post~war boom in the stock exchanges between 1945 and' 
1946 and its aftermath emphasised the urgency of stock exchange re-
form on an all-India basis. Accordingly, the Government of India 
asked the then Economic Adviser to the Ministry of Finance to under-
take a comprehensive study on .the subject in 1948. Later in the· 
year, an official Committee consisting of representatives of the Minis-
tries of Finance and Law, the Reserve Bank of India and the Govern-
ment of Bombay was appointed to consid'er the recommendations 
contained in this report and to submit detailed proposals for legisla-
tion. The report of this Committee indicated the broad lines on which 
such legislation should be framed, while another Informal Com-
mittee went into the details of these proposals and prepared a draft 
Bill for the consideration of Government. As the representatives of 
the business community and stock exchanges were not associated with 
either the official Committee or the Informal Committee, the Govern-
ment of India considered it necessary. at this stage, to appoint another 
Committee with a predominantly non-official membership, under the-
Chairmanship of Shri A. D. Gorwala. The terms of ref~ence of this 
Committee were-
(i) to consider the draft proposals of Government on the sub-
ject of Stoek Exchange regulation; . 
(ii) to submit a revised draft Bill; and 
(iii) to make CUly other recommendations on the subject. 
This Committee submitted its report in August, 1951, and enclosed 
with it a revised draft Bill. The report and the draft Bill prepared 
hy this Committee 'were circulated to all principal stock exchanges in 
this country, chambers of commerce and other interested associations 
and individuals. The comments from all these bodies and individuals 
were received in course of 1952 and were afterwards studied and 
analysed in this Department. The present Bill is based on the results 
of this study and analysis. 
3. The Bill, as now drafted, broadly follows the recommendations 
contained in the report of the Gorwala Committee. The. scheme ~f 
regulation contemplated in the Bill provides for (a) the prIor recogm-
tion of the stock exchanges, subject to the fulfilment. by them of 
certain conditions relating to their membership and their rules and 
bye-laws (clauses 3 4 and 5); and (b) a general control over their 
trading methods an'd practices, to be exercised through the powers 
proposed to be conferred on the Central Government to· approve of 
their rules, regulations and bye-Ia.ws and to make or amend them 
IS 

16 
(clauses 8, 9 and 10). Powers are taken in clauses 11 and 12 to deal 
-with abnormal situations or emergencies, which may gravely affect the 
working of the stock exchanges and call for urgent and drastic action 
by the Central Government. 
The Central Government are also empowered to call for such in-
-formation as they may require .in respect of the affairs of a stock ex-
change or of ~y of its members and also to direct investigations to 
be made into the affairs of a stock exchange, if they consider that 
'it is in the interest of trade or in the public interest to do so (clause 
16). 
Clauses 13 and 14 of the Bill impose certain restrictions on trans-
:actions in securities carried on in or outside the recognised stock 
-exchanges, while clause 19 specifically prohibits dealing in options in 
securities. Power is also taken in clause 17 to prohibit transactions in 
:specified securities, after consultation with the exchanges concerned, 
in order to prevent undesi.rable speculation in them. 
In order to regulate the buying and selling of securitieS outside 
the recognised stock exchanges, the Bill provides for the licensing of 
all dealers in securities who are not members of a recognised stock 
.exchange or are otherwise exempted from the licensing requirements 
.( clause 18). The provisions of the Bill on this subject broadly follow 
the pattern of control underlying the Prevention of Fraud -(Invest-
ments~ Act in the U.K., which was passed in 19'39, and are intended 
to protect small and ill-informed investors against unscrupulous share 
brokers and dealers. 
C. D. DESHMUKH. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 22nd December. 1954. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 29 authorises the Government to make rules in respect of 
the Irultters set out therein. In a Bill for the regulation of securities 
contracts, it is difficult to d~al with every item of regulation in the 
Bill itself. The standardisation of trading methods and practices in 
stock exchanges will necessarily have to depend upon the circum-
stances in each of the areas concerned. Government is therefore em-
powered to impose such conditions as may be necessary in the in-
terest of the trade before recognising any stock exchange. It is also 
empowered to make bye-laws for, or modify or r~scind any bye-laws 
already made by, stock exchanges, wherever public interest so re-
quires (see clauses 8 and 10). Under clause 29, apart from the routine 
matters on which rules may be made as specified therein, the only 
provisions of importance to which attention may be drawn are the 
provisions referred to in sub-clauses (2) (b), (2) (g) and (2) (h). 
Before stock exchanges are recognised, it may be necessary to im-
pose conditions with respect to membership which may either be 
limited or unlimited, having regard to the area served by the stock 
exchange and the number of recognised stock exchanges, if any, in 
.the area. It may also be necessary to ensure that before recognition is 
granted, the bye-laws of the stock exchange are so drafted as to en-
sure fair dealing. It would be difficult to visualise what those 
conditionS' would be at the present moment and a certain amount of 
discretion will have to be vested in the rule-making authority. In 
the same manner,' for the purpose of licensing dealers in securities 
other than stock exchanges, rules may have to be made imposing con-
ditions subject to which the licences will be issued and such conditions 
will again have to be so devised as to ensure that investors are 
adequately protected. Rules may also have to be made respecting the 
form in which contracts shall be entered into by dealers in securities 
so that the utmost gO'Od faith is ensured in respect of such transactions 
With respect to the listing of securities, rules may require the furnish-
ing of necessary information respecting the financial affairs of the 
company whose securities are to be listed the market which such 
securities command 8Qd so on. 
As the Bill is drafted, the stock exchanges will enjoy in a large 
measure internal autonomy, and Government interference will be 
confined to the rerulation of the working of the exchanges in a 
manner which wi) su.bserve bona fide trading and public interest. 
In the context of this Bill, the rule-making power is not of an 
exceptional character. 
17 

LOK, SABHA 
---
A 
BILL 
'to prevent undesirable transactions in socurities by ~ 1tipg the 
business of dealing therein, by prohibiting options and by 
providing for certain other matters connected therewith. 
'" - .... 
(Shri C. D. Deshmukh, 
MimSler of Finance.) 