१ 8 NOV 2006

As InTRoDUCED IN‘ Lok SABHA

Bill No. 65 of 2006

THE RAINWATER (COMPULSORY HARVESTING) BILL, 2006
By
SuriMaTI KRisHNA Tiratu, M.P.
A

BLL.
to provide for compulsory harvesting of rainwater by every household, business
establishment and Government building, in order to ensure availability of
water and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
1. (/) This Act may be called the Rainwater (Compulsory Harvesting) Act, 2006. Short title,
(2) It extends to the whole of India. Seek
5 (3) It shall come into force at once.

2. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in public interest that the Union Government _ Declaration.
undertake measures to preserve and harvest rainwater in the country for augmenting drink-
ing water availability in the country.

3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.

10 (a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;


Compulsory
rainwater
harvesting in
Government
buildings,

Compulsory
rainwater
harvesting by
the
households
and business
establishments.

Duty of the
appropriate
Government
to provide

and protect
water bodies.

Appropriate
Government
to prepare an
action plan to
educate the
Masses about
rainwater.

Central
Government
to provide
requisite
funds.
Punishment.

Act to have
overriding
effect.

Power to
make rules.

2

(6) “business establishment” means and includes any building used as an office
or a factory in connection with any trade or business;

(c) “government building” means and includes the offices of the Ministries,
departments, public sector enterprises, statutory bodies or bodies owned or
administered by the appropriate Government and autonomous bodies, local self
Government bodies and residential areas of Government employees provided by the
appropriate Government;

(4) “household” means a dwelling unit of any description; and
(७) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the appropriate Government shall construct and provide necessary infrastructure for
rainwater harvesting in the buildings owned by it in such manner and within such time as
may be prescribed.

5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
every household and business establishment shall compulsorily adopt measures for rooftop
rainwater harvesting in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed.

(2) 1 shall be the duty of the head or karta of the household to implement the
provisions of sub-section (7).

6. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to construct/repair conventional
water bodies such as wells, tanks, ponds, creeks, watersheds or other water bodies to
preserve the rainwater so as to recharge the levels of ground water to fulfil the purposes of
this Act.

7. The appropriate Government shall, as soon as possible, prepare an action plan to
educate the masses about the technology and benefits of rooftop rainwater harvesting and
associate Non-Governmental Organisations and other such agencies or institutions, as it
may deem fit, for the purpose in such manner as may be prescribed.

8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by the Parliament by
law in this regard, make available requisite and adequate funds to the States and Union
Territories for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

9. Any person violating the provisions of this Act, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with a fine which may extend to
Tupees one lakh or with both.

10. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder, shall have effect,
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force, but save aforesaid, the provisions of this act, shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law, for the time being in force, dealing with the subject matter of
this Act.

11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

It is estimated that our country receives rainfall of about four thousand billion cubic
metres every year and major part of this rainwater goes waste as it falls into the sea through
the rivers of our country. This huge wastage of rainwater is taking place in spite of the fact
that there is a severe shortage of drinking water throughout the country. Water is a scarce
resource and its availability for drinking and other household purposes in the country as a
whole is hardly as per requirement-more so in the desert and drought prone areas. The only
way to overcome this problem is to prevent the wastage of rainwater by conserving it
through harvesting and recharging the ground water levels.

Identification of the areas not receiving normal rainfall with the help of reconnaissance
of each and every hamlet of the country, for success of this programme is the need of the
hour. The private sector as well as the non-governmental organisations have to play a major
role in physical and financial terms, in order to achieve the goal of rainwater harvesting. To
save the planet earth, we have to make rooftop rainwater harvesting a movement of the
masses, in which, the Government, corporates and every household would participate and
preserve the rainwater which is the purest form of water. This will increase the level of ground
water which can be used for drinking and other purposes. Hence, it has become necessary to
make rooftop rainwater harvesting mandatory throughout the country to overcome the
water scarcity which otherwise will worsen further in near future if we do not act now.

Hence this Bill.

New DEtHt; KRISHNA TIRATH.
July 21,2006.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for creating infrastructure for compulsory rainwater
harvesting in Government buildings. Clause 6 provides that the appropriate Government
shall construct, repair and protect water bodies. Clause 7 provides that the appropriate
Government shall give publicity to benefits of rainwater harvesting and provide assistance
to non-governmental organisations and private sector for the purpose of creation of rainwater
harvesting infrastructure. Clause 8 provides that Central Government shall provide requisite
funds to the States and Union Territories for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Therefore,
the Bill, ifenacted, is likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crore is likely to be involved as recurring
expenditure per annum.

A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of Tupees five thousand crore is also likely to
be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A

BILL
to provide for compulsory harvesting of rainwater by every household, business
establishment and Government building, in order to ensure availability of
water and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

. (Shrimati Krishna Tirath, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1916LS(S-3)—07.08.2006.