     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill  No.  65  of  2022
THE  THALASSEMIA  PREVENTION  BILL, 2022
By
SHRI RAHUL SHEWALE, M.P.
A
BILL
to promote awareness to prevent passing of thalassemia from parents to
children through mutated haemoglobin genes and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Thalassemia Prevention Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “educational institution’’ means a primary or a middle or a secondary
school imparting education to children, by whatever name such institution is
called;
(c) “Fund” means the Thalassemia Prevention and Awareness Fund; and
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette,
constitute a Fund to be known as the Thalassemia Prevention and Awareness
Fund.
(2) The Fund shall be utilised to:—
(a) create awareness about thalassemia at bus stands, railway
stations and government hospitals in urban and rural areas; and
(b) organise blood donation camp in such manner as may be
prescribed.
4. From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the official
Gazette, specify, thalassemia and preventive measures therefor shall be taught as a
compulsory subject in all educational institutions.
5.  The appropriate Government shall ensure that the testing for thalassemia is
made compulsory,—
(i)    at the time of taking admission in Educational Institutions;
(ii)  at the time of being appointed in Government establishment and
Nationalised Bank:
Provided that mere testing positive for thalassemia shall not be a ground
to deny admission in educational institutions or appointment in Government
establishments and nationalised banks, as the case may be.
6. Each party to marriage shall, before solemnisation of marriage, submit
thalassemia test report to the appropriate Government in such manner as may be
prescribed:
Provided that mere testing positive for thalassemia of either party to the marriage
shall not be a ground for denial of registering or solemnisation of a marriage.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds, from time to time, for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
9. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Definitions.
Thalassemia
Prevention and
Awareness
Fund.
Compulsory
Teaching of
thalassemia in
educational
institutions.
Compulsory
Thalassemia
Test Report.
Thalassemia
Test Report
before
marriage.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

   Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a
period of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
5
10
15
3
Power to make
rules.

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Thalassemia is a disease caused by a defect in the blood. Most people are
unaware of this disease. The disease is fully genetic. In other words, it is the parents
who cause the disease in children. This disease is of two types, minor and major.
Children get this serious disease only because of ignorance of their parents about the
disease. Thalassemia minor are carriers and can live their lives like everyone else.
But if two thalassemia minors are married to each other there are twenty five per cent
chances of getting thalassemia major child. To stop all this a simple procedure is to
get tested for thalassemia before marriage. This test can be carried out at any pathology
lab. If the person carries out the test for thalassemia and tests negative or positive, the
result remains same for the rest of life. That’s why it is must that the person should
get tested once.
The Bill provides for creating awareness about thalassemia so as to prevent
passing of thalassemia from parents to children.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;                             RAHUL SHEWALE
19 January, 2022.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Thalassemia Prevention
and Awareness Fund, which shall be utilised for creating awareness about the disease
in urban and rural areas and for organising blood donation camps. Clause 7 provides
that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes
of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India.  It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about
rupees ten crore per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill.  As the rules will relate to matters of detail only,
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to promote awareness to prevent passing of thalassemia from parents to children
through mutated haemoglobin genes and for matters
connected therewith.
.
————
(Shri  Rahul Shewale, M.P.)