As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

(25 AUG tem

Bill No. 140 of 2000

THE COMPULSORY MILITARY TRAINING FOR COLLEGE
STUDENTS BILL, 2000

By
SHRI CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE, M.P.
A
BILL
40 make provision for compulsory military training for college students in the country,
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—

1. (2) This Act may be called the Compulsory Military Training for College Stu- Shortt,
dents Act, 2000, extent and

commencement.
5 (2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notifi-
cation in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise Tequires,— Definitions.

(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government
10 of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;

(b) “training” means military taining.


Compulsory
military train-
ing for all able
bodied stu
dents,

Formulation of
a scheme,

Coordination
cell,

Expenditure in-
curred on mili-
lary training,

2

3. Military training for a period as may be prescribed, shall be compulsory for all
able bodied male students of all recognised colleges in the country:

Provided that in case of girl students the military training shall be voluntary:

Provided further that all able-bodied college students shall have to pass the prescribed
examination fixed for the purpose.

4.The appropriate Government shall formulate a scheme and establish necessary
institutions throughout the country to give effect to the Provisions of section 3.

5. (1) The Central Government shall set Up a coordination cell comprising senior
officers of the Ministry of Human Resource Development and the Ministry of Defence to
maintain coordination among the Government of States, administrators of the Union
territories for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

(2) The Ministry of Defence shall provide necessary assistance to impart military
training to the college students throughout the country and review the shortcomings of
military training from time to time,

& The appropriate Government shall bear expenditure incurred on military
‘raining, in such manner and proportion, as may be prescribed,

15


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Today our country is facing not only external threats but also internal threats frorh
terrorists and divisive forces, One of our neighbouring countries has occupied a major part
of our Jammu and Kashmir State. Since, 1947, our country has been invaded by
neighbouring countries more than four times. At present, a proxy war has been waged
through terrorism or insurgency by enemy countries in different parts of our country. In
this situation it has become imperative to impart compulsory military training to all able.
bodied students in colleges in order to instill a sense of nationalism in their mind from
beginning and prepare them to meet any challenge in future,

New Deu; CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE
July 24, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for formulation of scheme and establishment of
necessary institutions for imparting military-training to college students, Clause 6 provides
that the Central Government shall bear expenditure incurred on military-training as may
be prescribed, The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve. expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore per annum is likely to be
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India,

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two crore is also likely to be involved
from the Consolidated Fund of India.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to make provision for compulsory military training for college
students in the country,

(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2340LS—09-08-2000.