1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 65 of 2015
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR STUDENTS BILL, 2015
By
DR. A. SAMPATH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a National Commission for Students and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1.  (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Students Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come in to force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act , unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Commission" means the National Commission for Students constituted
under section 3;
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "member" means a member of the Commission and includes the Member-
Secretary;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) "student" means a person who is pursuing any course of study in any
educational institution or in any branch outside India of an educational institution
registered in India.
CHAPTER II
T
HE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR STUDENTS
3. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a body to be known as the National
Commission for Students to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions
assigned to, it under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson, committed to the cause of students, to be nominated by the
Central Government, who is or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or High Court
or eligible to be appointed as a Judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court.
(b) seven Members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst
persons of ability, integrity and standing who have had experience in law, student
activism, management of an industry or organisation administration, economic
development, health, education or social welfare, committed to increasing the
employment potential of students and promoting voluntary organisations of students
(including students activists):
Provided that—
(a) at least one member each shall be from amongst persons belonging to the
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the other backward classes, respectively;
(b) at least one member shall be a woman;
(c) at least one member shall be a person having adequate legal background in
welfare legislations.
(c) a Member-Secretary to be nominated by the Central Government, who shall
be—
(i) an expert in the field of academic or management of educational
structure or social movements launched by students, or
(ii) an officer who is a member of a civil service of the Union or of an all-
India service or holds a civil post under the Union with appropriate experience.
4. ( 1) The Chairperson and every Member shall hold office for such period, not
exceeding three years, as may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf.
(2) The Chairperson or a Member (other than the Member-Secretary) may, by writing
and addressed to the Central Government resign from the office of Chairperson or, as the
case may be, of the Member at any time.
(3) The Central Government shall remove a person from the office of Chairperson or a
Member referred to in sub-section (2) if that person—
(a) becomes an undischarged insolvent;
(b) gets convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which in the
opinion of the Central Government involves moral turpitude;
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting;
Constitution
of National
Commission
for Students.
Term of office
and conditions
of service of
Chairperson
and Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(e) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Commission, absent from
three consecutive meetings of the Commission; or
(f)  in the opinion of the Central Government has so abused the position of
Chairperson or Member as to render that person's continuance in office detrimental to
the public interest:
Provided that no person shall he removed under this clause until that person has been
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
(4) A vacancy caused under sub-section (2) or otherwise shall be filled by fresh
nomination.
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the Chairperson and Members shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Central Government shall provide the Commission with such officers and
employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of the functions of the
Commission under this Act.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other  terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and the other employees appointed for the purpose of the Commission
shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. The salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and Members and the
administrative expenses, including salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the officers
and other employees referred to in section 5, shall be paid out of the grants referred to in
sub-section (1) of section 11.
7. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be questioned or shall be invalid on
the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the
Commission.
8. (1) The Commission may appoint such committees as may be necessary for dealing
with such special issues as may be taken up by the Commission from time to time.
(2) The Commission shall have the power to co-opt as members of any committee
appointed under sub-section (1) such number of persons, who are not Members of the
Commission, as it may think fit and the persons so co-opted shall have the right to attend the
meetings of the committee and take part in its proceedings but shall not have the right to
vote.
(3) The persons so co-opted shall be entitled to receive such allowances for attending
the meetings of the committee as may be prescribed.
9. (1) The Commission or a committee thereof shall meet as and when necessary and
shall meet at such time and place as the Chairperson may think fit.
(2) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure and the procedure of the
Committees thereof.
(3) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the Member-
Secretary or any other officer of the Commission duly authorised by the Member-Secretary
in this behalf.
CHAPTER III
F
UNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION
10. (1) The Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions, namely:—
(a) investigate and examine all matters relating to the rights and safeguards
provided for students;
Officers and
other
employees of
the
Commission,
Salaries and
allowances to
be paid out of
grants.
Vacancies
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings
of the
Commission.
Committees
of the
Commission.
Procedure to
be regulated
by the
Commission.
Functions of
the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(b) present to the Central Government, annually and at such other times as the
Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;
(c) make, in such reports, recommendations for the effective implementation of
those safeguards for improving the conditions of students by the Union or any State;
(d) review, from time to time the existing provisions of the Constitution and other
laws affecting students and recommend amendments thereto so as to suggest remedial
legislative measures to meet any lacunae, inadequacies or shortcomings in such
legislations;
(e) take up the cases of violation of the provisions of the Constitution and of
other laws in relation to students with appropriate authorities;
(f) look into complaints and take suo moto notice of matters relating to—
(i) deprivation of student's rights; including denied and unfair trade
practices of educational loans;
(ii) non-implementation of laws enacted to provide protection to students
and also to achieve the objective of equality and development;
(iii) non-compliance of policy decisions, guidelines or instructions aimed
at mitigating hardships and ensuring welfare and providing relief to students,
and take up the issues arising out of such matters with appropriate authorities;
(g) call for special studies or investigations into specific problems or situations
arising out of discrimination and atrocities against students and identify the constraints
so as to recommend strategies for their removal;
(h) participate and advise on the planning process of socio-economic development
of students;
(i) evaluate the progress of the development of role of students under the Union
and any State;
(j) inspect or cause to be inspected a jail, juvenile home, remand home, women's
institution or other place custody where students are kept as prisoners or otherwise,
and take up with the concerned authorities for remedial action, if found necessary;
(k) to inspect any educational institution and its premises including hostels and
offices and take up with concerned authorities for remedial action, if found necessary;
(l) fund litigation affecting a large body of students in disputes relating to
educational issues with managements;
(m) make periodical reports to the Government on any matter pertaining to
students; and
(n) any other matter which may be referred to it by the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause all the reports referred to in clause (b) of sub-
section (1) to be laid before each House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining
the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and
the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
(3) Where any such report or any part thereof relates to any matter with which any
State Government is concerned, the Commission shall forward a copy of such report or part
to such State Government who shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the State
along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the
recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any
of such recommendations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(4) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in clause (a) or
sub-clause (i) of clause (f) of sub-section (1), have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit
and, in particular in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of
India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
CHAPTER IV
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
11. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, pay to the Commission by way of grants such sums of money as the
Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing the functions
under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the grants
referred to in sub-section (1).
12. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the
Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor
General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in
connection with such audit shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him in connection
with the audit of the accounts of the Commission under this Act shall have the same rights
and privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and
Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the
Commission.
(4) The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Commission.
13. The Commission shall for each financial year prepare in such form and at such time,
as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the
previous financial year and forward a copy thereof to the Central Government.
14. The Central Government shall cause the annual report  together with a memorandum
of action taken on the  recommendations contained therein, in so far as they relate to the
Central Government and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such
recommendations and the audit report to be laid as may be after the reports are received,
before each House of Parliament.
Grants by the
Central
Government.
Accounts and
Audit.
Annual
Report.
Annual
report and
audit report
to be laid
before
Parliament.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
15. The Chairperson, the Members, officers and other employees of the Commission
shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code 1860.
16. The Central Government shall consult the Commission on all major policy matters
affecting students.
17. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the OfficialGazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the forgoing power, such
rules may provided for all or any of the following matters, namely—
(a) salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and Members under sub-section ( 5) of section 4 and of
officers and other employees under sub-section (2) of section 5;
(b) allowances for attending the meetings of the Committee by the co-opted
persons under sub-section (3) of section 8;
(c) other matters under clause (f) of sub-section (4) of section 10;
(d) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be maintained under
sub-section (1) of section 12;
(e) the form in, and the time at, which the annual report shall be prepared under
section 13; and
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Chairperson,
Members and
staff of the
Commission
to be public
servants.
Central
Government
to consult
Commission.
Power to
make rules.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Students are the future of our nation. But the recent trend in education sector being
monetary based is eroding social consciousness. Education plays an important role in shaping
an individual's career. Education removes blanket of ignorance, empowers people and
familiarises them of their fundamental rights. The level of education helps people to earn
recognition and respect in the society. Article 21A of the Constitution guarantees free and
compulsory education to all the children between the age of six to fourteen years. However,
there is no obligation on the part of the Government to ensure pre-primary and higher
education. Although, Government has taken an important step by enacting the Right of
Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, yet, a lot more needs to be done to
enable the children to secure gainful employment after completing their education.
The Bill seeks to provide for the Constitution of a National Commission for welfare and
protection of rights of students. The main task of the Commission shall be to study and
monitor all matters relating to the constitutional and legal safeguards provided for students,
to review the existing legislations and suggest amendments, wherever necessary. It will also
look into the complaints and take students notice of the cases involving deprivation of the
rights of students in order to provide support, legal or otherwise, to hapless students. The
Commission shall monitor the proper implementation of all the legislations made to protect
the rights of students so as to enable them to achieve equality in all spheres of life and equal
participation in the development of the nation.
The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
N
EW DELHI; A.  SAMPA TH
February 11, 2015.
7

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a National Commission for Students.
Clause 6 provides for salaries and allowances to be paid to the Chairperson and members of
the Commission. Clause 8 provides for appointment of Committees to deal with special
issues. Clause 9 provides for meetings of the Commission and Committees. Clause 10 provides
for funds for meeting expenditure on litigation affecting students. Clause 11 provides that
the Central Government shall provide funds to the Commission. Clause 12 provides for
payment of expenditure incurred on audit of the Commission.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. At this stage, it is not possible to give the exact amount to be incurred. However, it
is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees four hundred crore will be involved
per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees forty crore is also likely to be involved.
8

9
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
provisions of the Bill. Such rules may provide for matters, such as—
(a) the manner of preparation of the panel of eminent persons under sub-section (2) of
section 3;
(b) salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service
of, the Chairperson and Members under sub-section (5) of section 4 and officers and other
employees under sub-section (2) of section 5;
(c) allowances for attending the meetings of the committee by the co-opted persons
under sub-section (3) of section 8;
(d) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be maintained under
sub-section (1) of section 12;
(e) the form in, and the time at, which the annual report shall be prepared under
section 13;
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedural and
administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them under the Bill itself. The
delegation of the legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—4771LS(S-3)—04.03.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a National Commission for Students and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. A. Sampath, M.P.)