1
Bill No. 65 of  2020
Short title and
commencement.
THE ORPHAN AND STREET CHILDREN (WELFARE)
BILL, 2020
By
SMT. VANGA GEETHA VISWANATH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an Orphan and Street Children Welfare Authority to
ensure social security and implementation of welfare measures for orphan and street
children and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-First Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called as the Orphan and Street Children (Welfare) Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Authority" means the Orphan and Street Children Welfare Authority
constituted under section 3;
(c) "child" means a boy or girl who has not completed the age of eighteen years;
(d) "intentional abandonment" means a child who has been intentionally
abandoned by the parents due to poverty, physical disablement, gender or any other
social restriction or reason;
(e) "Fund" means the Orphan and Street Children Welfare Fund constituted
under section 6;
(f) "orphan" means a child with unknown parentage or whose both parents have
died and includes a child who is not part of a family either natural or foster;
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(h) "street children" includes a child who is orphan or has been abandoned,
vagabond and who collects all kinds of waste from garbage dumps, streets and other
public places including neglected and destitute children who subsist on income from
working as a porter, vendor, shoe shiner, beggar or petty criminal and who generally
languish on pavements, hutments, slums or railway platforms, bus stops and such
other places and remain deprived and exploited.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
an Authority to be known as the Orphan and Street Children Welfare Authority for the
purpose of providing social security and welfare measures to orphan and street children, in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the efficient functioning of the Authority.
(3) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at New Delhi:
Provided that the Authority shall have its offices in every State and Union territory.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of services
of Officers and Staff of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. (1) Subject to the guidelines issued by the Central Government, the Authority shall
formulate a comprehensive national policy within one year of its constitution to achieve the
objectives of this Act and perform such functions as may be necessary to ensure welfare of
orphan and street children.
 (2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the functions of
the Authority shall include the following:—
(a) conducting and publishing the survey of orphan children in regard to
following—
(i) socio-economic status of orphan children;
(ii) data of orphan and street children;
(iii) demographic profile of orphan and street children;
(iv) register of missing children; and
(v) performance appraisal of existing orphan and street children welfare
schemes and programmes;
(b) taking steps for reunion of missing, orphan and street children with their
natural parents or relatives or through adoption by foster ones;
Definition.
Constitution
of Orphan and
Street Children
Welfare
Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
45
40

(c) establishment of a robust system of institutional care for orphan and street
children who are unable to be re-integrated in a family setting;
(d) development of a tracking system for identification of families of abandoned
children to facilitate reunification;
(e) development of psychological and other support system to prevent
abandoning of children by parents due to poverty, deprivation and other such factors
as may be specified;
(f) simplification and reform of the adoption system by foster parents;
(g) training and capacity building to health workers to cater to the complex
psychosocial needs of orphan children;
(h) specialised medical attention to orphan children suffering from vulnerable
diseases such as HIV , AIDS and other communicable diseases and chronic diseases;
(i) special attention to orphan children living in militancy and naxal affected
areas and their rehabilitation;
(j) post-institutional support to ensure education, skill training and livelihood
to orphan children;
(k) stringent monitoring of foster care institutions to prevent any kind of emotional,
physical or sexual abuse of orphan children;
(l) issuance of single and multi-purpose 'orphan certificate' containing therein,
if available, such information as date of birth, nativity, parental status and family
surname to ensure enjoyment of legal rights, entitlements and benefits;
(m) linkage of all orphan-related agencies such as cradle baby centres, adoption
centres and foster care homes with authorities that issue orphan certificates;
(n) promoting awareness about legal rights and entitlements of orphan children;
(o) encourage adoption of orphans and to provide for a procedure for facilitating
adoption of orphans;
(p) provide free medical aid to the orphans and street children up to the age of
eighteen years;
(q) provide free education for orphans upto the graduation; and
(r) such other provisions as may be deemed necessary and expedient for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
5. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the national policy
formulated under sub-section (1) of section 4.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the official
Gazette, constitute a Fund to be known as the Orphan and Street Children Welfare Fund for
the purposes of this Act with an initial corpus of rupees one thousand crores, to be provided by
the Central Government, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf.
(2) The Fund shall also be credited by—
(a) contributions made by the Central Government and State Governments in
such ratio, as may be prescribed;
(b) money received by way of donations, contributions, assistance or otherwise
from individuals, body corporates, domestic and foreign financial institutions.
3
Appropriate
Government
to implement
the Policy.
Establishment
of Homeless
Orphan and
Street Children
Welfare Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

(3) The Fund shall be utilised for rehabilitation and welfare of orphan children in
such manner as may be prescribed.
7. There shall be two per cent. reservation in educational institutions and in posts and
services under the Central Government for orphan and street children.
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code, 1860 or any other
law for the time being in force, whoever,
(a) forces or instigates any child covered under this Act to beg, commit petty
crime, rag picking or any act which is injurious to the health of such child shall be
punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less than four years but may extend
to seven years and also with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees;
(b) sexually exploits any child covered under this Act in any manner whatsoever
shall be punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less than ten years but may
extend to life imprisonment which shall not be less than ten years but may extend to life
imprisonment and also with fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but may
extend to ten lakh rupees;
(c) intentionally abandons any child covered under this Act shall be punishable
with imprisonment which shall not be less than one year but may extend to three years
and fine which may extend to one lakh rupees; and
(d) having already been convicted of an offence under this Act  or of an abetment
of such offence is again convicted of any such offence or abetment shall be punishable
with life imprisonment and also with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
9. (1) The appropriate Government shall designate a nodal officer in every district to
ensure effective implementation of all the schemes and policies meant for welfare of orphan
and street children;
(2) Every nodal officer shall submit to the appropriate Government an annual report
containing such details, as may be prescribed, of welfare measures provided to orphan
children in the district.
(3) The appropriate Government shall, if satisfied that schemes and policies are not
being implemented properly, remove  from the office, the nodal officer for dereliction of duty:
Provided that no criminal proceedings shall be initiated against the nodal officer who
is removed from office.
10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament, by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
11. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
12. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazetee, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
4
Reservation
in Educational
institutions
and in posts
and services.
Penalty.
Nodal Officer
to ensure
welfare
schemes in
every district.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session, or the successive sessions  aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Children are the future of a nation. It is essential that the upbrining of children happen
in a good atmosphere by providing them all the necessities of life, good education and a
joyful childhood. But in our country, unfortunately, there are millions of orphans with known
or unknown parentage, mostly homeless, abandoned, run away vagabond and destitute who
can be seen in most urabn areas loitering, collecting waste papers, plastic and metal scraps
from the dumping pits and public places for their subsistence. They are exploited by anti-
social elements and even by Police. These children are thus the most vulnerable to abuses,
exploitation and depravity. According to UNICEF statistics, 31 million Indian children live as
orphans. Orphans have a very low social status, lacking social identity, self esteem and
having insufficient access to social support structures and protective mechanisms.
It is the duty of the State to ensure that these hapless, homeless orphan and street
children are protected against neglect cruelty and exploitation and they must enjoy their
childhood by bringing them to the national mainstream by giving every opportunity and
protection they deserve to fully develop their potentials. They should be provided with
good education, nutrition, healthcare and good atmosphere which will enable them to grow
as responsible citizens. The Governments have to establish children homes with all facilities
for the street children. The NGOs too have to be encouraged for the uplift of orphans and
street children. If the orphans and street children are looked after well, it will not only uplift
the conditions of the homeless orphan and street children but it will also create a better
society and strong nation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VANGA GEETHA VISWANATH
February 10, 2020.
6

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Orphan and Street Children
Welfare Authority. Clause 4 provides that the Authority shall formulate a comprehensive
policy within one year of its constitution for welfare of orphan and street children including
conducting and publishing the survey of orphan children, training and capacity building to
health workers to cater the needs of orphan children, etc. Clause 6 provides for the constitution
of the Homeless Orphan and Street Children Welfare Fund with an initial corpus of rupees
one thousand crore to be provided by the Central Government. Clause 10 provides that the
Central Government shall provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.
The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a sum of rupees twenty thousand crore will be involved as recurring expenditure
per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty thousand crore will also be involved.
7

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will related to matters of details only the delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
8

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an Orphan and Street Children Welfare Authority to
ensure social security and implementation of welfare measures for orphan and street
children and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shrimati Vanga Geetha Viswanath, M.P. )
MGIPMRND—5383LS(S3)—28-02-2020.