As INTRODUCED IN Lok SaBHa

) rl ॥05?00।

Bill No. 65 of 2001
__ 55

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001
By
Stik ANANDRAO ViTHoBa AbsuL, M.P.
FS
BILL
Surther to amend the Constitution of India

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifly-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows: —

1, This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2001.
2. In article 117 of the Constitution, —
(i) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) A Bill making. provision for any of the matters specified in sub-
clauses (a) 10 (f) of clause (1) of article 110 shall not be introduced in the

Council of States.”;

(ii) Clauses (2) and (3) shall be omitted,
3. In article 207 of the Constitution —

Shorttitle.

Amendment of
article 117,

Amendment of
article 207,


2

(i) for clause (1), the following article shall be substituted, namely:—

“(1) A Bill making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-
clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 199 shall not be introduced in a
Legislative Council;

(ii) Clauses (2) and (3) shall be omitted.”

Omission of 4. Article 274 of the Constitution shall be omitted.
article 274.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Parliamentary form of democracy is the best form of democracy. Here will of the
people should prevail. Peoples’ representatives should have a final say in all matters of the
nation.

But certain legi
introduction/dis«
sometimes act as

ative measures, require prior sanction of the President for their
sion in the Legislatures. These provisions, though technical in nature,
an hurdle in piloting important legislations.

Perhaps the logic behind these provisions was that controversial and draconian laws
should not be allowed to be passed with brute majority of the Government. But, there is
an absolute change in the political set up in the country. People have more political aware-
ness than ever.

In the changed circumstances. these provisions are no more required to be in
statute. Hence amendment to the Constitution. But the provision regarding bar of
introduction of Money Bill/Financial Bill in upper House of a Legislature has been kept
intact.

New Dewat; ANANDRAO VITHOBA ADSUL
July 24, 2001.


pro
financial Bills.

Special
provisions as to
financial Bills.

Priorrecom-
mendation of
President
require to Bills
afffecting
taxation in
which States are
interested.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

117. (1) A Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters specified in
sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 110 shall not be introduced or moved except
on the recommendation of the President and a Bill making such provision shall'not be
introduced in the Council of States:

Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this clause for the moving
of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.

(2) A Bill or amendment shail not be deemed to make provision for any of the
matters aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other
pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services
rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration
or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.

(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India shall not be passed by either House of Parliament
unless the President has recommended to that House the consideration of the Bill.

* * * * * * *

207. (1) A Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters specified in
sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 199 shall not be introduced or moved except
on the recommendation of the Governor, and a Bill making such provision shall not be
introduced in a Legislative Council:

Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this clause for the moving
of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.

(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the
matters aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other
pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services
rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration
or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.

(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India shall not be passed by a House of Legislature of the
State unless the Governor has recommended to that House the consideration of the Bill.

* * * * * * *

274. (1) No Bill or amendment which imposes or varies any tax or duty in which
States are interested, or which varies the meaning of the expression “agricultural income”
as defined for the purposes of the enactments relating to Indian income-tax, or which
affects the principles on which under any of the foregoing provisions of this Chapter
moneys are or may be distributable to States, or which imposes any such surcharge for the
purposes of the Union as is mentioned in the forgoing provisions of this Chapter, shall be
introduced or moved in either House of Parliament except on the recommendation of the
President.

(2) In this article, the expression “tax or duty in which States are interested” means—

(a) a tax or duty the whole or part of the net proceeds whereof are assigned to
any State; or

(b) a tax or duty by reference to the net proceeds whercof sums are for the
time being payable out of the Consolidated Fund of India to any State.

* * * * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul, M.P.)

MGIP(PLUJMRND—1368LS—31-07-2001.