As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2.0 api 2००0

BBR: eg
Br.» Capcity

ARR Sm

Bill No. 65 of 2000

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
‘Suri Kirt Somarya, M.P.
A
BILL
| further to amend the Constitution of India.

| Beitenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India 85 follows:—

| 4. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000. Shorttitle
2. For Tenth Schedule to the constitution, the following Schedule shall be substituted, Substitution of
\ely:— new Schedule
for Tenth

Schedule
"TENTH SCHEDULE

[Arrictes 102(2) ano 191(2)]
Provisions as to disqualification on ground of defection
1, Interpretation—In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) "House" means cither House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly or, as the
e may be, either House of the Legislature of a State;


2

(6) "legislature party" in relation to a member of a House belonging to any
Political party means the group consisting of all the members of that House for the
time being belonging to that political party;

(©) "paragraph" means a Paragraph of this Schedule; and

@ "political party" means a political party classified as recognised political
1 ere Political party under any law or any rule, regulation, order or
notification having the force of law with respect to matters relating to, or in connection
with, elections to either House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly or as the
case may be, either House of the Legislature of a State

2. Disqualification on ground of defection. A member of a House belonging to any
Political party shall be disqualified for being a member of that House,

(2) if he has voluntarily given up his membership of such political party: or

(6) if he has been expelled from such political party in accordance with the
Provisions of the Constitution or rules of that political party; or

(०) if he votes or abstains from voting in that House contrary to any direction
issued by the political party to which he belongs or by any person or authority so
authorised by it in this behalf, without obtaining, in either case, the prior permission of
such political party, person or authority and such Voting or abstention has not been
condoned by such political party, person ot authority within fifteen days from the date
of such voting or abstention.

Explanation—For the purposes of this paragraph, —

(व) an elected member of a House shall be deemed to belong to the political
party, if any, by which he was set up as a candidate for election as such member;

(6) anominated member of a House or an elected member of a House who has
been elected as such otherwise than as a candidate set up by any political party, shall —

(0 be deemed to belong to the politica! party of which he becomes, of, as
the case may be, first becomes a member before the expiry of six montha from
the date on which he takes his seat in the House: and

(1) be liable to be disqualified for being a member of the House ithe joins
any political party after the expiry of six months from the date on which he takes
his seat in the House.

3. Exemption. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Schedule, a person who
has been elected to the office of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the House of the
People or the Legislative Assembly, or the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States or the
Chairman or the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of ६ State, shall not be
disqualified under this Schedule, —

(2) if he, by reason of his election to such office, voluntarily gives up the
membership of the political party to which he belonged immediately before such
clection and does not, so long as he continues to hold such office thereafter, rejoin that
political party or become a member of ‘another political party; or

(6) ifhe, having given up by reason of his election to such office his membership
ofthe political party to which he belonged immediately before such election, rejoins
such political party after he ceases to hold such office.

4. Decision on questions as to disqualification on ground of defection, (7) If any
Question arises as to whether a member of a House has become subject to disqualification
under this Schedule, the question shall be referred for the decision of the President or, as
the case may be, the Governor 2

Provided that the President or, as the case may be, the Governor shall not

20

25

30

35

40

45


ie

entertain any question as to whether a member of a House has become subject to
disqualification under this Schedule unless the question has been referred for
his decision—

(A by the political party or, as the case may be, by the Legislature Party to which
such member belongs to, or through any person or authority so authorised by it in this
behalf; or

(ii) by any sitting member or members of the House.

(2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the President or, as the case may
the Governor shall obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according
to such opinion,

(3) Where the President or, as the case may be, the Governor decides that the member
has become subject to disqualification under paragraph 2 of the Schedule, such member
shall stand disqualified from the date of the decision and his seat in the House shall become
vacant with effect from that date.

5. Rules. (7) The President or, as the case may be, the Governor may after consultation
with the Speaker or, as the case may be, the Chairman of the House, make rules for giving
effect to the provisions of this Schedule, and in particular, and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing, such rules may provide for—

(a) the maintenance of registers or the other records as to the Political parties
and the iegislature parties to which different members of the House belong to;

(6) the reports which the political parties or the legislature parties will be required
to furnish forthwith in regard to the members belonging to those parties, including
resignations or expulsion of members from political parties, persons or authorities 50
authorised to communicate with the Speaker or the Chairman of the House or the
Election Commission and changes in the nomenclature of political and legislature
parties;

(©) procedure for making complaints, disqualification of a member and the
information required to be furnished in this regard;

(४) matters in which violation of a direction issued by a political party or a
legislature party to vote or abstain from voting in the House in a particular manner
may render the member liable to disqualification; and

(©) procedure for making inquiry into the complaints regarding disqualification
of a member.

(2) The rules made under sub-paragraph (/) of this paragraph shall be laid, as soon as
beafter they are made, before the House for the total period of ‘thirty days which may be
ised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and shall take effect ‘upon the
of the said period of thirty days unless they are sooner approved with or without
odifications or disapproved by tne House and where they are so approved, shall take effect

such approval in the form in which they were laid or in such modified form, as the case
ay be, and where they are so disapproved, they shall have no effect.".


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS.

The Tenth Schedule to the Constitution popularly known as Anti-Defection Law was
added to the Constitution by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985 The
Tenth Schedule came into force with effect from Ist March, 1985.

2. Certain deficiencies and ambiguities have been noticed in the implementation of
the provisions of the Tenth Schedule, There have been varied views by the Presiding
Officers of legislatures on entertaining claims of splits in legislature parties, such ay

(a) whether splits in the legislature party should be taken note of or whether
split ina political party outside the legislature should be ascertained:

(6) whether a split is a one time affair or a continuous process; and

(©)amember of the House who is expelled from his political party for his activi-
ties outside the House continues to be a member of the House. What will be the staus
of such member in the House? Can he join another party or form a new party with
some other members?

3. Some decisions given by the Presiding Officers on the question of splits and mergers
have become controversial and have brought the office of the Presiding Offices ints ap
unnecessary controversy. Further, decisions given by the Presiding Officers have become
Justiciable thereby increasing the scope of contflict between the legislature and the judiciary,

4. Cases pertaining to Anti-Defection Law have to be decided in a judicial manner.
Political parties as also individuals, directly or through their lawyers appear before the
Presiding Officer to plead the dispute that comes before him. The Presiding Officer may or
may not be acquainted with procedures involved in sifting of facts, taking evidence of par-
ties and coming to decisions in a strictly legal manner,

5. In the present Bill, the following main changes have been suggested:

(0 Political party has been defined to include a "recognised political party" or
“a registered political party" for which provisions already exist in the Representation
of the People Act and the rules, made thereunder,

(i) A member shall be liable to be disqualified if he resigns from the political
party or is expelled therefrom or votes or abstains from voting contrary to the direc-
tions issued by his parent political party.

(id) A nominated member of a House or, an elected member who has been
elected otherwise than as a candidate set up by any political party, shall be liable to
be disqualified if he joins any political party after the expiry of six months from the
date on which he takes his seat in the House.

(19 Paragraphs in the existing Tenth Schedule regarding splits and mergers
are proposed to be omitted.

(2 It 's proposed that questions regarding disqualification of a member shall
be decided by the President or the Governor, as the case may be, after obtaining the
opinion of the Election Commission,

(५) ॥ is proposed that the President or the Governor, as the case may be, shall
in consuitation with the Speaker or the Chairman of the House may make detailed
rules under the Tenth Schedule for carrying out the purposes of the said Schedule.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives,

New Dei; KIRIT SOMATYA
March 15, 2000.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE ConsrrTution oF INpia

* * * *

‘[TENTH SCHEDULE]
[Articles 102(2) and 191(2)}
Provisions as to disqualification on ground of defection
1. Interpretation. In this Schedule, unless the Context otherwise requires, —

(a) "House" means either House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly or,
as the case may be, either House of the Legislature of a State;

(6) “legislature party", in relation to a member
Political party in accordance with the provisions of,
the case may be, Paragraph 4, means the group consisti

House for the time being belonging to that political par
provisions:

(2) “original political Party", in relation to a member of a House, means the

Political party to which he belongs for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph
2; and

(४) “paragraph” means a paragraph of this Schedule,

2. Disqualification on ground of defection. (2) Sul
4 and 5, a member of a House belonging to any
being a member of the House

ject to the provisions of | Paragraphs
Political party shali be disqualified for

of such political Party, person or authority and such Voting or abstention has not
been condoned by such Political party, person or authority within fifteen days from
the date of such voting or abstention,

Explanation—For the Purposes of this sub-paragraph,—

(@) an clected member of a House shall be doetned to belong to the political
Party, ifany, by which he was set up as a candidate for election as such member;

(b) a nominated member of a House shali,—

(2) where he is a member of any political party on the date of his
nominations as such member, be deemed to belong to such political Party;

(ii) in any other case, be deemed to belong to the political party of which
he becomes, or, as the case may be, first becomes, 2 member before the expiry
of six months from the date on which he takes his seat
the requirements of article 99 or, as the case may be, article 188.

(2) An elected member of a House who has been elected as such otherwise than as a
ididate set up by any Political party shall be disqualified for being a*member of the
ifhe joins any political party after such election,

(3) A nominated member of a House shall be disqualified for being a member of the
ifhe joins any political Party after the expiry of six months from the date on which

his seat after complying with the requirements of article 99 or, as the case may be,
188.


6

(# Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this paragra
4 person who, on the commencement of the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment)
1985, is a member of a House (whether elected or nominated as such) shall,—

(0) where he was a member of a
commencement, be deemed, for the pt
to have been elected as amember of si
party;

Political party immediately before suc
lurposes of sub-paragraph (, /) of this
uch House as a candidate set up by such

(80) in any other case, be deemed to be an elected m

ember of the House who h
been elected as such otherwise than as a candidate set a

paragraph.

3. Disqualification on ground of defection not to apply in case of split,
member of a House makes a claim that he and any other members of his legislature
constitute the group representing a faction which has arisen as a result of the split in
original political Party and such group consists of not less than one-third of the members
of such legislature party, —

(a) he shall not be dis:
ground —

qualified under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 on the

(that he has voluntarily given up his membership of his original political
party ; or

(id that he has voted or abst
any direction issued by such party
it in that behalf without obtainin,
authority and such Voting or abs

Person or authority within fifteen
and

tained from voting in such House contrary to
ty or by any person or authority authorised b
g the prior permission of such party. person of
stention has not been condoned by such party
n days from the date of such Voting or abstentic i

(6) from the time of such split, such faction shall be deemed to be the political
Party to which he belongs for the purposes of sub-paragraph (7) of paragraph 2 an
to be his original political party for the purposes of this paragraph.

4. Disqualification on ground of defection not to apply in case of merger. (7)
member of a House shal! not be disqualified under ‘sub-paragraph (/) of paragraph 2 where
his original political party merges with another Political party and he claims that he and
any other members of his original political party—

(a) have become members of such other political party or, as the ce
may be, of a new political party formed by such merger; or

(4) have not accepted the merg:

er and adopted to function as a separa
group,

and from the time of such merger, मु

Political party or group, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be the political

Party to which he belongs for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of parag

2 and to be his original political party for tie purposes of this sub-paragraph,

(2) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (7) of this
political party of a member of a Fiouse sitall be 0

not less than two-third of the members of the le;
such merger.

paragraph, the merger of the original

5. Exemption. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Schedule, a person who
has been elected to the office of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the House of the
People or the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States or the Chairman or the Deputy
Chairman of the Legislative Council of a State or the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly of a State, shall not be disqualified under this Schedule,

(a) if he, by reason of his election to such office, voluntarily gives up the
memibership of the political party to which he belonged immediately before such



7

election and does not, so long as he continues to hold such office thereafter, rejoin
that political party or become a member of another political party; or

(6) ifhe, having given up by reason of his election to such office his membership
of the political party to which he belonged immediately before such election, rejoins
such political party after he ceases to hold such office,

6. Decision on questions as to disqualification on ground of defection, (7) if any
question arises as to whether a member of a House has become subject to disqualification
under this Schedule, the question shall be referred for the decision of the Chairman or, as
the case may be, the Speaker of such House and his decision shall be final:

Provided that where the question which has arisen is as to whether the Chairman or
the Speaker of a House has become subject to such disqualification, the question shall be
referred for the decision of such member of the House asthe House may elect in this behalf
and his decision shall be final.

(2) All proceedings under sub-paragraph (/) of this paragraph in relation to any
question as to disqualification ofa member of a House under this Schedule shall be deemed
to be proceedings in Parliament within the meaning of article 122 or, as the case may be,
Proceedings in the Legislature of a State within the meaning of article 212.

7. Bar of jurisdiction of courts. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, no

court shall have any jurisdiction in respect of any matter connected with the disqualitication
of a member of a House under this Schedule,

8. Rules. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph, the
Chairman or the Speaker of a House may make niles for giving effect to the provisions of
this Schedule, and in particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing,
such rules may provide for—

(2) the maintenance of registers or other records as to the political parties, if
Any, to which different members of the House belong:

(©) the reports which a political party shall furnish with regard to admission to
Such political party of any members of the House and the officer at the House to
whom such reports shall be furnished: and

(4) the procedure for deciding any question referred to in sub-paragraph (7) of
eee aeh including the procedure for any inquiry which may be made forsie purpose
of deciding such question.

(2) The rules made by the Chairman or the Speaker of a House under sub-paragraph
(1) of this paragraph shall be laid as soon as may be after they are made before the Flouse for
3 total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions and shall take effect upon the expiry of the said Period of thirty days

and where they are so approved, they shall take effect on such approval in the form in which
they were laid or in such modified form, as the case may be, and where they are so disapproved,
they shall be of no effect.

(3) The Chairman or the Speaker of a House may, without prejudice to the provisions
ofatticle 105 or, as the case may be, article 194, andto any other power which he may have
under this Constitution direct that any wilful contravention by any person of the rules made
under this paragraph may be dealt within the same manner as a breach of Privilege of the
House].

* . * * *


A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Kirit Somaiya, M.P)

MGIP(MRND)PLU—a585LS—31-03-2000,