1
THE ACADEMY OF SCIENTIFIC AND INNOVATIVE RESEARCH
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI RAGHA V LAKHANPAL , M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Act, 2011.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research
(Amendment)  Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 4 of the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Act, 2011, in
sub-section (1), after clause (i), the following clause shall be added at the end, namely:—
"(j) develop and integrate in its courses alternative models to animals in science
and technology research, which shall include, inter alia, research in natural sciences,
life sciences and medical sciences.".
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 65 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of section 4.
5
10
13 of 2012.

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Act, 2011 was enacted to establish
an Academy for furtherance of advancement of learning and prosecution of research in the
field of science and technology. The Act lays down the objectives of the Academy which
include the advancement of science, dissemination of advance knowledge, innovation in
teaching and teaching processes and imparting instructions in areas not ordinarily covered
in regular academic institutions in India.
However, the research pertaining to alternative models to animal testing has not
progressed in India, whereas leading institutions of science and technology world over are
moving toward alternative models. For instance, Harvard University's Wyss Institute is
developing an approach known as "organs-on-a-chip" in which human cell cultures are
subjected to dynamic forces (e.g. lung cells "breathe") and subsequently display properties
that are very similar to those seen in vivo in humans.
India has been a signatory to the Mutual Acceptance of Data (MAD) agreement of
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) since 2011. The
OECD contains a number of non-animal alternatives for uptake by any of its member countries
or MAD signatory countries. However, the consideration of uptake of these alternatives
have been close to nil in India. With the advent of alternatives in a larger way in the near
future owing to the development of alternatives worldwide and the requirements of Indian
law, i.e., section 17(2)(d) of Chapter IV of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (PCA) Act,
1960 requires that "experiments on animals are avoided wherever it is possible to do so".
However, the lack of awareness in the developing technology for non-animal
alternatives in India prevents our scientific institutions from progressing in this field. The
Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Act, 2011
with a view to allow an institution of National importance such as the Academy of Scientific
and Innovative Research to develop and integrate in its courses the alternative models to
animals in research and development of science and technology.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAGHAV LAKHANPAL
March 7, 2017.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE ACADEMY OF SCIENTIFIC AND INNOVATIVE RESEARCH ACT, 2011
(13 OF 2012)
* * * * *
4. (1) The objects of the Academy shall be to—
(a) * * * *
(b) * * * *
(c) conduct courses in, and integrate into its courses, inter-disciplinary and multi-
disciplinary areas covering natural sciences, life sciences, mathematical and computational
sciences, medical sciences, engineering, applied art, humanities, social sciences, law relating
to these areas and interfaces thereof;
* * * * *
Objects of
Academy.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Act, 2011.
————
(Shri Raghav Lakhanpal, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5191LS(S3)—27-03-2017.