14
Bill No. 65-F of  2021
THE MINES AND MINERALS (DEVELOPMENT
AND REGULATION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2021
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK SABHA ON 19TH MARCH, 2021
RAJYA SABHA ON 22ND MARCH, 2021)
ASSENTED  TO ON 28TH MARCH, 2021
ACT  NO. 16 OF 2021

1
THE MINES AND MINERALS (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2021
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
further to amend the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Amendment Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be
construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. Throughout the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),—
(i) for the words “reconnaissance permit, prospecting license or mining lease”
wherever they occur, the words “mineral concession” shall be substituted;
Short title and
commencement.
Substitution of
references to
certain
expressions by
certain other
expressions.
67 of 1957.
Bill No. 65-F  of 2021

2
(ii) for the words “prospecting licence-cum-mining lease”, wherever they occur
[other than in clause (a) of section 3], the words “composite licence” shall be substituted.
3. In section 3 of the principal Act,-—
(i) for clauses (a) and (aa), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(a) “composite licence” means the prospecting licence-cum-mining lease
which is a two stage concession granted for the purpose of undertaking
prospecting operations followed by mining operations in a seamless manner;
(aa) “dispatch” means the removal of minerals or mineral products from
the leased area and includes the consumption of minerals and mineral products
within such leased area;
(ab) “Government company” shall have the same meaning as assigned to
it in clause (45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013;
(ac) “leased area” means the area specified in the mining lease within
which the mining operations can be undertaken and includes the non-mineralised
area required and approved for the activities falling under the definition of  “mine”
as referred to in clause (i);
(ad) “minerals” includes all minerals except mineral oils;
(ae) “mineral concession” means either a reconnaissance permit,
prospecting licence, mining lease, composite licence or a combination of any of
these and the expression “concession” shall be construed accordingly;’;
(ii) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-—
‘(fa) “production” or any derivative of the word “production” means the
winning or raising of mineral within the leased area for the purpose of processing
or dispatch;’;
(iii) clause (ga) shall be omitted;
(iv) after clause (hb), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(hba) “Schedule” means the Schedules appended to the Act;’;
(v) in clause (i),—
(i) for the words and figures, “the Mines Act, 1952”, the words and figures
“the Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions Code, 2020” shall be
substituted;
(ii) the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—
“Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,—
(i) a mine continues to be a mine till exhaustion of its mineable
mineral reserve and a mine may have different owners during different
times from the grant of first mining lease till exhaustion of such
mineable mineral reserve;
(ii) the expression "mineral reserve" means the economically
mineable part of a measured and indicated mineral resource.".
4. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in the second proviso, for the
words “such entity that may be notified for this purpose by the Central Government”, the
words “other entities including private entities that may be notified for this purpose, subject
to such conditions as may be specified by the Central Government” shall be substituted.
5. In section 4A of the principal Act, in sub-section (4),—
(i
) for the words “mining operations” wherever they occur, the words “production
and dispatch” shall be substituted;
Amendment
of section 3.
18 of 2013.
Amendment
of section 4.
Amendment
of section 4A.
35 of 1952.
37 of 2020.

3
(ii) for the first, second, third and fourth provisos, the following provisos shall
be substituted, namely:-—
“Provided that the State Government may, on an application made by the
holder of such lease before it lapses and on being satisfied that it shall not be
possible for the holder of the lease to undertake production and dispatch or to
continue such production and dispatch for reasons beyond his control, make an
order, within a period of three months from the date of receipt of such application,
to extend the period of two years by a further period not exceeding one year and
such extension shall not be granted for more than once during the entire period
of lease:
Provided further that such lease shall lapse on failure to undertake
production and dispatch or having commenced the production and dispatch
fails to continue the same before the end of such extended period.”.
6. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), after the second proviso, the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
 “Provided also that the composite licence or mining lease shall not be granted
for an area to any person other than the Government, Government company or
corporation, in respect of any minerals specified in Part B of the First Schedule where
the grade of such mineral in such area is equal to or above such threshold value as may
be notified by the Central Government.”.
7. In section 8 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, in case of Government
companies or corporations, the period of mining leases including the existing mining
leases, shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government:
Provided that the period of mining leases, other than the mining leases granted
through auction, shall be extended on payment of such additional amount as specified
in the Fifth Schedule:
Provided further that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette and for reasons to be recorded in writing, amend the Fifth Schedule so as to
modify the entries mentioned therein in the said Schedule with effect from such date as
may be specified in the said notification.
(5) Any lessee may, where coal or lignite is used for captive purpose, sell such
coal or lignite up to fifty per cent. of the total coal or lignite produced in a year after
meeting the requirement of the end use plant linked with the mine in such manner as
may be prescribed by the Central Government and on payment of such additional
amount as specified in the Sixth Schedule:
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette
and for the reasons to be recorded in writing, increase the said percentage of coal or
lignite that may be sold by a Government company or corporation:
Provided further that the sale of coal shall not be allowed from the coal mines
allotted to a company or corporation that has been awarded a power project on the
basis of competitive bid for tariff (including Ultra Mega Power Projects):
Provided also that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette and for reasons to be recorded in writing, amend the Sixth Schedule so as to
modify the entries mentioned therein with effect from such date as may be specified in
the said notification.”.
Amendment
of section 5.
Amendment
of section 8.

4
8. In section 8A of the principal Act,—
(a) after sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(7A) Any lessee may, where mineral is used for captive purpose, sell
mineral up to fifty per cent. of the total mineral produced in a year after meeting
the requirement of the end use plant linked with the mine in such manner as may
be prescribed by the Central Government and on payment of such additional
amount as specified in the Sixth Schedule:
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette and for the reasons to be recorded in writing, increase the said percentage
of mineral that may be sold by a Government company or corporation:
Provided further that the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette and for reasons to be recorded in writing, amend the Sixth Schedule
so as to modify the entries mentioned therein with effect from such date as may
be specified in the said notification.”;
 (b) in sub-section (8), the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:-—
 “Provided that the period of mining leases, other than the mining leases
granted through auction, shall be extended on payment of such additional amount
as specified in the Fifth Schedule:
Provided further that the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette and for reasons to be recorded in writing, amend the Fifth Schedule
so as to modify the entries mentioned therein with effect from such date as may
be specified in the said notification.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that all
such Government companies or corporations whose mining lease has been
extended after the commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Development and
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015, shall also pay such additional amount as
specified in the Fifth Schedule for the mineral produced after the commencement
of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment
Act, 2021.”.
9. For section 8B of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“8B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the
time being in force, all valid rights, approvals, clearances, licences and the like granted
to a lessee in respect of a mine (other than those granted under the provisions of the
Atomic Energy Act, 1962 and the rules made thereunder) shall continue to be valid
even after  expiry or termination of  lease and  such rights, approvals, clearances,
licences and the like shall be transferred to, and vested; subject to the conditions
provided under such laws; in the successful bidder of the mining lease selected through
auction under this Act:
Provided that where on the expiry of such lease period, mining lease has not
been executed pursuant to an auction under provisions of sub-section ( 4) of
section 8A, or lease executed pursuant to such auction has been terminated within a
period of one year from such auction, the State Government may, with the previous
approval of the Central Government, grant lease to a Government company or
corporation for a period not exceeding ten years or till selection of new lessee through
auction, whichever is earlier and such Government company or corporation shall be
deemed to have acquired all valid rights, approvals, clearances, licences and the like
vested with the previous lessee:
Amendment
of section 8A.
10 of 2015.
Substitution of
new section for
section 8B.
Provisions for
period and
transfer of
statutory
clearances. 33 of 1962.

5
Provided further that the provisions of sub-section ( 1) of section 6 shall not
apply where such mining lease is granted to a Government company or corporation
under the first proviso:
Provided also that in case of atomic minerals having grade equal to or above the
threshold value, all valid rights, approvals, clearances, licences and the like in respect
of expired or terminated mining leases shall be deemed to have been transferred to, and
vested in the Government company or corporation that has been subsequently granted
the mining lease for the said mine.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, it shall be lawful for the new lessee to continue mining operations on the land till
expiry or termination of mining lease granted to it, in which mining operations were
being carried out by the previous lessee.”.
10. In section 9B of the principal Act,—
(i) after sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the Central Government may give directions regarding
composition and utilisation of fund by the District Mineral Foundation.”;
(ii) in sub-section (5), after the words and figures, “Amendment Act, 2015”, the
words, brackets, figures and letter “, other than those covered under the provisions of
sub-section (2) of section 10A” shall be inserted;
(iii) in sub-section (6), after the words and figures, “Amendment Act, 2015”, the
words, brackets, figures and letter “and those covered under the provisions of
sub-section (2) of section 10A” shall be inserted.
11. In section 9C of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), for the words “non-profit body”, the words “non-profit
autonomous body” shall be substituted;
(ii) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(5) The entities specified and notified under sub-section (1) of section 4
shall be eligible for funding under the National Mineral Exploration Trust.”.
12. In section 10 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no person shall be
eligible to make an application under this section unless-—
(a) he has been selected in accordance with the procedure specified under
sections 10B, 11, 11A or the rules made under section 11B;
(b) he has been selected under the Coal Mines (Special) Provisions
Act, 2015; or
(c) an area has been reserved in his favour under section 17A.”.
13. In section 10A of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(i) in clause (b), the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that for the cases covered under this clause including the
pending cases, the right to obtain a prospecting licence followed by a mining
lease or a mining lease, as the case may be, shall lapse on the date of
commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Amendment Act, 2021:
Provided further that the holder of a reconnaissance permit or prospecting
licence whose rights lapsed under the first proviso, shall be reimbursed the
Amendment
of section 9B.
Amendment
of section 9C.
Amendment
of section 10.
11 of 2015.
Amendment of
section 10A.

6
expenditure incurred towards reconnaissance or prospecting operations in such
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.”;
(ii) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(d) in cases where right to obtain licence or lease has lapsed under,
clauses (b) and (c), such areas shall be put up for auction as per the provisions
of this Act:
Provided that in respect of the minerals specified in Part B of the First
Schedule where the grade of atomic mineral is equal to or greater than the threshold
value, the mineral concession for such areas shall be granted in accordance with
the rules made under section 11B.”.
14. In section 10B of the principal Act,—
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
 “(1) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the,—
(a) cases falling under section 17A;
(b) minerals specified in Part A of the First Schedule;
(c) minerals specified in Part B of the First Schedule where the grade
of atomic mineral is equal to or greater than such threshold value as may
be notified by the Central Government from time to time; or
(d) land in respect of which the minerals do not vest in the
Government.”;
(ii) in sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that where the State Government has not notified such area for
grant of mining lease after establishment of existence of mineral contents of any
mineral (whether notified mineral or otherwise), the Central Government may
require the State Government to notify such area within a period to be fixed in
consultation with the State Government and in cases where the notification is
not issued within such period, the Central Government may notify such area for
grant of mining lease after the expiry of the period so specified.”;
(iii) in sub-section (4), the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that-—
(a) where the State Government has not successfully completed
auction for the purpose of granting a mining lease in respect of any mineral
(whether notified mineral or otherwise) in such notified area; or
(b) upon completion of such auction, the mining lease or letter of
intent for grant of mining lease has been terminated or lapsed for any
reason whatsoever,
the Central Government may require the State Government to conduct and
complete the auction or re-auction process, as the case may be, within a  period
to be fixed in consultation with the State Government and in cases where such
auction or re-auction process is not completed within  such period, the Central
Government may conduct auction for grant of mining lease for such area after
the expiry of the period so specified:
Provided further that upon successful completion of the auction, the Central
Government shall intimate the details of the preferred bidder in the auction to the
State Government and the State Government shall grant mining lease for such
area to such preferred bidder in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.”;
Amendment of
section 10B.

7
 (iv) in sub-section (6), for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted,
namely:—
“Provided that no mine shall be reserved for captive purpose in the
auction.”.
15. Section 10C of the principal Act shall be omitted.
16. In section 11 of the principal Act,—
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
 “(1) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the,-—
(a) cases falling under section 17A;
(b) minerals specified in Part A of the First Schedule;
(c) minerals specified in Part B of the First Schedule where the grade
of atomic mineral is equal to or greater than such threshold value as may
be notified by the Central Government from time to time; or
(d) land in respect of which the minerals do not vest in the
Government.”;
(ii) in sub-section (4), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that where the State Government has not notified such area for
grant of composite licence of any mineral (whether notified mineral or otherwise),
the Central Government may require the State Government to notify such area
within a period to be fixed in consultation with the State Government and in
cases where the notification is not issued within such period, the Central
Government may notify such area for grant of composite licence after the expiry
of the period so specified.”;
(iii) in sub-section (5), the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that—
(a) where the State Government has not successfully completed
auction for the purpose of granting a composite licence in respect of any
mineral (whether notified mineral or otherwise) in such notified area; or
(b) upon completion of such auction, the composite licence or letter
of intent for grant of composite licence has been terminated or lapsed for
any reason whatsoever,
the Central Government may require the State Government to conduct and
complete the auction or re-auction process, as the case may be, within a  period
to be fixed in consultation with the State Government and in cases where such
auction or re-auction process is not completed within such  period, the Central
Government may conduct auction for grant of composite licence for such area
after the expiry of the period so specified:
Provided further that upon successful completion of the auction, the Central
Government shall intimate the details of the preferred bidder in the auction to the
State Government and the State Government shall grant composite licence for
such area to such preferred bidder in such manner as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.”;
(iv) for sub-section (10), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(10) On completion of the prospecting operations, the holder of the
composite licence shall submit the result of the prospecting operations in the
form of a geological report to the State Government specifying the area required
Omission of
section 10C.
Amendment
of section 11.

8
for mining lease and the State Government shall grant mining lease for such area,
to the holder of the composite licence in such manner as may be prescribed by
the Central Government.’’.
17. In section 12A of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (2),—
(a) for the words, figures and letter, “section 10B or section 11”, the words
“this Act” shall be substituted;
 (b) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-—
 “Provided that the transferee of mining lease shall not be required
to pay the amount or transfer charges referred to in sub-section (6), as it
stood prior to the commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Development
and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2021, after such commencement but no
refund shall be made of the charges already paid.”;
(ii) sub-section (6) shall be omitted.
18. In section 13 of the principal Act,—
 ( a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words “reconnaissance permits, prospecting
licences and mining leases”, the words “mineral concession” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2),—
(i) the clauses (qqh) and (qqk) shall be omitted;
(ii) for clause (r), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:-—
“(r) the period of mining lease under sub-section (4) of section 8;
(s) the manner of sale of mineral by the holder of a mining lease
under sub-section (5) of section 8;
(t)  the manner of sale of mineral under sub-section (7A) of section 8A;
(u) the manner for reimbursement of expenditure towards
reconnaissance permits or prospecting operations under the second
proviso to clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 10A;
(v) the manner of granting mining lease to the preferred bidder under
the second proviso to sub-section (4) of section 10B;
(w) the manner of granting composite licence to the preferred bidder
under the second proviso to sub-section ( 5) of section 11;
(x) the manner of granting mining lease by the State Government to
the holder of the composite licence under sub-section (10) of section 11;
(y) any other matter which is to be, or may be prescribed, under this
Act.”.
19.
In section 17A of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section (2A), the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2A) Where in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section ( 1A) or
sub-section (2), the Central Government or the State Government, as the case
may be, reserves any area for undertaking prospecting or mining operations or
prospecting operations followed by mining operations, the State Government
shall grant prospecting licence, mining lease or composite licence, as the case
may be, in respect of such area to such Government company or corporation
within the period specified in this section:
Amendment
of section
12A.
Amendment
of section 13.
Amendment of
section 17A.

9
Provided that in respect of any mineral specified in Part B of the First
Schedule, the State Government shall grant the prospecting licence, mining
lease or composite licence, as the case may be, only after obtaining the previous
approval of the Central Government.”;
(b) in sub-section (2C),—
(i) for the words, “may be prescribed by the Central Government.”, the
words “specified in the Fifth Schedule” shall be substituted;
(ii) the following shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette and for reasons to be recorded in writing, amend the Fifth
Schedule so as to modify the entries mentioned therein in the said Schedule
with effect from such date as may be specified in the said notification.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that
all such Government companies or corporations whose mining lease has
been granted after the commencement of the Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015, shall also pay such
additional amount as specified in the Fifth Schedule for the mineral produced
after the commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Development and
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2021.”;
(c) after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4) The reservation made under this section shall lapse in case no mining
lease is granted within a period of five years from the date of such reservation:
Provided that where the period of five years from the date of reservation
has expired before the date of commencement of the Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2021 or expires within a period
of one year from the date of commencement of the said Act, the reservation shall
lapse in case no mining lease is granted within a period of one year from the date
of commencement of the said Act:
Provided further that the State Government may, on an application made
by such Government company or corporation or on its own motion, and on
being satisfied that it shall not be possible to grant the mining lease within the
said period, make an order with reasons in writing, within a period of three
months from the date of receipt of such application, to relax such period by a
further period not exceeding one year:
Provided also that where the Government company or corporation in whose
favour an area has been reserved under this section before the commencement
of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment
Act, 2015, has commenced production from the reserved area without execution
of mining lease, such Government company or corporation shall be deemed to
have become lessee of the State Government from the date of commencement of
mining operations and such deemed lease shall lapse upon execution of the
mining lease in accordance with this sub-section or expiry of period of one year
from the date of commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Development and
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2021, whichever is earlier.
(5) The termination or lapse of mining lease shall result in the lapse of the
reservation under this section.”.
10 of 2015.
10 of 2015.

10
20. In section 21 of the principal Act, after sub-section (6), the following  Explanation
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘Explanation.—On and from the date of commencement of the Mines and
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2021, the expression “raising,
transporting or causing to raise or transport any mineral without any lawful authority”
occurring in this section, shall mean raising, transporting or causing to raise or transport
any mineral by a person without prospecting licence, mining lease or composite licence
or in contravention of the rules made under section 23C.’.
21. After the Fourth Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedules shall be
inserted, namely:—
“THE FIFTH SCHEDULE
[See sections 8(4), 8A(8) and 17A(2C)]
S.No. Mineral Additional amount on grant or extension of mining lease
1. Iron ore and chromite Equivalent to one hundred and fifty per cent. of the
royalty payable
2. Copper Equivalent to fifty per cent. of the royalty payable
3. Coal and lignite Equivalent to the royalty payable
4. Other minerals (other Equivalent to the royalty payable
than coal and lignite)
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Schedule, the additional amount shall be in
addition to royalty or payment to the District Mineral Foundation and National Mineral
Exploration Trust or any other statutory payment.
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE
[See sections 8(5) and 8A(7A)]
(i) For non-auctioned captive mines (other than coal and lignite):
S.No. Mineral Additional  Amount
1. Bauxite
(i) Metallurgical Grade Equivalent to one hundred and fifty per cent.
of the royalty payable
(ii) Non-Metallurgical Grade Equivalent to the royalty payable
2. Chromite
(i) Up to forty per cent. of Cr2O3 Equivalent to the royalty payable
(ii) forty per cent. and more of Equivalent to two hundred per cent. of the
Cr2O3 and concentrates royalty payable
3. Iron ore
(i) Lumps, ROM and concentrates Equivalent to two hundred and fifty per cent.
of the royalty payable
(ii) Fines Equivalent to one hundred and fifty per cent.
of the royalty payable
4. Limestone
(i) L.D. Grade (less than 1.5 per cent. Equivalent to two hundred per cent. of the
silica content) royalty payable
(ii) Other grades Equivalent to the royalty payable
Amendment
of section 21.
Amendment
of Schedules.

11
5. Manganese
(i) Less than thirty-five per cent. Equivalent to the royalty payable
of manganese content
(ii) Thirty-five per cent. and above Equivalent to five hundred per cent. of the
of manganese content royalty payable
6. Other minerals Equivalent to the royalty payable
(ii) For auctioned captive mines (other than coal and lignite):
S.No. Quantity of sale Additional  Amount
1. Sale of mineral up to twenty-five Nil
per cent. of annual production
2. Sale of mineral more than Equivalent to fifty per cent. of the royalty
twenty-five per cent. and up to payable
fifty per cent. of annual production
(iii) For coal and lignite:
S.No. T ype of  mine Additional  Amount
1. ( i) Captive coal and lignite mines, Equivalent to two hundred per cent. of the
auctioned for power sector royalty payable
through reverse bidding under the
Coal Mines (Special Provisions)
Act, 2015 (11 of 2015)
(ii) Captive coal and lignite mines Equivalent to the royalty payable
allocated through allotment route
[other than mines covered under
item no. (iv)]
(iii) Captive coal and lignite mines Equivalent to the royalty payable
allocated through auction route
[other than mines covered under
item nos. (i) and (iv)]
(iv) For captive coal and lignite
mines that were auctioned and
allotted with condition allowing
sale of coal up to twenty-five
per cent. of annual production—
(a) for sale of coal up to Additional amount payable as per the
twenty-five per cent. condition mentioned in the tender document
of annual production or allotment document
(b) for sale of coal more Fifty per cent. of the royalty payable
than twenty-five per cent.
and up to fifty per cent. of
annual production
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Schedule, it is hereby clarified that—
(i) the additional amount shall be in addition to royalty or payment to the District
Mineral Foundation and National Mineral Exploration Trust or any other statutory
payment or payment specified in the tender document or the auction premium (wherever
applicable).

12
(ii) Ad valorem royalty for the purpose of calculating the additional amount for
coal and lignite shall be based on National Coal Index and Representative Price of coal
excluding the taxes, levies and other charges.”.

A
BILL
further to amend the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
MGIPMRND—21RS(S3)—07-04-2021.