THE GLORIFICATION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN
MOTION PICTURES (PROHIBITION) BILL, 2012
By
DR. MAHENDRASINH P.  CHAUHAN, M.P.
A
 BILL
to prohibit glorification of consumption of alcoholic beverages in motion pictures in
order to check adverse effects of consumption of alcohol on people,
particularly on the younger generation, and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Glorification of Alcoholic Beverages in Motion
Pictures (Prohibition) Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “alcoholic beverage” includes beer, wine or spirits;
(b) “motion picture” includes cinema, television serials, telefilms, dramatic
performance or any visual display; and
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
Bill No. 65 of 2012
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
3.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
glorification of alcoholic beverages in motion pictures is hereby prohibited.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the expression “glorification of
alcoholic beverages” includes presentation of consumption of Alcoholic beverages as
status symbol or a refreshing drink or a stimulant or an antidote to all kinds of worries,
frustrations, tiredness, human sorrows or day-to-day problems.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.
4. (1) Whoever commits an offence under this Act shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which may extend to fifty thousand
rupees.
(2) Where an offence under this Act is committed by a body Corporate or a department
of a Government, any person who, at the time of the commission of the offence, was incharge
of the body corporate or department of the Government, as the case may be, shall be deemed
to be guilty of an offence unless he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he used all due diligence to prevent the commission of the offence.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session  immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Prohibition of
glorification of
consumption of
alcoholic
liquor.
Penalty.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Nowadays we find that in every movie, television serial, telefilm and even drama,
consumption of alcoholic liquor is glorified to the maximum extent possible. Every character
including the hero, heroine or the villain are shown taking liquor. If someone is tired or
worried or happy, he is shown taking alcohol. In fact, on every occasion, alcohol is portrayed
as an antidote to all kinds of sorrows, worries or even tiredness. Everyone is ready to prepare
and offer a drink to others as if it is a refreshing tonic which relieves a person from all
worries, sorrows and miseries. This glorification of liquor is unabated inspite of the fact that
medical science has proved beyond doubt that consumption of liquor is very harmful to our
health as it damages the liver and other vital organs of the body. After consuming liquor, a
person no longer remains sensible and may commit worst crimes.
The glorification of consumption of liquor in movies and television programmes has
started showing its impact on the society and consumption of liquor has become a status
symbol in the society. It has become an essential component of the menu in parties, marriages
and birthday celebrations and such other social gatherings. As a result, more and more people
are becoming alcoholic, families are getting ruined and heinous crimes are being committed
in the society.
Therefore, in order to get rid of this evil, the glorification of liquor in popular electronic
media has to be prohibited which will have far reaching implications for our society. After
all a beginning has to be done to cleanse the society.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MAHENDRASINH P. CHAUHAN
April 13, 2012.
3

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of administrative detail only.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
4

5
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit glorification of consumption of alcoholic beverages in motion pictures in order
to check adverse effects of consumption of alcohol on people,
particularly on the younger generation, and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1486LS(S-4)—13-07-2012.