1
Short title
and
commencement.
THE   SABARIMALA SREEDHARMA SASTHA TEMPLE
(SPECIAL PROVISIONS) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI N.K. PREMACHANDRAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to  provide for maintaining status quo on religious practices of the Sabarimala
Sreedharma Sastha Temple, as existed on the 1st day of September, 2018
and  for matters connected therewith
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Sabarimala Sreedharma Sastha Temple (Special
Provisions) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "conversion", with its grammatical variations, includes alteration or change
of whatever nature;
(b) "religious practice" includes custom, tradition or manner of worship as existed
and practiced in the Sabarimala Sreedharma Sastha Temple on or before the 1st day of
September, 2018; and
Bill  No. 65 of  2019
Definitions.
10
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(c) "Sabarimala Sreedharma Sastha Temple" situated in Sabarimala in
Pathanamthitta District in the State of Kerala include  Sannithanam, Pampa, Nilakkal,
Erumeli and Panthalam Palace.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, order or  decree of any
court, the religious practices of Sabarimala Sreedharma Sastha Temple shall continue to be
the same as existed and practiced on the 1st day of September, 2018.
(2) If, on the commencement of this Act, any suit, appeal or other proceeding with
respect to the religious practices of Sabarimala Sreedharma Sastha Temple is pending before
any court, tribunal or other authority, the same shall abate, and no suit, appeal or other
proceeding with respect to any such matter shall lie on or after such commencement in any
court, tribunal or other authority:
Provided that if any suit, appeal or other proceedings, instituted or filed on the ground
that conversion has taken place in the religious practices after the 1st day of September,
2018, is pending on the commencement of this Act, such suit, appeal or other proceeding
shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of sub-section ( 1).
4. The necessity, if any, of conversion of religious practices of the Sabarimala
Sreedharma Sastha Temple shall be in accordance with the tradition custom, existed and
practiced on or before 1st September, 2018.
5. The Central Government and the Government of the State of Kerala shall ensure
enforcement of the religious practices.
5
10
15
Continuance
of existing
religious
practice of
Sabarimala
Sreedharma
Sastha
Temple.
Conversion of
religious
practices shall
be in
accordance
with the
tradition and
custom.
Enforcement
of religious
practices.
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The attempt for conversion of tradition and custom followed and practiced in Sabarimala
Sreedharma Sastha Temple on 1st September, 2018 ceated unrest in the mind of devotees of
Sabarimala Sreedharma Sastha Temple. This has become an issue of law and order in the
State of Kerala. The fundamental rights enshrined in articles 25 and 26 are being violated.
The devotees of Sabarimala Sreedharma Sastha Temple are demanding for protection of their
rights entrusted under articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution. The change in tradition and
custom without taking into confidence the special class devotees of Sabarimala Sreedharma
Sastha is not as per the constitutional provision. It is necessary to enact legislation to
protect the fundamental rights specified in articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; N.K. PREMACHANDRAN
June 3, 2019.
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to  provide for maintaining status quo on religious practices of the Sabarimala
Sreedharma Sastha Temple, as existed on the 1st day of September, 2018
and  for matters connected therewith
————
(Shri N.K. Premachandran, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—457LS(S3)—14-06-2019.