10K SABRA 
CORRIGE~DA 
to 
THE J AIPUR UDI'OG LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF CEMENT 
UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 1979 
L-'£2. be/As introduced in Lok Sabha 7 
1. Page 3, line 4,-
for "encumbrances" read ''incumbrances'' 
2. Page 3, line 5,-
after "court" insert "or other au thori ty" 
3. Page 5, in the marginal heading to clause 10,-
(1) after "1:1 an aP;8Y;1e ;It ()f 1:::,.e·' i~isel' t 
'- ---
(ii) a.f~!:. "assets" inser! "etc." 
4. Page 6, against lines 50 to 52,-
omi t the marginal heading 'I('"ement. C;;orporB.tion." 
5 . Page 11, line 33,-
fa r "de s tro yes" re ag, "de strays It 
6. Page 15, line 27,-
for "frseh" Ee ad "fre sh" 
NEW DELHI; 
HeY 1, 1979 
Vais akha 11, 1901 ( Saka) 

· ~I ~iIl' 
..... - .. J !.J.r '" I. 
Btl No. 66 of 197D. 
*-. .. .... _._. -- ...... 
THE J.Mr.PR, ~DY~G LIMITED (ACQUTSITION AND TRANSFER OF 
, ".d·· CEM'ENT UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 1979 
',',..... \ 
CU,.. 
L Short title. 
2. i~.i~. 
ARRANGEMENTOFCLAU~ 
CHAPTER I 
, . 
CHAPTER II 
AecrolBl'llOK AlQ) 'l'IlANSFER OP THE cn.o:NT UND!JlTAKINCS OF THE COMPAXT 
a. Transfer and vesting in the Central Government of the cement 
undertakings of the Compmy. 
General e1fect of vesting. 
, ~.nital 'Government or the Cement Corporaaon or the Government 
, 'Cttinpanynot' tO"be liable for priot liab11ities. 
..>V .. ting Of 'the cement undertakings of the Company in the 
o,ment Corporation. 
'1. Power of the Central Government to direct vesting of the 
cement undertakings of the Company in a Government company. 
CHAPTERll 
PAYMENT OF AMOtnml 
" Payment of amount. 
...... i. 
CHAPTER IV 
Irlu'AQDRNT, ETC., OF THE CEMENT UNDERTAKINCS OJ' nu:COMPAlfr 
I. Management, etc., of the cement undertakings 01 the Company. 
10. Duty of persons in charge of management of the cement under-
takinp of the Compmy to deliver all property, asaeta, etc. 
CHAPTER V 
PaoftaaoM. ULATlNQ '1'0 CERTAIN EMPLOYEES OF THE COM:PAlft 
lL Employment of certain employees to continue. 
lI. Provident fund and other funds. 

,', ( it) 
CHAPTER VI 
COMMISSIONER or PAYMEN'IS 
, .. 
CLAUSES 
13. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments. 
14-
{ _. . 't. 0 ·", 
Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner. t ... 
15. Certain powers of the Central Government or Cement Corpora-
tion or Government company. 
16. 
17. 
Claims to be made to the Commissioner. 
Priority of claims. 
18. Examina tion of claims. 
19. Admission or rej ecHon of ·cbims. 
';;~.: :. .: .. .... ..1 ... 
20. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimanu. '.-
21. Disbursement of amounts to the Company. 
22. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be ·tnDsferred to the 
general revenue account. 
CHAPTER VII ... J.. 
MISCELLANEOUS 
23. Act to have overrid:ng effect. 
24. Contracts in relation to the cement undertakings of the CompanY' 
to cease to have effect unless ratified by the C,ntral Govern-
ment or Cement Corporation or Government complDy. ~ 
25. Protec~ion of action taken in good faith. 
26. Delegation of powers. 
27. Penalties. 
28. Offences by companies. 
29. Power to make rules. 
30. Power to remove difficulties. 
31. Declaration as to the policy of the State. 
THE SCHEDULE. 
.. ,', 
... 

..... , .. , 
BiD No. 81 of 1971. 
,;.. " .~ . 
. ~ ~ J'AIPtlR UDYOG I:.IMTTED (I\COm~ITTnN AND TRANSFER OF 
CEMENT UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 1979 
. 
" 
... 
A 
BILL 
• 
to ."romde for, in the 'Public interest. the a"quisition and tramfer of the 
right, title and interest of the .TaiplJ.r Udllo(J Limitei in relatfon to 
its cement un-iertaking~. jor the purpose of ensur;ng continuity of 
C:', .p,r04uc=tion of cement which is essential to the neetfs of the eommu-
nittl. the industries and other de1,p.1"pmental 'DToiects in the country 
. -erne! lOT' matters connected therew:th or incidental thereto. 
WUERl!:AS the Jalpur UtiVI)£l' Limited is engaged in the produetion of 
cement and other commodities; 
AND WHER"F'AS production of cement is essential to the needs of the 
. community, the industries and other developmen~al projects in the 
~S country; 
AND WHERP!AS as a re!';'11t of tl,e losses suftel'e1 bv th~ .Tafpur Udvog 
Limiterl, the n-o"ll"ti"n of "e~ent has suffered and the public interest h8!3 
~~en.a(!versely affected thereby; 
.. :·.ANn Wm:REAS it is n~{'e~c;'lrV to arol"it'P.. in the public i"te!'e~, the 
J~ .tillht. tiU"! 'Inri interf!"t of the .1ainur tTrtvnt! J)"'ite~ i" rpt.,tf,.,n to Its 
CNt{1lent· uTl1ertaltin~'1 t,., e"l;llre the cnl'ltinuitv of tl,ep .. nduc~fon of ('ement 
tn .• rder to serve bf'tter the needs of the ~ommunity, the industries and 
ether developmental projects in the country; 
'BE" it ent'tcted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year ot the Republic of 
If _dia as 10110 ..... : - . 
CHAPTER I .. , .. ~ 
• ... PRELIMINARY 
r~. . 
. .1 .. ~R Act may b,. called the Jaipur TJdvog Limited (Acquisition mel Shori 
• TranSfer of Cement Undertakings) Act. 19'19. " .... 

'l'ranSfer 
and vest-
ing in the 
O;mtral/ 
Gtwcrn-
mentof 
the 
cement 
under-
takinp 
of the 
Compan~. 
General 
etfect of 
vestinl· 
-- .~ 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requ1res,-
(a) "appointed day" means the date of commencement of this Act; 
(b) "Cement Corporation" means the Cement CorporaUon of 
India, a company incorpora~ed and registered under the ComplDla 
Act, 1956; , 1 e! 1". 
(e) "cement undertakings of the Company" means such of the 
undertakings of the Company as pertain to the production of eeJI*lt 
or to the distribution of cement produced by the Company; 
(d) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Payment. ap-
pointed under secaon 13; 10 
(e) "Comp:my" me'lns the Jaipur Udyog Limited, being a eom-
pany as defined in the Comp'lnies Act, 1956, and having its regWtereci lof lIN. 
office at Sawaimadhopur in the State of Rajasthan; 
(f) "Government company;' has the meaning assigned to it by 
section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956; 1$ lei .... 
(g) "notification" means -a notification published in the OIIcJal 
Gazette; 
(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under tbIa Act: 
(i) "specified date", in relation to any provision of this Act, mea. 
aeli date' as the Cl:!ntral Government may, -by:notlf\c~(".~lfijJtlr ao 
the purpose of that provlsionand'djj!erent ~!'1\ia1 be specified for 
different provisiofls of this Act; 
(i) words and expressions "1lled herein and not deftned but 
defined in the Companies A~t, 1956, shalLhave tbe maaa' .. 1'fIIPIlO'" 1"" 
t1vely, assigned to them in that Act. as 
CHAPTER n 
-Al!QDiSiliOlir ·AWD'~mPb· OF' THE' ctM!NT .11I41Smi'M'cs' 'bI'"+&1!ifIpAft 
3. On theappoJnted day, the cementundertakinga"" the~. 
_and the right, title and intE-rest of :he Company in. ~el~ti~~ t~ I.~ ~t 
undert1ddngs, shall, by virtue of th.sAct, stand ~ to, & '1haJ1 )0 
vest in, the Central Government. 
4. '(1) The e~ent unde~·hk.n~ of the 'Compmy lhaUbe .~. to 
int'lude all proper tv and assets (including lands, quarries, mtne.. bufld-
in.p's.offtce-;. factories, workshop'9.stot'es,l)hntq, ft'lach~_d··f!iIu'p­
ment. installations, tn~trumeTlts, labm-ltOti@!, offi~rfUfftltu~,.wtte~~"3~ 
8:ti equipm1!nt. vehicles_ st1?ff.:.qu"lrters and' WOTkt!'rseo'tdt\Nt . ttfplWt 
'With amenities and inshllations perhtntn'g to tb~, ealh 'tftallhah.'ee 
o~ h'md, rese'l"ve funis. tnve<:Itments, b'lok df!bt9, 't'IfJft, .. ....-, 
·p"wers, authoritie3 a'ftd· privileges) pertaining to tile Gitmeftt 1IlIIar-
takin~s of the Company or use:! for th~ product:OD'of'~-._ 
distribution of cement produce"! by the Comp'lny, and all other right. 
and interests in or arising out of such prope-:ty and assets, as were lmme-
diately before the appointed dS\v in 1heewnership, posqesston. p?wer or 
ccmtrol of the Company, whether within or: outsIde India, and aU boob 
of account; registers and aU ot~er docu~~ntsOfwba~ver D.afiarii'JIe~ 4S 
~bereto. . • ,., 1"'-.1$.·.....-. 

... -.1 •.. 
1,", ,(~) AD property and usets as' aforesaid· ,which blrVtt vested, in the 
t;entral Government under section 3 shall, byforee of such vestia& be 
f ... d aDd discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charle, lien 
~ aU other encumbrances affecting them, and anyat18clunent, injunc-
$' ij,. or decree or order of any court restricting the use of such property 
or assets in any m:mner or appointing any receiver in respect of the 
whole or any part of such property or assets shall be deemed to have 
bfein withdraWn. 
(31 Every mortga~ of any property which has vested under thts Aet 
10 itithe Central Government and every person holdin~ any chat'ge, lien or 
o~ber Interest tn, or in relation to, any such property, shall give, Within 
saeb time and in such manner as may be prescribei, an intimation to the 
Commissioner of sUcb ml)rtgage, charge, lien or other interest. 
I, (4) For the removal of doubts, it is herebydeclated that the I!MrtS!li~ 
of any property referred to in sub-section (3) or any other persOnhoJding 
any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such property 
.,.11 be entitled to claim. in accordance with his, ri~hts and interests,. pay-
~t of the mortgage money or other dues, in whole or inp3rt, out q!. the 
amounts referred to in se~tion 8, but no such mortga~, char~, lien or 
20 other interest shall be enforceable against any property which have 
vested in the Central Government. 
(5)' If, on the' appointed day, any suit, appeal 01' oth~t' proceed'n~ of 
whatever nature in relation to any property or asset whi~h h'lS vested III 
25 the Central Government, under section 3, instituted or preferred bv or 
against the Company is p:mding, the same sh'llI- not abate, be discontl-
lUled or be, in any way, prejudicially a1fected by reason of transfer of 
the cement undertakings of the Company or of anything contained In 
this Act, but the suit, appeal or othe!' proceeding may be contmuedi 
JK'osecuted or enforced bv or a~ainst the Central Government or the 
30 Cement Corporation or, where the cement undertakings of the Company 
are directed, undersectlon 7, to vest in a Government company, 'that 
Government company. 
5. (1) Every liability of the Company in relation to its cement 
undertakings in respect of any period prior to the apnointed day shall 
3Sbe the liability of the Company and shall be enforceable against it and 
neit against the Central Government or the Cement Corp,ration or, 
where the cement undertakings of the Company are directed, under 
reetIon 7, to vest in a Government c~p:my, against that Govern.ment 
company. 
40 ~ (zy For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared t'Wat,-
(a) s~ve as otherwise expressly provided in t,'s Act; rio lIabttfty 
4;f the Co'mpany in relation to its cement undertakfn~s in ~t of 
any perio-d prior to the appuinted day, sh111 be e"lforce:lble agifnst 
tlle Central Government or the Cement C,rporatiort or, where the 
45 cement undertakings of the Comp'my are dire ... ted. under section 7, 
to vest in a Government company, against that Government company; 
50 
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other 
~u~hority in relation to the cement undertakings of the Company, 
pUled after the appointed day, in resn~ct of any matter, claim or 
4fspute which arose before that d~y, shall be, enforceable ag'linst the 
Central Government or the Cement Co"poratlon or, where the 
cement undertaking~ of the Com;pan.x are directed, under sect~o:n .', 
'to vest in a Government company, againSt that C;;~etit 
~mp8Df~ 
c .. .a. 
Go".... 
meat 01' 
the 
C ..... 
CorPora-
t.,ortIUt 
Gov ... 
JII~ , 
coman,. 
not to be 
llable for 
prior 
UabiUU-. 

Vestbt, 
at the 
cement 
undertak-
lnp of the 
Company 
in the 
Cement 
Corpora-
tion. 
Power 
of the 
C(ntral 
Govern-
ment to 
direct 
vestin, 
of the 
c:!mmt 
under-
taklnp 
of t~ 
C<lIftpany 
ift • 
Govern-
ment 
eODlpaJ' 
..... - '. 
(e) no llabnfty tncurred by the Company before theappolrited 
day, for the contravention of any provishn Of law for the time be'ng 
in force, shall be enforceable against the Central Government or 
the Cement Corporation or, where the cement undertakings of the 
Company are directed, under section 7, to vest in a Govenunent S 
company, against that Government company. 
, 
.. (1) Notwithstand!nq anything contained in sectIons 3 and 4. the 
Central Government shall, as 800n as may be, after the appointed day, 
dfreet. by notifi~ation. th'lt the cement undertakings of the Company, 
and the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its cement 10 
underlakinl!S. which have vestei in the Cent,.~l Government un tier . 
section 3. shlln, insteat! of continuinS! to vest in the Central Government; 
'lest in the Cement Corpora~ion either on the date of notification or on 
sueh earlier or later date (not bein~ a date earlier than the appointe:t 
day) as may be speeified in the notification. IS 
(2) Where the ri~ht, tttle and interest of the Comn'anv in rel~tton tt, 
its cement undertakin~s vest in the C~ment Cornoration under su"-
I~tton (1), the Cement C01'l"oration shall, on and from the date of such , 
vcstinq, be deemed to have becnme the owner in relation to such under-
takfn~s. and all the riehls and liabilities of the CeT'ltr'l' Government in 20 
r,"lation to such underhkin~ sh,ll, on and from the date of such vest-
ing. be deemed to have ,become the rights and liabilities, respectively, of 
the Cement Corporation. • 
'I. (1) Notwithstandin~ anything contaIned in sections S, 4 and 6, the 
Cenn-al Government may, if it to. satisfied that a Government company 2S 
is w:11ing to comply, or has complied, with t"uch terms and condl~ions as 
that GoYemment may tl-tink fit to impose, dire~t, bv notiflcatio.,. that the 
rement undertakings of the Company. and the r'~ht. title a,.jd inter~t 
of the Complnv in rehtion to itc; cement un de"hkfnes whtch have 
,,-ested in the Central Government under section 3 and there~fter in the 30 
Cement Corporation under sec:ion 6. shall. instead of contfnuinJ:! to vest 
in the Cement Corpnration, ve~t in the G,.,,,ernment comnanv either on 
thE' date of the notification or on su~h enlier or la~el' date (not bet,,1t 
a d~~e euUer than the appointed day) as may be specifte:i in 'the 
notiftcation. 35 
(2) Where the rf«ht, title and !ntere~ of the Compa..,v in re'ation to 
its ce~ent underhkin~s ve~t in a Governme.,t company under sub. 
section (n, the Gnvernment comn'tnv shall. on and f~om the date of 
luc-h vestin~, be deeme-l to h"lve become the owne,. in r!'htio"l t.., surh 
undert"lkin«s. and all the rights and lialJilities of the Centt'~l Goyer"l- 40 
ment or the Cement Corporation in relRtion to such uniert"lkings sh::lll, 
on and from the date or such vestine. be de~med to have be('ome the 
rights and liabilities, respectively, of the Government compmy. 
CHAPTER TIl 
PAYM!'NT OF AMOUNTS 
Payment 8. (1) For the transfer tn, and ve!lting in, the Central Governm"nt, 45 
of amount. uneler seetion 3. of the eement undertaJdnr:r"l of the C"mpanv and the ri~ht, 
title and ;"tere'lt of the Com",anv in relation to ite; eement underiaklnn, 
tbe-e sh,.U be tciven bv the Ce",tral Go,.'p.rnment to the Comp:lny. in caslt, 
an. in the manner sneeifled in Chapter VI, an amount of rupeeJ ten er:>res 
ad twenty...even Iakhs. So 

(~ The ft~ount spe~l&ed in mb-sed1011 (1) shan etIfI'J simple IIIletest 
.. ~tthe rate of four per cent. per annum for the perlod commenclu ... 
• he appui.lted day and endinl on the date on which payment of lu::h 
iunount is made by the Central Government to the CommissioDer.' 
, (3) The nmounts determined in accordance with the provisions of 
sub-se.ction (2) shall be given by the Central Government to the Com-
rany in addition to the amount specifie-fl in sub-seeton (1). 
(4) For the remov~J of doubts, it is h,ereby declared, that the liabilities 
ot. the Company in relation to its cement undertakings which have vested 
10 in the Central Government under section 3, shall be discharged from 
. the amount referred to in s~b-se~tion (1), and also from the amount 
· "determined under sub-section (2) in ac::ordance with the rights and 
interests of the creditors of ~he Company. 
,. 
· . 
cHAPTER IV 
IS MANACEMEln, ETC., OF THE CEMENT UNDEBTAXINCS or THE COMPAltt 
9. The general 8uperintenden':'e, direction, control and management 
cf the affairs and business of the cement undertakings of the Company, 
the right, title and interest in relation to which have ves~ed, under 
lIection 3, in the Central Government, shall,-
~ (/I) where a direction h:s been issued by the Central Government 
under f.ub-se.:t on (1) of section 6, vest in the Cement CorporatioD; 
(b) where a direction has been issued by the Central Govern-
ment unc!er sub-section (1) of section 7, vest in the GoverDDUtllt 
company spe~ed in such direction, 
25 and thereu~cn the Cement Corporation or, as the ease may be, the Gov-
· ernment company shall be entitled to exercise a:l such powers and do 
all such things as the Company is authoLised to exercise and do ill fa-
Ul'tron to its cement under.akings. 
10. (1) On the vesting of the management of the cement under-
30 takings of the Company in the Central Government or the Cement 
Corpora.ion or the Government company, as the case may be, all per~ 
IiOllS in charge of the management of such undertakings of the Company 
immediately before such vesting shall be bound to deliver to the 
Central Government or the Cement Corporation or the Government 
3S company or to such person or body of persons as the Central Govern-
n~ent or the Cement Corporation or the Government company. as the 
.: clll:1e may be, may specify in this behalf, aU property, assets, books of 
atcount, registers or other documents in their' custody relating to the 
cement undertakings of the Company. 
40 (2) The Central Government may issue such directioDs a. it may 
deem desirable in the circumstances of the case to the Cement Corpora-
tion or the Government company, as the case may be, .. to ita powen 
c'd . duties and' the Cement Corporation or the GOVerJlXlUmt. ~t 
Mana,.. 
ment, etc., 
oftha 
cement 
under~ 
hkin,sot 
the 
ComPaD7. 
Duty of 
personam 
char,eol 
mana,e-
ment of 
the under-
taldDII 
of the 
Co~ 
todeUver 
all pro-
perty, 
Uleta, 
., 

·~~me.~e;!J1.~y ~~.:may.~so. if l~ so,d~~~d~~ply:,to ~,e ~~n~"Qo.­
,!!~enfat ,any tl1lle, for InstructIons as to the manner in' wbieh tbe 
~lIhagemelJt of the cement undertakings of the Company 'sh.l1 ',be 
COhducted 'by It or in: relation to any other matter arising in the co. 
of such management. . ' '''"" 
CHAPTU V 
~NS RELATING TO CEIlTAINEMPLOYEES OF ~ Co~Alft 
EmplO)"- 11. (1) Every person who has been, immediately before the appoint-
mentor -eel day. employed by the Company in'connection with its cement Under-
c:ertaln 'takings shall become, on and from the appointed day or such later 10 
:':!:~~ :~,ui\te. as the case may be, an employee of the Central Government ~Ol" 
Due. 'ttte"Cement Corporation or the Government company,as the cue may 
..... ,,;., 
Cement 
Corpora-
.... 
"tie. in which the right. title and interest of the Company in rel.tieD 
to its cement undertakings, have vested under this Act, and shall bold 
ofBce or service under the Central Government or the Cement Corpora- 15 
tion or the Government company, as the case may be. with the same 
rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and o.her matters as would 
have b~ admissible to him if there had been no such vesting and, shall 
c(;ntinue to do so uDless and until his employm'ent under tlie Central 
Go.vernmcnt or the Cement Corporation or the Government com- 20 
pany. as the case may be, is duly terminated·or unt 1 his remuneraticu 
, ~~d other conditions of service are duly altered by the Central Qovern-
ment or the' Cement Corporation or the Government company,' as :! the 
lase m.ly be.' ,'"i 
(2) .N()twithstandi~g ~nythiJ?g contained in the Industrial Disputes 25 
(Act. 1947. or in a~y other law for the time being in force, the transfer'~ 
of the services of any officer or other person employed by the Company 
In connection with its cement undertaklngs to the Central Government 
'01' the cement Corporation or the Government company, as the case 
may be. shall not entitle such otlicer or other employee to anycompen- 30 
aation under this Act or under any other law for the time being in force 
,AJ+d DO ~h claiJu~ be entertained by a1ly court, tribunal or other 
u ,Ll[thori ty • .. • • I 
(3) W1l;e;::e, ~r tJ?e ,terms of any contract or service or oth~rwise. 
cny person, whose servLes become transIerred to the Central Govern- 35 
ment or the Cement Corporation or the Government company. aI 'lb. 
,~e,. may, be, by reason of the provisions of this Act. is entitled to any 
~ ~rears of,salary or wages or any payments for any leave not availed 
,,(of or, any other payment, not being plyment by way of gratuity or 
."pen.ion, such person may enforce his claim, against the Company but 40 
.. ' ~')t ASainst the Central Government or the Cement Corporation or the 
I.Cio~el'nmept comwmy.· , .: '. : 
'." 
J JZ: (1) Where the Comrany has established a provident fuod, 111&*'-
annuation fund. 'Welfare' fund Or any other fund for the benefit of Uae 
; ~~ODS employed.lfu any of the undertakings of theComp~y.the 
:' moneys i'elatableto the oftlcers or other employees, whoseBervicel have 4' 
become transferred by or under this Act to the Central GQvernmtnt,or 
the Cement Corporation or the Government company, as the case may 
, be. shall, out of the moneys st~ding. oXl the appoin\e~ day, to the crecUt 
ofaueh provident fund. superannuation fund, welfare fund or othe(f~d, 50 
~",Itat'ld transferred to,' and ,shall vest in. the Central Government or' the 
. e •• e1 CorporatioDor. the G~m",nt cOPl,pany. 8fth"':'~:~7 ~ . 
IfoUWI. 

.. 
·4.~ . __ ,~_ r 
(2) The moneys which stand transferred under sub-section (1) to tht 
Central Government or the Cement Corporation or the Government 
company, as the case may be, shall be dealt with by the Central Gov .. 
ernment or the Cement Corporation or the Government company, as the 
S case may' be, in such manner as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER VL 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYKEN'l'S 
lJ. (~) The c.tral Government shall, for the p1ll'pOll8 of dWnIniDI 
tJae. IllDewda papble to the Campany UDder aeefiea 8, by noti&cati-., 
10 appoint a CommissiODeJ." of PaymAmts. 
(2), The Ceutral Govemment may appoint IlUch other perIODI as it 
1DA1' think tit to uaist the COIIUDissioner and thereupon the COIDmi .. 
Doner may autllor.ise ODe o.r more of sudl pel'SOD8 also to exereise all or 
any of the powers exercisable by him UD.CIIer this Act aad different per-
I S ~n& may be authorised. to exercise different powers. 
(3) Aay peJIIOIl authoriaecl by the Commissioner to exercise any of 
the powers exercisable by the Commissioner may exercise those powers 
in the same manner and with the same eftect as • they have been COD-
ferred 011 that person directly by this Act and not by way of authorisation. 
(4) The JaIarie& and aHowau.ees of the Commissioner and. other per-
20 IIQU appointe4 uader th.i& section shall be defrayed. out of the COIIIOlida-
led Fund of India. 
l4. (1) The Central, Government shall, within thirty days from tbe 
speci1ieci date, pay, ~n caah, to the Commissioner, for payment to the 
2S Company an amount equal to the amount specified in section 8. 
.(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government 
in favour of the Commissioner, in the Public Account of India, and every 
amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be deposited by 
him to the credit of the said deposJt acC()unt and the said deposit account 
30 shall be operated by the Commissioner. 
(.9) The interest accruing on the amount standing to the credit of the 
deposit account referred to in sub-section ,(2) shall enure to the benefit 
of the Company. 
15. (1) The Central Government or the Cement Corporation or the 
3S Government _ company, as the cast! may be, shall be entiUed 1x> receive 
up to the specified date, to the exclusion of all other persons, any money 
due to the Company, in relation to its cement under~ which have 
vested in the Central Government or the Cement Corporation or the 
Government company, as the case may be, realised after the appointed 
40 day JlOtw ithatanding that the realisation pertains to a period prior to 
the appointed day. - • ~ .. 
(2) The Central Government or the Cement Corporation or the Gov-
enunent company, as the case may be, may make a claim to the Com-
missioner with regard to every payment made by it after the appointed 
4S day for discharging any liabi~ity of the Co~pany pertaining to ita 
cement undertakings in relation to any penod prior to the appointed 
Appoint-
mentof 
Commis-
sioner O! 
Payment&. 
Payment 
by the 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
the Com-
missioner. 
Certain 
powers 
of the 
CeDtJ:al 
GoverD-
ment at' 
CemeDt 
Corpora-
tionor 
Govern-
ment 
company. 

Claimato 
to be 
made 
to the 
Cammis-
moner. 
Priority 
ofclaima. 
E:ramlna-
tiOD of 
c:la1ma. 
Admis-
sion or 
rejection 
of claims. 
~ 
• , 
day; and every such claim shall have prioqty in accordance with the 
priorities attaching under this Act, to the matter in relation to which 
such liability has been discharged by the Central Government or the 
Cement Corporatiou or the Government company, as the case may be. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of the'Com- S 
pany in relation to its cement undertakings in respect of any transaction 
prior to the appointed day, which have not been discharged on or before 
the specified date, shall ,be the liabilities of the Company. 
16. Every. person having a daim against the Company shall prefer 
such claim before the Commissioner within thirty dayS from the ,.pecifteci 10 
date: 
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was 
prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the claim within the said 
period of thirty days, he may enterfain the claim within a further period 
of thirty days and not thereafter. IS 
17. The claims arising out of the matters specified in the Schedule 
shall have priorities in accordance with the following principles, namely:-
(a) Category I will have precedence over all other categorieS 
and Category II will have precedence over Category ru, and so on; 
(b) the claims specified in each of the categories shall. rank ao 
equally and be paid in full, but, if the amount is inSUfticient to meet 
such claims. in full, they shall abate in equal proportions and be 
paid accnrdingly; 
(c) the question of discharging any liability with regard to' a: 
matter specified in a lower category shall arise only if a surplu8 .·a5 
left after meeting all the lia~es specified in the immediately 
higher category. 
18. (1) On receipt of the claims made under section 16, the CommIs-
sioner shall arrange the claims in the order of prioritJ.es speclfled in the 
Schedule and examine the same in accordance with such order of 30 
priorities. 
(2) If, on examination of the claims, the Commissioner iI of opiDicm 
that the amount paid to him. under this Act is not suftlcient to meet the 
liabilities specified in any lower category, he shall not be r8quited to 
examine the claims in respect of such lower category. . 35 
19. (1) After examining the claims with reference to the prJorlUe. 
set out in the Schedule. the Commissioner shall fix a date on or 
before which .-ery claimant shall file the proof of his claim, faillng 
which he will De excluded from the benefit ot the disbursements made 
by the Commissioner. 
(2) Not less than fourteen days' notice of the date so fixed abaU be 
given by advertisement in one issue of a daily newspaper in the EngUah 
language having circulation in the major part of the! country and one 
issue of such daily newspaper in the regiona11anguage as the Commis-
sioner may consider suitable. and every such notice shall call upon the 45 
claimant to file the proof of his claim with the Commissioner within the 
time specified in the advertisement. .,' 

.otl_ 
41011880. 
• 
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the 
time specl1led by the Commissioner shall be excluded from the disburse-
mentsmade by the Commissioner. 
(4) The Conuirlssioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his 
S opinion, be necessary and after giving the Company an opportunity of' 
refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a reasonable opportunity 
ot being heard, in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole or in part. 
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own pr0.-
cedure in all matters arising out of the discharge of his function8, in-
10 cluding the place or places at which he will hold hils sittings and shall, 
ler the purpose of making an investigation under this Act, have the same 
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:-
IS 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness 
and examining him on oath; 
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other 
material object prodUCible as evidence; 
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 
'Cd)' the fssu!ng of any commission for the examination of 
20 witnesses. 
(8)' Any. investigation hefore the Commissioner shall be deemed to 
tie a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of 
the fndian Penal Code and the Commissfonpr shall be deemed to be a 
etvn court for the pUrposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the 
25 Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
, '('1)' A claimant who is dissatf!'lftro with the deci!'lion of the Commis-
~oner may prefer an appeal against the decision to the princfpal ""efvil 
court of" orlgf",'11 iurf"rt;r-tfon within the lnt'::tt HmUs of whose 1U1"fsdf$::tion 
the registered office of the Company is situated: 
30 Provided that where a person who f!'l a" .Tung-e of a Hi~h Court is 
.. 
appolInted to be the Commissioner. the appeal shall lie to the Hlgh Court r' 
within the local limits of whose iurfsdidion snch re~stel'ed office is 
situated, And such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not less 
thRn two Judges of that High Court. 
3:5 - to. After admitting a claim under this Act, the amount due in respect 
of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or persons 
to whom such sums are due. and, on such payment, the liability of the 
CoIrI.pany In respeet of such claim shall stand dtl'!char~ 
11.. (1) If, out of the moneys paid to hfm under 1*!ctlon 14. there 1s 
40 a balance left after meetfn~ tn" liAbilities I'll'! l'!pectftp.~ in the Schedule, 
the Commissioner shall disburse such balance to the Company. 
(Z) Where the possession of any machinery, equipment or other 
property, has vested in the Central Government or the Cement 
DiIburIe-
mehtof 
money 
by the 
CommJa-
sionerto 
claimants. 
Disburse-
mento! 
amounw " 
totba 
Company. 

Undi!Jburs-
edor 
unclaimed 
amount to 
be transfe-
rred to the 
general 
revenue 
aecount. 
Ad to 
han over-
ridlna 
eIhct. 
Contracts 
Jb rela-
tion to 
the ce-
ment 
under-
takings 
of the 
Company 
toceue 
to have 
effect ua-
leu 
ratifted 
lJy the 
Central 
Govern-
mentor 
Cement 
Corpor8-
tionar 
Govern-
meat compaD7. 
Protection 
ofaetlon 
tabn III 
IOOd faith. 
10 
Corporation or the Government company, as the case may be, under this 
Al't, but such machinery, equipment, or other property does ~ot belong 
to the Company, it shall be lawful for the Central Government or the 
Cement Corporation or the Government company, as the case may be, to 
continue to possess such machinery or equipment or other property on 5 
the same terms and conditions under whiBh they were possessed by the 
Company immediately before the appointed day . 
.. Any money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed 
or unclafmed for a period of three years from the last day on which 
the disbursement was made shall be transferred by the Commissioner 10 
to the general revenue account of the Central Government; but a claim 
to any money so transferred may be preferred to the Central Govern:" 
ment by the person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with: 
as if such transfer had not been made, the order, if any, for payment of 
the money being treated as an order for the refund of the revenue. IS 
CHAPTER vn 
MISCEl,LANEOUS 
!S. The provisinl1S of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any-
thing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being 
In force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law, other 20 
than this Act. or in any decree or order of any coun, tribunal or otlier 
authorfty. 
II. (1) Every contract entered into by the Company in relation to 
its cement undertakings for Any service, sale or supply, and in force 
immediately before the appointed day. snaIl, on and from the expiry of 2S 
one hundred and eighty days from such day, cease to have effect unless 
such contract is before the expiry of that period, ratified, in writing, by 
the Central Government or the Cement Corporation or the Government 
company, as the case may be, and, in ratifying such contract, the Central 
Government or the Cement Corparation or the Government company, 8S 30 
the case may be, may make such alteration or modification therein as it 
may think flt: 
Provided that the Central Government or the Cement Corporation 
or the Government company. as the case may be, shall not omit to ratify 
a contract, and shall not make any alteration or modiftcation in a con- 3S 
tr act, unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous or has 
bE"en entered into in bad faith or is detrimental to the Interests of the 
Central Government or the Cement Corporation or the Government 
company, as the case may be. 
(!) The Central Government or the Cement Corporation or the Gov. 40 
emment company, as the case may be, shall not omit to ratify a contract, 
and shall not make any alteration or modification therein, except after 
giving to the parties to the contract a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard and except after recording, in writing, its reason!; for refusal to 
ratify the contract or for making any alteration or modfftcatfon therein. 45 
%5. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall He agalDst 
the Central Government or any officer of that Government, or the Cement 
Corporation or the G~vernment company, or any offtcer or other person 
authorised by that Government or Corporation or Government company 
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be dOlte under So 
this Act, . I , 1_ I .. _. 

11 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shal1lie against the Clentral Gov-
ernment or any of its officers or other employees, or the Cement Corpora-
tion or the Government company, or any officer or other person autho-
rised by that Corporation or Company for any damage caused or Ukely 
5 to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to 
be done under this Act. 
ft. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all 
or any of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the 
power conferred by section 29, may also be ,exercised by such person 
10 or persons as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) Whenever any delegation of, power is made under sub-section (1), 
the person to whom such power has been delegated shall act under the 
direction, control and supervision of the Central Government. 
Delegation 
of powers. 
21. Any person who,- Penalt1elt. 
IS (4) having in his pORsesRion. custody or control any property 
20 
30 
• 
or assets forming part of the cement undertakings' of the Company, 
wrongfully withholds such property- or asset." from the Central 
Government or the Cement Corporation or the Government com-
pany; or t· 
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property or 
assets forming part of the cement undertakings of the Company or 
wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Government, or 
the Cement Corporation or the Government company, oJ" any person 
or body of persons specified by that Government or Corporation or 
Government company, any document relatin~ to such undertakings 
which may be in his possession, custodv or control or fails to 
deliver to the Central Government, or the Cement Corporation or 
the Government company, or any person or bodv of personi'!' speci-
fled by that Government ot' Corporation or Government company, 
any property, assets, books of account, remsters or other docu-
ments in his possession, custody or control, relating to the cement 
undertakings of the Company; ~r 
(el wrongfully removes or destroyes any property or asset form-
ing part of the cement undertakings of the Company or prefers any 
35 claim under this Act which he knows or has rea.'1onable cause to 
lI>w1 believe to be false or grossly inaccurate 
~ , 
F. shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
,. to two yelll'll, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or 
~, with both. 
; ..... 
40 til. (1) mere an offence under this Act has been committed by a com-
pany, every person who at the time the ofl'enee WAS committed was in 
charge of, and was responsible to, the cOmpany for the conduet of the 
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offenCE" and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
45 punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall rent!er Ilny 
such person IIable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge (\r that he had exercised all due dili-
gence fo prevent the commission of such offence. 
Ofteneel 
by com-
pant ... 

Power to 
make 
rules. 
Power to 
remove 
diftlcul-
ties. 
Declara-
tim uto 
the: .,Ucy 
of the 
State. 
12 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the oftence has been committed with the consent or conni-
vance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
manager, secretary, or other officer of the company, such director, mana- 5 
ger, secretary, or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
E1'P~tion.-For the purposes of this section,-
, .. 
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or 
other association of individuals; 10 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
29. (1) The Central Government may, by notiftcation, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
'(2) In parttcular. and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following IS 
matters, namely:- . 
(4) the time within which. and the manner in which, an intima-
tion shan be given to the Commissioner under sub-section "(3) of sec-
tion 4; ", "''\ 
(b) the manner in whicli the moneys in any provident fund or 20 
other fund referred to in section 12 shall be dealt with; 
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, 'pres-
cribed. ' "'" " '- , ... "'"'l""'''f1" ~ 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made. before each House of Par- 25 
Jiament. while it is In session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may he comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if. before the expiry ar the session immediately following the session 
or the suc('essive sessions aforesaM. both Houses a~ee in making any 
modification In the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 30 
made. the rule shall thereafter havE" effect only in such modified f<>rm or 
be of no effect, as the case mav be; so, however, that any such modfft-
cation or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done undcr that rule. ' 
SO. Tf any dffftculty arlses in p,ivin~ effect to the llt'OVlsions of this Act, 35 
the Central Government may, bv order, not inconsistent with the provi-
sions of this Act, remove the difficulty: " 
Provided that no stIch order shall be made after the expfry of a pertod 
of two yeat'S from the appoInted day. " 
31. It is hereby declared that this Act Is for giving effect to the policy 40 
of the State towards securing the princlples specified In clause (b) of 
article 39 of the Constitution. 
ExPlfJn.ation..-Tn this section, "State" has the same meantng as In arti-
cle 12 of the Constitution, I . '.\ 

[See sections 17, 18, 19 and 21] 
OBDa OJ' PBIORIT.U!'.& FOR THE DISCHARGE OF LIABILl'1'IlI8 OF THB COMPANY 
l:ategotry I. 
S Wages, salaries and other dues of the employees of the Company. 
c.:atef/O'rJl II. 
. \ 
(i) Loans advanced by the Central Government by defennent of 
excise duty. 
(ii) Loans advanced by the State Government by deferment of royalty 
10 and sales tax. 
(iii) Loans advanced by financial institutions and banks. 
(iv) Arrears in relation to contributions to be made by the Company 
to the provident fund, salaries, wages and other amounts due to the 
employees of the Company including contributions to be made under 
34 of 194B. IS the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948, and any other law for the 
time being in force providing for such contributions. 
CClitegOTJI III. 
Revenue, taxes, ceases, rates or any other dues to the Central Gov-
ernment, a State Government, a local authority or a State Electricity 
20 Board. 
CateflMll IV. 
Any credit availed of by the Company for the purpose of carrying oli 
any trading or manufacturing operations, as under:-
(i) Repayment of advances and deposits, received from Gov-
25 ernment Departments and public undertakings for the supply of 
. cement. 
(ii) Repayment of advances and deposits, received from stockists 
and dealers for the supply of cement. 
(iii) Repayment of advances and deposits, received from the 
30 general public for the supply of cement. 
Category V. 
Any other loans. 
Category VI. 
Over<iI'afts from banks. 

b'TATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REAsoNS 
The unsatisfactory funcl.iODing of Jaipur Udyog Limited, one of the 
largest cement production units in the country, with a licensed capacity 
of 10 lakh tonnes per annum, has been engaging the attention o.f the 
Central Government. Due to tinancial difficulties resulUna 1rom mia-
management, the Company closed down production durina the period 
September 1975 to April 1976. To enable the Company to restart pro-
duction from April 1976, financial assistance of about Rs. i crores was 
provided by the Central Government, the State Government and the State 
Bank of India. The management was also liitrengthened by the inclusion, 
on the Board of Management, of representatives of the Central Govern-
ment, the State Government, the State Bank of India and the financial 
institutions. However, the functioning of the Company has continued 
to be unsatisfactory and it has not been able to generate sufficient funds 
to finance the production or to meet its commitments even for the repay-
ment of deferred excise duty and interest charges. The subsidiary unit 
of the Company at Kanpur for production of jute goods is also present-
ly closed down. 
2. The preSent losses of the Company exceed Rs. 16 crores and the 
liabilities of the Company for repayment of loans advanced by the Cen-
tral Government, the State Government, the State Bank of India and 
the financial institutions are of the order of about Rs. 17.14 crores. An. 
investigation under section 15 of the Industries (Development and Re-
gulation) Act, 1951, was ordered on the 22nd July, 1978 into the working 
of the Company. Mter considering the report of the Investig&tillg Com-
mittee and taking into account the continued unsatisfactory functioning 
of the Company, the losses and the liabilities, the Central Government 
has decided that it would be in the public interest to acquire the cement 
undertakings of the Company and transfer them to the Cement Corpora-
tion ot India which is a public sector undertaking engaged in the manu-
facture and sale of cement. 
3. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above object. 
NEW DELHI; 
Tlle 23rd April, 1979. GEORGE FERNANDES. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 9-11-Cem.ent/78/M47-Int, dated the 24th April, 
1979 from Shri George Fernandes, Minister of Industry to the Secretary, 
Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Jaipur Udyog Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Cement Under-
takings) Bill, 1979, has been recommended under article 117 (1) and (3) 
of the Constitution of India, the introduction in and consideration by 
Lok Sabha of the said Bill in the current session. 
14 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 80f the Bill provides for the payment. in 
cash, and. in the manner specified in Chapter VI Of the Bill, an amount 
of rupees ten crores and twenty-seven lakhs, for vesting in the Central 
Government, the right, title and the interest of the Jaipur Udyog Limited 
in relation to its cement unit. 
2. Sub-clause (2) of clause 8 provides for the payment of simple in-
terest at the rate of 4 per cent. per annum for the period commencing 
from the date the legislation comes into force and ending on the day on 
which payment of the amount specified in sub.<llause (1) is made by the 
C~ntral Government to the Commissioner ,of Payments. It is estimated 
that the interest payment in terms of the provisions of sub-clause (2) is 
lil(ely to be of the order of about Rs. 3.42 lakhs per month. 
3. Clause 13 of the Bill provides for appointment of Commissioner 
of Payments by the Government with adequate staff to assist him for 
the purpose of di9bursing the amount payable to the Company. The 
salary and allowances of the Commissioner of Payments and hi's staff 
and expenditure on office and establishment will be defrayed out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India. The estimated expenditure on this account 
i's likely to be of the order of Rs. 15,000 per month. 
4. At the time of restart of production by the end of April, 1976, after 
closure, the banks and financial institutions were not agreeable to ad-
vancing further amounts to the Company for restarting production un-
le~s the Central and State Governments were also involved in the nurs-
ing programme in view of the huge requirements of funds. At the ins-
tance of the Central Government, the State Bank of India closed its 
earlier account with the Company and extended frseh cash credit faci1i-
tip.s to enable the Company to restart its production. In addition, the 
banks continue to provide facilities for current operations. 
5. It was, therefore, felt that Government having sponsored the nurs-
ini programme of the Company it would not be appropriate to deny 
necessary protection to the dues of the banks and financial institutions. 
It was, therefore, decided that after taking into account the amounts they 
are likely to get in accordance with the priorities provided in the Bill and 
the amounts that they would be expected to get by recourse to legal reme-
dies available to them, Government would take note of the shortfall and 
pay the amounts to the banks and finanCial institutions. The shortfall 
is estimated to be about Rs. 6 crores. Payment in pursuance of this 
decision will be made after due appropriation by Parliament by law. 
6. Funds will also have to be provided to the Company for a "First 
Aid" operation in the short term for which the financial requirements 
have been estimated at Rs. 150 lakhs by the Investigating Committee 
consistent with the need for economy in expenditure particularly in the 
15 

16 
case of a unit like Jaipur Udyog Limited. The Government has already 
given an undertaking to the Industrial Development Bank of India ~r a 
short term loan of Rs. 85 lakhs to the Company to enable them to under-
take the immediate repairs to avoid any possible ma:jor break-down. 
This expenditure is necessary to enable the Company to undertake imme-
di3te repairs of or replacements for the plant to operate at the capacity 
Ie'/el for the next 4 to I) years. A further investment of the order ot 
lbout Rs.· 15 crores would also be necessary for the long term rehabili-
tation of the cement unit of the Company. 
7. The Bill, it enacted, is not likely to involve any other recurring or 
non-recurring expenditure. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISILATION 
Clause 29 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill. Such rules may provide for 
matters, such as-
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an lnti-
mation referred to in sub-clauae (3) of clause 04 of the Bill shall be 
given; and 
(b) the .manner in which the moneys in any provident fund or 
other fund referred to in clause 12 shall be dealt with. 
The matters in respect of which such rules may be made are mat-
ters of procedure and admi'nistrative detail and it is not practicahle to 
provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power 
is, therefore, of a normal character. 
18 

LOK SABRA 
'\~" . A '. 
. --~~- --
.. to provide for, in the public interest, the acquisition and transfer '~f the 
right, title and interest of the Jaipur Udyog Limited in relation to'ita. 
cement undertakings, for the purpose of ensuring continuity of pro-
duction of cement which is essential to the needs of the community, 
the industries and other developmental projects in the country and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri George Ferrwmde., 
Minister of Inlium'y.) 