AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

10 JUL 1४४४

Bill No. 66 of 1998
——

THE WOMEN WELFARE BILL, 1998
By

‘Surat Jayanti Patnaik, M.P.
A

BILL

| comprehensive measures for all-round development of Women and for
connected therewith or incidental thereto.

by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as

‘This Act may be called the Women Welfare Act, 1998, ‘Short title, ex-

ean
Itextends to the whole of India, 1 अमेटस कक

Tt shall come into force at once.


Definitions

Free education
to women,

Provision of pen-
sion to destitute
women,

Reservation of
post in Govern-
iment Services,

Fa nd in-
frastructure for
selfemployment

2

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires —

(०) “appropriate Governmeat” means the Central Government a
Government, as the case may be;

(6) ‘destitute woman’ means a woman who has been separated, divorced.
widow who has no source of income;

(c) “employer” means—
( in relation to an establishment which is under the control of
appropriate Government, a person or an authority appointed by the apy

Government, for the supervision and control of employees or where no
or authority is so appointed, the head of the department;

(ii) in relation to an establishment under any local authority, the
appointed by such authority for the supervision and control of employ
where no person is so appointed the chief executive officer of the local aut

(di) in any other case, the person who, or the authority which, has
ultimate control over the affairs of the establishment and where the said
are entrusted to any other person whether called a manager, managing di
managing agent or by any other name, such person;

(d) “establishment” means—
(7) a factory;
(ii) a mine;
(iii) a plantation;
(iv) an agricultural field;

(v) an establishment wherein persons are employed for the exhil
equestrian, acrobatic and other performances; and

(e) “woman” means a woman whether gainfully employed or not.
3. The appropriate Government shail, —
(a) provide free education upto graduation level for women;

(b) open adequate number of educational institutions including p1
and technical institutions, exclusively for women;

(c) reserve fifty per cent of seats in educational institutions for women till
time adequate number of educational institutions exclusive to them have
up; and

(d) provide scholarships to women pursuing higher education,
Explanation —

In this section, ‘free education means’ uniform, books and stationery, nutri
meals during school hours, transportation free of cost and no fees for admission
taking any examination shall be charged.

4. The appropriate Government shall provide a pension at the rate of
one thousand and five hundred per mensem, to be revised from time to time,
destitute women till they are gainfully employed or facitities for self-employment!
been created for them or accommodated in women’s homes whichever is the

5. The appropriate Government shall reserve thirty per cent, of posts and appoi
under its control for women.

6. (1) The appropriate Government shall provide all necessary facilities
infrastructure for women for self-employment.

FBI


3

| For the purpose of sub-section (1), the appropriate Government shall make
lable loans at very low rate of interest returnable in easy instalments after a period of
years from the date of sanction of loan.

7. (0) The appropriate Government shall establish women’s homes in every
for accommodating destitute women.

(2) In every women’s home:-
(i) medical care, food and clothes shall be supplied free of cost to the inmates;
(i) recreational facilities shall be made available;
(iii) necessary facilities for self-employment shall be made available.

8. (/) The Central Government shall administer in Insurance Scheme for all

(2) The Insurance Scheme so administered shall cater to housewives, working women
self-employed women or working women in both organised or unorganised sectors.

(3) The insurance shall cover against accidents, injuries, illness connected with
¥y or otherwise or any loss in the self-employment due to natural calamity or any

(4) The Central Government shall determine the amount of insurance and the premium
by every woman and the period of the insurance cover thereon,

9, (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be called the Women
Fund for carrying out welfare measures for women other than working women.

(2) Every State Government shall contribute to the Fund in such a ratio as may be
ined by the Central Government,
(3) The Fund shall be utilised for providing necessary facilities to women for pursuing
ion, for self-employment and for payment of pension to destitute women.
10, (J) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be called Working
Welfare Fund for carrying out the following purposes:—
(i) to ensure the right to work for the women employees in any industry or
establishment;

(ii) to ensure equal wages to women employees;

4 (iii) to ensure steady and definite increase of the women employees in the total
work force;

(iv) to ensure after suitable amendments, proper application of the existing
labour laws for the benefit of the women employees;

(v) to ensure child care facilities for the women employees with minimum
needs like milk, tiffin, clothes, toys and trained ayahas to look after the children;

(vi) to ensure mobile child care facilities for agricultural women employees,

(vii) to ensure retiring rooms with adequate facilities like bathrooms, latrines,
etc. at the work-site for the women employees;

(viii) to ensure residential facilities for the women employees nearest to the
of work;

(ix) to ensure recreational facilities for the kids of the women employees at the
child care centres;

(x) to ensure proper and adequate security arrangements for the women
Jloyees at the work site as well as to and from their residential places;

(xi) to ensure improved and conducive working conditions for the women

(xii) to ensure reservation of beds in the hospitals for women employees;

Womens’

Insurance
‘Scheme for
women.

Welfare fund
for women
other than
working

Working

‘Welfare Fund.


Representation
of women
employees in
trade unions,
Constitution of
Advisory
‘Committees.

Central
Advisory
Committee

Appointinent of
officers

Register of
women
employees.

Annual report
of Advisory
Committees,

Employerto
furnish
information in
respect of
women
employees,
Over-riding
effectofthe
Act

(xiii) to ensure proper and adequate maternity facilities for the won
‘employees;

(xiv) to ensure equality for married and unmarried women employees
employment as well as in service conditions and wages;

(xv) 10 ensure hostel facilities for women employees, both married
unmarried, nearest to the place of work;

(xvi) to ensure cheap, safe and quick transportation facili
employees;

ies for wo

(xvii) to ensure protection from health hazards, particularly for the w
employees working in industries like cashew, mines, tobacco, construction proj
ele.

(2) Every employer and State Government shall contribute to the fund in such:
as may be fixed by the Central Government.

11. The Government shall ensure representation of women employees in
committees of trade unions formed for the purposes of working class,

12. (/) The Central Government shall constitute in every State and Unio
territory an Advisory Committee in respect of the area at the city level, district I
and an apex body at State level, consisting of equal number of representatives fr
the appropriate Government, the employees and the trade unions, who shall prefer
be women, to advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of
administration of this Act as may be referred to it by the Central Government includi
matters relating to the application of the Fund.

(2) The members of committees so constituted shall from amongst themselves ef
the Chairmen of the committees.

(3) The Central Government shall publish in the Official Gazette the names of
members of all Advisory Committees.

13, The Central Government shall constitute a Central Advisory Co

which shall coordinate the functioning of all the Advisory Committees for their p
functioning and for the adoption of uniform policies.

14. The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 5:
appoint as many officers as it may deem necessary for the proper enforcement of!
provisions of this Act.

15. The Advisory Committee at the district level shall maintain a register
women employees in its area and the information contained therein shall be check
with the information supplied by each employer of the area regarding women empl
by them and their specific needs, if any.

16. Each Advisory Committee shall, as soon as may be, after the end of each fina
year, prepare a comprehensive report of its activities of the previous year, which
financed from the Fund, together with a statement of accounts.

17. The appropriate Government may require an employer, who employs women
his industry or establishment, to furnish for the purposes of this Act, such statisti
other information, in such form and within such period as may be prescribed

18. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anythi
inconsistent contained in any other law or in the terms of any award, agreement or conlt
of employment, whether made before or after the coming into force of this Act, but w
unde any such award, agreement, contract of employment or otherwise, a woman el
is enli\led to benefits in respect of any matters which are more favourable to her than th


5

she would be entitled under this Act, she shall continue to be entitled to the more
benefits in respect of that matter, notwithstanding that she is entitled to receive
in respect of other matters under this Act.

The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, makes Power to make
carrying out the purposes of this Act, oles


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Women constitute more than 50 per cent. of our population, Nevertheless, no
attention has ever been given to improve the lot. Today, we find everywhere that women
are treated as second grade citizens, They are deprived of even basic education not to —
speak of higher and technical education, ‘They live in miserable conditions without
anybody caring for them. They do not have necessary means and facilities to fend for
themselves. Although the Government has done a lot to improve the welfare measures _
for women, yet they are not sufficient and much has to be done in this area. Girls are not
sent to schools on the pretext that the parents do not have sufficient means for spending
for their education.

Though we have been voicing for so many years to take steps for protection of
interests of women, yet we have never touched the basic sectors like education,
employment and health for women. There has been a demand for reservation of seats in
legislatures for women. Though this is a welcome step, yet it is most essential that
adequate provisions should be made for their improvement.

‘Therefore, it is proposed to provide for free education to girls, reservation in jobs
and facilities for self-employment to women, facilities for working women and for
necessary facilities for destitute women.

These measures will go a long way in protection of interests of women as a whole.

‘New Deut; JAYANTI PATNAIK
May 26, 1998.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM १
!+ sit

.. Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall provide ‘ree
| education upto graduation level and open educational institutions including professional
| and technical institutions exclusively for women and for payment of scholarships. Clause
4 provides that the appropriate Government shall provide a pension at the rate of rupees
one thousand and five hundred per mensum to all destitute women. Clause 6 provides that
| the appropriate Government shall provide all necessary facilities and infrastructure for
“women for self-employment. Clause 7 provides that the appropriate Government shall
“establish womens’ homes in every district for destitute women with food, clothes, medical
and self-employment facilities. Clause 8 provides that the Central Government shall
administer an Insurance Scheme for all women. Clause 9 provides constitution of a Women
‘Welfare Fund and Working Women Fund. Clauses 1 | and 12 make provision for constitution
Advisory Committees. Though State Governments are also require to contribute fo the
dds yet their contribution will not be sufficient and the Central Government has to make
juate provisions. The Mill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
solidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about
ten thousand crore is likely to be involved. A non-recurring expenditure of rupees
thousand crore is also likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of" India



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 18 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

‘0 provide for comprehensive measures for all-round development of women
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shrimatt Jayanti Painaik, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—-925LS—22-6-1998,