As INTRODUCED IN t.OK SABlfA ON 
". ..' .. 'I j 
J'~ .Ii ~ I " ... ,'. 
Bill No. 66 of 1987 
THE NATIONAL SECURITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1987 
A 
BILL 
fu.rther to amend th.e Nc&t1ioncdSecurity Act, 1980, m its application to 
the State of Punjab and the Union territory of Chaft.digarh. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-eighth Year of the Republic 
(If India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may he call~d the National Security (Amendment) Short 
Act, 1987. lille and 
commen~-e­
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 9th day of 
June, 1987. 
2. The National Security Act 1980 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act) shall, in its appli~ation to the State of Punjab and the 
Union territory of Chandigarh, have effect subject to the amendments 
I specified in section 3 o . 
ment. 
Amend-
ment of 
Act 
65 of 
1980 in 
ilf; 
applica-
tion to 
Punjab 
and 
Chandl-
aam. 

1l1set. 
tion of 
new 
IICction 
14A. 
Circum-
stances ill 
which 
persODs 
may be 
detained 
for 
periods 
loqer 
than 
three 
months 
without 
obtaining 
the 
opinion 
of 
AdvilO1'Y 
Boards. 
3. In the principal Act, after section 14, the followiIlj section shan ht 
inserted, namely:-
'14A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, or in any judgment, decree or order of any 
court or other authority, any person in respect of whom an order of 5 
detention has been made under this Act at any time before the 8th 
day of June, 1988 may be detained without obtaining the opinion of 
the Advisory Board for a period longer than three months, but not 
exceeding six months, from the date of his detention where such 
person had been detained with a view to preventing him from aet- 10 
ing, in any disturbed area, in any manner prejudicial to-
(a) the defence of India; or 
(b) the security of India; or 
(c) the security of the State; or 
(d) the maintenance of public order; or IS 
(e) the maintenance of supplies and services essential to 
the community. 
Explanation 1.-The provisions of the Exp14nati<m to sub-section 
(2) of section 3 shall apply for the purposes of this sub-section as 
they apply for the purposes of that sub-section. 20 
Exp141141tion 2.-ln this sub-section, "disturbed area" means any 
area which is for the time being declared by notification under section 
3 of the Punjab Disturbed Areas Act, 1983, or under section 3 of the 
Chandigarh Disturbed Areas Act, 1983, to be a disturbed area. 
(2) In the case of any person to whom sub-section (1) applies, 25 
sections ~, 8 and 10 to 14 shall have effect &ubject to the follOWing 
modifications, namely:-
(a) in section 3,-
(i) in sub-section (4), in the proviso,-
(A) for the words "ten days", the words "fifteen 30 
days" shall be substituted; 
(B) for the words "fifteen days", the words "twenty 
days" shall be substituted; , 
(ii) in sub--section (5), for the wo.rds "seven days", the 
32 of 1983. 
33 of 19113. 
words "fifteen days" shall be substituted; IS 
(b) in section 8, in sub-section (1), for the words "ten days", 
the words "fifteen days" shall be substituted; 
(c) in section 10, for the words "shall, within three weeks", 
the words "shall, within four months and two weeks" shall be 
subitituted; 

LOK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
-1:') 
ruE NATIalAL SEaJRITY (AMENDMENT) BILL. 1987 
(To be/As introd Jced in Lo·~. S abha) 
1. Page 1. line 18. in the marginal citation,-
i2£ "3 of 1987." ~ "Ord. 3 of 1987." 
2. Page 5. line 2,-
i2!:. "mE NATIONAL SECURI1Y (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1985" 
read "THE NATIONAL SECURITY ACT. 1980" 
3. Page 5. line 3,-
i.E!:. "(65 CF 1985)" ~ "(65 OF 1980)" 
NEW DElli!; 
Julv 28 .. 1987 
S"ravana 6, 1909 {S ak aJ 

s 
5 -
(d) in .ection 11,..-
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "seven weeks", the 
words "five months and three weeks" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "detention of the 
person concerned", the words "continued detention of the , 
person con~erned" shall be substituted; 
·(e) in section 12. for the words "for the detentIon", at both 
the places where they occur, the words "for t~ continued deten-
tion" shall be substituted; 
10 (1) in oection 13, for the words "twelve months", the words 
"two years" shall be substituted; 
(g) in section 14, in the proviso to sub-section (2), for the 
words "twelve months", the words "two years" shall be sub-
stituted.'. 
24 of 1984. 15 4. The National Security (Amendment) Act, 1984, section 4' of the Repeals. 
60 of 1984. National Security (Second Amendment) Act, 1984 and the National 
23 of 1985. Security <Amendment) Act, 1985 are hereby repealed. 
3 of 1987. 5. (1) The National Security 
hereby repealed. 
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1987, is Repeah. 
and 
20 (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended 
by this Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASON::, 
During the last few months, the activities of the extremist and terro-
rist elements in the State of Punjab and the Union territory of Chandi-
garh have been a matter of serious concern. These elements indulged in 
violent activities and terrorist methods, including tl:J'eats to persons in-
volved in the investigation and prosecution of cases. Although the entire 
State of Punjab and the whole of the Union territory of Chandigarh had 
been declared as "disturbed areas" under the relevant ·Disturbed Areas 
Act, there had been no improvement in the effective prevention of these 
activities. Whle the deteriorating law and order situation had necessitat-
ed the imposition of the President's rule in the State of Punjab, further 
strong action was found necessary to prevent the terrorists from indulg-
ing in activities prejudicial to the secunty of the State and the mainte-
nance of public order. The State Government had also requested the 
taking of suitable measures to enable it to take preventive action. Ac-
cordingly, the President prom\llgated on the 9th June, 1987 the National 
Security (Amendment) Ordinance, 1987 to provide for certain modiflca-
tions in the application of the National Security Act, 1980 to the State of 
Punjab and the Union territory of Chandigarh. 
2. The Ordinance provided for the following, among other things, 
namely:-
(a) to inc,rease from 10 days to 15 days the maximum period 
within which grounds of detention may, in exceptional circumstances, 
be communicated to the detenu and to increase from 15 days to 20 
days up to which the orders made by the officers referred to in sub-
section (1) of section ,3 of the Act shall remain in force without the 
approval of the State Government; 
(b) to provide in certain cases for detention of persons without 
obtaining the opinion of the Advisory Board for a period of more 
than three months but not exceeding six: months from the date at 
tr.eir detention and to provide also in such cases for a longer maximum 
period of detention; and 
(c) to make the necessary consequential amendments in the Act. 
3. The 8UI seeks tc! repl,ee the aforeAid Ordinance. 
BUTA SINGH. 
New Delhi; 
The 22nd July. 1987. 
4 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTs FROM THE NATIONAL SECUBI'lT (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1985 
(65 OF 1985) 
... ... ... ... ... 
3. (1) • ... ... • • 
(4) When any order is made under this section by an officer mention-
ed in sub-section (3), .he shall forthwith report the fact to the state 
Government to which he is subordinate together with the ground~ on 
v.rhich the order has been made and such other particulars as, in his 
opinion, have a bearing on the matter, and no such order shall remain 
in force for more than twelve days after the making thereof unless, in 
the meantime it has been approved by the State Government: , , 
Provided that where under section 8 the grounds of detention are com-
municated by the officer making the order after five days but not late .. than 
ten days from the date of detention, this sub-section shall apply subject 
to the modification that, for the words "twelve days", the words "fifteen 
days" shall be substituted. 
(5) When any order is made· or approved by the State Government 
under this section, the State Government shall, within seven days, report 
the fact to the Central Government together with the grounds on which 
the order has been made and such other particulars as, in the opinion of 
the State Government, have a bearing on the necessity for the order . 
... ... ... • ... 
8. (1) When a person.is detained in pursuance of a detention order, 
the authority making the order shall, as soon as may be, but ordinarily 
DOt later than five days and in exceptional circumstances and for reasons 
to be recorded in writing, not' later than ten days from the date of 
detention, communicate' to him the grounds on which the order has been 
made anei shall aJford him the' .rliest opportunity of making . a repnt-
sentation against the order to the appropriate Government. ". . 
... • ... ... ... 
10. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, in every case 
where a detention order has been made under this Act, the appropriate 
Government shall, within three weeks from the date of detention of a 
person under the order, place before the Advisory Board constituted by 
it under section 9, the grounds on which the order has been made and 
the representation, if any, made by the person affected by the order, 
and in caSe where the order has been made by an officer mentioned in 
sub-section (3) of section 3,. also the report by such officer under sub-
section (4) of that section. 
Power to 
make 
order. 
detaininl 
certain 
persont5. 
Grounds 
of order 
of deten-
tion to be 
disclosed 
to per-
SODS 
affected 
by the 
order. 
Reier-
ence to 
Adivisory 
Boards. 

Proe. 
duro of 
Advisory 
Boalds. 
AClion 
upon the 
repm10f 
Iho Ad-
visory 
Board. 
Muimum 
period of 
dell:ntion. 
Revoca-
tion of 
del·ention 
orders. 
6 
11. (1) The Advisory Board shall, after considering the material. 
placed before it and, after calling for such further information as it 
may deem necessary from the appropriate Government or from any 
person called for the purpose through the appropriate Government or 
f~om the person concerned, and if, in any particular case, it considers it 
essential so to do or if the person concerned desires to be heard, after 
hearing him in person, submit its ~port to the appropriate Government 
wj!hin seven weeks from the date of detention of the person concerned. 
(2) The report of the Advisory Board shall specify in a separate 
part thereof the opinion of the Advisory Board as to whether or not 
there is sufficient cause for the detention of the P,erson concerned . 
• • • • • 
12. (1) In any case where the Advisory Board lias reported: that there 
is, in its opinion, sufficient cause for the detention of a person, the appro-
priate Government may confirm the detention order and continue the 
detention of the person concerned for such period as it thinks fit. 
(2) In any case where the Advisory Board has reported that there 
is, in its opinion, no suftlcient cause for the detention of a person, the 
appropriate Government shall revoke the detention order and cause the 
person concerned to be released forthwith. 
13. The maximum period for which any person may be detained in 
pursuance of any detention order which has been confirmed under sec-
tion 12 shall be twelve months from the date of detention: 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall affect the power 
of the appropriate Government to revoke or modify the detention order 
at any earlier time. 
14. (1) * * • * 
(2) The expiry or revocation of a detention order (hereafter in this 
sub-section referred to as the earlier detention order) shall not [whether 
such earlier det~ntion order has been made before or after the com-
mencement of the National ~curity (Second Amendment) Act, 1984] 
bar the making of another detention order (hereafter in this sub-ser.tion 
referred to. as the subsequent detention or~er) l,1l1der 8eCtion 3 against 
the same person: I , 
Provided that in a case where no fresh facts have arisen afte,r the 
expiry or revocation of the earlier detention order made against such 
person, the maximum period for which such person may be detftined 
in pursuance of the subsequent detention order shall, in no case extend . , 
beyond the expiry of a period of twelve months from tb:e date of deten-
tion under the earlier detention order .~. 

i..6K SABliA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the National Security Act, 1980, in its application to 
the State of Punjab and the Union territory of Chandigarh. 
(ShTi Buta Singh, 
Minister oj Home AffaiTs.) 