Aj
/ ' A s IJJTRODUCED IN Lo: 
2 6
S a b h a  o n
BUI No, €6 of 1988
T I ^  AIRCRAFT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1988
A
BILL
jurther to amend the Aircraft Act,  1934
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-ninth Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —
1. This Act may be called the Aircraft (Amendment) Act, 1988.
2. In section 10 of the Aircraft Act, 1934, after sub-section ( 1 ) , the
5 following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely: —
''(lA ) I f  any person contravenes any provision of any rule made  
under clause ( q q )  o f sub-section (2) of section 5 prohibiting the  
slaughter and fiaj-ing of animals and of depositing rubbish, filth and  
other polluted and obnoxious matters within a radius of ten kilo­
metres from the aerodrome reference point, he shall be punishable  
with imprisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine  
which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both.
10
2 of 1974.
( I B ) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of  
Criminal Procedure, 1973, an offence referred to in sub-sectien  
(lA ) shall be cognizable.”.
Short title.
.r\mend-  
ment of  
Act 22 of  
1934.


In recent times, bird strikes to aeroplanes near aerodromes have  
increased in number and consequent damages to aircraft have multiplied.  
Any damage to an aircraft causes heavy financial losses and causes death  
to passengers sometimes. The presence of large number of birds near  
airports is mainly due to slaughter and flaying of animals and of deposit  
of rubbish, filth and other polluted and obnoxious substances around  
aerodromes. The penalty provided in the existing law against such  
deposit of harmful materials which induces the presence of birds is not  
severe enough to act as an effective deterrent. The offence is also not  
cognizable and as such the offenders cannot be arrested immediately.  
With the result, n o  preventive action can be taken on the spot.
2. It is, therefore, proposed to amend section 10 of the Aircraft Act  
to pro\dde for stringent punishment i^ o r contravention of any provision of  
any rule prohibiting the slaughter and flaying of ai^imals and depositing  
rubbish and filth, etc., around aerodromes.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.
N e w D e l h i; SHIVRAJ V. PATIL.
The 8th July,  1988. .
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS


LOK SABHA
A
B IL L
fu rth e r to am end th e A ircraft A ct 1934.
(Shri  Shivraj V. Patil, M inister oj State of the Ministry  of  Civil  
A viation and Tourism)
