DIU No. 66 of 195~ 
THE SALT CESS BILL, 1953 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the levy and collection of a cess on salt for the purpose 
of raising funds to meet the expenses incurred on the salt q,rga-
nisation maintained by Government and on the measures taken 
by Government in connection with the manufacture, supply and 
distribution of salt. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Short title, extent and commencement.-(l) This Act may be 
called the Salt Cess Act, 1953. 
(2) It extends to whole of India except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Gove'rn-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. Definitions.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise re-
quires,-
Ii 
(a) 'manufacture' in relation to salt includes collection. re- 10 
moval, preparation, steeping. evaporation, boiling or anyone or 
more of these processes, the separation or purification of salt 
obtained in the manufacture of saltpetre, the separation of salt 
from earth or other substance so as to produce. alimentary salt. 
and the excavation or removal of natural saline deposits or 15 
efflorescence; and the word 'manufacturer~ shall be construed 
accordingly and shall include not only a person who employs 
hired labour in the production or manufacturE! of salt but also 
any person who engages in it~ production or manufacture on his 
own account if the salt is intended for sale. 20 
Explanation.-In this clause; 'saltpetre' includes rasi, .~aiji. 
and all other substances manufactured from saline earth, and 
Kharinun and every form of sulp~ate or car~ona~e of soda; 

5 
to 
15 
, (b) 'salt' includes swamp salt, spontaneous salt, and salt or 
saline solutions made or produced from any saline substances or 
from salt earth; 
(c) 'salt factory' includes-
(i) a place used or intended 40 be used in the manufae-
ture of salt and all embankments, reservoirs, cOndensing and 
evaporating pans, buildings, and waste places situated 
within the limits of such place, as defined from time to time 
for the purposes of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 
(I of 1944); . 
(ii) all drying grounds and storage platforms and store· 
houses appertaining to any such place; 
(iii) land on which salt is spontaneously produced; and 
a 'private salt factory' is one not solely owned or not solely 
worked by the Central Government; 
(d) 'standard maund' means a maund of 82 2/7 pounds avoir-
dupois; 
(e) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made' under this 
Act. 
20' 3,·Levy aDd collection of cess on salt.~There shall be levied and 
collected in sueh manner as may be prescribed a cess in the nature 
of an excise duty on all salt manufactured in the territories ,to which 
r this Act extends-. 
(a) in the case of salt manufactured in a private salt factory, 
25 at the rate of two annas per standard maund; 
(b) in the case of salt manufactured in a salt factory solely 
owned or solely worked by the Central Govemment, at the rate 
of three and a half annas per standard maund. 
4. Application of proceeds of cess.-The proceeds of the duty 
30 levied under this Act, reduced by the cost of collection as determined' 
by the Central Government, shall, if Parliament by ~ppropriation 
made by law in this behalf so provides, be utilised on all or any of 
the following objects, namely:-
35 
(a) meeting the expenditure incurred in connection with the 
salt organisation maintained by the Central Government: 
(b) meeting the cost of measures take'll in connection with 
the manufacture, supply and distribution of salt by Union agen-
I cies and the regulation' and control of the manufacture. supply 
and distribution bf salt by other agencies; and in particular, 
measure'S for-
(i) the establishment and maintenance of research sta-
tions and model salt farms; . 
(ii) the establishmellt, maintenance and expansion of salt 
factories; 
(iii) fixing the grade'S of salt; 
(iv) promoting and encouraging co-operative effort 
among manufacturers of salt: and 

3 .. 
(v) promoting the welfare of labour employed in the 
salt industry. 
5. VaHdation of charges levied on salt before the commencement 
of this Act.-The charge in respect of the manufacture or production 
of salt imposed by the rule made by the Central Governme'nt under 
section 37 of the Central Excises and Salt -Act, 1944 (I of 1944) and 
published with the notification of the former Finance Departme'llt 
(Revenue Division) No.3, dated the' 29th March, 1947, shall be deem-
5 
ed to have been levied under this Act as if this Act was in force on 10 
the day on which the charge was so imposed and accordingly,-
(a) any sum paid or payable by way of such charge shall 
be deemed to have been paid or payable in accordance with law; 
and 
(b) no claim shall lie in any court for the refund of any sum 
so paid. 15 
6. Power to make rules.- (1) The Central Government may, by 
'notification in the Official Gazette. make rules for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular and withot:t prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for- 20 
(a) the assessment and collection' of the cess levied under 
this Act; 
(b) the. determination of the cost of collection of the cess; 
(c) the manner in which accounts relating to the proceed!' 
of the cess shall be maintained; 25 
(d) the manner in which the proceeds of the cess may be 
applied on the objects specified in 'section 4; -
(e) the exemption from the whole or any part of the cess 
levied under this Act-
(i) in respect of salt exported from India; :40 
(ii) in respect of salt manufactured by any specified cate-
gories of small manufacturers; and 
(iii) in respect of salt utilised in the manubeture of any 
other product of industry. 

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
By a rule made under section 37 of the Ce'ntral Excises and Salt 
Act, 1944 (I of 1944), a cess of 2 annas per maund is being levied on 
all salt produced in private factories and of 3j ann as per maund on 
all salt produced in the Government FactoriE'S. The proceeds of the 
cess are mostly utilised to meet the expenses incurred on the salt 
organisation maintained by the Governme'nt of India, and on the 
measures taken by Government in connection with the manufacture, 
supply and distribution of salt. It is, however, desirable that both 
the levy of the cess and the utilisation of the proceeds the-reform 
should be regulated by an Act of Parliament. 
K. C. REDDY. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 12th December, 1953. 

fl 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill provides for the levy of a cess at the rate of two annas 
peT maund in the case of salt manufactured in private factories, and 
at three and a half annas per maund in the case of salt manufactured 
in factories solely owned or solely worked by the Central Government. 
It is expected that the cess will yield about Rs. 95 lakhs p~r annum. 
After meeting the expenditure of the Salt Organisation which amounts 
roughly to Rs. 40 lakhs, the balance will be utilised, subject to ap-
propriation by Parliament, on the objercts specified in clause 4(b) of 
the Bill. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the levy and collection of a cess on salt for the 
purpose of raising funds to meet the expenses incurred 
on the salt organisation maintpjned by Government 
and on the measures taken by Government in 
connection with the manufacture, supply and distribution 
of salt. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (1) and (3) of 
article II7 of the Constitution of India, recommended to the 
House of the People the introduction and consideration of the 
Bill 
(Shri K. C. Reddy, 
M. N. KAUL, 
S"retilry. 
Minister for PrgllNcnon) 
GJPD-LAD-B57 P.S.-I4-U-S3- J ,750 