'.!.-.. .. "., . !!!!-. No. 66 of I!!I ~ . , ..... 
' .. 
THB CONSTITUTION (ELEVENTH 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 19~J. 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK 8ABHA 
ON 30TH NOVEMBER 1961) 
' ... 
. ,~ 
i: f.. I } --' f 
... ..:.~..,.; .. ,,~;. ... : 

8m No. "of I,,, 
THE CONSTITUTION (ELEVENTH AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to ameTtd the Constitu.tion of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Eleventh Amend- Short title. 
ment) Act, 1961. 
5 Z. In article 66 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words Amendment 
"members of both Houses of Parliament assembled at IQ joint meet- of article 66. 
ing", the words "members of an electoral college consisting of the 
members of both Houses of Parliament" shall be substituted. 
3. In article 71 of the Constitution, after clause (3), the following Amendment 
10 clause shall be inserted. namely:- Ofarticlc 71. 
" (4) The election of a person as President or Vice-Presi-
• dent shall not be called in question on the ground of the existence 
of any vacancy for whatever reason among the members of the 
electoral college electing him.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under article 66 (1) of the Constitution, the Vice-President has to 
be elected by members of both Houses of Parliament assembled at a 
joint meeting. The requirement that members of the two Houses 
should assemble at a joint sitting for the election of the Vice-Ptesident 
seems to be totally unnecessary and may also cause practical difficul-
ties. It is, therefore, proposed to amend this article to provide that 
the Vice-President will be elected by members of an electoral college 
consisting of members of both Houses of Parliament. Under article 54 
of the Constitution, the President is elected by an electoral college 
consisting of the elected members of both Houses of Parliament and 
of the Legislative Assemblies of the States. Every effort is made ta 
complete such elections before the date of the Presidential election. It 
is, however, possible that the elections to the two Houses of Parlia-
ment may not De completed before the President or the Vice-President 
is elected. It is, therefore, proposed to amend article 71 of the Con-
stitution so as to make it clear that the election of the President or 
the Vice-President cannot be challenged on the ground of any vacancy 
for any reason in the appropriate electoral college. 
2. The Bill seeks to achieve these objects. The notes on clauses 
appended to the Bill explain the provisions thereof. 
A. K. SEN. 
NEW DBLBI; 
The 24th November l 1961. 
2 

Notes on clauses 
Clause 2.-Under article 66(1) of the ConstItution, the Vice-
President of India has to be elected by the members of both Houses 
of Parlhtment assembled at a joint meeting. Where there is only 
one duly nominated candidate, the necessity for a joint meeting is not 
apparent and section 8 of th~ Presidentital and Vice-Presidential 
Election Act, 1952, states that in such '3 case the Returning Officer 
shall forthwith declare the candidate to be duly elected. Even 
where there is a contest, conformity with article 66 can only be 
more formal than real in that important proceedings relating to the 
election, like the receipt of nomin'3tions, scrutiny of nominations and 
withdrawal of candidature, take place before the members of the 
two Houses of Parliament assemble at a joint meeting, and only 
the polling and declaration of results take place at that meeting. In 
practice also, there can be no meeting in the usual sense, but the 
electors will be coming in as and when they like, casting their votes 
and going away. The requirement that members should assemble 
at a joint sitting seems to be totally unnecessary and is also likely 
to cause practical difficulties. It may be noticed that erticle 54 con-
tains no such requirement in the case of the Presidential election. 
This clause therefore seeks to omit the requirement as to joint 
meeting and incidentally brings the language of this clause into con-
formity with the language of article 54. 
Clause a.-In Narayan Bhaskar Khare VB. the Election Commission 
of India, 1957, S.C.R. 1081, a point was made that for a valid election 
of the President, all elections to the two Houses of Parliament should 
be completed before the date of the Presidential election, as other-
wise some members would have been denied the right to take part 
in the election. But the Supreme Court expressed no opinion on the 
point as it was not necessary to do so. 
It is possible that elections to the two Houses may not always be 
completed before a President or a Vice-President is elected. In Dr. 
Khare's case, when the notification for the election of the President 
was issued, elections in certain snow-bound areas in the North had 
not been completed. There may be vacancies for other reasons also. 
It is therefore desirable to make it clear that the election of a Presi-
dent or Vice-President cannot be challenged on the ground that there 
are vacancies in the appropriate electoral college for whatever rea-
sons. 

Election of 
Vice-Presi-
dent. 
Matters re-
lating to or 
connected 
with the 
. election of a 
Pre8ident 
or Vicc-
President. 
ANNEXURE 
ExTRAcTS FROM 'mE CONS~ON OF INDIA 
• • • • • 
86. (1) The Vice-President shall be elected by the members of 
both Houses af Parliament asaembled at a joint meeting in accord-
ance with the system of proportional representation by means of the 
single transferable vote and the voting at such election shall be by 
secret ballot. 
(2) The Vice-President shall not be a member of either House of 
Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State, and jf a 
member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legis-
lature of any State be elected Vice-President, he shall be deemed to 
have vacated his seat in that House on the date on which he enters 
upon his office as Vice-President. 
(3) No person shall be eligible for election as Vice-President 
unless he--
(0) is a citizen of India; 
(b) has completed the age of thirty-five years; and 
(c) is qualified for election as a member of the Council of 
States. 
(4) A person shall not be eligible for election as Vice-President if 
he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the 
Government of any State or under any local or other authority subject 
to the control of any of the said Governments. 
ExpZoftOtion.-For the purposes of this article, a person shall not 
be deemed to hold any office of profit by reason only that he is the 
President or Vice-President of the Union or the Governor of any 
State or is a Minister either for the Union or for any State . 
• • • • • 
7L (1) All doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection 
with the election of a President or Vice-President shall be inquired 
into and decided by the Supreme Court whose decision shall be final. 
(2) If the election of a person as President or Vice-President is 
declared void by the Supreme Court, acts done by him in the exercise 
and performance of the powers and duties of the office of President 
or Vice-President, as the case may be, on or before the date of the 
decision of the Supreme Court shall not be invalida~ by reason of 
that declaration. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may 
by law regulate any matter relating to or collDected with the electicm 
of a President or Vice-President. 
• • ... • • 
4 

. 
LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
. (Shn Aloke K. Sm, Minb,. of Lmo) 