BiU No. 66 of 1957 
THE LIFE INSURANCE 
CORPORATION (SECOND 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 19S7 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

31 of 1956. 
Bill No. 86 of 1957 
THE LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION (SECOND 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1957 
(AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Life Insurance (Second Amend- Short title 
ment) Act, 1957. and cam-mer.cement. 
5 (2) It shaH come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In section 2 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 (here- Amen~ment 
inafter referred to as the principal Act),- of secuon 2. 
(i) after clause (6), the following clause shall be inserted, 
10 namely:-
15 
'(6A) "Investment Board" m€Gns the Life Insurance 
Funds Investment Board established wtder section 23A;'; 
(ii) after clauae(8), the following cla.u.e·5ha1l be inserted, 
namely:-
C (BA) "securities" includes shares, scrips, stocks, bonds, 
debentures, debenture stocks,orother marketable securities 
of a like nature in, or of, any incorporated company or other 
.body corporate and aI., Government securities;'. 
3. In section 6 of the principal Act, in clause (b) of sub-section Amendmclt 
2.0 (2), for the words "subject to the rules;', the words "subject to the of section 6. 
provisions contained iIi Chapter VA and to the rules" shall be' subs-
tituted. 

2 
Amendment 4. In section 19 of the principal Act, sub-section (2) shall be 
ofaoction omitted. 
19· 
Insertion of 5. After 1)ection 23 of the principal Act, the following Chapter 
vA. Chapter shall be inserted, namely:-
Batab1ish-
mentand 
incorpora-
tion of the 
Investment 
Board. 
"CHAPTER VA 
INVESTMENT OF LIFE INSURANCE FUNDS OF THE CORPORATION 
23A. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notifioo.tion in the Official Gazette, appoint, there 
shall be established a Board called the Life Insurance Fund~ 
Investment board. 10 
(2) The Investment Board shall be a body corporate having 
perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire, 
hold ami dispose of property and to contract, and may by its 
name sue and be sued. 
(3) The Investment Board shall consist of the following IS 
members,-
(11) the Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, consti-
tuted under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, who shall 2 of 1934. 
be the Chairman of the Investment Board; 
(b) the Chairman of the Central Board of the State 10 
Bank of India constituted under the State Bank of India Act, 
1955; aud 23 of 195! 
(c) the Chairman of the Corporation. 
(4) If, for 6Ily reason, the Chairman of the Investment Board 
or any other member thereof is unable to attend any meeting of 25 
the Board, the Chairman or such other member, as the case 
may be, may depute any other person to attend the said meet-
ing, and the person so deputed shall, for all the purposes of the 
said meeting, be deemed to be a member of the Investment 
Board. 30 
(5) At every meeting of the Investment Board, the Chair-
man of the Board or in his absence the Chairman of the Central 
Board of the State Bank of India or in the absence of both, the 
Chairman of the Corporation shall preside; and if at any such 
meeting the Chairman and the other members of the Investment 35 
Board are all absent, the persons deputed to attend the said meet-
ing under sub-section (4) shall elect one trom among themselves 
to preside thereat. 

5 
10 
20 
30 
3S 
3 
(6) Subject to the provisions contained in this section, the 
Board shall have power to regulate its own procedure. 
23B. As from the commencement of the Life Insurance Cor- Functions of , 
poration (Second Amendment) Act, 1957, the functions of the ~~:D~~rrel:­
~orporation in remtion to the investment of its funds in securi- tion to in-
ties shall be discharged by the Investment Boarp. !:U~~~~i::, 
be discharg-
ed by the 
Irveslmcnt 
Busrd. 
23C. (1) The Corporation shall from time to time transfer Transfer of 
in the prescribed manner to the Investment Board from and out ~~:;: 
of its funds all such sums of money as are not required by the ration to tht: 
Corporation for the discharge of its functions or for the perfor- w:~rr;~t 
mance of its duties under this Act, and the sums so transferred investment 
h 11 b· h in securidcs. sa, su Ject to any rules that may be made by t e Central Gov-
ernment in this behalf, be invested by the Investment Board 
in such securities as it may think fit and in making any such 
investments the Investment Board shall have due regard to 
the interests of policyholders of the Corporation. 
(2) All investments in securities, whether made by the 
Corporation before the commencement of the Life Insurance 
Corporation (Second Amendment) Act, 1957, or transferred to 
and vested in the Corporation under section 7 shall, on and 
from such commencement, be deemed to have been transfer-
red to and vested in the Investment Board,. and shall, notwith-
standing anything to the contrary contained in this Act, be 
deemed to have been made by and in the name of the Invest-
ment Board. 
(3) If any question arises as to whether any security is 
a security which by virtue of sub-section (2) has been trans-
ferr.ed to and vested in the Investment Board, the question 
shall be referred to the Central Government. whose decision 
shall be fina1. 
23D. The Investment Board may, for the purpose of advi- Committees 
sing it on matters relating to the investment of the funds of" 110 adv,ise thtCi Ilve! me.' 
the Corporation in securities, constitute at each of the follow- Boud. 
ing places, namely, Bombay, Calcutta and Madras, an Advi-
sory Committee consisting of not more ·than five members 
who shall be persons having special knowledge and experience 
in respect of financial matters, particularly matters relating to 
business on the stock exchange. 

Ministerial 
assistance to 
the Corpora-
tion. 
Power of 
Investment 
Board to call 
for informa-
tion. 
Accounts of 
the Invest-
ment Board 
ard their 
audit. 
4 
23E. (1) The Investment Board may, for the purpose of 
enabling it to efficiently discharge its functions, require the 
Corporation or any of its employees to assist it in any matter 
connected with the investment of the funds of the Corporation 
transferred to it under this Act, or employ such number of , 
persons and on such terms as it thinks fit, and all the adminis-
trative and other expenses of the Investment Board in the dis-
charge of its functions under this Act shall be payable by the 
Corporation from and out of its funds. 
(2) Where the Corporation or any of its officers ia required 10 
to assist the Investment Board in relation to any matter under 
sub-section (1), the Corporation or the officer, as the case may 
be, shall be bound to do so. 
23F. The Investment Board may call for such information as 
it may require from the Corporation in relation to any matter IS 
connected with investments of the funds of the Corporation, 
and where the Corporation is called upon to furnish such infor-
mation, the Corporation shall be bound to furnish such 
information. ' 
23G. (1) The Investment Board shall maintain in the pres- 20 
cribed manner accounts relating to- • 
(a) all sums of money transferred to the Investment 
Board by the Corporation from and out of its funds for the 
purpose of investment in securities; 
(b) all investments in securities transferred to and .2S 
vested in the Corporation under sub-section (2) of section 
23C; 
(c) all investments in securities made by the'Invest-
ment Board; 
(d) all income accruing from any of the investments re- 30 
ferred to in this sub-section. 
(2) The Investment Board shall have its accounts audited 
at prescribed intervals by auditors duly qualified to act as 
auditors of companies under the law for the time being in 
force relating to companies and shaU, as soon as -may be after 3S 
the end of each financial year, prepare and submit to the 
Central Government in such form as may be prescribed a 
report in relation to the investments made by it under this 
Act during the period under report. 
(3) The Investment Board shall prepare in the prescribed 40 
form a balance-sheet and a profit and loss account for every 

s 
5 
such period for which the Corporation prepares its balance-sheet 
and 1,1 profit and loss account, and shall forward a copy of such 
balance-sheet and profit and loss account to the Corporation. 
(4) In preparing its balance-sheet and profit and loss 
account the Corporation shall treat the profits and losses of the 
Investment Board as the pro~ts and losses of the Corporation. 
23H. Notwithstanding anything contained -in, any law for fExemption 
h . b' . fl' . t t rom tax. 
10 
t e tIme emg m orce re atmg to mcome- ax, super- ax or 
wealth-tax, the Investment Board shall not be liable to pay 
income-tax, super-tax or wealth-tax on any income, profits 
or gains or assets of the Investment Board, and for the purposes 
of any such law the income, profits or gains or assets of the 
Investment Board shall be deemed to be the income, prOfits 
qr gains or assets of the Corporation.'". 
15 6. In section 43 of the principal Act, in sub-section 
figures and letter "27A" shall be omitted. 
(2), the Amendment 
of section 43. 
7. In section 47 of the principal Act, for the words "of the Amf enc!ment . 0 Section 47. 
CorporatIon", the words "of the Corporation or of the Investment 
20 
Board" shall be substituted. 
8. In section 48 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) for clause (g), the following clauses shall be substitut-
ed, namely:-
"(g) the manner in which the Corporation shall 
transfer to the Investment Board moneys for investment in 
25 securities; 
(gg) the manner in which, and the conditions subject 
to' which, investments in securities may be made by the 
Investment Board; . 
(ggg) the manner in which the Investment Board 
30 shall maintain its accounts, the intervals at which such 
accounts shall be audited, and the form in which the 
Investment B.oard shall prepare its balance-sheet and profit 
and loss account;". 
Amendment 
of section 48. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under section 19 (2) of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, 
an Investment Committee set up by the Corporation advises it in 
matters relating to the investment of its funds. It is now proposed 
to entrust the work of investment of the funds of the Corporation 
to an Investment Board, so that the Life Insurance Corporation may 
be able to devote greater attention to its primary task of acquiring 
new business. The Investment Board will consist of the Governor 
of the Reserve Bank as Chairman, the Chairman of the Central 
Board of the State Bank and the Chairman of the Life Insurance 
Corporation as members. On the setting up of the Investment 
Board, the Investment Committee constituted by the Life Insurance 
Corporation will cease to exist. The Investment Board will, how-
ever, have Advisory Committees at Bombay, Calcutta and Madras, to 
advise it in respect of investment problems. 
The Bill seeks to amend the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, 
for this purpose. The various clauses. of the Bill deal with the con-
stitution of the Investment Board and its functions. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 23rd August, 1957. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
The Life Insurance Corporation (Second Amendment) Bill, 1957, 
provides for the establishment of an Investment Board for the pur-
pose of taking over the functions of the Corporation in relation to 
the investment of its funds. All procedural matters connected with 
the transfer of moneys from the Corporation to the Investment 
Board the manner in which the moneys so transferred may be in-
vested and the manner in which accounts may be kept and audited, 
etc., will necessarily have to be regulated by rules, and claUse 8 of 
the Bill seeks to amend section 48 of the principal Act for this pur-
pose. The rule-making power thus sought to be vested in the 
Central Government is of a normal character. 
7 

Functions of 
the Corpora-
tion. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS F'ROM THE LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION ACT, 1956 
(No. 31 OF 1956) 
... ... ... ... 
6. 
... ... ... ... 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions co.-
tained in sub-section (1) but subject to the other provisions con-
tained in this Act, the Corporation shall have power-
... ... ... * 
(b) subject to the rules, if any, made by the Central 
Government in this behalf, to invest the funds of the Corpora-
tion in such manner as the Corporation may think fit and to 
take all such steps as may be necessary or expedient for the 
protection or realisation of any investment; including the 
taking over of and administering any property offered as 
security for the investment until a suitable opportunity arises 
for its disposal; 
... ... ... ... 
Committees . ofthc Cor- 19. 
poration. 
... ... • ... 
(2) The Corporation may also constitute an Investment Com-
mittee for the purpose of advising it in matters relating to the 
investment of its funds, and the Investment Committee shall consist 
of not more than seven members of whom not less than three shall 
be members of the Corporation and the remaining members shall 
be persons (whether members of the Corporation or not) who have 
special knowledge and experience in financial matters, particularly, 
matters relating to investment of funds . 
... ... ... ... 
8 

9 
43. 
.. .. • .. 
1 Application 
I of the Insu-
rar.cc Act • 
(2) The Central Government shall as soon as may be after the 
commencement of this Act, ,by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that the following sections of the Insurance Act shall apply 
to the Corporation subject to such conditions and modifications as 
may be specified in the notification, namely:-
Sections 2D, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 27A, 
28A, 35, 36, 37, 40, 40A, 40B, 43, 44, 102 to 106, 107 to 110, 111, 113, 
114 and 116A. 
• • • • 
47. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against P"?tec~i.?.?A of 
b I f h C . f h' h' h . action LaM;n any mem er or emp oyee 0 t e orporation or anyt mg w Ie IS under Act. 
in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
48. 
* * * • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:-
* * • • 
(g) the manner in which and the conditions subject 
,which investments may be made by the Corporation; 
.. .. • • 
\ 
to 
Power to 
meke rules. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956. 
~. ' 
GIPND-LSI-loSSLS-26-8-S7- 1620 
(Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, 
Minister of Finance.) 