M INTRODUCEID IN LoK SABHA 
Bill No. 86 of 198% 
THE FOOD CORPORATIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1982 
A 
BILL 
fu;rthell to amend the Food COTporationa A,ct, 1964. 
.. 
BE it enacted by Parlinment in the Thirty-third Year of the RepuhHc 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Food Corporations (Amendment) Act, Short 
1982. title. 
37 of ]964 . .5 2. In the Food Corporations Act, 1964, (hereinafter referred to as the 
~rincipal Act), in sub-section (5) of section 12A,-
(a) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, 
nemely:-
"(b) shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank 
10 except after an inquiry in which he has been informed of the 
charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard in respect of those charges:"; . 
15 
(b) in the proviso tb clause (b), for the words "Provided that", 
the worns "Providei further that" shall be substituted and before 
the proviso, as so amended, the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"Provided that where it is proposed after such inquiry, to 
impose upon him any such penalty, such penalty may be hnposed 
Amend-
ment 
of 
section 
12A. 
• 

Amend-
mentof 
section 
44r. 
Amend-
mentol 
section 45. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
46. 
Valida-
tion. 
• 
on the basis of the evidence adduced during such inqwry slid 
it shall not be necE'ssary to give such person any opportunity Df 
making representation on the penalty proposed: ", 
:{ In section 44 of th~ principal Act, in sub-section (3), 'for the words 
"which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, 5 
arid if. before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session 
immediately following,", the words "which may be cOm::>rised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session immediatply following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid," shall be substituted. 10 
4. In section 45 of the principal Act,-
(a) after sub-sedlon (1), the 'following sub-section shall be 
fnserted. namely:-
"(lA) The power t~ make regulations under this section 
shall include the power to give retrospective effect from a dat.e II) 
not earlier than thp. date of commencement of this Act, to thp. 
regulations or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be 
given to any regulation ~o as to prejudicially affect the inter~gb 
of any person to whom such regulation may be applicable."; 
(b) after sub-sec-tinn (4), the following sub-section shall he 20 
added, namely:-
.. (5) Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid. as 
. soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia-
ment, while it is in session. for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 25 
successive sessions. and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive seS!dOnR 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any· modification in t.hE' 
regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not 
be made, th~ regulation shall thereafter have effect only in 30 
such modified form or he of no effect, as the case may be, $0, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shalt be 
without prejurJiC'~ to the validity of anything previously lione 
under that regulation.". 
5: After section 45 of the principal Act, the 'following section shall~) 
be inserted; namely:-
"46. No regulation made or purporting to have been made with 
retrospective effect. under section 45 of the prinCipal Act bt>fore 
the commencement of this Aet shall be deemed to be invalid or 
ever to have been ~nvalid merely on the ground that such regulation 40 
was made with retrospective effect and accordingly every such 
regulation and anv action taken or thing dotle thereunder shalt be 
as valid and effective as if the provisions of section 45 of the princi-
pal Act, as amended hy this Act, were in force at all material timf"R 
when such regulation was made or action or thing was taken or A 5 
done.". ,. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND PEASONS 
According to section 12A of the Food Corporations Act, 1964, em-
ployees of the Central Government whose services were transferred to 
the Food Corporation of India are entitled to a second opportunity of 
making representation in disciplinary proceedings where it is proposed 
to impose on the employees concerned the penalty of dismissal, removal 
or reduction in rank. This is in accordance with the constitutional pro-
vision which applied to Governmen~ servants at the time of their 
transfer. Subsequently, by the Constitution (Forty-second Amend-
ment) Act, 1976, clause (2) of article 311 of the Constitution has been 
amended doing away with the second opportunity. The relevant service 
rules governing the Government servants have already been amended to 
be in conformity with the Constitutional amenrlments. 
2. With the amendment of the Constitution, there is now no justifica-
tion for continuing to allow the transferr~d employees of the Food Corpo-
ration o'f India the opportunity of being heard twice when that is 1'lO 
longer available even to Government servants. The rationale for 
giving the benefit, that they would have been entitled to this oppor-
tunity had they continued to remain in Government service, has dis-
appeared. In view of this and in order to bring the provisions of section 
12A of the Food Corporations Act in conformity with the present 
constitutional position, it is proposed to amend sub-section (5) of section 
12A of the Food Corporations Act, 1964 so as to do away with the 
requirement of giving second opportunity of making representation 
with regard to the penalty proposed to be imposed. 
3. It is proposed to avail of the present opportunity to amend sub-
section (3) of section 44 of the Act relating to laying df the rules made 
by the Central Government under section 44 before each House of the 
Parliament, so as to bring it in line with the Standard Model Clause 
recommended by the Committee on Subordinate Legislation. 
4. It is also proposed to amend section 45 of the Act relating to .,ower 
to make regulations so as to enable retrospective effect being given to 
the regulations. The practice has been to make the same terms and 
conditions, pay scales, etc., which are applicable to employees of the 
Government generally applicable to the employees of the Food CorpC\-
ration. For the purpose of extending the benefit of any revision in the 
pay scales or in the allowances paynble to, or the terms and conditions 
applicable to employees of the Food Corporation from the same date 
from which those benefits have been given to employees of the Govern-
ment, it becomes necessary to make the regulations on the subject with 
retrospective effect. In accordance with the recommendations of the 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, provision is being made for 
laying of regulations before each House of Parliament. It is also pro-
posed to make it clear in the proposed amendment that the p(,wer to 
3 

4 
make regulations with retrospective effect will not be exercised so as to 
prejudicially affect the interest of any person. 
5. It is also proposed to add a new section 46 to provide for validating 
retrospective effect given to the regulations already framed by the Food 
Corporation under the regulation making power conferred on it hy 
section 45 of the Food Corporations Act, 1964. 
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.' 
NEW DELHI; RAO BIRENDRA SINGH. 
The 24th April, 1982. 

· . 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED L1!:liISLATION 
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend section 45 of the Food Corpora-
tions Act, 1964 to empower the Food Corporation to make regulations 
thereunder with re'lOpect to the terms and conditions of appointment and 
service and scales of pay of its employees with retrospective effect also. 
Such a power is neceso3ary to give effect to the decisions for extending 
with retro~ective effect benefits to the employees of the Food Corpora-
tion. Further, it has been made clear that no such regulation can be 
made so as to take effect from a date earlier than the commencement of 
the said Act and so as to prejudicially affect the interest of any persl!ln 
governed by any such regulation. This latter safeguard is in accordance 
with the directions of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation in 
regard to the service matters of the employees of the Central Govt.rn-
ment. Besides, no such regulation can be made without the previous 
approval of the Central Government. Further, in accordance with the 
recommendations of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, pro-
vision is also being made for the laying of regulations before both 
Houses of Parliament. 
In these circumstanc&6, the delegation of legislative power is of a 
normal character. 
5 

Special 
provi-
sions for 
transfer 
of 
Gov-
emment 
employees 
to the 
Corpo-
ration 
incer-
tain 
cases. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
lZA. (1) 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE FOOD OoRPORA.'nONS AcT, 1964 
(37 OF 1964) 
• • ., • • 
• • • • • 
(5) No officer or oth~r employee transferred by an order made under 
sub-section (1) ,-
• • • • • 
(b) shall be d;o::;missed or removed or reduced in rank except 
after an inquiry in which he has been informed of the charges 
against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in 
respect of those charg,es and where it is proposed, after ,u.~h 
inquiry, to impose on him any such penalty, until he has been 
given a reasonable opportunity of making a representation on the 
penalty proposed, but only on the basis of the evidence adduced 
during such inquiry: 
Provided that this clause shall not apply,-
(i) where an officer or employee is dismissed or removed 
or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to 
his conviction on a criminal charge; or 
(ii) where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove 
an officer or employee or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that 
for some reason, to be recorded by that authority in writing, 
it is not reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry; or 
(iii) to an officer or employee who, after transfer to the 
Corporation, is appointed to a higher post under the Corpora-
tion in response to an open advertisement and in competition 
with outsiders. 
• • • • • 
44. (1) • • • • 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section 
shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament while it is in ;,ession for a total period or thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of th~ session in which it is so laid or the session 
immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be' made, the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 710 
effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or 
annulment shall be withollt prejudice to the validity of anything pre-
viQusly done under that rule . 
• • • • 

J"QK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Food Corporations Act, 1964 
(RIIO Birendra Si1ll:Jh, 
Minister of Agriculture 
and Rural Development 
and Civil Supplies.) 