As IN'fttOJ)VCI'J? IN Loa ~ OJJ 
"." ,,\' ,', '994 
BiU No. 86 ofltM 
THE CONSERVATION OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE AND 
PREVENTION OF SMUGGLING ACTIVITIES 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 19M 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Co~servation of Foreign Exchcmge and 
Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974-
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fifth Year of the RepubUc 
of Dldia as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Conservation of Foreigp Exchange 
and Prevention of Smuggling Activities (Amendment) Act. 19M. 
ShorttlUe 
and cma-
mence-
r 
S : (~) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 13th day of 
1'fte1lt. • 
Ie 52 of 1114. 
July, 1984. 
Z. In the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention ot 
Smuggling Activities ~ct, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as the principal 
Act) I for section 9, the following section shall be substituted, namely:-
'9. (1) Notw~ ..,..... COIDMd in tab Act, 1lIIY 
pIeI'SOD (iacIDditIg • 1oreIgaer) i. re .... of ,.... .. order of ....... 
Is IIIItde UBder this Ac.1 .. .y dille WOre die 31st .., of July, 1987, 
.., he .. iaed widIoll obWnitIg. ill ~OnfIaCe wHII tile pio ...... 
Substl· 
tutlon 
ot new 
liection 
for III!C. 
tioD t, 
Cues ift 
wbleb aQ4 
cll'CUlllo 
SUcII 
ua4er 
I 

which 
pel'lOhS 
may be 
detataed 
for 
periods 
10Dpr 
than 
tbne 
IDOIltU 
Without 
obtaiDlDl 
opbUou 
of AcM-
aoq 
Doard. 
.' 
... ' I. 
2 
of -.e .... (Q) of dause (4) of artkle l2 of the CoasdadioD, .... 
opiIIIoa of aD Advisory Board fOr 8 period longer ttum three moat. 
bat DOt exc:eediug six months from the eWe of his deteadoa, where 
.. order oil detention has been made against 'Suda per!lOD with a "iew 
to pml!lldD.g him: t\'Om ~ graoch or abeUingj the smualiue 5 
Of goods 01' enpging in transporting 01" canceaUng or keepi~ SI1I1II-
&led ... - the Central Gcmnmeut 01" any oftioer of the' Central 
~I DOt below the rank of an Adttidonal Secrefia'y to tJ8t 
Go.eUWleut,· specially elll}JOWered for the purposa of this sedion by 
that Goteroment, is satisfied that suck" person- 10 
(a) .. ~ or is likely to smuggle good9 iBto, oat 01 -: 
tbrouah any area highly vu.1oerahie to smuglimg; or 
(b) abets or is likely to abel the smuggling of goo. info, 
out of or through any area "highly vulnerable to slJlllllling; or 
(e) . eagages or is likely to enpge in tnmsportin« or COII- t 5 
ceaIiDg or keeping smoggled goodS in any area bIgbIy vulDeraWe 
to ~i.~. 
IIDdmakes a declaration to that effect within five weeks of the 
,.".. of sudt person. 
EzplG.nation I.-In this sub-section, "area highly vulnerable to 20 
sm1,1ggling" means-
"(t) the Indian customs waters contiguous to the States of 
Gqjarat, Karn'ataka, Kerala, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu and 
the Union territories of Goa, Daman and .Diu and. Pondicherry; 
(ii) the inland area fifty kilometres in width from the coast liS 
of India falling within the territories of the States of Gujarat, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra and. Tamil N adu and the Union. 
territories of Goa, Daman and Diu and Pondicherry; 
(iii) the inland area fifty kilometres in width from the India-
Pakistan border in the States of Guj.a.rat, Jammu and Kashmir, 30 
Punjab and ,Rajasthan; 
(iv) the cU'stoms airport of Delhi; and" 
(v) such further or other Indian customs waters, or inumd 
area not exceeding one hundred kilometres in width from any 
other cout ot' border of lndta, or such other customs station, 35 
as the ~ntral Government may, having regard ·to the 'VUlner-
ability of such waters, area or customs station, as the case may 
be, to 'Smuggling, by notification in the Official Gazette, speetfy 
in this behalf. 
E~Zan.ation 2.-For the purposes of Explanation 1, "customs 40 
.. a.i«'pqft" . and "customs station" spall have th, same meaning as in 
c1e.11ies (10) and (13) or section 2 of the Customs Act, 1962, respec-
tively . 
(2) In the case of -any person detained under a detention order 
to which the proVisions of sub-section (1) apply, section 8 shall have 45 
effect subject to the following modifications, namely:-
(i) p1 clause. (b), for the words "shall, within five weeks", 
. t@ wor~ "$hall, within four months and two weeks" shan be 
",: tsubstituted' 
•• \ 4 ' 
52 or 1982. 

10K SA.BHA 
CORRIGmM 
to 
mE (X)NSlltVATIQ!I OF FOREIrn EXCHANGE AND PREVENTION OF 
SMUGGLING ACTIlJITIEE (AM1§HMENT) BILL, 1984 
I-To be/As in traduced in Ipk Slttla 7 
1. page 2, in the IJll.rginal heading to propo sed section 9,-
a..!.i'll: ''obta1n1.ng'' insert "the" 
2. Page 2, line 6,-
~ "oancealing" ~ "conce&li.ng" 
NEW DBIHI; 
July 31, 1984 
Bra vana 9, 1906 (Salta.) 

5 
(to in clause (c) ,-
(1) for the words lithe detention of the person conc:era. 
ed", the words "the continued detention of the person con-
cerned" shall be substituted; 
(2) for the words "eleven week's", the words "five 
months and three weeks" shall be ~ubstituted; 
(iii) in clause (f>, for the words "for the detention", at 
both the places where they occur, the wontl "for' the .. continued 
detention" shall be substituted'. • 
10 3. (1) The' Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of 
B of 1984. Smuggling Activities (Amendment) Ordinance, 1984, is hereby repealed. 
(2) NotwithstancHng suth repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under ,the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, aha11 be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended, 
IS by this Act. 
Repeal 
and 
-viDe-

• 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The provisions of the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and. Pre· 
vention of, Smuggling Activities Act, 1974, have kad a deterrent effect 
and had been useful in combating smuggling activities. However, In 
view of the rec~t trends in smuggling activities, as indicated by the 
intelligence receIved, seizures made, etc., specially in the highly 
vulnerable areas of the west coast, south.eastern coast, India-Pakistan 
border 'and Delhi airport, it became urgently necessary to secure the 
availability of the special provisions of section 9 of the Act relating to 
smuggling operations in areas highly vulnerable to smuggling. Section 9 
of the Act was available only in respect of detention orders made at 
any time before'the 31st day of December, i977. It was also felt neces-
sary to re-defme u areas highly vulnerable to smuggling" so as to cover 
the aforesaid areas. Hence, the President promulgated on ,tlie 13th July, 
1984, the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling 
ActiVities (Amendment) Ordinance, 1984. 
2. The Bill seelws to replace the above-mentioned Ordinance and to 
provide that the amended provisions of section 9 will be applicable only 
to orders of detention made at any time before the 31st July, 1987. 
NEW DI:Lm;' PRANAB MUKHERJEE. 
The 25th July, 1984. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to substitute the existing section 9 by a 
new ~ection. The enforcement of the provisions of the new section wU1 
reqUiTe deployment of additional manpower involving a recurring 
expenditure of the order of about· Rs. 7.63 lakhs per annum and a nOn~ 
recurring expenditure of about Rs. 1 lakh. 
The provisions of the Bill would not l'equire·any other recurring or 
non-recurring expenditure. . 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Erpl4nation 1 to sub-section (1) of new section 9 of the Conserva-
'$ion of JI'"oreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 
1974, proposed by clause 2 of the Bill seeks to specify, certain 
Indian customs waters, inland areas and the customs airport of 
Delhi as areas highly vulnerable to smuggling. With a view to covering 
areas which may become highly vulnerable to smuggling in .future, this 
E:rplanaticn also seeks· to empower the Central Government to specify, 
by -notification in the Official Gazette, such further or other Indian 
customs waters, Or inland areas, not exceeding one hundred kilometres in 
width. from any other coast or border of India or such other customs 
station, as that Government may I having regard to the vulnerability of 
that area to smuggling, determine to be an area highly vulnerable to 
smuggling. As it is not possible to visualise now itseU the areas wl1.ich 
may become highly vulnerable to smuggling in future and as the guide-
lines subject to which the power to notify areas under this Explanlltion 
may be exercised have been spelt out in the Explanation itself, tbe 
delegation of power is of a normal character. 

Memorandum expZaining the modifications contained. tn the Bill to 
replace the Conservation of Foreign E:rehange and PrtVention of 
Smuggling Activities (Amendment) Ordinance, 1984. 
In addition to replacing the provisions of the Conservation of Foreign 
Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities (Amendment) Ordi-
nar ... ce, 1984, the Bill seeks to provi4e that the new section 9 will apply 
only to orders of detention made UDder the Act at any time before the 
31st July, 1987. 

Cues in 
wbich 
and 
UDder 
which 
persons 
mI7 be 
detained 
'!tor Ionaer 
than three 
months 
without 
obtalDini 
optnion 
of Advl· 
I«Y 
BoIrd. 
ANNEXURE 
ExTRACT FROM THE CoNSERVATION OF FOlU:IGN ExCHANGE AND 
PlulvErmON OF SMuGGLIING ACTIVITIES ACT, 1974 
(52 OF 1974) 
• • • • • 
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any person 
(including a foreigner) in respect of whom an order of detention is made 
under this Act at any time before the 31st day of December, 1977 may 
be detained without obtaining. in accordance with the provisions of sub-
clause (4) of clause (4) of article 22 of the Constitution, the opinion of 
an Advisory Board for a period longe,r than three months but not ex-
ceeding one 'year from the date of his detention where the order of 
detention has been made against 'Such person with a view to preventing 
him from smuggling goods or abetting the smuggling of goods or engaging 
in transporting or concealing or keeping smuggled goods and the 
Central Government or any officer of the Central Government, not below 
the rank of an Additional Secretary to that Government, specially em-
powered for the purposes of this section by that Government, is satisfied 
!'tbat such pe.r$on-
(i) smuggles or is likely to smuggle goods into, out of or 
through any area highly vulnerable to smuggling; or 
(ii) abets or is ll"kely to abet the smuggling of goods into, out 
of or through any area highly vulnerable to smuggling; or" 
(iii) engages or is likely to engage in transporting or concealing 
OT keeping smuggled goods in any area highly vulnerable to smug-
gling, 
and makes a declaration to that effect within fi\'e weeks of the detention 
of such person . 
.E%plaMtiIon..-In this sub-section, "area highly wluerab1e to smug-
gling" means--
(i) the Indian customs waters; 
. (U) the inland area fifty kilometres in width from the coast of 
India falling within the territories of the States of Gujarat, Kama-
taka; Kerala, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and the Union territories of 
Goa, Daman and Diu and PondicherrYi and 
(iii) such further or other inland area not exceeding one .hun-
dred kilometres in width from any coast or other border of India, 
as the ~tral Government may, having regard to the vulnerability 
of that area :to smuggling, by notification in the Ofttcial Gazette, 
JP8Cify in this behalf. ' r:· 
_ 8 

(2) In the case of any person detained under a detenaon order to 
which the provisions of sub-section (1) apply, section S. shall have eft'ect 
subj'e.:.-t to the following modifications, namely:-
(i) in clause (b), for the w'Ords "sball, within five weeks", the 
words "may, at any ·time p.rior to but in no c:'se hter than three 
months before the expiration of one year" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in clause (c), for the words "ft'o:n the date of detention of 
. the person concerne1", the words "fron the dat" on which the 
reference is made to !t" shall be substituted. 
(3) The case of every person detained unde.L' a detention order to 
which the provisions of sub-section (1) apply shall, within a period Of 
six months from the date of detention, be reviewed [unless in the 
meantime a reference has been made in resp."'Ct thereof to an Advisory 
Board constituted under clause «(I) of section 8 read with sub-section 
(2) or 'Such order has been revoked] by the appropriate Government in 
consultation with a person WI10 is, Or hmi been, 0;' is qualified to be 
appointed. ~s a Judge of a lijgl: Court nomina ~d in that behalf by that 
Government: 
~Provided that where the appropriate Government 'is a State Govern-
ment, ~hat Government shall also consult the Central Government in the 
matter. 
• • • • • 

LOR SABHA 
A 
Bn,.L 
further to amend the ConIervation of Foreign Exchange and Prev~UoR 
of Smuggling Activities Act, 19'74. ' 
(Shri Pr,mab Kumar MukhL'f';ee, Mini!Uer of Fi,tance.) 