     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
       
Bill No. 66 of 2022
THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
SHRIMATI POONAMBEN HEMA TBHAI MAADAM, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Code on Social Security, 2020.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the
Republic of India as follows:–
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Code on Social Security  (Amendment)
Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2. In section 60 of the Code on Social Security (hereinafter referred
to as the Code), in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:
“Provided that in case of a woman employed in any
establishment having ten or less employees or woman being
Short title andcommencemnet.
5
Amendment of
Section 60.
10
36 of 2020.

a wage worker, the maternity benefit shall be payable by the
appropriate Government through Social Security
Organisations and the details of such organisation shall also
be shown at the e-shram Portal of the Government of
India.”.
3. In section 62 of the Code,—
(a) in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:
“Provided that in case of a woman employed in any establishment
having ten or less employees or woman being a wage worker, such
woman shall give notice in writing in such form, as may be prescribed
by the Central Government, through institutions of local
self-Government to the designated Social Security Organisations or
any other authority.”; and
(b) in sub-section (5), the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:
“Provided that in case of a woman employed in any
establishment having ten or less employees or woman being
a wage worker, the amount of maternity benefit for the period
preceding the date of her expected date of delivery and the
amount due for subsequent period shall be payable by the
designated Social Security Organisation or any other
authority on production of such proof as may be prescribed
by the Central Government.”.
  4. In section 63 of the Code, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:
“Provided that in case of a woman employed in any
establishment having ten or less employees or woman being
a wage worker, the designated Social Security Organisations
shall pay the maternity benefit or any other amount to the
person nominated by such woman.”.
 5. In section 64 of the Code, the following proviso shall be added, namely:
“Provided that in case of a woman employed in any
establishment having ten or less employees or woman being
a wage worker, the medical bonus or such amount as may be
notified by the Central Government shall be payable by the
designated Social Security Organisations.”.
 6. In the First Schedule of the Code, under the heading “Maternity
Benefit”, after entry (b), the following entries shall be inserted, namely:—
“(c) to every establishment, factory or shop in which ten or less
employees are employed; and
(d) to every domestic worker.”.
Amendment of
Section 62.
Amendment of
Section 63.
Amendment of
Section 64.
Amendment of
First Schedule.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
2

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Social security will remain incomplete unless appropriate maternity
benefits are available for all working women. If maternity benefits are
restricted to women working in organized sector and those working in a
set-up of 10 or more workers, large number of women will be left out.
Women make up a disproportionate part of the unorganized sector as
part-time or full-time domestic help, seasonal agriculture workers, handloom
and handicraft workers, frontline workers. Women in unorganized sector are
not homogeneous group and therefore, ambit of ‘unorganized sector workers’
requires to be broadened by taking the reality into consideration.
Such workers belong to low-income group that is particularly neglected
when it comes to health. Most of these women usually start off as weak
mothers in terms of weight, hemoglobin levels etc. and due to that, the new
born infants are usually low birthweight with lower immunity.  Mental stress
of a mother in difficult circumstances affects her own health along with the
health of the child. Since most of these women workers are engaged in manual
arduous work, they need more rest and better nutrition. In absence of entitlement
like paid 26-week leave, the woman is much more likely to return to work
within a few days after delivery to avoid wage loss.
The infant born to such mothers further suffers as exclusive breastfeeding
and mother care are compromised. Evidence from all scientific study and
policy research emphasizes upon the early child care for his/her physical and
cognitive development for life. Provision of proper care to the mother and
infant is fundamental to the growth and well-being of the society.
As labour force participation of women is considered as a crucial indicator
of nation’s development path, legislature framework needs to ensure their
well-being as well.  The proposed Bill seeks to guarantee certain rights for the
women working in unorganized sector at par with all other working women in
India.
The Bill thus endeavours to ensure maternity benefit for all women workers
by amending the code of social security 2020.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;
 1 February, 20221.
3
POONAMBEN HEMATBHAI MAADAM

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed amendment to section 60 provides for
payment of maternity benefit also to women employed in any establishment
having ten or less employees or women being wage workers by the appropriate
Government through Social Security Organisations. Clause 3 vide proposed
amendment to section 62 provides for payment of maternity benefit also to
women employed in any establishment having ten or less employees or women
being wage workers for period preceding the date her expected delivery and
the amount due for subsequent period by the designated Social Security
Organisations or any other Authority. Clause 4 vide proposed amendment to
section 64 provides for payment of maternity benefit also to persons nominated
by women who are employed in any establishment having ten or less employees
or who are wage workers. Clause 5 vide proposed amendment to section 65
provides for payment of medical bonus also to women employed in any
establishment having ten or less employees or women being wage workers.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about
rupees Seven thousand eight hundred crore per annum would involve from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 3 of the Bill vide proposed amendment to sub-section (1) of section
62 provides that a woman employed in any establishment having ten or less
employees or a woman being a wage worker shall give notice in writing in
such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government through institutions
of local self-Government to the designated Social Security Organisations or
any other authority. As the form of notice will relate to matter of detail only,
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY, 2020
* * * * *
60. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Code, every woman shall
be entitled to, and her employer shall be liable for, the payment of maternity
benefit at the rate of the average daily wage for the period of her actual
absence, that is to say, the period immediately preceding the day of her delivery,
and any period immediately following that day.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “the average daily
wage” means the average of the woman’s wages payable to her for the days
on which she has worked during the period of three calendar months immediately
preceding the date from which she absents herself on account of maternity,
subject to the minimum rate of wage fixed or revised under the Code on Wages,
2019.
* * * * *
62. (1) Any woman employed in an establishment and entitled to
maternity benefit under the provisions of this Chapter may give notice in writing
in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government, to her employer,
stating that her maternity benefit and any other amount to which she may be
entitled under this Chapter may be paid to her or to such person as she may
nominate in the notice and that she will not work in any establishment during
the period for which she receives maternity benefit.
* * * * *
(5) The amount of maternity benefit for the period preceding the
date of her expected delivery shall be paid in advance by the employer to the
woman on production of such proof as may be prescribed by the Central
Government that the woman is pregnant, and the amount due for the subsequent
period shall be paid by the employer to the woman within forty-eight hours of
production of such proof as may be prescribed by the Central Government
that the woman has been delivered of a child.
* * * * *
     63. If a woman entitled to maternity benefit or any other amount under
this Chapter, dies before receiving such maternity benefit or amount, or where
the employer is liable for maternity benefit under the second proviso to sub-
section (3) of section 60, the employer shall pay such benefit or amount to the
person nominated by the woman in the notice given under section 62 and in
case there is no such nominee, to her legal representative.
* * * * *
     64. Every woman entitled to maternity benefit under this Chapter shall
also be entitled to receive from her employer a medical bonus of three thousand
five hundred rupees or such amount as may be notified by the Central
Government, if no pre-natal confinement and post-natal care is provided for by
the employer free of charge.
* * * * *
Right to
payment of
maternity
benefit.
Notice of claim
for maternity
benefit and
paymentthereof.
Payment of
maternity
benefit in case
of death of a
woman.
Payment of
medical bonus.
6

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See sections 1(4), (8) and 152 (1)]
APPLICABILITY
Chapter No. Chapter Heading Applicability 
   
        *                 *                *                 *                 *                * 
VI Maternity Benefit (a) to every establishment 
being a factory, mine orplantation including any such
establishment belonging to 
Government; and 
(b) to every shop orestablishment in which ten or 
mo re emplo yees are employ ed,  or were employed, on any day 
of the preceding twelve months; and such other shops 
or establishments notified by 
the appropriate Government. 
        *                 *                *                 *                 *                * 
 
7

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to amend the Code on Social Security, 2020.
————
(Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam, M.P.)