5
Short title and 
commencement.
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 66 of 2025
THE RESERV ATION FOR THE OTHER BACKWARD CLASSES, THE 
SCHEDULED CASTES AND THE SCHEDULED TRIBES IN PRIV ATE 
SECTOR SERVICES AND APPOINTMENTS BILL, 2025
By
Shri Dharmendra Yada v , MP
a
BILL
to provide for reservation in favour of persons belonging to the Other Backward 
Classes, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in private sector  
services, appointments and for matters connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Reservation for the Other Backward Classes, 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in Private Sector Services and 
Appointments Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 

2
5
10
15
20
Definitions.
Government 
to give 
incentive to 
Private Sector 
to provide 
reservation. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) “private sector” means an organisation, institution, educational institution 
or establishment wholly owned by any private individual or corporation or 
limited  company; and
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 
3. (1) The Central Government shall provide appropriate incentives to private 
sector for making provisions for reservation in favour of persons belonging to the 
Other Backward Classes, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. 
(2) The incentives as provided in sub-section (1) shall include— 
 ( i) special concessions under various existing central schemes; and
 ( ii)  loans from nationalized banks at reduced rate of interest.
4. The Central Government shall cause to be laid an annual report before both 
Houses of Parliament on the action taken under this Act. 
5.(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Annual 
Report.
Power to make 
Rules.

25
3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Reservation is available to persons belonging to other backward classes, 
scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in appointments and posts in Government 
banks, financial institutions, insurance companies and public sector undertakings 
under the control of the Government of India. But after privatization of public 
sector undertakings and liberalization of economic policies by the present Central 
Government, persons belonging to other backward classes, scheduled castes 
and scheduled tribes have been deprived of the benefit of reservation in all the 
subsidiary/joint ventures of Government banks, subsidiary/joint ventures of financial 
institutions, subsidiary/joint ventures of insurance companies and subsidiary/joint 
ventures of public sector undertakings in which the Government has less than  
51 per cent stake.
In the present era, due to disinvestment and privatization of public sector units, 
private sector has become very important and employment oriented. In such a 
scenario, the private sector is active in infrastructure and economic projects. Due 
to lack of reservation, people from other backward classes, scheduled castes and 
scheduled tribes are facing great challenges in getting jobs in private sector.
Reservation for OBCs, SCs and STs is followed mutatis mutandis by Public 
Sector Undertakings (PSUs), Financial Institutions under the Central Government 
including Public Sector Banks as per the instructions issued by the Government 
of India under Articles 16(4) and 16(4A) of the Constitution. Implementation 
of reservation provisions for persons belonging to OBCs, SCs and STs is a  
pre-condition for receiving grants-in-aid for voluntary organisations, autonomous 
bodies/institutions etc. Where the body receiving grants-in-aid employs more than 
20 persons on regular basis and at least 50 per cent of its recurring expenditure is met 
from grants-in-aid of Central Government and the body is a registered cooperative 
society and receives annual general purpose grants-in-aid of two lakh rupees and 
above from the Consolidated Fund of India.
There are many schemes and special provisions for the welfare of the people 
of Other Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the country. 
However, despite all these measures, no major change has been seen in their social, 
educational and economic development. In this situation, reservation in the private 
sector is very important to ensure the promotion of their all-round and holistic 
development.
At present, there is no provision of reservation for persons belonging to OBCs, 
SCs and STs in the private sector. However, the Government cannot force the private 
sector to provide reservation to them. In such a situation, by providing concessions 
and special schemes in all the subsidiaries/joint ventures of public sector banks, 
subsidiaries/joint ventures of financial institutions, subsidiaries/joint ventures of 
insurance companies and subsidiaries/joint ventures of public sector undertakings 
in which the Government has less than 51 per cent stake, reservation for persons 
belonging to OBCs, SCs and STs can be encouraged and social justice and harmony 
can be realised. 
Hence, this Bill.
    New Delhi;  DHARMENDRA YADA V
March 3, 2025

4
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail 
only, the delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to provide for reservation in favour of persons belonging to the Other Backward 
Classes, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in private sector  
services, appointments and for matters connected therewith.
(Shri Dharmendra Yadav, MP)