1
Bill No.  66 of 2015
THE PRIV ATE VEHICLES (EXEMPTION FROM TOLL) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI PRAHLAD SINGH PATEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to exempt owners of private vehicles from payment of toll on national highways.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Private Vehicles (Exemption from Toll) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "private vehicle" means a vehicle owned by any person for personal use but
does not include a commercial vehicle;
(b) "toll" means a fee charged from a driver or owner of a motor vehicle for using
any section of a national highway; and
(c) "toll plaza" means a structure built on a National Highway for the purpose of
collecting toll by the National Highway Authority of India or by any other entity under
the public private partnership.
3. No toll shall be charged for using any section of any national highway from a person
driving in a private vehicle at any toll plaza.
4. Any person who violates the provision of section 3 shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees.
Exemption to
private
vehicles from
payment of
toll.
Penalty.
5
10

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The recent increase in initiatives of public private partnership model infrastructure
projects of highways and other roads have satisfactorily increased the safety and security of
passengers and speed of vehicular traffic. At the same time, it has created additional burden
on private vehicle owners as they have to pay user fee at toll plazas on highways even when
they use the vehicle for personal purpose. Most of the times the heavy vehicular traffic leads
to long traffic jams causing significant loss of valuable time along with precious fuel causing
stress on individual and nations' economy as we have to import petroleum products. The
share of amount collected from private vehicles is hardly ten per cent of total amount of toll
collections. Therefore, exemption to private vehicles from payment of user fee will not lead to
financial burden on National Highways Authority of India or the agency concerned under
public private partnership. To save time, protect valuable natural resources, foreign exchange
and also environment, it is necessary to exempt the owners of private vehicles from payment
of user fee at toll plazas for using any section of national highways for personal purpose.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; PRAHLAD SINGH PATEL
February 10, 2015

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to exempt owners of private vehicles from payment of toll on national highways.
————
(Shri Prahlad Singh Patel, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4774LS(S3)—04-03-2015.