5

"2 5 NOV 006

As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 66 of 2006

THE CRIMINAL LAW AMENDMENT (AMENDING) BILL, 2006
By
Suri Mouan Sincu, M.P.
A
BILL
Further to amend the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1932.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Criminal Law Amendment (Amending) Act, 2006.

(2) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. Section 7 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1932 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), shall be omitted. :

3. In section 9 of the principal Act,—

(i) in clause (ii), for the words and figures "sections 5 or 7", the word and figure
“section 5" shall be substituted; and

(ii) clause (iv) shall be omitted.

Short title
and
‘commencement.

Omission of
section 7.

Amendment
of section 9.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Criminal Law Amendment Act was passed in 1932 by the then British Government
in order to suppress the civil disobedience movement launched by the torch-bearers of
freedom struggle under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi. The salt struggle was at its peak.
Congressmen were picketing the Government offices. In order to kill the movement, British
Government officials wanted some barbaric laws to deal the non-violent freedom fighters
with iron hands. This black law, a symbol of colonial power, is still being frequently used by
the police in free India. All the movements are being suppressed in the same old fashion.
Police usually invokes this draconian law, particularly section 7 of this Act, against all those
agitating peacefully to express just and genuine grievances of the people.

The Bill, therefore, seeks to omit section 7 of the said Act.

New DELHI; ; MOHAN SINGH
July 25, 2006.



of 1898,

ANNEXURE ‘
EXTRACT FROM THE CRIMINAL Law AMENDMENTACT, 1932

(Act No. XXIII oF 1932)

* * * * *

7. (1) Whoever—

(a) with intent to cause any person to abstain from doing or to do any act
which such person has a right to do or to abstain from doing, obstructs or uses
violence to or intimidates such person or any member of his family or person in
his employ, or loiters at or near a place where such person or member or employed
person resides or works or carries on business, or happens to be, persistently
follows him from place to place, or interferes with any property owned or used
by him or deprives him or hinders him in the use thereof, or

(b) loiters or does any similar act at or near the place where a person carries
on business, in such a way and with intent that any person may. thereby be
deterred from entering or approaching or dealing at such place,

shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.

Explanation.— Encouragement of indigenous industries or advocacy of temperance,
without the commission of any of the acts prohibited by this section is not an offence under
this section.

(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this section except
upon a report in writing of facts which constitute such offence made by a police officer not
below the rank of officer in charge of a police station.

* * * * *
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898,—

(i no Court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or Magistrate of the
first class shall try any offence under this Act;

(ii) an offence punishable under sections 5 or 7 shall be cognizable by the
police;
and (iv) an offence punishable under section 7 shall be non-bailable.

* * * * *

Molesting a
person to
prejudice of
employment
or business.

Procedure in
offences under
the Act.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1932.

(Shri Mohan Singh, M.P)

MGIPMRND—1959L S(S-5)—07.08.2006.