Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE  GOVERNMENT SERVICES (REGULATION OF
COMPASSIONATE  APPOINTMENTS) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI  A.T. NANA  PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the regulation of appointments on compassionate grounds in offices under
the control of Central Government and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as
 follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Government Services (Regulation of Compassionate
Appointments) Act, 2014.
(2) It shall apply to the offices under the control of Central Government.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appointment on compassionate grounds" means  any appointment to the
Government service of a member of the family of a Government servant who dies while
being in service;
Bill No. 66 of  2014
Definitions.
5
10
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "Dependent Family Member" means
(i) spouse; or
(ii) son (including adopted son); or
(iii) daughter (including adopted daughter); or
(iv) brother or sister in the case of unmarried Government servant, who
was wholly dependent on the Government servant at the time of his death in
harness; or
(v) parents, if the Government servant was their only child;
(c) "Government" means the Central Government;
(d) “Government servant” means a person who was a Government servant at the
time of his death but does not include a person ‘who’ was appointed on daily wage or
casual or apprentice or on ad hoc basis or contract or re-employment basis;
(e) “Government service” means any service to any Ministry, organization,
undertaking, autonomous body or society or any establishment for which funds are
provided by the Central Government or where majority of shares are held by the
Central Government; and
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law or rule or order or bye-law
or notification or judgement or order of any Court, for the time being in force, the Central
Government shall provide appointment on compassionate grounds to one dependent family
member of a Government servant who dies in harness within a period of two months from
the date of death of the Government servant in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The appointment on compassionate grounds provided under sub-section (1) shall
not be subject to any quota or ceiling prescribed for such appointments.
4. (1) The Central Government may prescribe such eligibility conditions and other
guidelines for appointment on compassionate grounds, as it may think fit.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, such eligibility
conditions shall also include,—
(i) that the dependent family member shall be living with the Government servant
at the time of his death;
(ii) that the eligible family member makes an application for appointment on
compassionate grounds; and
(iii) that the total income of  the dependent family members shall not be more
than rupees two lakh per annum.
5. (1) Subject to section 4, if no suitable employment is available on compassionate
grounds in the organisation in which the Government servant was working at the time of his
death, it shall be mandatory for the Government to provide employment in another organization
in the Government, preferably in the same city in which the Government servant was residing
at the time of his death.
(2) If none of the family members is eligible for compassionate appointment, then the
oldest member of the family who has not attained the age of fifty years shall be provided with
employment after giving him suitable training necessary for the job.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
Appointment
on
compassionate
grounds to be
provided
within two
months from
the date of
death of a
government
servant.
Central
Government
to prescribe
guidelines.
Government
to provide
employment.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
may be comprised in one session or in  two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
When a Government servant dies in service, his immediate family is left uncared for.
With the meagre pension benefits, the family will not be able to sustain in the present day
when cost of living is going up consistently. Of course, there is a provision for providing
employment to eligible dependent member of the immediate family of the Government servant
on compassionate grounds. But it has been observed that the employment is refused on
flimsy grounds or the family is made to run from pillar to post to get employment. Sometimes,
employment is also refused on the ground  that quota fixed for such appointments is already
over or none of the family members was found eligible for appointment in Government
service. Only in very few cases, compassionate employment is provided to immediate family
members of the Government servants.
In order to mitigate the sufferings of the family members of the Government servant,
the Bill seeks to provide for compulsory employment to dependent family members of the
Government servant on compassionate grounds within a given time frame.
The Bill will go a long way in mitigating the sufferings of the family members of the
Government servants. Moreover, the Supreme Court has, in a judgement, ordered that
compassionate appointments can be mandatory but can only be given in certain
circumstances. As a result, many of the families are suffering.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; A. T.  NANA  PATIL
June 27, 2014.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for appointment of dependent family members of the
Government servant on compassionate grounds within a given time frame. The Bill also
provides for suitable training to dependant family members in order to make them eligible for
Government service. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one
hundred crore per annum will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.
5

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the regulation of appointments on compassionate grounds in offices under
the control of Central Government and for matters connnected therewith.
————
(Shri A.T. Nana Patil, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—990LS(S3)—23-07-2014.