1
THE EMPLOYEES' STATE INSURANCE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2010
A
BILL
further to amend the Employees’  State Insurance Act, 1948.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first   Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Employees’  State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 2010.
 (2) Section 18 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 3rd day of July, 2008 and
the remaining provisions of this Act shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.   In the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act),  in section 1, in sub-section  (5), for the words "six  month's", the words " one month's"
shall be substituted.
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. 66-C  of 2009
AS PASSED BY  LOK SABHA
ON 3 MAY, 2010
34 of 1948. Amendment
of section 1.
5

2
3. In section 2 of the principal Act, —
(A) in clause (6A),—
(a) for sub-clause ( i), the following sub-clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
"(i) a widow, a legitimate or adopted son who has not attained the
age of twenty-five  years, an unmarried legitimate or adopted daughter,";
(b) in sub-clause (ii), for the words "eighteen years", the words "twenty-
five years" shall be substituted;
(B)  in clause ( 9), for the words "or under the standing orders of the
establishment;",  the words "and includes such person engaged as apprentice whose
training period is extended to any length  of  time" shall be substituted;
(C) in clause ( 11), for sub-clause  (v), the following sub-clauses shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(v) dependant parents, whose income from all sources does not exceed
such income as may be prescribed by the Central Government;
(vi) in case the insured person is unmarried and his or her parents are not
alive, a minor brother or sister wholly dependant upon the earnings of the insured
person;";
(D) for clause (12), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(12) "factory" means any premises including the precincts thereof
whereon ten or more persons are employed or were employed on any day of the
preceding twelve months, and in any part of which a manufacturing process is
being carried on or is ordinarily so carried on, but does not include a mine
subject to the operation of the Mines Act, 1952 or a railway running shed;’.
4. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section  (1), for clauses (a) and (b), the
following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
"
(a) the Director General,  the Employees'  State Insurance Corporation,
ex officio as Chairman;
(b) the Director General, Health Services, ex officio as Co-chairman;".
5. In section 12 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
"(3) A person referred to in clause (i) of section 4 shall cease to be a member on
becoming a Minister or Speaker or Deputy  Speaker of the House of the People or Deputy
Chairman of  the Council of  States or when he ceases to be a member of Parliament.".
6. In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (a), after the proviso,
the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided further that this sub-section shall not apply to appointment of
consultants and specialists in various fields appointed on contract basis,";
7. In section 37 of the principal Act, for the words "five years", the words "three years"
shall be substituted.
8. In section 45 of the principal Act,—
(a) for the words "Inspectors" and “Inspector”, wherever  they occur, the words
"Social Security Officers" and "Social Security Officer" shall respectively be
substituted;
Amendment
of section 10.
Amendment
of section 12.
Amendment
of section 17.
35 of 1952.
Amendment
of section 37.
Amendment
of section 45.
Amendment
of section 2.

3
(b) After sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(4) Any officer of the Corporation authorised in this behalf by it may,
carry out re-inspection or test inspection of the records and returns submitted
under section 44 for the purpose of verifying the correctness and quality of the
inspection carried out by a Social Security Officer.".
9. In section 45A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) for the word "Inspector", the words "Social Security Officer" shall be
substituted;
(ii) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided further that no such order shall be passed by the Corporation
in respect  of the period beyond five years from the date on which the contribution
shall become payable.".
10. After section 45A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"45AA. If an employer is not satisfied with the order referred to in section 45A,
he may prefer an appeal to an appellate authority as may be provided by regulation,
within sixty days of the date of such order after depositing twenty-five per cent. of the
contribution so ordered or the contribution as per his own calculation, whichever is
higher, with the Corporation:
Provided that if the employer finally succeeds in the appeal, the Corporation
shall refund such deposit to the employer together with such interest as may be
specified in the regulation.".
11. In the principal Act, in sections 51A and 51B, for the words "an insured person's",
the words "an employee's" shall be substituted.
12. In the principal Act, in sections 51C and 51D, for the words "Insured person", the
word "employee" shall be substituted.
13. After section 51D of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"51 E. An accident occurring to an employee while commuting from his residence
to the place of employment for duty or from the place of employment to his residence
after performing duty, shall be deemed to have arisen out of and in the course of
employment if nexus between the circumstances, time and place in which the accident
occurred and the employment is established.".
14. In section 56 of the principal Act, in sub-section  (3), for the third proviso, the
following proviso shall substituted, namely:—
"Provided also that an insured person who has attained the age of
superannuation, a person who retires under a V oluntary Retirement Scheme or takes
premature retirement, and his spouse shall be eligible to receive medical benefits
subject to payment of contribution and such other conditions as may be prescribed
by the Central Government.".
15. In section 58 of the principal Act, after sub-section  (4) ,  the  following
sub-sections shall be inserted  namely:—
(5) The State Government may, in addition to the Corporation under this Act,
with the previous approval of the Central Government, establish such organisation
(by whatever name called) to provide for certain benefits to employees in case of
sickness, maternity and employment injury:
Amendment
of section
45A.
Insertion of
new section
45AA.
Amendment
of sections
51A and 51B.
Amendment
of sections
51C and 51D.
Insertion of
new section
51E.
Accidents
happening
while
commuting to
the place of
work and vice
versa.
Amendment
of section 56.
Appellate
authority.
Amendment
of section 58.

4
Provided that any reference to the State Government in the Act shall also include
reference to the organisation as and when such organisation is established by the
State Government.
(6) The organisation referred to in sub-section (5) shall have such structure and
discharge functions, exercise powers and undertake such activities as may be
prescribed.
16. In section 59 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(3) The Corporation  may also enter into agreement with any local authority,
local body or private body for commissioning and running Employees' State Insurance
hospitals through third party participation for providing medical treatment and
attendance to insured persons and where such medical benefit has been extended  to
their families, to their families.".
17. After section 59A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"59B. The Corporation may establish medical colleges, nursing colleges and training
institutes for its para-medical staff and other employees with a view to improve the
quality of services provided under the Employees' State Insurance Scheme.".
18. For Chapter VA, the following Chapter shall be substituted, namely:—
'CHAPTER V A
S
CHEME FOR OTHER BENEFICIARIES
73A. In this Chapter,—
(a) "other beneficiaries" means persons other than the person insured under
this Act;
(b) "Scheme" means any Scheme framed by the Central Government from time to
time under section 73B for the medical facility for other beneficiaries;
(c) "underutilised hospital" means any hospital not fully utilised by the persons
insured under this Act;
(d) "user charges" means the amount which is to be charged from the other
beneficiaries for medical facilities as may be notified by the Corporation in consultation
with the Central Government from time to time.
73B. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, frame Scheme for other beneficiaries and the members of
their families for providing medical facility in any hospital established by the Corporation in
any area which is underutilised on payment of user charges.
73C. The user charges collected from the other beneficiaries shall be deemed to be  the
contribution and shall form part of the Employees' State Insurance Fund.
73D. The Scheme may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(i) the other beneficiaries who may be covered under this Scheme;
(ii) the time and manner in which the medical facilities may be availed by the
other beneficiaries;
Amendment
of section 59.
Insertion of
new section
59B.
Medical and
para-medical
education.
Substitution
of new
Chapter for
Chapter VA.
Definitions.
Power to
frame
Schemes.
Collection of
user charges.
Scheme for
other
beneficiaries.

5
(iii) the form in which the other beneficiary shall furnish particulars about himself
and his family whenever required as may be specified by the Corporation;
(iv) any other matter which is to be provided for in the Scheme or which may be
necessary or proper for the purpose of implementing the Scheme.
73E. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to, amend,
vary or rescind the Scheme.
73F. Every Scheme framed under this Chapter shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the Scheme or both Houses
agree that the Scheme should not be made, the Scheme shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or to be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything  previously
done under that Scheme’.
19. All things done, or, omitted to be done, and all actions or measures taken or not
taken during the period beginning on or after the 3rd day of July, 2008 and ending immediately
before the date of commencement of the Employees' State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 2010,
shall in so far as they are in conformity with the provisions of this Act, as amended by the
Employees' State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 2010, be deemed to have been done, or taken,
or  not taken, under the provisions of this Act, as amended by the Employees' State Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 2010, as if such provisions were in force at the time such things were done
or omitted to be done and actions or measures taken or not taken during the said period.
20. In section 87 of the principal Act, the following provisos shall be inserted at the
end, namely:—
"Provided that such exemptions may be granted only if the employees in such
factories or establishments are otherwise in receipt of benefits substantially similar or
superior to the benefits provided under this Act:
Provided further that an application for renewal shall be made three months
before the date of expiry of the exemption period and a decision on the same shall be
taken by the appropriate Government within two months of receipt of such application.".
21. In section 91A of the principal Act, for the words "either prospectively or
retrospectively", the word "prospectively" shall be substituted.
22. After section 91A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"91AA. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, in respect of
establishments located in the States where medical benefit is provided by the
Corporation, the Central Government shall be the appropriate Government.".
23. In section 95 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(i) after clause (ef), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(eff) the income of dependant parents from all sources;";
(ii) after clause (eh), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ehh) the conditions under which the medical benefits shall be payable to
the insured person and spouse of an insured person who has attained the age of
Amendment
of section 87.
Amendment
of section
91A.
Insertion of
new section
91AA.
Central
Government
to be
appropriate
Government.
Validation.
Amendment
of section 95.
Power to
amend
Scheme.
Laying of
Scheme
framed under
this Chapter.

6
superannuation, the person who retires under V oluntary Retirement Scheme and
the person who takes pre-mature retirement;".
24.   In section 96 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) after clause (e), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely: —
‘‘(ee) the organisational structure, functions, powers, activities and other matters for
the establishment of the organisation;’’.
25. In section 97 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), —
(i) in clause (xx), for the word "Inspectors",  the words "Social Security Officers"
shall be substituted;
(ii) after clause (xx), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
 "( xxa) the constitution of the appellate authority and the interest on
amount deposited by the employer with the Corporation.".
Amendment
of section 97.
Amendment
of section 96.

LOK   SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Employees'  State Insurance Act, 1948.
————
(As passed by Lok Sabha)
GMGIPMRND—2283LS(S4)—03-05-2010.