THE  PREVENTION  OF WITCH-HUNTING BILL,  2016
By
SHRI RAGHA V LAKHANPAL, M.P.
—————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
—————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
PUNISHMENT FOR OFFENCES
3. Punishment for accusing or identifying a woman as witch.
4. Punishment for labelling a woman as witch.
5. Punishment for Intimidating a woman for practicing witchcraft.
6. Punishment for use of criminal force against a woman and labelling of witch.
7. Punishment for assault or criminal force against a woman.
8. Punishment for torturous or humiliating acts on pretext of performing witchcraft.
9. Punishment for person claiming to be an ojha.
10. Punishment for removal or disappearance of evidence.
11. Attempt to commit offences.
12. Abetment of offence.
13. Punishment for community involvement.
CHAPTER III
TRIAL OF OFFENCES
14. Offences to be cognizable, non-bailable and non-compoundable.
15. Imprisonment for non-payment of fine.
16. Provision of compensation to the victim.
17. Appeal.
CHAPTER IV
M
EASURES FOR PREVENTION AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN
18. Measures to prevent and protect women from witch-hunt.
19. Duties of the Government.
20. Obligation to report about the commission of offence.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  66 of  2016

CHAPTER V
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
21. Rescue of victim.
22. Free medical assistance to the victim.
23. Rehabilitation grant to the victims.
24. Free legal aid to the aggrieved women.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
25. Non-application of section 360 of the Code or the Probation of Offenders Act to
persons guilty of an offence.
26. Non-application of section 438 of the Code to persons committing an offence under
the Act.
27. Application of certain provisions of the Indian Penal Code.
28. Act to override other laws.
29. Protection of action taken in good faith.
30. Power to make rules.
C
LAUSES
(ii)

1
THE PREVENTION OF WITCH-HUNTING BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RAGHA V LAKHANPAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for more effective measures to prevent and protect women from 'witch-hunt'
practices to eliminate their torture, oppression, humiliation and killing by providing
punishment for such offences, relief and rehabilitation of women victims of such
offences and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Witch-Hunting Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "abettor or identifier" means any person who brands or identifies any woman
as a witch;
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 66 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
Definitions.
10

2
(b) "Code" means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;
(c) "court" means a court of Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of
the first class exercising jurisdiction in the area where offence is alleged to have taken
place or of any other Judicial Magistrate of the first class or the Court of Sessions
specified as a Special Court by sub-section (1) of section 11 of the Code;
(d) "Government" means the Central Government or the State Government, as
the case may be;
(e) "ojha" means a person who claims that he has got power or knowledge to
identify witches and to have a capacity to attain control over them or who uses
Jhad Phoonk, either to cure or protect from evil spirit or who causes damage, suffering
or harm for the purposes of healing any disease by giving Tabij, Mantra or any
substance claiming to have the power to heal from witchcraft sufferings and includes
persons known as Guni, Shekha or Jan or by any other name;
(f) "Police Station" includes police outposts;
(g) "spell" means a form of words used as magical charm or incantation used by
ojha;
(h) "witch" means any woman who has been branded as witch by person or
persons in belief that such women has the power to harm anyone or that she allegedly
have such intention or having the belief that she has bad eyes or evil eyes or could do
black magic or that she, by Mantras can harm people or society at large, in any manner;
(i) "witchcraft" means the supposed power of a person to harm the other by—
(a) occult or supernatural means secret use of Tabij or any water or water
mixture pretending it to be sacred; or
(b) any other substance or things like spell, spirits or magic power with
the purpose of causing harm, damage or sickness to other person or harm or
damage to the properties;
(j) "witch-hunting" includes branding of a woman as witch, mostly after an
'ojha' confirms that a woman is a witch the process of prosecution and execution of
that woman, often involving mass hysteria and lynching; and
(k) "words and expressions" used but not defined in this Act and defined in the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or the Indian Penal Code, 1860 shall have the same
meanings has assigned to them in the Code or Indian Penal Code.
CHAPTER II
P
UNISHMENT FOR OFFENCES
3. Whoever,
(i) accuses or identifies or defames a woman, either by words or actions by
claiming that she is a Daain or Dayan or Dakan or Dakin or Chudail or Bhootni or
Bhootdi or Chilavan or Opri or Ranndkadi or Tonahi or Tonaha or Banamati or
Chetabadi or Chillangi or Hawa or Evil Eye or Halka or Daini or by using of any
other name or symbol suggesting her to be a witch; or
(ii) accuses a woman of performing witchcraft or any puja or use of mantra or
tantra aimed at harming any person by supernatural means,
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but may
extend upto three years and with fine which shall not be less than one thousand rupees but
may extend upon five thousand rupees:
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special reasons, to be recorded in the
judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than one year.
Punishment
for accusing or
identifying a
woman as
witch.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
2 of 1974.

3
4. (1) Whoever, labels a woman a witch and blames that woman for any misfortune,
which may include natural disasters like droughts, floods or crop loss, that befalls village or
any illness or death in the village shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend upon three years and a fine which shall not be less than one thousand rupees but
which may extend upto ten thousand rupees; and
(2) Whoever, assaults or uses criminal force or causes to assault or use criminal force
against a woman, accusing her to be a witch, resulting into her death, shall be punished
according to the provisions of section 302 of Indian Penal Code, 1860.
5. Whoever, intimidates a woman, calls her a witch and accuses her practicing witchcraft,
to the extent that the woman is compelled to commit suicide, shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend upto
imprisonment for life and with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees
but which may extend upto fifty thousand rupees:
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons, to be recorded in the
judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than three years.
6. Whoever, on the pretext of labelling a woman of performing witchcraft or being
witch, uses criminal force against that woman or instigates or provokes others in doing so
with intent to harm or to displace her from the house, place or the property, lawfully occupied
or owned by her or interferes with her rights over any land or premises or coerce her to leave
the area of which she is a rightful resident or a visitor, shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend upto five years and
with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees but which may extend upto to
fifty thousand rupees:
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons, to be recorded in the
judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than three years.
7. Whoever, on the pretext of labelling a woman of performing witchcraft or being
witch, assaults or uses criminal force against that woman to remove or causes to remove
clothes from her body and demonstrates and parades her naked or with such scanty clothes
that fail to protect her modesty, shall be punished with imprisonment of a term which shall
not be less than three years but which may extend upto to five years and with fine which shall
not be less than twenty five thousand rupees but which may extend upto to fifty thousand:
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be recorded in the
judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than three years.
8. Whoever, on the pretext of labelling a woman of performing witchcraft or being
witch,—
(i) subjects that woman to any form of torture including acts of stoning, hanging,
stabbing, dragging, public beatings, burns insertion of wooden or sharp objects into
her private parts, burning of her hair, forced hair shavings, pulling of her teeth out,
cutting of her nose or other body-parts, blackening of her face, whipping or branding;
or
(ii) forces that woman to perform public acts of humiliation or eat human excrement
or drink urine or drink or eat inedible or obnoxious substances or socially ostracize that
woman or stigmatize her for life or prohibit her to participate in auspicious occasions or
curtail her movements or employment,
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three yeas but
which may extend upto five years and with fine which shall not be less than twenty five
thousand rupees but which may extend upto fifty thousand rupees:
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons, to be recorded in the
judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than three years.
Punishment
for labelling a
woman as
witch.
Punishment
for
intimidating a
woman for
practicing
witchcraft.
Punishment
for use of
criminal force
against a
woman and
lebelling of
witch.
Punishment
for assault or
criminal force
against
woman.
Punishment
for torturous
or humiliating
acts on
pretext of
performing
witchcraft.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
9. Whoever, being 'ojha', claiming to possess spiritual and/or magical powers, declares
any woman as a witch and does any act of healing allegedly or purportedly to cure her or
performs any ritual by doing any act of 'jhadphook' or 'totka' to free the woman from the evil
spirit or entices a woman or any person on her behalf with a promise to bless the woman with
a child or performs any ritual on behalf of any person with intention to harm the woman, and
whoever promotes or helps organizing and performing of such rituals or associate oneself
with such rituals, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
one year but which may extend upto three years and with a fine of upto fifty thousand
rupees:
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be recorded in the
judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than one year.
10. Whoever, knowingly or having reasons to believe that an offence has been
committed under this Act, causes removal or disappearance of any evidence of the commission
of that offence with the intention of helping the offender to escape punishment, or with that
intention to mislead the investigation or gives any information, regarding the offence, which
he knows or believes to be false, shall, in addition to the punishment under section 182 of
Indian Penal Code, 1860 be liable for punishment.
11. Whoever attempts to commit any offence under this Act or does any act towards
such commission shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860.
12. A public servant, who willfully refuses to register a case or neglects the investigation
or tries to withhold facts and evidences with intention to minimize the gravity of the offence,
shall be deemed to have abetted an offence and shall be liable to such punishment for
abetting the offence as provided under this Act.
13. Where community involvement is proved in causing any offence under this Act,
every person of the community involved may be punished with fine which shall not be less
than five hundred rupees but may extend upto three thousand rupees and whosoever fails to
deposit the said fine shall undergo three months imprisonment excluding the punishment
imposed upon him by a court for causing that offence.
CHAPTER III
T
RIAL OF OFFENCES
14. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
every offence under this Act shall be cognizable, non-bailable and non-compoundable.
15. Any person, who willfully or otherwise, fails to pay the fine ordered by a court,
shall be liable to undergo imprisonment as provided under section 64 of Indian Penal Code,
1860.
16. (1) The fine realized as punishment for an offence under this Act shall be paid to
the victim as compensation.
(2) The compensation paid under sub-section (1) shall not be compounded with any
other compensation or financial assistance which the Government may decide to pay as
immediate relief to the victim or the rehabilitation grant payable under section 24.
17. Subject to the provisions of the Code, the aggrieved person shall be eligible to file
an appeal to the next higher court within ninety days of from the date on which the court
concerned has passed the order:
Punishment
for person
claiming to be
an ojha.
Punishment
for removal or
disappearance
of evidence.
Attempt to
commit
offences.
Abetment of
offence.
Punishment
for Commu-
nity Involve-
ment.
Offences to be
cognizable,
non-bailable
and non-
compound-
able.
Imprisonment
for non-
payment of
fine.
Provision of
compensation
to the victim.
Appeal.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
Provided that the court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of
ninety days if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the
appeal within the stipulated period.
CHAPTER IV
M
EASURES FOR PREVENTION AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN
18. (1) When a police officer receives any information or a report that a witch-hunt is
likely to be committed or there are reasonable grounds to suspect that a witch-hunt has been
committed against a woman, he shall forthwith proceed to the place and shall take all suitable
measures to prevent the witch-hunt and to provide protection to the woman including
getting her admitted to a recognized protective refuge or shelter home, in case the woman
has no safe shelter.
(2) The police officer shall immediately remove the person and the objects expected to
harm the woman and shall verbally or in writting warm the person or persons accused of
intending or attempting a witch-hunt against the woman to leave the place immediately and
abstain from inflicting any harm upon the woman.
(3) The police officer may arrest the person or persons and take action in accordance
with section 151 of the Code and the person so arrested shall be produced before the
executive Magistrate of the area who shall proceed under sections 107 and 116 of the Code.
(4) Whenever an offence under this Act is reported to a police officer, in whose
jurisdiction the offence is committed, the officer concerned shall record the First Information
Report and shall take suitable action as per the law.
(5) Whenever such incident is reported to a police officer which has occurred outside
his jurisdiction, the officer shall immediately inform the police officer in whose jurisdiction
the offence falls and send a copy of the written complaint, if available, for further necessary
action.
19. The Government shall,—
(i) draft appropriate guidelines for the implementation of the provisions of this
Act;
(ii) sensitize and train police offices regarding the issue of witch-hunting;
(iii) ensure confidentiality during testimony of victim as well as witnesses;
(iv) ensure proper monitoring and follow up of reported incidences;
(v) provide relief and compensation for victims of witch-hunting;
(vi) put in place rehabilitation mechanisms and schemes for victims of witch-
hunting;
(vii) provide counselling services to victims of witch-hunting;
(viii) promote education and awareness about the evil of witch-hunting and
include the issue of witch-hunting in school curricula;
(ix) launch public awareness schemes to inform communities of the provisions
of this Act;
(x) launch campaigns against superstition and witch-hunting practices and
organize padyatras and public awareness meetings with the participation of voluntary
organizations, schools, and others especially in regions where the menace of witch-
hunting is most rampant; and
(xi) organise women's groups at village level and draw up creative plans in
consultation with such groups to enhance the self-confidence and economic
independence of vulnerable women in such areas.
Measures to
prevent and
protect
women from
witch-hunt.
Duties of the
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
20. (1) Every employee of Government shall assist the police in the execution of the
provisions of this Act.
(2) All village officers or Panchayat people and such other officers as may be specified
by the Collector or the District Magistrate in relation to any area and the inhabitants of such
area shall, if they have reason to believe or have the knowledge that witch-hunt is about to
be, or has been, committed in the area shall forthwith report such fact to the nearest police
station.
(3) Whoever contravenes the provision of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend upto two
years and shall also be liable to fine.
CHAPTER V
S
PECIAL PROVISIONS
21. (1) Where a Magistrate has reasons to believe from information received from the
police or from any other person, that any woman has been victimized in the name of witchcraft,
he may direct a police officer not below the rank of a sub-inspector to enter such place, and
to remove from there such women and produce her before him.
(2) The police officer, after removing the woman shall forthwith produce her before the
Magistrate.
22. The Government may provide free medical assistance including medicines and
other supportive system to victims of witch-hunt.
23. The Government shall provide such rehabilitation grant to be paid to the victim of
offences under this act in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made by the Central
Government under this Act.
24. The aggrieved women shall have right to free legal aid under the Legal Services
Authorities Act, 1987.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
25. Section 360 of the Code and the provisions of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958
shall not apply to any person of the age of twenty-one years and above, who is found guilty
of having committed an offence under this Act.
26. Nothing in section 438 of the Code shall apply in relation to any case involving the
arrest of any person on accusation having committed an offence under this Act.
27. Subject to other provisions of this Act, the provisions of section 34, Chapter III,
Chapter IV, Chapter V, Chapter V-A, section 149 and Chapter XXIII of the Indian Penal Code
shall, so far as may be, apply for the purposes of this Act as they apply for the purpose of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860.
28. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time custom or usage or any instrument having
effect.
Obligation to
report about
the commis-
sion of
offence.
Rescue of
victim.
Free medical
assistance to
the victims.
Rehabilitation
grant to the
victims.
Free legal aid
to the
aggrieved
women.
Non-
application of
section 360 of
the Code or
the Probation
of Offenders
Act to persons
guilty of an
offence.
Non-application
of section 438
of the Code to
persons
committing an
offence.
Application of
certain
provisions of
the Indian
Penal Code.
Act to
override other
laws.
45 of 1860.
39 of 1987.
20 of 1958.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

7
29. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Government or
any officer or authority of the Government or any other person for anything which is in good
faith done or intended to be done under this Act.
30. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power to
make rules.5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The practice of 'witch-hunting' constitutes gender-based discrimination as it affects
women disproportionately. Witch-hunting is a gross violation of women's human rights
under Part III of the Constitution i.e. the Right to Equality under article 14, the prohibition of
discrimination on the grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth under article 15, the
Right to Protection of life and personal liberty under article 21 which includes the right to life
with dignity and prohibition of torture. Right of equality of opportunity in matters of public
employment under article 16, the abolition of untouchability under article 17 and the Protection
of the interests of minorities under article 29 of the Constitution. Witch-hunting also violates
norms of international human rights law including those in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and Convention on
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, which are binding upon India.
Presently, section 323 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 is used to deal with most
witch-hunt cases. The effect of this is that the persistent harassment of a woman, violence,
social ostracization and deprivation of rights are prosecuted in the same way as a common
assault. In addition certain provisions of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 have been typically
used to book offenders in cases relating to witch-hunting such as section 382 'theft after
preparation made for causing death, hurt or restraint in order to commit theft, sections
339—48 'wrongful restraint and confinement', sections 320—22, 'Causing grievous hurt',
sections 359—69, 'Kidnapping and abduction', sections 375—376, 'Rape', sections
499—501, 'Defamation' and section 302, 'Murder'.
The use of the aforesaid sections in the absence of a stringent law to deal with the
problem of witch-hunting has resulted in an ad hoc, un-coordinated and often insensitive
approach to tackle the social evil of witch-hunting. A national law on the other hand would
acknowledge, understand and address the specific harms and specific wrong done to women
who are labeled as witches and subjected to oppression. There is a need is to prevent,
prohibit and prosecute witch-hunting as a specific manifestation of ongoing discrimination
and violence against women across India. The co-ordinated and coherent approach of a
national law would, therefore, better redress the devastating impact that witch-hunting has
on the lives of targeted women across India. It would also better mobilize civil society and
law enforcement agencies to fulfil their obligations.
In many States including the States of Jharkhand, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Orissa, West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra,
Assam, Bihar and Meghalaya there are certain areas where the practice of witch-hunting is
prevalent even today. In some of these States, laws to tackle witch-hunting have been
enacted. However, these laws contain a range of different provisions at different level and
resulting in the pressing need for a coherent national legislation.
Witch-hunting is the practice of naming an individual particularly a woman a witch and
then causing her harm to such an extent layout emagination. Women are often singled out in
the name of witch-hunting by an individual or a group in the community or the community as
a whole for the purpose of holding such women responsible for causing ailment or misfortune
to the society. The victims of witch-hunts are usually dalit, adivasi, or indigenous tribal
women often living in poverty. Victims are also usually but not always elderly widows, single
women or unmarried women. The practice of witch-hunting  is most prevalent in rural areas
of lower socio-economic development where there is no access to education, medical care,
sanitation or legal services. This evil practice, therefore, affects those who are already most
vulnerable section in society and who already suffer from multiple forms of disadvantage.
The stigma of being labeled a witch and the resulting harm being an additional burden that
those already marginalized individuals have to bear.
8

9
There have been instances where such women are branded as witches beaten, burned,
paraded naked, tonsured, forced to eat human excrement, raped, teeth and fingernails are
pulled out. There have also been instances of mutilation of women's body parts and organs
including genitalia. Women are tortured to death or murdered.
Branding women as 'witches' cause them harm is used to keep women subordinate in
the social hierarchy. It is often used to control and oppress women who are deemed to be
'strong', 'outspoken' or have refused to submit to coercion. For example, women may be
branded witches if they have sought to protect their bodily integrity or sexual autonomy and
refused sexual or romantic advances of a neighbour. Women are branded witches in order to
deprive them of their socio-economic or property rights. Women are branded as witches to
prevent them from participating in the public or political life of their communities. For example,
Lata Sahu, a dalit woman in Raipur, in the State of Madhya Pradesh, contested the polls
against the wishes of landlord or higher castes. She was condemned as a witch, stripped and
beaten.
Women who are accused of witchcraft in India, do not seek any legal or police assistance
often for fear of further violence and reprisals in the absence of adequate protection by the
law enforcement agencies. In many cases, the police fails to lodge First Information Report.
Even if First Information Report is lodged and an arrest is made, the accused are set free due
to lack of evidence. Due to lack of adequate rehabilitation, relief or compensation to women
who have been identified as witches return to their villages and they often face more hostility
and anger from their communities with no socio-economic or property rights. Therefore, it is
necessary to raise awareness among public about the problem as well as sensitise civil
society and law enforcement agencies to check growing incidents of witch-hunting and
provide adequate rehabilitation and welfare of victims of 'witch-hunting'.
In summary, witch-hunting is preventing women from participating in and contributing
to society and fulfilling their responsibility.
The proposed Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for more effective measures to protect
women from 'witch-hunt' and present the act of torture, oppression, humiliation and killing
by providing punishment for such offences, relief and rehabilitation of women victims of
such offences.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAGHA V LAKHANPAL
February 11, 2016.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 19 of the Bill provides that the Government shall provide compensation,
rehabilitation mechanism and schemes, counseling services and other welfare measures for
the victims of witch-hunting. Clause 22 provides for free medical assistance to victim of
witch-hunt. Clause 23 provides for payment of rehabilitation grant to the victims of offences
under this Act. Clause 24 provides for right to free legal aid to the aggrieved women. The
expenditure relating to States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of State
Government concerned. The expenditure relates to Union Territory shall be incurred from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore would be incurred
per annum from Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.
10

 MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 23 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to provide payment of
rehabilitation grant to the victims of offences under this Act in such manner as may be
prescribed by rules made by Central Government. Clause 30 of the Bill empowers the Central
Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to
matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
11

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for more effective measures to prevent and protect women from 'witch-hunt'
practices to eliminate their torture, oppression, humiliation and killing by providing
punishment for such offences, relief and rehabilitation of women victims of
such offences and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Raghav Lakhanpal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4572LS(S3)—03.03.2016.