1
Short title,
extent,
commencement
and
application.
THE AIRLINES REGULA TORY AUTHORITY BILL, 2017
By
SHRI M.K. RAGHAV AN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for setting up of an Airlines Regulatory Authority to
regulate the operation of airline companies and for
matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Airlines Regulatory Authority  Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
(4) It shall apply to all airline companies, including private and foreign airline companies
operating to and from India and providing commercial helicopter/aircraft services on  payment
basis.
Bill No. 66 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Authority" means the Airlines Regulatory Authority constituted under
section 3; and
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
an Authority to be known as the Airlines Regulatory Authority to regulate the operation of
airline companies in the country.
(2) The Authority shall consist of—
(i) a Chairperson, who shall be an expert in the discipline of aviation, to be
appointed by the Central Government; and
(ii) three members, each representing airline companies, the Department of
Commerce and the Department of Industry of the Union Government, to be nominated
by the Central Government.
(3) The Secretary of the Union Ministry of Civil Aviation shall be the ex-officio
Secretary of the Authority.
(4) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff to the
Authority as may be required for its efficient functioning.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
Chairperson, members and officers and staff of the Authority shall be such as may be
prescribed.
4. The Authority shall:—
(i) prescribed guidelines regarding functioning of all airline companies operating
in the country;
(ii) formulate guidelines regarding services provided by various airline companies
in the country;
(iii) fix fares for various domestic flights without putting any restrictions on the
power of the airline companies to fix fares lower than that fixed by the Authority;
(iv) prescribe guidelines regarding minimum facilities to be provided to passengers
without restricting the power of the airline companies to provide more facilities than
prescribed  by the Authority;
(v) issue guidelines regarding payment of compensation to passengers in case
of delay in the scheduled flights;
(vi) prescribe facilities to be provided to passengers by airline companies in
case of delay or cancellation of flights due to reasons beyond the control of airlines
companies;
(vii) prescribe norms regarding fee including license fee for the usage of the
airport;
(viii) prescribe compensation for loss of luggage, baggage or delay in transit of
luggage or baggage;
(ix) issue guidelines regarding insurance cover for passengers;
(x) issue guidelines regarding prior information to passengers in case of delay or
cancellation or rescheduling of flights;
(xi) frame guidelines for  regulation of advertisement issued by airlines;
(xii) establish redressal mechanism to deal with complaints of and against airlines;
and
Definitions.
Establishment
of Airlines
Regulatory
Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(xiii) undertake any other function that may be entrusted to it by the Central
Government, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
5. If any airline company violates any of the guidelines framed or issued by the Authority,
the registration or licence of such company shall automatically stand suspended for a period
of six months.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds for the implementation of the provisions of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force, regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Punishment.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Act not to be
in derogation
of other
Laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There has been a mushrooming growth of private airlines in the country as a result of
economic liberalization. Since there is no mechanism to regulate the functioning of airlines,
they are not functioning properly and are harassing the passengers by undue delay or
cancellation of scheduled flights. The constitution of a regulatory body in aviation sector is
required to mitigate the problems being faced by the airlines passengers.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; M.K. RAGHA V AN
March 7, 2017.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of an Airlines Regulatory Authority.
Clause 6 provides that Central Government shall release funds to Central Authority after due
appropriation. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of rupees ten crore would
be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one crore is also likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for setting up of an Airlines Regulatory Authority to
regulate the operation of airline companies and for
matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri M.K. Raghavan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—5337LS(S3)—27-03-2017.