     AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  66  of 2021
THE FOREST (CONSERV ATION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2021
By
SHRI RAHUL KASWAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Forest (Conservation) Amendment Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5

2. In the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, after section 2, the following section
shall be added, namely:
“2A. Notwithstanding anything in this Act or any other law for the time being
in force, the Central Government or a State Government or any other authority shall
not permit the use, for any purpose, or clearing, of forest land or any portion thereof,
if such land or portion thereof has naturally grown trees belonging to mangrove
species.”.
2
5
Insertion of
new section
2A.
69 of 1980.
No clearing of
forest land
having
mangrove
species.

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Forest Conservation Act of 1980 was enacted to provide for the
conservation of forests. However, the Act is silent on mangrove forest cover area. As
a matter of fact, area covered by mangroves currently is about 4921 square kilometer
in India, which is nearly 3.3 per cent. of world mangrove vegetation. Mangrove forests
are mostly found in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and on the eastern and western
coasts of India. India has lost about 45 per cent. of its mangrove areas in the last
century. Mangrove ecosystems represent the natural ecosystem capable of producing
a wide range of goods and services for coastal environments and communities and
societies as a whole.
Mangroves provide nursery habitat for many wildlife species, including
commercial fish and crustaceans, and thus contribute to sustaining the local abundance
of fish and shellfish populations. Mangrove systems support a range of wildlife species
including crocodiles, birds, tigers, deer, monkeys and honey bees. Many animals find
shelter either in the roots or branches of mangroves.
The decision of the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
for clearing out approximately 57,000 mangrove trees for construction of bullet train
is disheartening and alarming as people who will form the rider base of the upcoming
bullet train are not directly dependent on mangrove trees for their survival but it is
important to understand that numerous species of fauna and flora are. This is also the
case with a substantial part of people who are dependent on mangroves for their
livelihood. The need to protect mangrove forest cover is therefore very important.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;                               RAHUL KASWAN
March 1, 2021.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE FOREST CONSERV ATION ACT, 1980
* *        * *
2. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force in a State, no State Government or other authority shall make, except with the
prior approval of the Central Government, any order directing—
(i) that any reserved forest (within the meaning of the expression
“reserved forest” in any law for the time being in force in that State) or any
portion thereof, shall cease to be reserved;
(ii) that any forest land or any portion thereof may be used for any non-
forest purposes;
(iii) that any forest land or any portion thereof may be assigned by way
of lease of otherwise to any private person or to any authority, corporation,
agency or any other Organisation not owned, managed or controlled by
Government;
(iv) that any forest land or any portion thereof may be cleared of trees
which have grown naturally in that land or portion, for the purpose of using it
for reafforestation;
Explanation.--- For the purpose of this section “non-forest purpose”
means the breaking up or clearing of any forest land or portion thereof for---
(a) the cultivation of tea, coffee, spices, rubber, palms, oil-bearing
plants, horticultural crops or medicinal plants;
(b) any purpose other than re-afforestation,
But does not include any work relating or ancillary to conservation,
development and management of forests and wild life, namely, the establishment of
check-posts, fire lines, wireless communications and construction of fencing, bridges
and culverts, dams, waterholes, trench marks, boundary marks, pipelines or other
like purposes.’.
* *        * *
4
Restriction on the
de-reservation of
forests or use of
forest land for
non-forest
purpose.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.
.
————
(Shri  Rahul Kaswan, M.P .)