‘ ant
As wrropuce ww Lox Sanna’ 4 AUS 200

Bill No. 66 of 2001
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001
By
Suri Basavanacoup Kouur, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Beitenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-Second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1, This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2001.

Short title.

2. In article 189 of the Constitution — Amendment of
article 189.

“(i) in clause (3), the following provisos shall be added at the end, namely:—

5 Provided that the Speaker or the Chairman or any person acting as such, may
continue the meeting of a House of the Legislature if a quorum has been made in the
beginning of the meeting of the House but subsequently there is no quorum in the
House:

Provided further thet the quorum shall be compulsory if any question has to be
10 decided by the House.

(ii) clause (4) shall be omitted”.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

At present, when there is no quorum the Speaker or the Chairman or person acting as
such shall either adjourn the House or to suspend the meeting until there is quorum. This will
affect the business of the House and just because of the absence of few members to consti-
tute a quorum, the entire House cannot be adjourned. Therefore, when once the initial
quorum is formed, the meeting should continue until the quorum is compulsory to decide
any question.

The Bill accordingly sceks to amend the Constitution.

New Deut; BASAVANAGOUD KOLUR
July 19,2001.



ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE ConsTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * * * *

189. (1) * * * * Voting in Houses,
power of Houses to
Act notwithstanding
vacancies and

(3) Until the Legislature of the State by law otherwise provides, the quorum
to constitute a meeting of a House of the Legislature of a State shall be ten mem-
bers of one-tenth of the total number of members of the House, whichever is

areal quorum,
(4) If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative

Council of a State there is no quorum, it shall be the duty of the Speaker or Chairman,

or person acting as such, cither 10 adjourn the House or to suspend the meeting until

there is a quorum,

* * * * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Basavanagoud Kolur, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1364LS—31.07.2001.