1
THE IMMORAL TRAFFIC (PREVENTION) AMENDMENT
BILL, 2018
By
SHRIMA TI DARSHANA  VIKRAM JARDOSH , M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Immoral Traffic (Prevention)  Amendment Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  66  of  2018
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), in section 2, after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely,—
"(ia) 'trafficking in person' means the recruitment, transportation, transfer,
harbouring or obtaining of persons, by means of threat or use of force or other forms
of coercion, abduction, kidnapping, fraud, deception, abuse of power or of a position
of vulnerability or of giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent
of a person having control over another person, for the purpose of exploitation.
Explanation. (1)—The expression "exploitation" includes, exploitation for prostitution
or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to
slavery, servitude or the removal of organs and the consent of a victim of trafficking in
persons to the intended exploitation set forth in clause (ia) shall be irrelevant where any of
the means mentioned in clause (ia) have been used.
Explanation. (2)—The expression 'trafficking in persons' includes recruitment,
transportation, transfer, harbouring or obtaining of a child for the purpose of exploitation
even if it does not involve any of the means as mentioned in clause (ia)".
3. In the principal Act, after section 5, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"5A. Any person who commits trafficking in person shall be punished with imprisonment
for life.".
Punishment
for trafficking
in person.
Insertion of
new section
5A.
Amendment
of section 2.
104 of 1956.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The menace of child trafficking in our country has been growing at an alarming pace.
The common reasons for child trafficking range from economic deprivation, lack of employment
opportunities, low social status (more common for girls), low education level and general
awareness, disadvantageous socio-cultural norms, gender and minority discrimination etc.
The prevalence of child trafficking is high in poverty stricken areas of Andhra Pradesh,
Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Orissa and West Bengal.
Traffickers force young girls into prostitution, and other men, women, and children are
held in debt bondage and face forced labour working in brick kilns, rice mills, factories,
homes as domestic servants, or as beggars or in hazardous occupations etc. The traffickers
of young girls are often those women who themselves have been trafficked and who use
their personal relationships and trust in people in their villages to recruit additional girls.
A large number of children are abducted every year of which a sizeable number remain
untraced according to a report by the National Human Rights Commission of India. The
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) has estimated that the majority of children trafficked
are engaged in hazardous occupations.
Although the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 is in place to address the issue of
human trafficking. The Act only refers to trafficking for prostitution, hence does not provide
comprehensive protection for children. The Act also does not provide clear definition of
"trafficking". Thus, there is an imperative need to define, trafficking and to enhance the
punishment for the heinous offence to protect children and others against trafficking.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DARSHANA VIKRAM JARDOSH
February 15, 2018.
3

4
ANNEXURE
[EXTRACT FROM THE IMMORAL TRAFFIC (PREVENTION) ACT, 1956]
(ACT NO. 104 OF 1956)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) * * * * *
*****
(i) "special police officer" means a police officer appointed by or on behalf
of the State Government to be in charge of police duties within a specified area
for the purpose of this Act;
* * * * *
Definition.

MGIPMRND—4248LS(S3)—28-02-2018.
LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956.
—————
(Shrimati Darshana Vikram Jardosh, M.P.)