1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL,  2010
By
SHRI ANANDRAO VITHOBA ADSUL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first  Year of the Republic of  India  as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2010.
2. In article 117 of  the Constitution,—
(i) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) A Bill making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses
(a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 110 shall not be introduced in the Council of
States."; and
(ii) clauses (2) and (3) shall be omitted.
Short title.
Bill No. 66 of 2010
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment of
article 117.
5

2
3. In article 207 of the Constitution,—
(i) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) A Bill making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses
(a) to ( f) of clause ( 1) of article 199 shall not be introduced in a Legislative
Council."; and
(ii) clauses (2) and (3) shall be omitted.
4.  Article 274 of the Constitution shall be omitted.
Amendment
of article 207.
Omission of
article 274.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Parliamentary form of democracy is the best form of democracy. Here will of the people
should prevail. Peoples' representatives should have a final say in all matters of the nation.
But certain legislative measures require prior sanction of the President for their
introduction/consideration in the Legislatures. These provisions, though technical in nature,
sometimes act as hurdle in piloting important legislations.
Perhaps the logic behind these provisions was that the controversial and draconian
laws should not be allowed to be passed with brute majority of the Government. But, there is
an absolute change in the political set up in the country. People have more political awareness
than ever.
In the changed circumstances, these provisions are no more required to be in the
Constitution. Hence, the proposed amendment to the Constitution. However, the provision
regarding bar on introduction of Money Bills/Financial Bills in the Upper House of a
Legislature has been kept intact.
N
EW DELHI; ANANDRAO  VITHOBA  ADSUL
May 7, 2010
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
117. (1) A Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-
clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 110 shall not be introduced or moved except on the
recommendation of the President and a Bill making such provision shall not be introduced in
the Council of States:
Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this clause for the moving of
an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the matters
aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary
penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or
by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of
any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.
(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India, shall not be passed by either House of Parliament unless the
President has recommended to that House the consideration of the Bill.
* * * * * *
207.  (1) A Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-
clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 199 shall not be introduced or moved except on the
recommendation of the Governor, and a Bill making such provision shall not be introduced in
a Legislative Council:
Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this clause for the moving of
an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the matters
aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary
penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or
by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of
any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.
(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India, shall not be passed by a House of Legislature of the State
unless the Governor has recommended to that House the consideration of the Bill.
* * * * * *
274. (1) No Bill or amendment which imposes or varies any tax or duty in which States
are interested, or which varies the meaning of the expression "agricultural income" as defined
for the purposes of the enactments relating to Indian income-tax, or which affects the
principles on which under any of the foregoing provisions of this Chapter moneys are or may
be distributable to States, or which imposes any such surcharge for the purposes of the
Union as is mentioned in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, shall be introduced or
moved in either House of Parliament except on the recommendation of the President.
(2) In this article, the expression "tax or duty in which States are interested" means—
(a) a tax or duty the whole or part of the net proceeds whereof are assigned to
any State; or
(b) a tax or duty by reference to the net proceeds whereof sums are for the time
being payable out of the Consolidated Fund of India to any State.
* * * * * *
Special
provisions as
to financial
Bills.
Special
provisions as
to financial
Bills.
Prior
recommendation
of President
required to
Bills affecting
taxation in
which States
are interested.
4

LOK  SABHA
————————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2636LS(S4)—05-07-2010.