Short title and
commencement.
THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020
By
SHRI E.T. MOHAMMED BASHEER,  M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
(Amendment) Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
   Bill No. 66 of  2020
5

2
2.  In section 2 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),—
(a) for clause (viia), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(viia) 'commercial quantity', in relation to,–
(a) narcotic drugs other than hemp (ganja) and psychotropic
substances, means any quantity greater than the quantity specified
by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette;
and
(b) hemp (ganja) means two thousand and five hundred grams
of ganja;";
(b) for clause (xxiiia), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(xxiiia) 'small quantity', in relation to,–
(a) narcotic drugs other than hemp (ganja) and psychotropic
substances means any quantity lesser than the quantity specified
by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette;
and
(b) hemp ( ganja) means two hundred and fifty grams of
ganja;".
3. In section 20 of the principal Act, in clause (b), in sub-clause (ii),—
(a) in entry (A), for the words, "one year", the words "three years" shall
be substituted; and
(b) in entry (B), for the words, "ten years", the words "seven years" shall
be substituted.
4. In section 37 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (b), for the
words "section 19" the words "section 19 or entry (B) of sub-clause (ii) of clause (b)
of section 20" shall be substituted.
Amendment of
section 2.
Amendment of
section 20.
Amendment of
section 37.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
As per the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985, the
penalties are divided into three categories based on quantity of drugs (small, medium
and commercial). In respect of drugs involved in small quantity cases the offence is
bailable and penalty is much lesser. However, the small quantity fixed as per the
NDPS Act is not actually small. In the case of Ganja, the small quantity is one kg.
Hence the person who possess 999 gram of Ganja will get the bail and he will be
able to restart his criminal activity on the same day. Thus the fixing of one kg. as
small quantity, many of the smugglers and carriers are utilizing this provisions and
is trafficking the substances in quantities less than one kg. to get off with fine in
caught. The organized criminals are misusing the provision and it creates threat to the
society and handicap to the enforcement agencies. Moreover, Ganja does not have
any legal bona fide use for normal citizens. In order to take strong action against
those who indulge in the drug trafficking, there should not be any discrimination
based on quantity. Thus permitting possession of one kg. is promoting it trafficking.
The National Drugs Dependence Treatment Centre (NDDTC), All India
Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi was entrusted with the
responsibility to lead the technical and scientifice aspects of the National Survey
which was conducted in all the thirty-six States and UTs of the country, in
collaboration with ten oher medical institutes and a network of fifteen NGOs. This
is the first occasion in the history of the country when effort has been made to
study and document substance use from all the States and UTs of the country.
More than 1500 personnel were involved in data collection exercise which was
conducted between December 2017 and October 2018.
The NDDTC and AIIMS in this report titled" ... of Substance use in India,
2019" also has recommended as follows:—
"Considering the enormous challenge of substance use disorders in the
country, there is an urgent need of policies and programmes which can bring
relief to the large number of affected Indian citizens. It is imperative that these
policies and programmes are based upon the scientific evidence and take into
consideration the local, socio-cultural context. Substance use Disorders are
clearly a significant public health concern in the country, as evident by the
findings contained in this report. Thus, we now discuss various measures
which must be undertaken to enable the country, deal with this concern.".
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act, 1985 with a view to—
(a) include ganja with two thousand and five hundred grams under the
commercial quantity;
(b) include ganja with two hundred and fifty grams under the small
quantity;
(c) increase punishment for producing, manufacturing and possessing,
etc. small quantity cannabis;
(d) reduce punishment for producing, manufacturing and possessing,
etc. quantity less than commercial quantity and greater than small quantity
cannabis; and
3

4
(e) restrict on release on bail or on his own bond to a person accused
of producing, manufacturing and possessing, etc. cannabis either in
commercial quantity or less than commercial quantity but greater than small
quantity.
N
EW D ELHI; E.T. MOHAMMED BASHEER
February 6, 2020.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC
SUBSTANCES ACT, 1985
(61 OF 1985)
** **
2. * * * *
(viia) "commercial quantity", in relation to narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances, means any quantity greater than the quantity specified by the
Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.
** **
(xxiiia) "small quantity", in relation to narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances, means any quantity lesser than the quantity specified by the
Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.
** **
20. Whoever, in contravention of any provision of this Act or any rule or
order made or condition of licence granted thereunder,—
(a) cultivates any cannabis plant; or
(b) produces, manufacturers, possesses, sells, purchases, transports,
imports, inter-State, exports inter-State or uses cannabis, shall be punishable,—
(i) where such contravention relates to clause (a) with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also
be liable to fine which may extend to one lakh rupees; and
(ii) where such contravention relates to sub-clause (b),—
(A) and involves small quantity, with rigorous imprisonment
for a term which may extend to 2 [one year], or with fine which
may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both;
(B) and involves quantity lesser than commercial quantity
but greater than small quantity, with rigorous imprisonment for a
term which may extend to ten years, and with fine which may extend
to one lakh rupees;
(C) and involves commercial quantity, with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years
but which may extend to twenty years and shall also be liable to
fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may
extend to two lakh rupees:
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the
judgement, impose a fine exceeding two lakh rupees.
** **
Definitions.
Punishment for
contravention in
relation to cannabis
plant and cannabis.
5

6
37. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973,—
(a) every offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable;
(b) no person accused of an offence punishable for 3 offences under
section 19 or section 24 or section 27A and also for offences involving
commercial quantity shall be released on bail or on his own bond unless—
(i) the Public Prosecutor has been given in opportunity to oppose
the application for such release, and
(ii) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the court
is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is
not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence
while on bail.
(2) The limitations on granting of bail specified in clause (b) of
sub-section ( 1) are in addition to the limitations under the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 or any other law for the time being in force on granting of bail.
* * * *
Offences to be
cognizable and
non-bailable.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.
————
(Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5416LS(S3)—02.0 3.2020.