1
THE ERADICATION OF MALNUTRITION BILL, 2011
By
SHRI BHAKTA CHARAN DAS, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for setting up of an Authority for supply of nutritious food to the neglected,
homeless, street, physically and mentally challenged malnourished children and
to the members of the families living below poverty line who cannot
afford nutritious food and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Eradication of Malnutrition Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 66 of   2011
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Authority" means the Eradication of Malnutrition Authority established
under section 3;
(c) "malnourished person" includes neglected, destitute, physically and mentally
challenged, homeless and street children and members of families living below poverty
line who do not have proper means of nutrition or cannot afford it due to their poor
economic condition or a pregnant women; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish an Authority to be known as the Eradication of Malnutrition Authority.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate and have perpetual succession and a
common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable
and to enter into contract and shall also be liable to sue and be sued by that name.
(3) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at New Delhi.
(4) The Authority shall have the power to establish its branches in all States and
Union territories in such manner as may be prescribed.
(5) The Authority shall have a Secretariat with such number of officers and employees,
as may be necessary for its efficient functioning and with such terms and conditions of
service, as may be prescribed.
4. The Authority shall consist of the following Chairperson and members, namely:—
(a) the Union Minister of Women and Child Development who shall be the
Chairperson-ex-officio;
(b) a Deputy-Chairperson, having such qualifications, as may be prescribed, to
be appointed by the Central Government;
(c) five Members of Parliament, of whom three shall be from the Lok Sabha and
two from the Rajya Sabha, to be nominated by the Presiding Officers of the House
concerned;
(d) not more than two members representing the Union Ministries of Human
Resource Development and Social Justice and Empowerment to be appointed by the
Central Government;
(e) not more than five members representing State Governments to be appointed
by the Central Government in consultation with the State Governments, on rotation
basis; and
(f) not more than four members representing Non-Governmental Organizations
working in the field of welfare of physically and mentally challenged, destitute,
neglected, homeless, street children and members of families living below poverty
line to be appointed by the Central Government.
5. (1) It shall be the duty of the authority to supply nutritious food to malnourished
persons in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Authority shall
also perform the following function,—
(a) maintain district-wise register of destitute, neglected, homeless, street,
physically and mentally challenged malnourished children and families living below
poverty line with such details and in such manner as may be prescribed;
Definitions.
Establishment
of Eradication
of
Malnutrition
Authority.
Composition
of the
Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(b) giving wide publicity to the provisions of this Act and also about the steps
being undertaken by the Authority to supply nutritious meal to the malnourished
persons through electronic and print media; and
(c) such other functions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may
be assigned to it by the appropriate Government from time to time.
6. The appropriate Government shall, on the recommendations of the Authority, to
provide to the malnourished persons, namely:—
(a) payment of two thousand five hundred rupees per month to such families or
to a guardian who is assigned with the responsibility to look after a malnourished
child;
(b) payment of rupees one thousand per month as subsistence allowance to such
families suffering from malnutrition and having no dependent child;
(c) payment of financial assistance to Non-Governmental Organisations
working for the welfare of malnourished persons in such manner as may be prescribed;
(d) free periodical medical check-up of malnourished persons with a view to
provide them with required nutritious food to overcome the deficiency in nutrition
level; and
(e) such other facilities, as may be necessary, for well being and all-round
development of malnourished persons.
7. The Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the Authority, after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, from time to time carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, but save as aforesaid the
provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the
time being applicable to those covered under this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previous done under that rule.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
certain
facilities.
Central
Government
to provide
adquate funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Approximately forty per cent. of the total population of our country lives below poverty
line. Their income is so meagre that they have to struggle for survival throughout their lives.
On account of extreme poverty, it is not possible for them to take adequate nutrition. They
are inadequately nourished but have to do hard manual labour. The women cannot bear
healthy children for want of proper nutrition. Likewise they cannot give proper nutrition to
their children. Most of the children of the parents living below poverty line are placed in a
vulnerable condition. There are also destitute, neglected and street children who suffer a lot
of hardships in silence. Therefore, the families as well as the children suffer from the
malnutrition which affect their proper development. Affirmative action by the State to provide
nutritious food to such children and families is an ineluctable social necessity. Proper
development of children is possible only when they are provided with proper and nutritious
food by the State to meet their requirements to stay healthy.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHAKTA CHARAN DAS
August 1, 2011.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Eradication of Malnutrition
Authority. Clause 4 provides inter alia for appointment of Deputy Chairperson and other
members representing Non-Governmental Organisations working for the welfare of
malnourished children, etc. Clause 5 provides for maintaining district-wise register of
neglected, destitute children and giving publicity to the scheme undertaken by the Authority
for supplying of nutritious food, etc. Clause 6 provides that the appropriate Government
shall pay certain amount per month and to provide certain other facilities to the destitute and
neglected children and families living below poverty line. Clause 7 provides that the Central
Government shall provide requisite funds to the Authority, after due appropriation made by
Parliament. The expenditure relating to States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds
of the respective States. However, the expenditure in respect of Union territories shall be
borne out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five hundred crore may be involved as a recurring
expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore may also be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of  a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for setting up of an Authority for supply of nutritious food to the neglected,
homeless, street, physically and mentally challenged malnourished children and
to the members of the families living below poverty line who cannot
afford nutritious food and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Bhakta Charan Das, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1119LS(S3)—24-08-2011.