THE DELHI UNIVERSIT r~~"""" 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1961 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

I of 1922. 
DUI No. '7 of 1961 
THE DELHI UNIVERSITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1961 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
futrther to amend the Delhi University Act, 1922. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the 
ment) Act, 1961. 
Delhi University (Amend- Short title IIDd com-
mencement. 
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central 
10 
IS 
20 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In section 4 of the Delhi University Act 1922 (hereinafter Amen~nt , of aection 4. 
referred to as the principal Act) ,-
(a) in clause (2)-
(i) in sub-clause (c), the word uor" shall be inserted 
at the end; 
(ii) after sub-clause (c), the following sub-clause 
shan be inSE"rted' namely:-
"(d) have pursued a course of study by correspon-
dence, whether residing within the territorial jurisdic-
tion of the University or not,"; 
(b) existing clause (12A) shan be re-numbered as clause 
(12C) and before clause (12C) as 80 re-numbered, the following 
clauses shan be inserted, namely:-
U (12A) to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of property 
movable or immovable, including trust or endowed proper-
ty, for the purposes of the University, 

2 
(12B) with the approval of the Central Government, 
to borrow, on the security of University property, money 
for the purposes of the University,". 
Amendment 3. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (l), after 
of eec:don s· the words "under this Act", the brackets, words and figures "(other S 
than those conferred by sub-clause (d) of clause (.2) of section 4)" 
shall be inserted. 
AJnerUment 4. In section 33 of the principal Act,after the words "the 
ofeection :l3· University", the brackets and words "(other than a student. who 
pursues a course of study by correspondence)" shall be inserted. 10 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Third Five Year Plan includes a scheme for instituting 
evening colleges and for the introduction of correspondence courses 
under the various Universities in India. To begin with, the corres-
pondence courses will be conducted in the Arts subjects but at a 
later stage Science subjects may also be included. These courses 
are likely to benefit mostly those who are living far away from the 
University and College centres and also those who are unable to 
obtain admission or otherwise prosecute higher studies in colleges. 
The Expert Committee appointed by the Central Government 
under the chairmanship of Dr. D. S. Kothari to finalise the details 
of this schemE: has, with the concurrence of the University of Delhi, 
recommended that correspondence courses be introduced! under the 
University of Delhi from January 1962. Such courses will be open 
not only to those who reside in the Union territory of Delhi but 
also to those who reside outside that territory. Section 5 of the 
Delhi University Act, 1922, however, precludes the University from 
exercising the powers conferred upon it beyond the limits of the 
Union territory of Delhi. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the 
Act SUitably in order to ,enable the University to conduct such 
courses and to confer degrees, etc., on persons who have pursued a 
course of study by correspondence. Opportunity has also been 
taken to empower the University to borrow money, with the ap-
proval of the Central Government, on the security of University 
property. The Bill seeks to give effect to these proposals. 
K. L. SHRIMALI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 24th November, 1961. 

Territorial 
exen:iee of 
powers. 
aeljdence. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE DELHI UNIVERSITY ACT, 1122 (8 OF 1922) 
• • • • • • • 
5. (l) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the powers of 
the University conferred by or under this Act shall not extend 
beyond the limits of the Union territory of Delhi, and notwithstand-
ing anything in any ather law for the time being in force, no educa-
tional institution beyond those limits shall be associated with or 
admitted to any privileges of the University. 
• • • • • • • 
REsmENCE 
33. Every student of the University shall reside in a College or 
a Hall, or under such condlitions as may be prescribed by the 
Ordinances. 
• • • • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Delhi University Act, 1922. 
(Dr. K. L. Shrimali, Minister of Education) 