As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
Bill No. 67 of 198' 
THE GOVERNORS (EMOLUMENTS, ALLOWANCES AND 
PRIVILEGES) AMENDMENT BILL, 1989 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and 
privileges) Act, 1982 
BI it enacted by Parliament in the Fortieth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances Short 
and Privileges) Amendment Act, 1989. title. 
2. In section 3 of the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances ahd Privi-
leges) Act, 1982, in the proviso, in clause (a).-
(a) in sub-clause (ii) , for the word "and", occuring at the end, 
the word "or" shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been 
substituted with effect from the 1st day of June, 1988; 
(b) SUb-clause (iii) shall be omitted and shall IDe deemed to have 
been omitted with effect from the 1st day of June, 1988. 
Amend-
ment of 
Act 43 
of 1982. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Section 3 of the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and P.r1vi1eges) 
Act, 1982 (43 o( 1982) provides that there shall be paid to every Gover-
nor emoluments at the rate of Rs. 1l,000/- per mensem.. Clause (a) of 
the proviso to that section, however, provides that if a Governor, at 
the time of his appointment is in receipt of a pension (other than dis-
ability or wound pension) in respect of any previous service under the 
Government of India or any of its predecessor Governments or under the 
Government of a State or any of its predecessor Governments, his emo-
luments shall be reduced,- I 
(i) by the amount of that pension; and 
(ii) if he has. before such appointment, received in lieu of a 
portion of the pension due to him in respect of such previous service 
the commuted value thereof. by the amount of that portion of the 
pension; and 
(iii) if he has, before such appointment, received a retirement 
gratuity in respect of such previous service, by the pension equiva-
lent of that gratuity. 
2. The Government of India in the Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions have issued orders to the effect that the pen-
sion equivalent of gratuity may not be dedueted while fixing the pay of 
re-employed pensioners. The Ministry of Finance have also issued ordera 
that pension equivalent of gratuity will not be taken into account while 
fixing the initial pay of retired Judges of the High Courts and Supreme 
Court appointed to on Committees/Commissions. These orders have 
been made effective from the 1st June, 1988. 
3. The Bill seeks to amend the said Aat to allow the. benefit of not 
deducting pension equivalent of gratuity from the emoluments payable 
to Governors. According to the amendments proposed. in the Bill. 
Governors who had received retirement gratuity in respect of previous 
service would be benefited. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object. 
NEW DELHI; BUTA SINGH. 
The 11th August, 1989 
2 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE GOVERNORS (EMOLUMENTS, ALLOWANCES AND PRIVILEGES) 
ACT, 1982 
(43 OF 1982) 
• • • • • 
3. There shall be paid to every Governor emoluments at the rate of &nolu-
rupees eleven thousand per mensem: menM. 
Provided that if a Governor, at the time of his appointment,-
(a) is in receipt of a pension (other than disability or wound 
pension) in respect of any previous service under the Government 
of India or any of its predecessor Governments or under the Govern-
ment of a State or any of its predecessor Govemments his emolu-
ments shall be reduced,-
(i) by the amount of. that pension; and 
(ii) if he has, before such appointment, received in lieu of 
a portion of the pension due 'to him in respect of such previous 
service, the commuted value thereof, by the amount of that 
portion of the pension; and 
(iii) if he has" before such appointment, received a retire· 
ment gratuity in respect of such previous service, by the pen-
sion equivalent of that gratuity; or 
(b) is in receipt of any benefit by way of contributory provident 
fund. his emoluments shall be reduced by the pension equivalent of 
such benefit. 
• • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Governors (Emoluments. Allowances and Privile-
ges) Act, 1982 
(Shri Buta Singh~ 
MiniBte-r of Home Affairs.) 