A~ INTRODUCED IN LoK SABIIA ON 
BID No. 67 or Inl 
THE GENERAL INSURANCE (EMERGENcY PROVISIONS) 
BaL, 197 1 
to provide fM tlM tAking. 0Nf". ita the p1o&blic interest. of the mGftClgement 
of general insu"lflCe bumaela pending ftCItiotaaZilation 01 auch Wainess. 
WItEREAS it is expedieat in the public interest that general insurance 
bUSKle&S should be natloaalised; 
AND WIIZRZAS it is expedient that pending such nationalisation ade-
quate steps should be taken to protect the interests of the policy-hoJder:'!: 
BE it enacted by ParlilUllent in the Twenty-second Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (I) This Act may be called the General Insurance (Emergency Pro- Short title 
visiODl) Act, Urll. and COIn-
S (2) It ahaD be deemed to bave c:ome into force OIl the 13th day of May, 
menc:e-
men\. 
1971. 
-----

" 
'f 
:r, " itionL 
! j 
I 
~ , 
I'l~ 
Manage-
ment of 
undertak-
ings to 
vest in 
Govern-
ment on 
commen-
. cement of 
,this Act. 
Z. In t.bls Aet. unl .. the context otherw~ requires,-
(a) "appointed d8'_ ., means the 13th day of May, 1971; 
(b) "Custodian" lDeans the person appointed under section 4 to 
take over the management of the undertaking of any insurer; 
(c) "general insurance business" means fire, marine or miseella- 5 
neous insurance business. whether carried on singly or in combina-
tion with one or more of them, but does not include capital redemp-
tion business and annuity certain business; 
(d) "Insurance Act" means the Insurance Act, 1938; fotl'" 
(e) "insurer" means an insurer, as defined In the Insurance Act, 10 
who carries aD general Insurance business in India, and Includes an 
insurer whose registration under that Act has not remalDed wholly 
cancelled for a period of six months immediately before the appoiHt-
ed day, but does not include the Life Insurance Corporation of India 
established under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1958, or any 15 31 of 1158. 
State Government which carries on general insurance business; 
(1) "notified order" means an order notified in the Ot1idal Gazette; 
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(h) "undertaking", in relation to an insurer incorporated outside 
India, means the undertaking of that insurer in India; 20 
(i) words and expressions used herein but not defined, and defin-' 
ed in the Insurance Act, have the meanings respectively assigned to 
them in that Act. 
3. (I) On and from the appointed day, the management of the under-
takings of all insurers shall vest in the Central Government, and, pending 25 
the appointment of a Custodian for, the undertaking of any insurer, the 
persons in charge of the management of such undertaking immediately 
before the appointed day shan, on and from the apPOinted day. be in charge 
of the management of the undertaking far and on behalf of the Central 
Government; and the management of the undertaking of the insurer 30 
shall be carried on by them subject to the provisions contained in sub-
sections (3) and (5) and to such further directions, if any, a'l the Cent-
ral Government may give to them by notice addressed and sent to the 
principal officer of the insurer. 
(2) Any contrKt, whether express or implied, providing for the ma- 35 
nagement of the .1ndertaking of an insurer, made before the appointed 
day between the insurer and any person in charge of the management of 
such undertaking immeciiately before the appointed day, shall be deemed 
to have terminated 011 t:1C :lppointed day_ 
, (3) No insurer shall, without the previous approval of the person s .. 40 
clfied by the Central Government in this behalf in respect of that insurer 
(hereinafter h!ferr~ to as the "authorised person") ,_ 
(a) make any payment or grant any loan otherwise than in 
accordance with the normal practice obscrvL'Cf by him in respect of 
such mutters immediatdy before the appointt.'Cf day; 

., .. ~.) .. 
." ~ 
'",' 
i 
if 
~ .~: 
.~ 
\" 
~ uf 1934. 
5 
JO 
3 
(b) incur any expenditure from the assets appertiining to the 
undertaking otherwise than for the purpose of making routine pay-
ments of salaries OT commissions to employees, insurance agents or 
for the purpose of meeting the routine day to day expenditure; 
(c) transfer or otherwise dispose of any such assets or create any 
charge, hypothecation, lien or other encumbrance thereon; 
(d) invest in any manner any moneys forming part of such 
assets; 
(e) acquire any immovable property out of any moneys forming 
part of such assets; 
(f) enter into any contract of service or agency, whether ex-
pressly or by implication, for purposes connected wholly or partly 
with the undertaking or vary the terms and conditions uf any such 
contract subsisting on the appointed day; 
J S (g) enter into any other transaction relating to the undertaking 
f1f the insurer other than a contract relating to the transaction of 
general insurance business or vary the terms and conditions of any 
agreement relating to any such transaction subsisting at the com-
mencement of this Act. 
::0 (4) The approval of the authorised person may be given either gene-
rally in relation to certain classes of transactions of the insurer or speci-
aUy in relation to any of his transactions. 
(5) Every insurer shall deposit all securities and documents of title to 
any assets appertaining to the undertaking in any Scheduled Bank or 
25 Nationalised Bank in which the insurer had an account immediately be-
fore the appointed day or in any branch of the State Bank in the place 
where the head office or the principal oftlce of the insurer is situated or, 
where there is no branch of the State Bank in such place, the nearest 
branch of the State Bank; and DO such security or document shall be 
30 withdrawn from the Scheduled Bank, the NatioDaliaed Bank or the State 
Bank, 81 the cue may be, except with the permission of the autbGriaecl 
person: 
Provided that nothing contaiiled in this su1Hection shall apply to any 
security or document of title kept in trust with an Oftlcial Trustee in 
35 pursuance of the articles of association of an inaurer unleas the Central 
Government, by notifted order, otherwise direetl. 
EzplcmGtion.-In this sub-section,-
(a) "Scheduled Bank" means" bank iDcluded for the time being 
in the Second Schedule to the Rc.:erve Bank of India Act, 1 .. ; 
40 :!3 \If 1955. 
(b) "State Bank" means the State Bank of India CODStituted 
under the State Bank of India Act, 1955; 
:. "111170. 
(c) '"NationaUsed .Bank" means a COI'nIPODdin, new bank .. 
debecI JD the Benldn. Companies (Acquisition and Tnnafer of 
UndertaJdDp) Act, lIno. 

Power 
of Cen-
tral Gov-
.rnment 
to ap-
point 
Custodi-
ans to 
toke over 
the mDn-
cl~('ment 
of the 
unrlcrtak-
InG of 
the in-
surer. 
(6) Every insurer shall deliver forthwith .,., the penon .. tpeelftecl M 
this behalf by the Central Government in' respect of that iasu.rer the fol-
lowing documents, namely:-
(4) the minutes book or any other book in India containing all 
resolutions up to the appointed day of the perlons in charge of the 5 
management of the undertaking before the appointed day; 
(b) the current cheque books relating to the undertaking which 
are at the head office or the principal office of the insurer; 
(c) all registers or other books containing particulars relating to 
the investment of any moneys appertaining to the undertaking in- 10 
eluding investments on mortgaged properties aDd d·loans granted 
and advances made; 
(d) all brokers' notes or certificates in the posseslion of the in-
surer in respect of any orders far the investment of any.JDODI..,. 
appert.lining to the undertaking. 15 
(7) Without prejudice tb the generality of the powers conferred by 
sub-section (1) and to the provisions contained in sub-sections (3), (1) 
~nd (6), any direction issued under sub-section (/) may reqUire the per-
Stlns in charge of the management of the undertaking of an insurer under 
this Act to furnish to the Central Government or to the authorised per- 20 
son such returns, statements and other information relating to the under-
taking as may be mentioned in the direction. 
(8) The persons in charge of the management of 'the undertaking of 
bll insurer under this Act shall be entitled to such remuneration, whe-
ther by way of allowance Or salary or perquisites as the Central Gov- 25 
ernment may fix; and any such person may, by giving one month's notice 
in writing to the Central Government of his intention so to do, relinquish 
chal'ge of the management of the undertaking. 
4. (1) The Central Government may, as soon as.it is convenient admi-
nistratively so to do, appoint any person as Custodian for' the purpose of 30 
taking over the management of the· undertaking of. an inSurer and: the 
person so appointed. shall carry on the lI18Il8pIDent of the undertaldng 
of the insurer for and on behalf of the Central Govenunent. 
(2) On the appointment of a Custodian under sub-section (1), the 
charge of management of the undertaking of the insurer shall vest in bim 35 
and all persons in charge of the management of such undertaking imme-
diately before such appointment shall cease to be in charge of such man-
:l~ement and shall be bound to deliver to' the Custodian all boob of 
account, registers or other documents in their custody relating to the 
un1~rtaking of the insurer. 40 
(3) Nothing contained in sub-sections (3), (5) and (6) of section 3 
IIhaU apply to any insurer the charge of management of whose under-
taking has been taken over by the Custodian, but the Central Government 
mlly issue such directions to the Custodian as to his powers and duties 
as it deemed desirable in the circumstances of the case, and the Custodian '145 
m:JY apply to the Central Government at any time for instructions as 
t, the manner in which he shall conduct the management of the under-
lHkmg of the insurer or in relation to any matter ari.in, in the course 
of such management. 

.. 
J 
(4) The CUSlOU,OlU shall rcct!ivc (rum the (unds 01 the undertaking 
for the charge o( management of which he is appointed under sub-
section (I) such remuneratiun as the Central Government may fix. 
(5) rrhe Cust'Odian shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central 
~ G(lv~rnment. 
5. The Custodian may, in relation to the undertaking of any insurer 
tile charge of management of which has been taken over by him, exer-
cise-
(a) all or any of the powers which the Controller of Insurance 
)0 may exercise under section 106 or sectt:Jll 107 of the Insurance Act; 
(b) all or any of the powers under section 52B, section 52BB, 
section 52C or section 52D of the Insurance Act which an Adminis-
trator appointed under section 52A of that Act could have exercised 
in relation to life insurance business of an insurer. 
15 G. (I) Every insurer shall be given by the Central Government 
compensation for the vesting in it, under section 3, of the manalemel.t 
of the undertakinlof the insurer. 
(2) For every month durin, which the manalement of the ullder-
taking of the insurer remains vested in tbe Centrol Government, tlte 
20 amount of compensation referred to in !liub-section (1) sholl be-
(A) in the case of an insurer .. · .. ferred to in dau~ (b) of sub. 
seelion (9) of section 2 of the Insur: :tce Act,-
(i) where the insurer hos de lared a dividend durin.: at lea!!t 
one of the three calendar year" 1967, 1968 and J9II.-
25 (a) a sum equal to one-twelfth of the annual average (for 
the three years) of the amount distributed to shareholders as 
dividend; Or 
,(b) a'lUID .,..ual to two-and-a.half rupees for eve.,. tho .... nd 
".,... or part tIle...,.f of the Dei pl'lllDhun income of the under-
30 ~ of'iasarer tlariac the year till, 
'w ....... is peMeri 
(it) .ia. aD, etIIer cue, a IRIID equal to two-aDd .. ·half. rupees 
for every tho ...... d ........ or part thereof of the Det premiam 
iDceme.of tbe .... ertakin& of the insver duri ... tile ,ear lMt; 
25 (B) ill tbe aM ., aD insurer referred to in ell'DIe (a) of sub-
seetioD (9).of .. tloa Z·of tbe Insul'8llee Act, a sum eqal to two-and-
a-half rupees for eMrI thousand rupee& or part thereof of the net 
pnmium lneome of tbe undertWn.r of the insurer in India durinl 
the year I •. 
40 7. (1) The·compensation referred to in section 6 shall be paid by the 
Central Government in cash to every insurer. 
. (2) The compensation received by an insurer under section 8 shall be 
dealt' with by him in such manner as may be prescribed.. 
Power oC 
Custodi-
All to 
insmute 
proceed-
ings, 
etc, 
Payment 
of eam-
pen .. -
tion, 
Compen-
saUon 
how to 
be paid. 

nalU .. 
nsurer 
#lot to 
~ wound 
:;Up by 
J, ourt. 
,kXCIU-
(sion of 
''time of 
.Act for 
rom put-
.:1n, period 
;of limita-
'lion. 
Effect 
of Act on 
other 
laws. 
, Delcga-
.lion of 
. powers. 
i Protection 
. of action 
taken 
under 
this Act. 
New 
certificate 
of 1'eIis-
tration 
not to be 
i!l!lued. 
Act 
where not 
~o apply. 
t II Ill)' penon-
Ca) fan. to deUver to the Custodian any books of acecn.uit, rep.. 
tars or any other documents in his custody reIafng to the undertak-
ing of an insurer in reaped of the management of which the Custo-
dian has been appointed, or 
(b) retains any property of such insurer appertaining to the, 
undertaking of the insurer, or 
(c) fails to comply with the provisions contained in sub-leetion 
(3) or sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) of section 3, or 
(d) faDs to comply with any c:lirections issued under IUb-aec:tion 
(1) or sub-section (7) of section 3, 10 
he shall be punishable with imprisomneDt for a term which may a-
tend to six mOlltba, or with fine which may extend to one thoUlUld 
rupees, or with both. 
t. No proceeding for the winding up of an inlurer, the JDIlDIlIeIDeDt 
of whose undertaking has vested in the Central Government under this I, 
Act, or for the appointment of a Receiver in respect of IUch business, 
shall lie in any Court. 
10. In computing the period of limitation prescribed by any law for 
the time being in force for any suit or application against any penon by 
an insurer in respect of any matter arising out of his undertaking, the 20 
time during which this Act is in force shall be excluded. 
11. The provisi-ms of this Act shall have effect notWithstanding any-
thing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law 
other than this Act. 25 
12. The Central Government may, by notified order, direct that all or 
any of the powers exercisable by it under this Act may alaa be exerciled 
by any such person as may be specified in the order. 
13. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding lhalllie against 
any Custodian or authorised person in respect of anything which is in 30 
good faith done or intended to be done under this Aet. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
Government or any Custodian or authorised person for any damage caus-
ed or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith dane or in-
tended to be done under this AcL 35 
14. NotWithstanding the provisions of section 3 of the Insurance Act, 
the Controller of Insurance shall not, after the appointed day, issue any 
new certificate of registration under that section to any person. 
IS. Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to-
(a) any insurer whose business is being voluntarily wound up 40 
or is being wound up by a Court; 
(b) any insurer to whom the Insurance Act does not apply by 
reason of the prOVisions contained in section 2£ thereof; 

1 
(c) the Calcutta Hospital and Nursing Home Beneftt Associa-
tion, Limited; 
(d) the Export Credit Guarantee Corporation; 
(e) the Deposit Insurance Scheme; 
(I) any scheme of insurance which might be exempted by the 
Central Government relating to-
(i) crop and cattle, 
(ii) war risks, 
(iii) emergency risks; 
!, 10 (g) general insurance business carried on by a State Govern-
ment or by the Life Insurance Corporation of India. 
Iti. (I) The Central Government may, by notiftcation in the Oftlcial Power to 
Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. make 
rules. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
IS going power, such rules may provide for all oc any of the following mat-
ters, namely:-
(a) the form and manner in which books elf account appertain-
ing to undertakings shall be maintained by insurers; 
(b) the manner in which any compensation payable under thil 
20 Act shall be dealt with by an insurer; 
(e) the circumstances in which the remuneration payable to per-
sons in charge of the management of the undertaking of an insurer 
under this Act (If to Custodians shall be met by the Central Govern-
ment, whether who'lly or in part; 
2S (d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, pres-
cribed. 
11. (1) The General Insurance (Emergency Provisions) OrdiDaDce, Repul 
1971, is hereby repealed. aad 
SaYiJlD, 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any ac:tiOD taken 
30 (including any direction given and orders and rules made) under the 
said Ordinance shall be deemed to hav~ been done or taken UDder the 
~orresponding provisions of this Act. 

~'fATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The General Insurance (Emergency Provisions) Ordinance, 117l (6 of 
1971) was promulgated by the President of tbe 13th May, 19'71, and came 
into force at once. The said Ordinance provides for the taking over, In the 
public interest, of the management of the undertakinp of inaurel'l 
carrying on general insurance business, pending nationalisation of lucb 
business. Government proposes to introduce in Parliament, .. early 
as possible, a Bm providing for the nationalilation of general lnBurance 
business. Since preparation and introductiOD of such Bill would' take 
some time, it IJ necessary to ensure that the action taken under the 
above-mentioned Ordinance may not expire before the, enaetment·, by 
Parliament of the proposed law for the nationalisatioD of the auWI'!: 
insurance business. 
2. The present Bill seeks to achieve the said object 
NEW DELHI; Y. B. CHAVAN. 
The ~th May. 1971. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 51 (7)-INS-1171-III, dated the 21st May, 1971 from 
Shri Y. B. Chavan, Vitta Mantri to the Secretary Lok Sabha.) 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the pro-
posed General Insurance (Emergency Provisions) Bill, 1971, recom-
mends the introduction of the Bill in the Lok Sabha under clause (1) 
of article 117 and its consideration under clause (3) of article 117 of the 
Constitu tion. 
• 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the payment. by the Central Gov-
ernment. of compensation for the taking over of the management of the 
undertakings 01 insurers carrying on general insurance in India until 
such time as the undertakings of insurers carrying on genera) insurance 
business is nationalised by an Act of Parliam~nt. The l:xpenditure on 
account of the payment of compensation under claus~ 6 of the Bill is 
likely to be of the order of RI. 33 lakhs pel" month. 
2. The Authorised Person!; mentioned in clause 3 of the Bill. pending 
appointment of Custodians, will be Central Government offieials and, 
as such, no additional expenditure would be incurred to meet, by reason 
of the provisions of the Bm, the expenditure on their pay and allowanees. 
, 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill. Such rules may provicle 
for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
Ca> the form and manner in which books of account appertain-
ine to undertakings shall be maintained by insurers; 
(b) the IDIUlIlef in which any compensation payable under this' 
Act shall be dealt with by an insurer; 
(c) the drcumstanc:es in which the remuneration payable to 
persons in charge of the management of the undertaking of an in-
surer under this Act or to Custodians shall be met by the Central 
Government, whether wholly or in part. 
2. The matters in respect of which such rules may be made are gene-
rally matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not prac-
ticable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of the 
legislative power is. therefore. of a normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the wking over, in the public interest, of the management of genera) 
inc;urance business pending nationalisation at such business. 
(Shri Y. B. ChmIQII, Villa Ma"rn) 