5 
10 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
I ~ SEP 196~ 
BiD No. '7 of I". 
THE ANTI-CORRUPTION LAWS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1964 
A 
BILL 
. 
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898, the Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance, 
1944, the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946, the Pre-
vention of Corruption Act, 1947 and the Criminal Law (Amend-
ment) Act, 19~2. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Anti-Corruption Laws (Amend- Short title. 
ment) Act, 1964. 
2. In the Indian Penal Code,-
(1) in section 21,-
(i) for clause Third, the following clause shall be 8U~ 
stituted, namely:-
"Third.-Every judge including any person empoW-
ered by law to discharge, whether by himself or as a 
member of any body of persons, any adjudicatory func-
tions;"; 
(ii) in clause Fourth, after the words "officer of a Court 
of Justice", the brackets and words" (including a Uquida-
Amendment 
of As;t 45 
of 1860. 
IS tor, receiver or commissioner)"" shall be inserted; 
(iii) in clause Nilnth, the words "and every officer in the 
service or pay of the Government or remunerated by fees 
or commission for the perfonnance of any public duty" shall 
be omitted; 
1118(B) LS-l. 

Amendment 
of Act. S of 
1198· 
(iv) for clause Twelfth, the following clause shall 
substituted, namely:-
ItTwelfth.-Every person-
(a) in the service or pay of the Government, 
remunerated by fees or commission for. the pe 
formance of any public duty by the Governmen 
(b) in the service or pay of a local authorit 
a corporation established by or under a Centrl 
Provincial or State Act or a Government Compar 
as defined in section 617 of the Companies A( 
1956."; 
(v) Explanation 4 shall be omitted. 
(2) in section 161, section 162 and section 163, after tt-
words "the Legislature of any State", the words and figures "c 
with any local authority, corporation or Government compan 
referred to in section 21" shall be inserted. 
3. In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898,-
(1) in section 198B,-
(a) in sub-sectian (1), the brackets and words " (othf 
than the offence of defamation by spoken words)" shall ~ 
omitted; 
(b) after sub-seetion (5), the following sub-sectio 
shall be inserted, namely :-
"(SA) Every trial under this section shall be hel, 
in camera if either party thereto so desires or if th 
court of session so thinks fit to do."; 
(c) after sub-section (13), the following sub-sectiol 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"(14) Where a case is instituted under this seetio! 
for the trial of an offence, nothing in sub-section (13) 
shall be construed as requiring a complaint to be mad4 
also by the person aggrieved by such offence."; 
(2) in sub-section (2) of section 222, for the words "diS' 
honest misappropriation of money, it snaIl be sufficient to speeif3 
the gross sum", the words "dishonest misappropriation of mone3 
or other movable property, it shall be sufficient to specify th~ 
gross sum or, as the case may be, describe the movable property' 
shall be substituted; 
(3) in sub-section (1) of section 492, for the words uTIlE 
State Government", the words "The Central Government or thE 
State Government" shall be substituted; 

LOK SABHA 
• CORHIGENDA 
to 
TH1I: ANTI-CORRUPTION LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1964 
(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 1, in the Long Title,-
(i) for lithe Criminal Law (.Amendment) Ordinance" J:JWl -
"the Criminal Law .Amendment Ordinance ll 
(ii) lJtJ: lithe Criminal Law (Amendment) Act It .I.W -
lithe Criminal Law Amendment Act ". 
2. Page 2, line 26,-
m "court of session lt J:.Wl5l IICourt of Session" 
3. Page 6, in the marginal heading to section ?A,-
m "The Code of Criminal 1898, to procedure, 8 apply 
subject modifications" J:WW -
liThe Code of Criminal Procedure,1898, to apply 
subj ect to certain modifications" 
4. Page 9, line 1 from bottom,-
.t:Q! "article" ~ "articles ll 
5. Page 11, line 9 from bottam,-
m "sections" ~ "section" 
6. Pag e 1?, line 3 from bottcm,-
m. "192B" ~ "198B" 

7. Page 17, in the marginal heading to section 198B,-
~ "defamatio" .r...w "defamation" 
8. Page 20, line 11 from bottan,-
m "unles lt ~ "unless" , 
9. Page 22, in the marginal heading to section 7 ,-
.w tip eon" ~ tip er son n 
10., In the Docket page,-
(i) .w "Indian Panel Code" ~ "Indian Penal Code" 
(ii) .!2! "the Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance"..t.tuW-
"the Criminal Law AJnencinent Ordinance tl 
(~ii) m "the Criminal Law (Amendment) .Act" ~ -
\ "the Criminal Law Amendment Act" 
11. Corr ect line num bar s on pag as 6 and 7. 
NEW DELHI; 
Be~tember 23 1964 
AsVVna i, '88~(Saka) 

4 
(ii) after clause (d), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(e) if he or any ,person on his behalf is in pos-
session or has, at any time during the period of his 
office, been in possession, for which the public ser- 5 
vant cannot satisfactorily account, of pecuniary re-
sources or property disproportionate to his known 
sources of income."; 
(b) in sub-section (2), the words "in the discharge at 
his duty" shall be omitted; 10 
(c) for sub-sections (2A) and (3), the following sub-
sections shall be substituted, namely:-
"(3) Whoever habitually commits-
(i) an offence punishable under section 162 or 
section 163 of the Indian Penal Code, or 
(ii) an offence punishable under section 165A of 
the Indian Penal Code, • 
shall.be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
shall not ,be less than one year but which may extend 
4S of 1860 
15 
to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine: 20 
Provided that the court may, for any special reasons 
recorded in writing, impose a sentence of imprison-
ment of less than one year. 
(3A) Whoever attempts to commit an offence re-
ferred to in clause (c) or clause (d) of sub-section (1) 25 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
(3B) Where a sentence of fine is imposed under 
sub-section (2) or su1>-section (3), the court in fixing the 
amount of fine shall take into consideration the amount 30 
or the value of the .property, if any, which the accused 
person has obtained by committing the offence or where 
the conviction is for an offence referred to in clause 4(e) 
of su1>-section (1), the pecuniary resources or property 
referred .to in that clause for which the accused person 35 
is unable to account satisfactorily."; 

10 
45 of 1860. IS 
25 
30 
5 
(3) for section SA, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"5A, (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. no police officer below the 
rank.-
Investiga-
(4) in the case of the Delhi Special Police Establish- tion into 
ment, of an Inspector of Police; ~8:er 
(b) in the presidency-towns of Calcutta and Madras, 
of an Assistant Commissioner of Police; 
(c) in the presidency-town of Bombay, of a Superin-
tendent of Police; and 
(d) elsewhere, of a Deputy Superintendent of 
Police; 
shall investigate any offence punishable under section. 161, 
section 165 or section 165A of the Indian Penal Code or uInfer 
section S of this Act without the order of a Presidency Magis-
trate or a magistrate of the first class, as the caSe may be, 
or make any arrest therefor without a warrant: 
Provided that if a police officer not below the rank of 
an Inspector of Police is authorised by the State Govern-
ment in this behalf by general or special order, he may also 
investigate any such offence without the order of a Presi-
dency Magistrate or a magistrate of the first class, as the 
case may be, or make arrest therefor without a warrant: 
Provided further that an offence referred to in clause 
(e) of sub-section (1) of section 5 shall not be investigated 
without the order of a police officer not below the rank of 
a Superintendent of Police. 
(2) If, from information received or otherwise, a police 
officer has reason to suspect the commission of an offence 
which he is empowered to investigate under sub-section (1) 
and considers that for the purpose of investigation or inquiry 
into such offence, it is necessary io inspect any bankers' 
books, then, notwithstanding anything contained in any law 
for the time being in farce, he may inspect any bankers' 
books in so far as they relate to the accounts of the person 
suspected to have committed that offence or of any other per-
son suspected to be holding money on behalf of such per-

Particulars 
iD a charse 
in relation 
to aD offeDCe 
uDder 
section 
S(I)(C). 
The Code 
of Criminal 
1898. to 
Procedure, 8 
appi1. lubje<:t 
mOdifica-
tions. 
.... --=-
6 
son, and take or cause to be taken certified copies of the 
relevant entries therefrom, and the bank concerned shall be 
bound to assist tbepolice officer in the exercise of his powers 
under this sub-section: 
Provided that no power under this sub-section in rela- S 
tion to the accounts of any person shall be exercised by a 
police officer below the rank of a Superintendent of Police, 
unless he is specially authorised in this behalf by a "police 
officer of or aboVe the rank of a Superintendent of Police. 
ExplanatiOn.-In this sub-section, the expressions "bank" 10 
and "bankers' books" shall have the meanings assigned to 
them in the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891."; 18 of 1891. 
(4) in sub-section (1) of section 6, after the word, brackets 
and figure "sub-section (2)", the words, brackets, figure and 
letter "or sub-section (3A)" shall be inserted; IS 
(5) after section 6, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"6A. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898, when an accused is charged with 5 of 1898. 
an offence under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 5, 20 
it shall be sufficient to describe in the charge the property 
in respect of which the offence is alleged to have been com-
mitted, and the dates between which the offence is alleged 
to have been committed, without specifying particular items 
or exact dates, and the charge so framed shall be deemed 2S 
to be a charge of one offence within the meaning of section 
234 of the said Code: 
Provided tha.t the time included between the first and 
last of such dates shall not exceed one year."; 
(6) in section 7, the words, brackets and figure "sub-section 30 
(2) of" shall be omitted; 
(7) after section 7, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"7A. The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1898, shall, in their application to any proceeding in relation 35 5 of 1898. 
to an offence punishable under section 161, .action 165 or 
section 165A of the Indian Penal Code or under section 5 of 45 of 1860. 
this Act, have effect as if,-
(4) in Bub-section (8) of section 251A, for the words 
"'!'he accused shall then be called upon", the words "The 
aeCuied shall then be required at once to give in writing 40 

5 
10 
15 
20 
·35 
7 
a list of the persons (if any) whom he proposes to 
examine as his witnesses and of the documents (U any) 
on which he proposes to rely, and he shall then be called 
upon" had been substituted; 
('b) in sub-section (IA) of section 344, after the 
second proviso, the following proviso had been inserted, 
namely:-
"Provided also that the proceeding shall not be 
adjourned or postponed merely on the ground that 
an application under section 435 has been made by 
Ii party to the proceeding."; 
(c) in sub-Bection (1) of section 435, before the Ez-
planation, the following proviso had been inserted, 
namely:-
"Provided that where the powers under this sub-
section are exercised by a court on an application 
made by a party to such proceedings, the court shall 
not ordinarily call for the record of the proceeding-
(a) without giving the other party an oppor-
tunity of showing cause why the record should 
not be called for; or 
(b) if it is satisfied that an examination of 
the record of the proceeding may be made from 
the certified copies thereof; 
and in any case, the proceedings, before the inferior 
court shall not be stayed except for reasons to be 
recorded in writing.".; 
(d) after sub-section (2) of section 540A, the follow-
ing sub-section had been inserted, namely:-
"(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (1) or sub-section (2), the judge or magis-
trate may, if he thinks fit and for reasons to be re-
corded by him., proceed with inquiry or trial in the 
absence of the accused or his pleader and record the 
evidence of any witness, subject to the right of the 
accused to recall the witness for cross-examination."; 
(8) in section 8, after the word, brackets and figure "sub-
section (2)", the words, brackets, figure and letter "or sub-aection 
(3A)" shall be inserted. 
7. In the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952, in clause (a) of sub- Amendment 
40 section (1) of section 6, the words, brackets and figure "sub-section ~:s:.ct 46 of 
(2) of' shall be omittei. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Committee on Prevention of Corruption was appointed in 
1962 to review the problem of corruption and to suggest measures 
to combat it. The Committee has made various suggestions for 
dealing with the problem and has, inter alia, recommended certain 
changes in the law to ensure speedy trial of cases of bribery, cor-
ruption and criminal misconduct, and to make the law otherwise 
more effective. The Bill is intended to give effect to such of these 
recommendations that have been accepted. 
2. The following are the main features of the Bill:-
(a) The definition of 'public servant' in section 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code is proposed to be amended so as to bring 
within its purview certain additional categories of persons such 
as persons performing adjudicatory functions under any law, 
liqUidators, receivers, commissioners, etc. 
(b) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 is being amended 
so as to bring within the purview of section 198B of the Code the 
offence of defamation by spoken words also and to make it clear 
that it should not be necessary to take the consent of the person 
defamed before proceedings are instituted under the section. 
It is also proposed to provide that trials under this section may 
be held in camera under certain circumstances. Besides, it is 
also proposed to amend the Code so as to empower the Central 
Government to appoint public prosecutors. 
(c) The Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 is being 
amended to enable officers of the Delhi Special Police Establish-
ment, not below the rank of a Sub-Inspector, to exercise the 
powers of an officer in charge of police station. 
(d) The Committee has recommended a number of impormnt 
amendments to the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947. It has 
suggested that the presumptions enunciated in sub-sections (1) 
and (2) of section 4 of the Act should 'be made available also in 
respect of offences under section 5 and possession of dispropor-
tionate assets should be made a substantive offence. It has also 
recommended that habitually corrupting ,pUblic servants should 
be made an offence and that attempts to commit certain offences 
8 

9 
under section 5 of the Act should also be made punishable. Cer-
tain other recommendations in regard to investigation into corrup-
tion cases have also been made. It is proposed to give effect 
to all these recommendations,· subject, of course, to suitable 
safeguards. 
The Committee has suggested certain amendments to the 
Cod~ of Criminal Procedure, 1898, particularly to the provisions 
relating to the inspection of documents .(in so far as they have 
a bearing on the inspection of bankers' books) I adjournments, 
stay of proceedings, calling of records, recording of evidence in 
the absence of the accused, etc. As these recommendations have 
been made in the context of the limited problem of prevention of 
corruption, it is proposed to give effect to them by inserting 
suitable provisions in the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947. 
(e) Further, it is considered necessary to take powers to 
obtain an order of attachment of mmey Gf other property believed 
to have been obtained by the commiSlion of oft.eoces under 
section 5 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 atld for this 
purpose, it is proposed to amend the Criminal Law Amendment 
Ordinance, 1944, suitably. 
(f> The Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952 is being amend-
ed to make the new offences under the Prevention of Corrup-
tion Act al80 trtableby speciel courts. 
NEW DELHI; JAISUKHLAL HATHI. 
T.J\e 11th. Septembe1'. 19M. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
{Cepy of letter No. 43/3'/i4-AVD, dated the 11th September, 
l~ from Shri Jai Sukh La! Hathi, Minilter of State in the 
MiDistry of Home Affairs to the Secretary, Lok Sabba.] 
. The President l1aving been infonned of the Bubject matter of the 
Anti-Corruption Laws ·(AmendmeDt) Bill, l~. recomulends the 
introduction and consideration of the Bill in the Lok Sabha "ndel" 
article 117(1) qnd 117(3) of the Constitution Qf IndiEl, 

Note. on Clau..e. 
Clause 2.-This clause seeks to amend the Indian Penal Code. 
Sub-clau.se (1) .-'Public servant' has been defined in section 
21 of the Code and it is proposed to amend it so as to bring within 
its purview certain additional categories of persons, namely, 
(a) persons discharging adjudicatory functions, 
(b) liquidators, receivers and commissioners appointed 
by courts and 
(e) persons in the service or pay of any statutory cor-
poration which is not engaged in any trade or indusby. 
Su.b-clause (2) .-The amendments are of a consequential 
nature. 
Clause 3.-This clause seeks to amend the Code of Criminal Proce-
dure, 1898. 
Sub-clause (1) .-This sub-clause seeks to amend section 
) 98B of the Code. Under this sectIon, public prosecutors are 
empowered under certain circumstances to file complaints in 
respect of offences of defamation other than, by spoken words 
against the President, Vice-President, Ministers and other pub-
lic servants in respect of their conduct in the discharge of their 
public functions. It is proposed to amend section 198B so as 
to enable proceedings. being taken thereunder, even in respect 
of an offence of defamation by spoken words. It is further 
proposed to provide that a trial under the section may be held 
in camera under certain circumstances. Doubts have arisen 8S 
to whether a public prosecutor can ftle a complaint under this 
section without the consent of the public servant alleged to 
have been defamed. It is proposed to make it clear that it will 
, . not be nec~sary to obtain the consent of the public servant for 
instituting proc~dings \,lDder the section. 

ii 
Sub-ciause (2) .-This sub-clause seeks to amend sub-sectiort 
(2) of section 222 of the Code for providing that even in cases of 
dishonest misappropriation of movable property other than 
money, it shall be sufficient to describe in the charge the movable 
property in respect of which and the dates between which the 
offence is alleged to have been committed without specifying par-
ticular items or exact dates. This is for avoiding multiplicity of 
proceedings in such cases. 
Sub.clause (3) .-This su·b-clause seeks to amend section 492 
of the Code to enable the Central Government to appoint 
public prosecutors. • Such a power is necessary for dealing expe-
ditiously with corruption cases. 
Sub-cLauae (4) .-The amendment made by this sub-clau~e is 
of a consequential nature. 
Clause 4.-This clause seeks to amend the Criminal Law Amend-
ment Ordinance, 1944 which provides for attachment of money or 
other property believed to have been obtained by the commission of 
offences specified in the Schedule thereto. To facilitate similar action 
in relation to offences under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 
1947, it is proposed to include those offences also in the Schedule. 
Clause S.-This clause seeks to amend section 5 of the Delhi Spe-
cial Police Establishment Act, 1946 for enabling officers of the Delhi 
Special Police Establishment not below the rank of a Sub Inspector of 
Police to exercise the powers of an officer in charge of a police station. 
Such powers are necessary for speedy investigation into corruption 
cases. 
Clause 6.-This clause seeks to amend the Prevention of Corrup-
tion Act, 1947. 
Sub-clause (1) .-Section 4 of the Prevention of Corruption 
Act provides that on proof of certain facts constituting an offence 
'under sections 161, 165 or 165A of the Indian Penal Code, the 
motive requisite under those sections shall be presumed unless 
the contrary is proved. This sub-clause seeks to amend the said 
section 4 so as to provide that a similar presumption as to motive 
shall be made also in cases of offences \.lllder the Prevention of 
Corruption Act which involve motive as an ingredient thereof, 
namely, the offences referred to in clauses (a) and (b) of sub-
section (l) of section 5 of the Act and the offence under . clause 
(U) of proposed sub-section (3) of the said section 5. 

1:1, 
Sub-c&Gwe (2) .-This &l.lb-clawse Beeks to amend section ~ 
of ~he Act,-
(i) to cover offences of criminal misconduct by public 
servants acting as intermediaries by deleting the words 'in 
the discharge of his duty'; 
(ii) to make posaession of assets by public servant dis-
proportionate to the known sources of his income for which 
he cannot satisfactorily account, a substantive offence; 
(iii) to 'make habttual commission of offences under sec-
tions 162, 163 and 165A· of the Indian Penal Code, substantive 
offences; 
(iv) to make, attempts to commit offences of criminal 
misconduct referred to in clause (c) or clause (d) of sub-
mUon (1) of the sa:tion abo, punishable, and 
(v) to make certain consequential changes. 
Sub.cZa'U8e (3) .-This wb-clause seeks to substitute a new 
section SA for exilting section SA of the Act. Sub-section (1) of 
the new section corresponds to the existing section 5A subject to 
two modifications aimed at facilitating quick investigation of cor .. 
ruption cases. The modifications are <a> for empowering Ins .. 
pectors of the Delhi Special Police' Establishment to investi-
gate offences mentioned in the section without any authorisation 
as at present and (b) for empowering State Governments to 
auth«ise police omeers, not below the rank of ln8pectOrBt to m,.. 
vestigate the said offences. 
Experience has shown that for the effective and speedy in-
vestigation of the offences mentioned in sub-section (l> of the 
new section 5A, it is necessary to confer on the police oftlcers 
empowered under that sub-section to investigate those of!encee, 
powers to inspect bankers' books, in so far as such books relate 
to the accounts of any person suspected to have been guilty of 
commission of any of the said offences. 'Sub-sectIon (2) of new 
section SA is for this purpose. To ensure that the powers' are not 
abused, it bas been provided that the' powers shall not be exer-
cised by a police officer below the rank of a Superintendent of 
Police uniess he is specially authorised in this beha!f by a police 
oftl~er of or above the rank of a Superintendent of Police. 
Su~ (4).-1'he amendments are of 8 conMquential 
naturre. 

d 
Sub-claue (5) .-In the case of an offence of dishonest or 
fraudulent misappropriation or conversion of property entru~ted 
to or under the control of a public servant referred to in clause 
(c) of sub-section (1) of section 5 of the Prevention of Corrup-
tion Act, it is often difficult to describe in the charge the exact 
dates on which the various items of the property have been so 
misappropriated or converted. To overcome this difficulty and 
also to avoid multiplicity of proceedings, it is proposed to provide 
that in such cases, it will be sufficient to describe in the charge the 
propeTty in, respect of which and the dates between which the 
offence is alleged to have been committed without specifying 
particular items or exact dates. 
Sub-clause (7) .-This sub-clause seeks to modify various pre-
visions of the Code of Criminal Procedure in their application 
to any proceeding in relation to an offence punishable under sec-
tion 161, section 165 or section 165A of the Indian Penal Code 
or under section 5 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947. The 
modifications are for the purpose of ensuring speedy trial of the 
offences. The following are the modifications:-
(a) Section 251A of the Code of Criminal Procedure 
which deals with the procedure to be adopted "in the trial of 
warrant cases instituted on a police report contains necessary 
provisions to ensure that the accused is supplied with impor-
tant documents, namely, the documents referred to in sec-
tion 173 of that Code, on which the prosecution wants to 
rely. The reason for this is that the accused should not be 
taken by surprise. The section does not cast a simUar obli-
gation on the accused to furnish to the prosecution a list of 
witnesses and documents on which he proposes to rely upon 
in his defence. The modification to section 251A is for the pur-
pose of casting such an obligation. 
(b) Suitable provision is being made to avoid adjourn-
ment or postponement of trials or inquiries on the ground 
merely that an application for revision fs pending. 
(c) Summoning of records and stay of proceedings by 
revisional courts cause considerable delay in the trial of 
cases. In order to minimise such delay, it is proposed to in-
sert a new proviso in section 435(1) of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure for the purpose of laying down certain conditions 
which have to be fulftlled before a record may be ealled for 
or before the proceedings may be stayed. 

14 
(d) To avoid delay occasioned by absence of the accuS-
ed, it is proposed to provide that the court may, in its discre-
tion, proceed with the trial or inquiry and record the 
evidence even in the absence of the accused, while suitably 
protecting the right of the accused regarding cros!I-examina-
tion of the witnesses. 
Sub-cla1.C.fe (8) .-The amendment is of a consequential 
nature. 
Clause 7.-This els.use seeks to amend section 6 of the Criminal 
Law Amendment Act for making the new offences provided in the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 also triable by special jUdges. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to make the new offences relating to 
bribery end corruption under seCtion 5 of the Prevention of Corrup-
tion Act, 1947, triable by special Judges. This may involve expendi-
ture as it may be necessery to sct up more special courts. The ex-
penditure in respect of special courts in the State3 and in the Union 
Territories with separate Consolidated Funds of their own will be 
met from their respective Consolidated Funds. The expenditure in 
respect of special courts in the othel Union Territories, however, wlll 
be met from the Consolidated Fund of India. The quantum of this 
expenditure is likely to be smaUbut it cannot now be estimated with 
any degree of accuracy. 

• 
ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, IS6() 
,(45 OF 1860) 
• • • • 
Zl. The words "public servant" den.o~ a person faWng UDder any ''Publl 
of the descriptions hereinafter following namely:- servan~" 
• • • • • 
Third.-Every Judge; 
Fourth.-Every officer of a Court of Justice whose duty it 11, as 
such omcer, to inv.estigate or report 9n any matter or law or fact, or 
to make, authenticate, or keep any document, w to take charge or 
dispose of any property, or to execute any judicial process, or to ad-
minister any oath, or to interpret, or to preserve order in the Court, 
and every person specially authorized by a Court of Justice to per-
form any of such duties; 
• • • • • 
Ninth.-Every officer whose duty it is, as such offtcer, to take, 
receive, keep or expend any property on behalf of the Government, 
or to make any survey, assessment or contract on behalf of the Gov-
ernment, or to execute any revenue-process, or to investigate, or 
to report, on any matter aifecting the pecunfary interests of the Gov-
ernment, or to make, authenticate or keep any document relating to 
the pecuniary interests of the Government, ~ to prevent the infrac-
tion. of any law for the protection of the pecuniary interests of the 
Government and every officer in the service or pay o.f the Govern-
ment or remunerated by fees or commission for the performance of 
any public duty; 
• • * • • 
Twelfth.-Every officer in the service or pay of IQ local authority 
or of a corporation engaged in any trade or industry whi~h is estab-
lished by a Central, Provincial or State Act or of a Government com-
1 Of 1958. pany as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956. 
• • • • • 
Exp14Mtion 4.-The expression "corporation engaged in any trade 
or industry" includes a banking, insurance or financial corporation, a 
river valley corporation and a corporation for supplying power, Ught 
or water to the public. 
• • • • • 

17 
CHAPTER IX 
OF OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO PuBLIC SERVANTS 
. 161. Whoever, being or expecting to be a public servant, accepts PUbl!C';'; 
or obta!ns, or agrees to accept •. or attempts to obtain from any person. ~~~t:Ca~ 
for himself or for any other person, any gratification whatever, other tion other 
than legal remuneration, as a motive or reward for doing .ar forbear- than legal 
ing to do any official act or for showing or forbearing to show, in the :em~era-
. f hi ffi' 1 f . f di f t hon m res-exerCIse 0 SOCIa unctIons, avour or savour 0 any person, t of an 
or for rendering or attempting to render any service, or disservice ~ial act. 
to Rny persons, with the Central or any State Government or Pa:diu-
ment or the Legislature of any State, or with any public servant, as 
such, shall be 'Punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a tenn which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
. .....,. . 
'. ~. ~~~~~r a~e~ o~ obtaj~~, or a~ee8 to accept, or attempts ~:ak~~~a_ 
to oMl'lin, from any pen.on,for· himself ,or for any other' person, any tion, in 
gratiflcation wootever as a motive .or reward for inducing,. by corrupt order, by . 
or nl~(tal means, any public ,!'lervant to do or to forbear to do any ~orrupt Or 
official act, or in the exercise of the official functions of such public Illegal t . ' means, 0 
servant to show,favour or dlSfavoul' to Bnv person, or to rPTld'er or in1luence 
AtteUl'Dt to render' any service or diseervice to any pe~on, with the public ler-
Central or any State Government or Parliament 01' the Le~s)attJre vant. 
of any State, or with any public servant. as such, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of ,. either desQription for a term which may 
extend to three years, or with nne, or with both, 
"1"1"" CO"' ":' "."., ';','"f' A. '~", ;"'. j ',. !. I 
, lU. "Wboev#o1U>~""ho .m: obtains,.: Ar·8<fN>es to -accept or 'attempts' :ra~ t' . .,,--~. ..... 5" -, Il' .... llca 101 
to,.QJ)taln, from ",",y. person, for himsellf OF for any other person, any for exercise 
~8tUll:;ationwhatev~,:as ,8, mQtive or. rewllrd for'inciucing, by the' of personal 
ex~e .,of .. ~r~ll lmlueaee;·,anv:!Dublic servant to" do • or influence 
to.~p~~, to. do. any Qftleial act,or. in the exerclse of ·the oftletalft1ne- with public 
tlons of such public servant to show favour or disfavour to any penon~ :serv4nt. 
or to render or attempt to render any service ,or, dJsse~ to any 
p~on with. the Central or any State Government or Parliament or 
the Lemslature of any State, or with any public servant. as such, shall 
be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
, .,' .. _. ,.... . . . 
EXTRACTS PROM THE COD~ OF CRTMINAL PROCEDURE, 1898 
(5 OF 1898) 
• • • • • . Prosect!-45 of 1880. -,:U!If(l), NotwfthstancUnlt:aDJ&1;hitltreontatned In this Code, wnen tion tot 
aI!",(4~' falUn! tIIlder .~~. XXI ()f the Indian . PenalCodedefamatio 
(other than th~ t?~~ @f ~~art1at1on by spoken words) ts alleged against, 

18 
public .ser- to have been committed against the President, or the Vice-President, 
;::C~nOf or the Governo~ or Rajpramukh of a . State, or a. Mini~ter, or 
their con- any other pubbc servant employed In connection With the 
duct in the affairs of the Union or of a State, in respect of his conduct in the dis-
dischar~e charge of his public functions, a Court of Session may take 
of p~bhc cognizance of such offence, without the accused being com-
functions. mitted to it fbr trial, upon a complaint in writing made by the public 
Particulars 
as to time, 
place and 
. person. 
Procedure 
to be 
adopted in 
Prosecutor. 
• • • • • 
ZZ2. (1) • • • • • 
(2) When the accused is charged with criminal breach of trust or 
dishonest misappropriation of money, it shall be sufficient to specify 
the gross sum in respect of which the offence is alleged to have been 
committed, and the dates between which the offence is alleged to 
have been committed, without specifying particular items or exact 
dates, and the charge so framed shall be deemed to be a charge of 
one offence within the meaning of section 234: 
• • • • • 
!s1A. (1) • • • • 
cases (8) The accused shall then -be called upon to enter upon his de-instituted on police- fence and produce his evidence; and if the accused puts in any written 
report statement, the Magistrate shall file it with the record . 
Power to 
postpone 
or adjourn 
proceed-
ing. 
Remand. 
Power to 
call for 
records. 
• • • • • .... 
344. (1) • • • • 
(lA) If, from the absence of a witness, or any other reasonaplo 
cause, it becomes necessary or advisable to postpone the eom.mene~ 
ment of, or adjourn any inquiry or trial, the Court may, if it thinks 
fit, by order in writing, stating the reasons therefor,' from time to 
time, postpone or adjourn the same on such terms as it thinks fit, 
for such time as it considers reasonable, and may by a warrant r~man~ 
the accused if in custody: .. 
Provided that no Magistrate shall remand an accused person 
to custody under this section for a term exceeding fifteen day~ 
at a time: ~.~. 
Provided further that when witnesses are in attendance~ 
no adjournment or postponement shall be granted, without 
examining them, except for special reasons to be recorded in 
writing. 
• • • • • 
W. (1) The High Court or any Sessions Judge or District Magis-
trate,or any Sub-divisional Magistrate empow~ b)' th~ $11.l~e Gov-
;-: .. 

i9 l 
etnment in this behalf, may call for and examine the record of any ot in-
proceeding before any inferior Criminal Court situate within the ferior 
local limits of its or his jurisdiction for the purpose of satisfying Courts. 
itself or himself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of any 
finding, sentence or order recorded or passed, and as to the regular-
ityof any proceedings of such inferior Court and may, when calling 
for such record, direct that the execution of any sentence or order 
be suspended and, if the accused is in confinement, that he be re-
leased on bail or on his own bond pending the examination of the 
recordi 
• • • • 
PART IX 
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS 
CHAPTER XXXVIII 
OF THE PuBLIC PROSECUTOR 
• 
492. (1) The State Government may appoint, generally, or in anY'Power to 
case, or for any specified class of cases, in any local area, one or more appoint 
officers to be called Public Prosecutors. Public Pro 
secutors . 
• • • • • 
495. (1) Any Magistrate inquiring into or trying any case may,p mUss'on 
permit the prosecution to be conducted by any person other than an t: cond~ct 
officer of police below a rank to be prescribed by the State Govern-prosecutio1) 
ment in this behalf, but no person, other than the Advocate General, 
Standing Counsel, Government Solicitor, Public Prosecutor or other 
officer generally or specially empowered by the State Government 
in this behalf shall be entitled to do so without such permission . 
• • • • • 

EXTRCATS FROM THE PREVENTION OF CORRt1P'rION ACT, 1947 
2 OF 1947 
• • • • • 
Presumption 4. (1) Where in any trial of an offence punishable under sec-
where public tion 161 or section 165 of the Indian Penal Code, it is proved that an 45 of 1840. 
~~ ~d person has accepted or obtairted; "or 'has agreed' to 'accept or 
:b~,~~n ~pted',to obtain, ,for himself ot' ~or any o~ person,~y gl'at~-
lept remu- fication (other than legal remuneratIOn) or any-valuable thmg frOm 
neration. any person, it shall be presumed -unless the contrary is pl"Oved that 
Criminal 
misconduct 
in discharge 
of olllieal 
duty. 
he accepted or obtained, or agreed to accept or attempted to obtain, 
that gratification or that valuable thing, as the case'may be, as a 
motive or reward such as is mentioned' in the said section 161, or,as 
tb.e,.~ase maybe, without consideration or for a consideration which 
he !maws to be 'inadequate. 
(2)' Where in any trial' of an offence punishable under section 
165A of the Indian Penal Code, it is proved that any gratification 45 of 1860. 
(other than legal remuneration) or any valuable thing has been given 
or offered to be given or attempted to be given by an accused person, 
it shall be presumed unles the contrary is proved that he gave or 
offered to give or attempted to give that gratification or that valuable 
thing, as the case may be, as a motive or reward such as is mentioned 
in section 161 of the Indian Penal Code or, as the case may be, with-
out consideration or for a consideration which he knows to be inade-
quate. 
• • • • • • 
5. (1) A public servant is said to commit the offence of criminal 
misconduct in the dischaTge of his duty-
(a) if he habitually accepts or obtains or agrees to accept or 
attempts to obtain from any person for himself or for any other 
20 

45 of 1860. 
45 of 1860. 
~I 
person, any gratification (other than legal remuneration~ U 
li'mbt1ve or rewatdsuch as is mentioned ill section '161 of the 
Indian Penal -Code', or ; -
• ..' .. • • 
(2) Any public servant who commits criminal miscondJJct inUle 
, discharge 'of his duty shall be pUIliShable with' lmpii~rm,.ent for r' a 
term which shall 'riot be less -than one year bu~ which ~y- extenq. t.o 
seven "yeats and shall also be liable to fine: .., ' , 
Provided that the court may, for any special reasons recorded in 
writing, unpose a sentence of imprisonment of less than one 'year . 
• • & ~ , " '. 
(2A) Where a sentence of fine is imposed under sub-section (2), . , 
the court, in fixing the amount of fine, shall take into consideratIon 
,the amount or value of the property which the accusedpeJ:~n has 
obtained :by committing the offericeofci'iminal miSconduct 'o~ \\There 
the conViction: Is based on the presumption undbr' stib-se.ctio~ '(3~, the 
pecuniary resources or property referred to In 'that sub-section for 
which the accused person is unable to account satisfact?ril~. 
" '. '. 
(3) In any trial of an o~ence punishable under su~section (2) 
the lact that the' accused person or any other person on his behalf is 
in possession, for which the accused person CaDDot satisfactorily 
accoi.ml," of pecuniarr resources or property disproportiona.te to hit! 
kDown sources of income may be proved, and on such proof the court 
shall presume, unless the contrary is proved, that the accused person 
is guil,~y of criminal misconduct in the disch8irge of his ofBcial duty , 
and hiS conviction iherefor shal) not be invalid by reason only that 
if is based. 'solely on such presumption . 
• • • • • • 
5A. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Inve&ti88tlOD 
Procedure, 1898, no police officer below the rank- ' into calel " ,UDder this 
(a) in the preSidency-towns of Madras and Calcutta, of _~ Act. 
Assistant Commissioner of Police, .' 
(6) in the pre~id~ncy-to~n of Bombay, of a SupEU'iAt~ndent 
of Police, una ' , ,'" .. ' 
(c) elsewhere, of a Deputy Superintendent of Police, 
s4IillJ investigate any offence punishable under section 161, ~~,io~, 169 
or section 160A of the Indian Penal Code or under 'sub~section: (2) of 
section 5 'of this Act, without the order of a Presiq~~~,~~~~M~,Rr 
a magistrate of the first class, as the case may be, or make any arrest 
therefor without a warrant: ' J; -
Provided that a police officer of the ~lhi Special Police ~,t~plish­
ment, not ,below the rank of ali Inspector of Pql1<;e" Wile) is.s~ally 
authorized by the Inspector-General of Police 'of that ~blishment 
L ",' 

~2 
may, if he has ~easons to believe that, on account of the deiay invoiv .. 
ed in obtaining the order of a magistrate of the first class, any valuable 
evidence relating to such offence is likely to be destroyed or conceal-
ed, investigate the offence without such order; but in every case 
where he makes such investigation, the police officer shall, as soon as 
may be, send a report of the same to a magistrate of the first class, 
together with the circumstances in which the investigatIon was made. 
s.. (1) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable 
under section 161 or section 164 or section 165 of the Indian Penal 
Previous 
aanctiOn 
JlCCClJary 
for prosecu-
tiOD. 
Code, or under sub-section (2) of section 5 of this Act, alleged to have 4.5 of 1860. 
been committed by" a public servant, except with the previous sanc-
tion,-
(a) in the case of a person who is employed in connection 
with the affairs of the Union end is not removable from his office 
save by or with the sanction of the Central Government, of the 
Central Government; 
• • • • • 
Acewed 7. Any person charged with an offence punishable under sec-
re on to tion 161 or section 165 or section 165A of the Indian Penal Code, or 4.5 of J860-
:::i:ss. under sub-section (2) of section 5 of this Act shall be a competent 
witness for the defence and may give evidence on oath in disproof of 
the charges made against him or any person charged together with 
him at the same trial: 
• • • • 
Statement by 8. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
bribe siver being in force, a stfltement made by a person in any proceeding against 
:~j: him a public servant for an offence under section 161 or section 165 of the 
t? prosccu-. Indian Penal Code, or under sub-section (2) of section 5 of this Act, 4.5 of 1860. 
tlOn. that he offered or agreed to offer any gratification (other than legal 
remuneration) or any valuable thing to the public servant, lJhall not 
subject such person to a prosecution under section 165A of the said 
Code. 
Power to 
apPOint 
.peclal 
Judges. 
• • • • • 
EXTRCAT FROM THE CRIMINAL LAw AMENDMENT Aer, 1952 
(46 OF 1952) 
• • • • • 
6. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the OfIlcfal 
Gazette, appoint as many special Judges as may be necessary for suCh 
area or areas as may be specified in the notification to try the follow-
ing offences, namely:-
(a) an offence punishable under section 161, section 162 
section 163, section 164, section 165 or section 165A of the India~ 
Penal Code or sub-section (2) of section 5 of the Prevention of 4.5 of 1860-
Corruption Act, 1947; 
• • • 
of 1941. 
• • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
funher to amend the Indian Panel Code, 1860, the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 18<}8, the Criminal Law (Amendment) 
0Idinana:, 1944, the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 
1946, the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 and the Criminal 
Law (Amendment) Act) 1952 • 
(ShriJai Sukh Lal Hathi. Minister of State in the Ministry 
of H~ Affairs.) 