IDK SABRA 
to 
THE TERRORIST AFFECIi::J.J JU{;:;.AS (S.PECIAL COURTS) BILL, 1984 
. [1'0 bolAs introduced in I.;a}:~3::;.bha 7 
1. Page 3, line 44,-
2. 
3. 
for "he" read "theft 
Pa g"'e'4-, line 1--:-!Q.r. "( 5) • " 
Page ~, line 3~,-
~ "5." 
for "sectior" read "section" 
4. Page~, line 36,-
for "sub-sectior" read "sub-section" 
5. Page 9, in the marginal heading to clause 21,-
for "Seving" read "Saving" 
, '. Page 9, line 36,-
"section" read. - "sections" 
7. Page 12, line 7,-
f.Q!. "thereat ened" ~ "threat ened" 
8. page 12, line 29,-
for "a" read "the" 
N.EW DELHI· , 
July 31 , 1984 
Sravana 9, 1906 (Saka) 

5 
As INTaoDUCED tN 1.01: ,S.WtA; 
r 
Biil No. '" of 191*4:' 
THE TERRORIST AFFECTED AREAS (SPECIAL COURTS) 
BILL,1984 
A. 
BILL 
10 pro:vide for the speedy trial of certain offences in terrorist afJected are49 and 
for motters connected therewith. 
BB it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic-o' 
India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Terrorist Affected Areas (Special 
Courts) Act, 1984. Short tfUe, 
extent ad 
. commence-
(2) It extends to the whole of India excePt the State of Jammu and Kashmir. ment. 
(3) It shall be deemed to have come iltto force on the 14tq day of July, 
1984. 

DeftnitiODS . 
• 
1)ec1ara-
tiOD of 
tWrorist 
·:.Jlfectea 
area. 
l. (1) In this ACl, unllS& the context otherwise requirCII,-
(a) "Code" means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; 
(b) "Hiah Court", in relation to a Special Court, means the Hlib 
Court within the territorial limits of whos~ jurisdiction such Special Court 
is proposed I.e be, or is, established; 
(c) "judicial zone" means a judicial zone constituted under sub-section 
(1) of section 3; ., 
(dJ "notilication" means a lluL.ilk:aliun published in the Official 
(.i~te; 
(e) "Public Prosel.:utol''' means a Public Prosecutor or an Additional 
• Public Proseculor or a Special Public Prosecutor appointed under secllon 9 
.. ud includes any person acting WIder, th~ directions of the Public Prosecutor; 
U) "scheduled ofr~nce" means all llll';l1Ce specified in the S..:iJedule 
btlin& aa oftcnce committed in a tefluIJ:,( 'aHc~lCd area; 
S 
10 
(8) "Special Courl'" means a Special Court or an Additional Special 
Court established under section 4; IS 
~h) "terrorist" means a person who indulges in wanton killmg of per-
s0ns or in violence or in the disrupllon of services or means of communica-
llOD$ essential to the CODlJDUnJty or jn damaging property with a view to--
(i) pulting the public or any seclion Of the public in fear; or 
(ii) afrccting adversely the harmony between different religious, 
racial, language or regional groups or castes or communities; or 
liij) coercing or overawing the Govcrnmeilt es.tablished by law; 
.OI 
(iv) endangering the sovereignty and integrity of India; 
(;) "terrorist afIt',cted area" means an area declared as a t~rrorist 
atfccted aJ'ea under section 3; 
(j) words and expressions used but not defined ill this /(ct and 
defined in the Code shall have the mcanin~ res.pectively assigned to them 
in the Code. 
(2) Any reference ill this Act to the Code or any provision thereof 
!>hall, III relation to an area in which the Culi.: or such provlsion is not ill force, 
be construed as a reference to the corcespouding law or the relevant provision 
of the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area. 
3r) 
a. (1) If the Central Government is of the opinion that offences of lhe nature 
bpecilicd in the Schedule are being committed in any area by terrorists on such a 35 
licale and· in such a manner that it is expedlent for the purpose of coping with 
the activities of such ter~orists to have recourse to the provisions ot this Act, 
it may, by notitic8tion,~ 
(a) declare such area to be a terrorisl affected area; and 
(b) constitute such area into a single jtl(Jicial ~Ollc or into as many 40 
• judicial zones as it may deem fit. 
2 ot 1974. 

a 
(2) A notification issued under su~section (J' in respect of an area shall 
specify the period during which the area shall, 'for the purposes of this Act, 
be a terrorist affected area, und where the Central Government is of the 
opinion that terrorists had been committing in that area, from a date earlier than 
5 the d it.: of issue of the noti/le,,; ion, offences of the nature specified in the Sche-
dule o;l;uch a scale and in su;:h a manner that it is expedient to commence tRc 
period specified in the notification from such earlier date, the period specifled 
in the notification may commence from that date: 
Provided that-
10 (a) no period commencing from a date earlier than six months from the 
date of publication of the notification shall he specified therein; and 
(b) so much of the period 'Specified in such notification as is 8ubsequest 
to the date of publication of the notification shall oot, in the first instance, 
exceed six months, ,but the Centra) Government may. by notification, eXteDd 
Ij such period from time to tilll..'! by any period not exceoohlg six months at 
~y one time, if the Central Government, havin.!:! re~ard to thl! activities 
of terrorists in such nrea, is of the opinion that it is expedient .so 10 dC'. 
EX/ilanation.--For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that th. 
period specified in a nqtification issued under this section may cQmmence froRt 
20 a. date enrlierthan the date nf commencement of thie; Act. 
4. (1) For the purpose of providing fot' speedy tr;J of scheduled oiellCeS 
committed in a judicial 7.one. the Central Go\'emment mIly r!d1lbJislt. h~ .oftfI-
cation. R' Special COUI1 in relation to such judicial zone-
(a) within such jndicial zooe; or 
(b) if the Central Govemment htnin~ ~ to the nieencies of the 
sltaatlon prevaiH01! in -oneh indicia' zO;ne considers it elOJiefJient so to do, at 
any place oufSide suet. ll'(Udal lone but within the State i. which mch 
Judicial zone is sltuatt'd. 
Kst ... 
lishmeat 
ot Spe-
cial 
Cctl .. rt'S. 
(2) Notwidlstandinp. anvthin'! co~talnect In sub-sedlon (1). if, h"Yint ~.rd ..-
3°' to tile edgencies of the sftul1tion ~1'8ilin~ in a ~. the StAte GOYP.l' .... eDt 
Is of the opinion that it is expedient to establish In relaflon to R iudfcW ZOIIe. 
Or In relatio.,.. to two or more tcuHciai zones. In the State, 8.n AdditIonal Special 
Court ontslde the State. for ~ trial of ~nch· deduled offences cOInmffted in! 
the j,.diriaJ zone Or jnd'cl9' .7fl1teS, the trilll whereof within fl1f' Stitte-- .... 
35 (a) Is not Dkely to h .. fair or fmpartl.' or cOtnpletect wfth afJnOst dis-
pafCh; or 
(b) is not likely to h(' feasible wif"o,,~ oc('AsionfA~ :l hreach of peace 
... or crave' risk to the safetv of die ~CC1Ised. the. witnf'sserl. tbe P .. blle 1Ii'ftlIe-
('utor and the Ju~e Or 'In\' of them: or ... .. .. . . . .. .. 
(c) Is IJC)t otherwist' ill the interests of i" .. tke. 
the State Government mav rl;',.ucst the Centml· r.ovemment fo ('sfabUsh ;'" reJ.a.-
don to spch Judicial lOne or iudici81 zone~ an Addtfional Spec'I'" Court oofs'. 
the State and thereopo.n the Cential Govemmellf may, alter ,,,lei"., intf) 8(,I'Onnt 
the infonuation '"mlshed bv he Sfatte Gowmment and making- snch in(,ufrv. 
111 " any. 8!i it may deem fit. t'fIfablfsh, hv nofIftcaflon. tn.ch Addlffon!1l Sueda' 
Court at sitch p11K'e outside the State AS ma~ h," specified in fhl" n"fIR~~thm·· . 

~ 
-Won 
aDd ap-
POint-
mentor 
Judi. of 
Special 
eourtl. 
t. 
... 
• 
(5).(1) A 8pedII Court ..... pre .... OV. 1t1 • J" to ............ 
., die o.tnI Got ...... wlOt tile collCUl'l'eaee at tile CIIId JUItke 01 .. 
..... c..t. 
(2) TIle c.na Govenuneat ... y also appoint, will the CODeIll'l-.c8 or .. 
QIeI JIIIdc:e or tile HIP Out, Additional Judges to exerdIe jarisdIdJcP.J ... S 
SpeeW ColD. 
(3) A person. shall not be quaHfied for appointment as 3 Judge or an Addi-
tional JOOp of a Special Court unless he is immediately before such appointment 
a Sessions Judge or an Additional Scssiom Judge in any State. 
(4) For the removal Of doubts, it is hereby provided that the attainment by 10 
a person, appointed 8!1 a Judge or an Additional Judge of a Special Court, of 
ale of suplerannuation under the rules applicable to him in the Service to wbich 
be belongs, shall not affect his continuance as !lucb Judge or Additional Judge. 
(S) Where any Additional Judge nr Additional Judges is. or are. appointed 
in a Special Court, the Judge of the Special Court may. from ti"me to time, by IS 
general or special order. in writing. provide for the distribution of business of 
the Special Coun among himself and the Additional Judge or Additional Judps 
. and also for the diBposaI fA urgent businells in the event ot his absence or the 
absence of any Additional Judge. 
'- A SpeciaJ Court may, if it considers it e~pecJient or desirable 80 to do, flO 
sit ft)r any of its proceedings at any place, other than the ordinary place of its 
,sitting, in the State in which it is establishec.l: 
Provided that if the Public ProSecutor certifies to the SpeCiAl Court that it 
is in his opinion necessary for the protection of the accused or any witness or 
otherwise expedient in the interests of justice that the whole or any part of tbe 2S 
trial should be held at some place other than the ordinary place elf its sitting. 
the s"ecial (bun may, after hearinl! the accused. make an order to that efreef 
unless, for reasons to be recorded in writfn!!. the Special Court thinks fit It) 
make any other order. 
7. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code or in any other law, 30 
a scheduled ofTence committed in a judicial ~one in a State at any time durin, 
the period during which such judicial zone is. or is part of, a terrori"t affected 
area sha11 be triable, whether duriD~ or after the expiry of such period, only 
by die Special Court established for such judicial zone in the State: 
. ·Provided that where the period specified under sub-section (2) of sectio, 35 
3 as the "eriod during which an area declared by notification under sub-sectiof. 
(1) of that section to be a terrorist affected area commences from a date earlier 
than the date on which such notification is issued. then-
(a) nothing in the for-eeroin/! J)rovisions of this flUb-seCtion Rhan ap"ly 
to a scheduled ofFence committed in such area in which the whole of the 40 
evidence for the prosecution has been taken before the date of issue of 
sucb notHication: and 
(b) aU other caSes invotvin~ scheduled offences committed in '~uch 
area and pendin~before any court immedi~telv before the date of i!l~ue 
of such notification sha11 stand transferred tn the St'lecial Court lmv:l'Ig 4S 
JorlscHcttoa under this section and the Special Coun to wbich such P.rn-
ceed"111JS stIDd transfen-ed shall proceed witl1 sudi ('rtllce; fmm the ~ta~e ::It 
wbicb tbey were pendin!! at that time. 

-.. '. 
"" \, .~ . . • 
i 
(2) Notwitb&tpdiDg anything contained in sub-section (1), if iB respect d. 
a case involving a scheduled offence committed in any judicial zone in a State, 
the Central Government, having regard to the provisi'ms of sub-section (2) of 
section 4 and the facts and circumstances or the case and an other relevaDt 
5 factors, is of the opinion that it is expedieDt that such offence shQuld be tried 
by the Additional Special Court established in relation. to such judicial zone 
outRide the State, the Central C:rOvernment may make a dectlration to that eifect: 
Provided that no such declaration shaH be made unless the State Govern-
ment has forwarded to the Central Government a report in writing cOntainbal 
10 a request for making of such d~laration. 
Explanatioll.-Where an AdditionaJ Special Court is establiUled in relation 
to two or more judicial zones. such Additional Special Court sball be deemed, 
for the po:rpoaes of this sulHection. to have been ~!ltab1ished in retation to 
ench of such tudicial zones. 
15' (3) A declaration made under sub-section (2) shall not he called in question 
in any court . 
. ,(4) Where any declaration ill made in respe~t of any offence committed in 
• judicial zone in a State. any 'Prose~ution in res~ct of such offence 'SbaU be 
;r."t1tutecl Gilly fa the Additional Special' Court established in retation to ~ 
~o ;udiclal zone outside tbe ~ate, and if any prosecution i" respect of such ,offence 
i~ pending Immediately before such declaration in any other court, the same 
'1han stand ~ to sucb Additional Special Court and such Additimal 
~pecia1 Court sban yft'oeeed witb sueh ca~e from the stage at whictl it wall! pending 
'at tlla time. 
2 ~ R. (1) When trying ~my ~('hedlJled offence. ~ Special C.ourt may also try 
. 'lnv offence otber than the ~cheduled offence- with which the accused may. nnder 
Jhe Code, be cbarged at the !lame tri:l1 if the offence h coinected with the 
~c.heduled offence. 
30' . '(2') If., in' the coune 0' any trial under this Act. it is Ifound dlat the 
IccuSedperSon has committed ::In" offt"nc!". the Special ("<'Urt m~v. whether RUcb 
ofrence is or io; not a scheduled offence. convio:"t such J)eT!lon of ~uch offence and 
pII~1l any !llentence authorised bv law for the Tmnic;hment thereof. 
9. (1) JI'Gr ewI"f SwtecW Court, tfte Cenfral ("..,....... shaD .ppot.t • 
perIIOIt to be tile ... bIIe PIGset.1Itor 8IItI IMV ...... nt ... or DI01"e perMB to 
35 1ft the AdtIItIomII PuMIc Pro~~utor or A"dldonal PubIk Pro!Jecut",,: 
Pn....... .... the CeDtnI GOftnmeaf ma, 8150 &ppnfnt for .. ~ ~ or 
cl-.s of cases a s,ed.t Pubic Pmlerufor. 
(2) A ners01'l II:ha11 be e1i~ible to be :mnointed as' a PuNic Prosecutor or an 
AdrHtional Public Proseclltor nr a· Sf'eciRl'PublicProsecutor under this section 
40 onlv if he ba"l been in practke as an Advocate for not less thaD !!even years or 
hac: held anv OOIlt. for It neriod of not les~ than srven years. under the Union or 
a !i;tate. requirinl! specinl knowled~e of law. 
(.1) Everv person "nPOinted ~r a Public Pror-::ecutor or an Additional Publi(' 
Pr~ecl1tor- or A ~cial Public Prl1c;ecutor under thi"l c;ectjon shan he d~ed to 
4' h~ a Publie Pro~ecutnr within the "''''!lIninl! I'lf elau!!e (u) of Clt'!et1on 2"' the CO'd~, 
nnd the prnvic:inn<: of th~ ("odl" <;h~l1 ho"e 't-ff.-ct J1ccimfh'~ty, ' 
Power of 
Special 
Ceurts 
with res-
peet to 
other of.. 
fenee •. 
Public 
Pl'ttoHCU-
tors, 

Preced-
ure and 
~of 
~ial 
Courts. 
Pow.rof 
SUpreme 
Court 
to traas-
fer case. 
Protec-
tion of 
wltaes-
lei. 
£(. .. E .• (. 
10. (1) A Special Court may take cognizance of any scheduled offeuce, 
without the accused being commjU'cd to it for trial, upon receiving a .complaint 
of facts which comtilule such offence or upon a police report of such facts. 
(2) Where a scheduled offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term 
not e~ceeding three years or with fine or with both, a S~ecjal Court ~y, not- , 
withstancling anything contained i 11 sub-section (1) of sr,ctton 260 or sectiOn 262 
of the Code, try the offence in a summary way in accordance with the procedure 
prescribed in the Code and the provisions of sections 263 to 265 of the COde, 
shall, so far as may be, npply to snch trial: 
Provided that when, in the course of a summary trial under this sub-section, 10 
it appears to the Special Court that the nature of the ca~ is such that it is un-
desirable to try it in a summary way, the Special Court shall recall any witnesses 
who may have been examined and proceed tore-hear the case in the IDJlRDcr 
provided by the provi~ions of the Code fer the trial of such offence and tbe said 
provisions shall apply to and in relation to a Special COUrt as they apply to and 15 
in relation to a Magi~trate: 
Provided further that in th~ case of any conviction in a summary trial under 
this section, it ~hall be Jawful for a Special Court to pass a sentence of imprisoa:.. 
ment for a term not exceeding two years. 
(3) A Special Court may, with a view to obtaining the evidence of aay person 2. 
supposed to have been directly or indirectly concerned in. or privy to. an ot!ence. 
tender a pardon to such pe)'!;On on condition of his making a fun and true cfis-
closure of the whole circumstances within his knowledge relative to the oIence 
and to every other person concerned whether as principal or abettor in the 
commission thereof. and any pardon So tendered shall, for the purposc!': of section 25 
30R of the Code. he deemed to have been tendered under section ~07 thereot. 
(4) Subject to the other ~rO\li5ions of this Act, . a Special Court shall. 
for the purpose of trial of any offence. nave all the !'lowers of a Cnurt nr SessfoJ1 
and shall try such offence as if it were a Court of ~ion 50 far a'l may he in 
accordance with the procedure prescribed in the Code for the trial before a CoUl't 30 
of Srssion. 
(5) Subiect to the other provisions of this Act. evet'V case hefora an 
Additional Special Court shall be dealt with as if such ca<>e had been tran*",ed 
under section 406 of the Code to such Additional Soecial Court. 
11, Whenever it is made to 3J)1'ear to the ~lI!'1reme Court that rift order under 3!\ 
thi~ section is expedient for the ends of justicc. it may direct that anv particubr 
ca!'\t' he transferred from one Special ("ourt to nnother Special Court. 
12 .. (]) NOtwtth'!;tandin!:' anythinl! contllined, in th~ Cocle. lllY "rocet.'ct.tn~ 
bofore a Special Court shall be conducted;n ('flml'ra: 
ProVided that where the Public Prosecutor so applie~. ~mv oroceedin~s or ~o 
pnrt thereof may be heM in open court. 
(2) A Special Court mav. nn an aoplication made bv a witness in any pro-
ceedinJ!'s -before it or by .the Publio PrMecntor in rellRtinn to S" ~h ",,jt",.~s or on jt~ 
OWD motion. tab such measures liS it de~ms fit for keel'i"~ th,. identitv and 
;l(l~res~ of the witn~1I !llCr'et, ".5 

•• 
(3) In partioular and without prejuaoe to th. iPneraHty 0( the provi6iGns 
of sllHec.tion (2), the mouuros wbM:b a Special Coun may tab ynder iliat 
sub-section Dl.IIy include-
(a') the holding of the proceeding5 a~ a protected place; 
5 (b) the avoidina of the mention of the names and addrCiSes of tile 
witnesses in its orders or judaments or in any records of the case 1LQ:leS. 
sihle to public; 
(c) the issuing of any directions for securing that the identity and 
addresses of the witnesses are not disclosed. 
10 ( 4) Any person who contravenes any direction issued under sub-section (2) 
shall be punishable WilimPriSOODient for a term which may extend to oae year 
and with fine which y extend to one thousand rupees. 
13. Where after takina co,nizance of any offence, a Special Court is of Power to 
opiBion that the offence js not a scheduled offence, it shall, notwithstandtas that transfer 
J 5 it has no jurisdiction to try such offence, tran&fer the case for trial of &uch offcoce cases t. 
to any court having jurisdiction under the Code and the court to which the case" r~lar 
is translerred may proceed with the trial of the offence ·as if it has taken coan i- courts. 
'tance of the offence. 
14. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, an appeal shal lie Appeal. 
20 as a matter of right from any judgment, sentence or order, not being interlocu-
tory order, of a Special Court to the Supreme Court both on facts and on law. 
(2) Except as aforesaid, no appeal or revision shall lie to any court frem 
any judgment, sentence or order of a Special Court. 
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period 01. 
25 thirty days from the date of the ;udsment, sentence or order appealed from: 
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry 
uf the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied tbat the appellant had sufficient 
cause for noL preferring the appeal within the period Of thirty days. 
15. (1) Notwithstanding.. anything contained in the Code or any other law, 
30 every scheduled offence shall be deemed to be a cognizable offence within the 
meaning of clause (c) of section 2 of the Code and "cognizable case" as defin-
ed in that clause shall be construed accordingly. 
Modified. 
applia8-
tio.n of 
certain 
pl'Dvi-
. (2) Section 167 of the Code shall apply in relation to a case involving a siodsof 
scheduled offence subject to the modifications that- the Code. 
35 
(a) the reference in sub-section (J) thereof to "Judicial Magistrate" 
shall be construed as.a reference to ;'Judicial Magistrate or Executive 
Magistrate"; 
(b) the references in sub-section (2) thereof to "fifteen days", "ninety 
days" and "sixty days", wherever they occur, shall be construed as refer-
ences Lo "thirty days", "one year" and "one year", respectively; and 
(c) sub-section (2A) thereof shall be deemed to have been omitted. 
(3) Sections 366 to 371 and section 392 Of the Code shall apply in relation 
to a case involving a scheduled offence subject to the modifications that the 
references to "Court of Session" and "Hi&h Court", wherever occurring therein, 
45 sball be cOlIsllUed as references to "Sp~ial Court" and "Supreme Court", 
respcctlve1y. 

... 
Overrld-
In,etfect 
of Aot. 
Dele,a-
tion. 
Pow.erto 
make 
rules. 
Savint. 
Amend-
meDtot. 
Act 1 of 
1872. 
Presump-
tion as to 
certaia 
otffmces 
8· 
. (4.) N0tlbiDa ill section 438 of dI, Code· ,hall app1y in roijWoA ~ lAy QUO 
mvolvlltj tile arrest of my pcrsoa OIl an accuaauQn 0( haviat committed I. AC-
duled oJfcace ill a terrorist atIectcd area. 
(5) Notwitbst4wJ.jna mything contained in the Code, no person accuaod of 
a scheduled offence shall, if in custody, be released on bailor on his own bond S 
unless-
(0) Ule Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the 
application fer such release, and 
(b) wbere the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the court 
is satisfied that there arc reasonable grounds for believiDi that he is not 10 
auilty of sllch offence arid that he is not likely to commit any otIence while 
on bail. 
(6) The limitations on granting of bail specified uAub-section (5) aro in 
addition to the limitations under the Code or any other law for the time. beinl 
in force on grantina of. bail. 
16. (1) The provisions of this ACl shall have effect notwithstandiog 
anythina contained in the Code or any other law, but saVe as expressly provided 
inthil Aot, the provisions of the Code snall, in so far as they are not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, apply to the proceedingt 
beforo a Special Court; and for the purpose of the said provisions of the Code, 
the Special Court shall be deemed to be a Court of Session. . 110 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions 
contained in sub·section (1), the provisions of sections 326 and 475 of the Code 
shall, as far as may be, apply to the proceedinjl! before a Special Court, and for 
this purpose any reference in those provisions to a Magistrate ,hall be construed 25 
as a reference to the Special Coun. 
17. The ~al Government may, by notification, deleg~te, subject to sudl 
conditions as may be specified, all or any of the powers exercisable by it Ullder 
this Act [except the power under sub-section (2) of section 4 and the . 
power under sub-section (2) of section 7] to the State Govemm~t. 30 
11. Tho Supreme Court may, by notification, make such fules, if any. as it 
may deem necessary for carrying out the ,purposes 01' this Act. 
19. (1) Nothing in this Act shall affect the jurisdiction cxetcisable 
by, or the procedure applicable to, any court or other authority under my law 
. rolatiDa to the naval, military or air forces or any other armed forc~ of the 35 
Union. 
(2) For the romoval of doubts, it is hereby declared that for the purposes of 
any such law as is referred to in sub-section (1), a Special Court shall be deemed 
to be a Court of ordinary criminal justice. 
20. In the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, after section 111, the followma 40 
section sball be inserted, namely:-
"lllA. (1) Where a person is accused of havmg committed any 
offence specified in sub-sectioo (2), in-
(a) uy area declared to be a disturbed area uadel' Illy enact-
IBent, for the time being in force, making provision for the iuppra-
.ion Of disorder and restoration and maintellance of Public ordet; or 45 

. ' 
... 
45 of 1860. 
43011860. 
'of 1'14. 
5 
10 
(b) say area iJ:l which there has been, over a period or more tbm 
ODe month, extensive disturbance of the public peace, . 
andt it is Ibown that such person .had been at a place in such area at a 
tUDe wilen Irearms or explosives were used at Ot from that place to attack 
.or reaiit the members of anYilrmed forces or the forces charied with the 
maintenance of public order actiag in the discharge of their duties, it sllalt 
be presumed, unless the contniry is shown, that such person had committed 
suell GtJ-ca, 
(2) The offences referred to in sub-section (1) are the following,' 
nameJy:-
(a) an offence under section 121, section I21A, section 122 or 
section 123 of the Indian Penal Code; , 
, (b) cd'minal compiracy or attempt to commit, or abotmnt of, 
an offence under section 122 or section 123 of the Indian Penal Code .... 
15 21. (1) The Terrorists Affected Areas (Special Courts) Ordinanc~ 1~84, Repeal and 
is hereby repealed. So?i.q. 
(2) NotMthstanding such reptJIll, anything dODe or any' aetiootaken :ulider 
the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the cor-
.. respeodbti provisionS' of this Act.' " , . 
TIlE SCHEDULE 
[See section 2 (f)] 
I . PARIT I-INDIAN PENAL CODE 
45011860.' 1. OfImces under the ron.wing provisions of the Indian 'Penal Code, 1-860:-
.. of 1114. 
--'l3 of 1885. 
(a) sections 121, 121A, 122, 123, 124 and 124A; 
25 " (b) ~qoDS 128, 129aad 130; 
35 
(c) scetions 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, U6, US and 140; 
sections IS3A and 153B; 
sections 189 and 190; 
sections 212, 216, 216A, 224, 225 and 225B; 
sections 295 and 295A~ 
··sections 302, 304 aDd 307~ 
,(4) ge9tions 308 and 326; 
(e) sections 332, 333, 342, 343, 344, 346, 347, 353; 863; 364 . 365 
BAd 367; 
sections 392, 393, 394, 395, 3~6, 397, 398, 399 and 436; 
.' r' r-, section 505, S06 and 507; 
r· .' ' PART n~ntE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884 
2. Offences uader the following provjsions of the Explosives Act, 1884:-
. < •. aectioD 9B. 
PItlT m-THE INDIAN TELEGRAPH ACT, 1'885 
3. Qftences under the toHowing provisions of the Indian Telegraph Act, 
18,8S:- - ' 
, . seCtIons 20 and 25. 

10 
'PAllT IV-~ lND1AN RAILWAYS Act, 1890 
4. Offences under the following provisions of the Indian Railways Act, 
lR90:-
sectiObs 126, 126A, 127 and 128. 
PART V-THE EX'PLOSrvE SUBSTANCES ACT, 1908 5 
5. Offences under the folJowing provisions of the Explosive SubstaDCeS Act, 
9 of 1880. 
1908:- soUa08. 
sections 3, 4, 5 and 6. 
PART VI-THE ARMs AJ:r, 1959 
. 
6. Offences under the following provisions of the Arms Act, 1959:- 10 54 01 1969. 
sections 25(1) excluding clause (b), 25(1A), 25(lB) excluding cla'*s 
(d), (e). (0, 26,' 27, 28 and 29. 
PAlt.T VII-TIft UNl.AWFUL ACTIVirI!! (PIt1!V!NTlON) ACT, 1961 
7. Offences under the following provisions of the UlIlawfui Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1967:- 15 37011987. 
sections 10, 11, 1~ and 13. 
PART VIII-THE ANn-HI.TACIONG ACT, 1981 
8. ~ences under the following provisions of the ADti-Hijacma Act, 1982:- 65 el 1982. 
5CCtions 4 and S. 
PART IX-THE SUPPaE9IION 01' UNLAWPUL AcTS AOAlNST SAPSTY 01' avn. 20 
AVIATION Am, 1982 
~. OtIences under the following provisionaot the Suppression of Unlawful 
Acts Against Safety of Ovil Avi~tion Act, 1982:-
sections 3 and 4. 
PART X-THE PREVENTION OP DAMA(;£ TO PuBLIC PROPERTY Ac:r, 1984 
10. Offences under the f('Uowing provisions ot the Prevention of Damap to 
Public Property Act, 1984:-
sections 3 and 4, 
68011982. 
s of 198 •• 
NOTE I.-An offence specified in item l(b) of Part I of this Schedule (that .50tl860 
is to aay, an oJ!eDce under section 128, 129 or 130 of the Indian Penal Code) 50 _. 
shall be deemed to be a scheduled offence only where such offeDce is com1Dltted 
in relation to a pri80Jler accused, charged or convicted of a scheduled offence. 
NOTE 2.-Ao offcnde specified in item 1 (d) of Part I of this Schedule (tha.1! 
is to say, an oflDnce UDder section 308 or section 326 of the Indian Penal Code) 
shall be deemed to bea scheduled offence ooly where such offence is committed 35 
with a InmD. 415 of 1860 • 
• NoTE 3.-'I'hc otlence of criminal conspiracy or attempt to commit, or abet-. 
meld CIf, an offen<:e specifled in this Schedule thalt be deemOd to be a IChtdolecI 
ofteDoe, 

11 
NOTI 4.-The coDlDlislion of an offC'41Ce specified in this Schedule by any 
membor of aD UDlawful assembly shall be deemed to be the commiuioo of that 
scheduJec:l offence by every other member of the unlawful as!lembly. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The law and order situation in certain parts of' the country has been 
disturbed because of the cominal activities of terrorists. They have been 
indulging in wanton killing of innocent persons, looting of properties, 
disrupting lines of communication and committing oth~r heinous crimes; 
on a scate and in a manner which have made the' life of the people in the 
affected area extremely difficult and 'have thereatened the security, and the 
territorial integrity of the country. In this situation proper and fair con-
duct of criminal trials had become very difficult. . The need was, therefore. 
felt. in the public interest, to estatJlish Special Courts for fair and speedy 
trial of offences. Concern was also expressed in the Parliament in this 
regard Since the Parliament was not in session and circumstances existed which 
rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action, the President on 
the 14th day of July. 1984 promulgated the Terrorist Affected Areas 
(Special Courts) Ordindnce, 1984 (9 of 1984). 
2. The Qrdinance. in/c'r aUa, seeks 10:-
(i) define "terrorist" as a person who, with a view to putting the 
public or any section' thereof in fear or adversely affecting the harmOny 
between different religious, racial, language or regional groups OIl 
castes or communitieis or' coercing or overawing the Government or' 
endan~ring the sovereignty and integrity of India, indulges in wanton 
killing of persons or in violence or in disroption of services or means 
of communications essential to the community or in damaging pro-
perty; 
(ii) empower the Central Government to declare an area to be-
a terrorist aff~ted area and to constitute such area into a single 
judicial zone or into as many judicia) zones as it may deem fit: 
(i;i)' empower the Central Government to establish Special 
Courts in re1ation to a judicial zones inside or outside the State; 
(iv) empower the Central Government to appoint Judges of 
Special Courts and Additional Special Courts with the concurrence 
of t~e Chief Justice of the High Court; ,. 
(v) prohibit grant of anticipatory batt in cases involving speci-
fied offences committed in terrorist affected areas and to make the 
grant of bail in respect of specified offences stringent; 
(vi) enhance the maximum limit of periOd of remand in police 
custody from 15 days· to 30 days'; 
(vii) provide for appeal against any judgment, sentence ()I' 
order of a Special Court to the Supreme Court. -. ' 
The OrdinaDcealso amended the Indian Evidence_Act, 1872 fOr 
including therein a new section 111 A to Provide for raisinp; of a presump-
tiDIl a.'l to the offellce of waging war against the State and related offences. 
12 

13 
The presumption under the section can 'be raised only in the C,8Se of a 
person accused of having commit,ted any such offence in a disturbed area. 
further, it must also be shown that such person hEl.d been at a place in 
such area at a time when firearms or explosives were used at or from that 
place to ~ack or resist the. member of any Armed Forces or the Forces 
charged with the maintenance of public order acting· in the discharge of 
their duties. ' 
4. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance . 
• Nsw DELHI; P. V. NARASIMHA RAO. 
The 25th JuZy, 1984 . 
• 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Special Courts 
by the Central Government, in relation to the judicial zones constituted 
under 8ub-clause (1) of claUSe 3 of the Bill. Clause 5 of the Bill provides 
for the appointments of the Judges and Additional Judges of the Special 
Courts. Clause 9 of the Bill provides for the appointments of the Public' 
Prosecutors, Additional Public ProsecutOI'!l and Special Public Prosecutors 
by the Central Government. • 
The expenditures towards setting up of the Special Courts and 
towards salaries and allowances of the Judges, the Public Prosecutors and 
staft' will be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund ot India. The l1kely 
expenditure for each Special Court and on the salaries and allowances 
of tlie Judges, Public Prosecutors! Additional Public Prosecutors, staff, 
etc., over a period of six months is expected to be about rupees 3.57 lakhs. 
out of which rupees 1.72 lakho; will be of a recurrfng nature and rupees 
1.85 lakhs of a non-recurring nature. A3 it is not possible at this stage 
to visualise the number of such Courts that may have to be established, 
it is not poasible to give an estimate ot the actual expenditure that may 
have to be incurred in this behalf. 

MEMORANDUM REGARD;ING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
aause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to delegate 
to the State Government, by notification, all or any of the powers exercis-
able by it except the powers under sulH:lause (2) of clause 4 and the 
.power under sub-clause (2) of clause 7 of the Bill. 
Clause 18 of the Btll empowers the Supreme Court to frame rules, as 
it deems necessary, for carrying out the purposes of the Act. 
The delegation of Legislative power is of a normal character . 
.., 
15 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the speedy trial of certain offences in terrorist aftected areas and 
for matters CODDected therewith. 
---
(Shrl p. V. NarArimha RtID. 
Mini1M' of Ho~ Allairs.) 