10f lNG. 
2101 JUO. 
Ie 
15 
~ . I 
10 
'. As INTRODUCED IN Lolt SABIIA OW 
Bill No. 67 of 1982 
- ---
THE LAND ACQUISITION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1982 
A 
r BILL 
further to amend the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. 
Bm it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, Short 
1982. title. 
Z. In sub-section (2) of section 1 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894-
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Actr. for the words, figures and 
lettens "the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 
19156, were comprised in Part B Stat~; and", the words "the State of 
Jammu and' Kashmir." shall be substituted. 
3. In section 3 of the principal Act,-
(a) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
C (aa) the expression "local authority" includes 'a town 
planning authority (by whatever name called) set up under 
any law for the time being in force;'; 
(b) after clause (c), the follOwing clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(cc) the expression "corporation owned or controlled by 
the State" means anv body corporate established bv Or under a 
Central, Provincial ~r State Act, and includes a . Government 
company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956, 
and a society registered under the Societies Registration Act. 
1860, being a society established 01 administered bv Govern-
ment;'; 
Amend-
ment of 
section 1. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 3. 

,...... ..... 
.. 
(c) for clause (e), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
'(e) the expression "company" means--
(i) a company as defined in section 3 of the Companies 
Act, 1956, other than a Government company referred to 5 . 1 of 1958. 
in clause (cc); 
(ii) a society registered under the Societies Registra. 
tion Act, 1860, other than a society referred to. in clause 
(ee) ; 
(iii) a co.operative society within the meaning. of any 10 
law relating to co·operative societies for the time being in 
force in any State;'; 
(d) for clause (f), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
• (I> the expression "public purpose" includes-
(i) the provision of village.sites, or the extension, 
planned development or improvement of existing village. 
sites; 
(ii) the provision of land for town or rural planning; 
(iii) the provision of land for planned development 20 
of land from public funds in pursuance of any scheme 
"1' <polic~ of Gover,~en,t anci ~9se~u~t d~sposal 'thereof 
in whole or in part by lease, a8signment or outright sale with 
the object of securing further development as pl~ed; 
(iv) the provision of land for a corporation owned or 25 
controlled ,by the State; 
(v) the provision of land for residential purposes <to the 
poor ,or landless or to persons residing in areas a¢~,tea by 
natural ,callWit:es, or to persons <ii~placed or~~ted by 
reasc)O of the implementation of any scheme u~dertaken by 30 
Government, any local 3~thority or 3 corp"rntion oWg.~~ or 
controlled by the State; 
(vi) the provision ,of land fQr cat:rying out ,8l\v edu-
cational, housing, health or slum clearance scheme sponsor· 
ed by Government or by any authority established bv Gov· 35 
ernment for carryin~ out any such scheme, or, with the 
'prior approval Qf th ~ appl'opriate Gove.t;nment, by a local 
authority, or a $ociety registere:l under the S1cieties 
21 of 1880. 
Registration Act, 11160. Qr a co.-operative society within ~he 21 crt 1860. 
meaning of any J,aw relating to co-operative .societies for 40 
the time being in force in any State; 
(mi) the provison Qf lalld for a~'y other 
development .spons(~~ by Govemm~nt, or, 
prior ~ppr.oval ;Qf th~ appropriate a"vernm,e.at, 
authority; 
scheme of 
with the 
by a local 
(viii) the provision of any premis~s orbuiJd:ng for 
locating 8 public office 
but doe::; not indud(' acquisition of land for companiet'l;'; 
45 

14 of 1882. 
G.of 1908. 
1 of 198" 
r-, ,.-
5 
.; 
(.) in clause (g), in the proviso, in clause (iii), for the word. 
a~R_ ~ , '~,Chapter,.~ of the Code o,f Civil Pr~ure", the 
words and figures "Order XXXII of the First Schedule to the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908" shall be substituted. 
4. In sub-section (1) of section 4 of the principal Act,-
(a) after the words "any public purpose", the words "or for a 
Company" shall be inserted; 
(b) after the words "O~cial Gazette", the words and brackets 
"and in two daily neW\;papers circulating in th;at l~~ity of which at 
10 l~ast one shall be in the regional langl,lage (the date of publication, 
or, as the case may be, the last of the dates of tnJblicati04, "f the 
notification in the Ofticfa1 Gazette and in the two daHy newspapers, 
being hereinafter referred to as the date of the publication of the 
notification) II shall be inserted. 
15 ~. In section 5A of the principal Act,-
Amend-
ment of 
aection 4. 
Amend-
mental 
section 
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "within thirty days after SA. 
the issue of the notification", the words "within thirty days from the 
date of the publication of the notification" shall be substitute.d; 
(b) in sub-section (2), ~or the words "either in person", the 
2'0 words "in person or by any Person authorised by him 1n thj'~ behalf" 
shall be substituted . 
so 
35 
. 
6. In section 6 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1),-
(i) for the first proviso, the following proviso shall be subl-
tituted, namely:-
"Provided that no declaration in respect of -.oy ~~ular 
land covered by a notification under section 4, sub-section 
0),-
(i) published aiter the commenc~t, Qf the Land 
Acquisition (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 
196'7, but before the commencement of the Land Acqui.l~ 
tiOn (Amendinent) Act, 198i, shall be made atter the 
expiry of three years from the date of the publication 
of such notificationj or 
(ii) published after the commencement of the Land 
Acquisition (Amendment) Act., 1982, shall be made, ~ftsr 
the expiry of one year from the date of the publ~c:ation 
of such notification: "; 
~ 
menta 
..... & 

Amend_ 
ment of 
section 9. 
Insertioll 
of new 
section 
llA. 
Period. 
withia' . 
whD:h: ,. 
an -a1J8,tCt--
ahall be 
made. 
(ii) the following Explanations shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:-
"Explana.ticm 1.-In computing any of the periods referred 
to in the first proviso, the period during which any action or 
proceeding to be taken in pursuance of the notification issued 5 
under section 4, sub-section (1), is stayed by an order of a 
Court shall be excluded. 
Explanation 2.-Where the compensation to be awarded 
for su~h property is to be paid out of the funds of a corpora-
tion owned or controlled by the State, such compensation 10 
shall be deemed to be compensation paid out Of public 
revenues."; 
(b) in sub-section (2), after the words "Official Gazette", the 
words and brackets "and in two daily newspapers cirC1i'lating in the 
locality in which the land is situate of which one shall be in the 15 
regional language (the date of such publication, or, as the case 
may be. the last of the dates of such publication, in the Oftlcial 
Gazette and in the two daily newspapers, being hereinafter refer-
red to as the date of the publication of the declaration) 'J shall be 
inserted. 
7. In section 9 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the words 
and figures "registered under Part III of the Indian Post Office Act. 
1866", the words and figures "registered under sections 28 and 29 of the 
Indian Post Office Act, 1898" shall be substituted. 
8, After section 11 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 15 
inserted, namely:-
U11A. (1) The Collector shall make an award under section 11 
within a periOd of two years from the date of the publication of the 
declaration: 
Provided that the Collector may, with the previous approval SO 
of the appropriate Government and for reasons to be recorded 
in writing, make his award after the expiry of the said period 
of two years. 
ExpkmatiOn.-In computing the period of two years referred 
to in this sub-section, the period during which any action or proceed- 15 
ing to be taken in pursuance of the said declaration is stayed by an 
order of a Court shall be excluded. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Bub-section (1), 
the failure on the part of the Collector to make an award within 
the period of two y~ars referred to jn that sub-section or to obtain IJO 
the previous approval referred to in the proviso to that sub-aection 
shall not affect the validity of any action taken by way. of, or in 
pursuance of, the enquiry by the Collector, but as soon as may be 
after any such failure takes place, the Collector shall forward to 
the appropriate GovernIllent a special report explaining the cir" ~S 
cumstances in which any'such failure occurred and act in accordance 
with such directions as that Government may, after considering 
th. special report, issue.". 

5 
t. After section 12 of the principal Act, the following section ~hall be 
1naerted. namely:-
"12A. (1) The Collector may, at any time but not later than six 
months from the date of the award, or where he has been required 
under section 18 to make a reference to the Court, before the making 
of such reference, by order, correct any clerical or arithmetical mis-
takes in the award or errors arising therein either on his own motion 
or on the application of any Qerson interested or a local authority: 
Provided that no correction which is likely to prejudicially 
10 affect any person shall be made unl~ss such person has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of making a representation in the matter. 
15 
(2) The Collector shall give immediate notice of any correction 
made in the award to all the persons interested. 
(3) Where any excess amount is proved to have been paid to 
any person as a result of the correction made under sub-section (1), 
the excess amount so paid shall be liable to be refunded and in the 
case of any default or refusal to pay, the same may be recovered as 
an arrear of land revenue.". 
10. In section 14 of the Qrincipal Act, for the words "Code of Civil 
14 of 1882. 20 Procedure", the words and figures "Code of Civil Procedure, 1908" shall 
I of 1". be aubstituted. 
.' 
11. In section 17 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "take possession of any 
waste or arable land needed for public purposes or for a Company", 
the words "take possession of any land needed for a public purpose" 
Ihall be subltituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), after the words "access to any such 
station,", the worcls "or the appropriate Government considers it 
necessary to acquire the immediate possession of any land for the 
purpose of maintaining any structure or system "ertaining to irriga-
tion, water supply, arainage, road communication or electricity," shalJ 
be inserted; 
(c) after sub-section (3). the following sl1b-sections shall be 
in.erted, namely:-
.Insert1oa 
0'1 new 
section 
12A. 
Correc-
tion of 
clerical 
elTOl'6, 
etc. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
14. 
Amend-
ment of 
eecUoa 
1'1. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
18. 
~­
mea~ :9f sectiou 
19. 
Amend-
ment of 
aectiOD 
23. 
Amend,.. 
blentOif 
tection~. 
!. t ., 
,. (3A) Where the Collector has taken possession of any lanel 
under sutrsection (1) or sub-section. (2). he shall, .witbout pre-
judice to the provisions of sUb-section (3), after to the pefIGnt 
entitled to compensation eighty per centum of the compfllsation 
for such land as estimated by him. 
(38) The amount, if any, paid under sub-section (3.i) shall 
be taken into account br determining the amount of compensa-
tion required to be tendered under section 31, and wtere the 
amount so paid exceeds the compensation awarded by the Collec-
tor under section 11. the excess may, unless refunded within 
three months from the date of the Collector's award, be recovered JO 
as an arrear of land revenue."; 
(d) in sub-section (4), for the words "after the ?ublication of the 
notification", the words "after the date of the publication of the 
notification" shall be substituted. . I~) 
12. In section 18 of the principal Act,-
(a) after sub-section (1). the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(lA) In the case of an award with respect to any land 
acquired with a view to its being transferred to or placed at the 20 
disposal of a local authority, the local authority may, if it eonsi-
ders that the amount of the compensation allowed by the awarn 
under section 11 to be exceSSive, by written application to the 
Collector, require that the matter be referred to the Court for the 
determination of the amount of compensation."; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "The an.plication", the 
words, brackets, figures and letter "An application under sub-eeetiort 
(11) or sub-section (lA)" shall be substituted. 
13. In section 19 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),-
(~) in clause (c), the word "and" occurring at the end shall be 30 
omitted; 
(b) after clauae (c). the fol1owing clause shall be iftterted, 
nsmely:-
II (ee) the amount, if any, paid under sub-section (SA) of 
Hedon 17; and". 95 
.It In 8UH6etioa (2) of sectioe 23 of tho J.tr~i&aa1 A.d, tor .~. words 
...n..a per eeatum". the words "thirty per centum'; shall be substituted. 
15. In section 24 of the principal Act,-
(4) iJl clause sixthly. the word "or" occurring at the end shall 
~ oriiltie:d;_ 
,. 

.- ., 
(b) in clause s.eventhty, the word "or" shall be inserted at the 
end, and after the d~use as so amended, the following clause shaU 
be if'serted, namely:--
"eighthly, any increase to the value of the land on acc<..unt 
of its being put to any use which is forbidden by law or oppos<:!d 
to public policy,". 
16. In section 25 of the principal Act,-
(a) the brackets and figure" (1)" occurring at the beginning ahall 
be omitted; 
Ie (b) s.ub-sections (2) and (3) shall be omitted. 
1.1. ~ ~.i.~~ ~ ~f ,the ~qp~ Act •. f~r :~~e words '~Iixper centum". 
the words "nine I*' .cent.~" shall be $uJlstituted. 
18. In section 34 of the principal Act.-
(a) for the words "six per centum" .. the words "nine per 
centum" s~alJ be substituted; 
(b) the following proviso shall be insert~d at the end, namely:-
'~PJ:oqv,i4ed that if .sucheom.peDs~tiop Or any ,part thQl'eof is 
not paid or deposited within a "e~ .Qf olle yeP' from :tl1e,date 
on which possession is taken. interest at the rate of flfteen per 
~ ceQtum . per .ap,num IIhfill ~be payable from the ,t,.te of eQiry of 
.thes,.i~ Reriod of one yefll' en the .amount of com~nsation or 
U8I't ;t'~reofwhkh ,bas not .b~n paid or 4epO!fited before such 
d~te.". 
e. ·Section 88 of the prinoipal Act shall be omitted. 
25 20. In section 33A of the principal Act. for the words, figlltes and letter 
"sectiom 5A. 6, 7, 17 and 50", the words. figures and letter "sections 4, 
5A, r6. 7 and SO" shaH be substituted. 
2rl. ,In secLion 39 of the principal Act,-
(a) for t"e worcts, figures and brackets "sections 6 to:rr (both 
inclusive) ". the words, figures and brackets "sections 6 to 16 (both 
inclusive) 'and sectionc:; 18 to 37 (both inclusive)" Shall be substituted; 
(b) after the words "for any Company", the words "under 
this Part" shan be inserted. 
22. In section 40 of the princiQal Act, jn sltb.sect~Qn (3), for .the words 
14 of 1882. 35 "Code of Civil Procedure", the words and figures "Code.df Civil Pro-
S of 1908. cedure. 1908" shall he substituted. 
140t 1866. 
Ii of 1898. 
23. In sub-section (3) of section 45 of the principal Act, in the pro-
Viso. for the word~ and figures "registered under Part III of the Indian 
P('ls1 Office Act. 1866". the words and figures "registered under section!' 
40 28 and 2~ of the Indian Post Office Act. 1898" shall be substituted. 
Amend-
mentof 
faction 
25. 
Amend-
mentof 
!'ec:tion 
28. 
Anaend-
ment of 
~tion' 
34. 
oma. 
~ion of 
~'ection 
38. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
38A. 
Amend-
ment ot 
section 
39, 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
40. 
Amend-
ment ot 
~ect'on 
4~ 

Amend-
mentot 
sectiu 
4t, ," ..... 
Amend-
ment or 
section 
50 .. 
lneertion 
of new 
section 
51A. 
Accep-
tance of 
certUled 
eopy as 
evidence. 
Amend,.. 
menior 
section 
53. 
Amend-
ment of 
action 
55. 
Transi-
tional 
provi-
,;ionll. 
.. 
,". .- ,~. 
.... ,..... 8 
24. In section 46 of the principal Act, for the words "not exceeding 
one month, or to fine not exceeding fifty rupees", the words "not exceed-
ing six months. or to fine not exceeding fiye hundred rupees" _mall be 
substitut~d . 
ZS. In sub-section (2) of section 50 of the principal Act, in the proviso, 5 
the words "local authority or" shall be omitted. 
26. After section 51 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted. namely:-
"5IA. In any (lroceeding under this Act, 8 certified copy of a 
document registered under the Registration Act, 1908, includipg a 10 1e of 1908. 
copy given under section 57 of that Act, may be accepted as evidence 
of the transaction recorden in such document.". 
27. In section 53 of the principal Act. for the words "Code of Civil 
Procedure". the words and figures "Code of Civil Procedure, 1908" shall 
be substituted. 
28. In sub-section (1) of section 55 of the principal Act, in the second 
prnviso, for the words "before the expiry of the session in which it is so 
laid or the successive sessions aforesaid", the words "before the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
15 
afnresaid" shall be substituted. 20 
29. (1) The provisions of sub-section (2) of section 23 and section 28 
of the principal Act, RS amended by secti~ 14 and 17 of this Act res-
pectively. shall apply and shall be deemed to have applied also to: and 
in relation to any award mane by the Collector or Court under the ;;:>ro-
visions of the principal Act after th':! date of introduction of the Land 25 
Acquisition (_\mendment) Bill, 1982, in the House of the People and be-
1'ore the commencement of this Act. 
(2) The provisions of section 34 of the principal Act, &s amended by 
section 18 of this Act shall apply and shall be deogmed to have applied 
olso to and in relation to- 30 
(a) every case in which possession of any land acquired under 
the principal Act had been taken before the date of introduction of the 
Lann Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 1982, in the House of the People 
and the amount of compensation for such acquisition had not been 
paid or deposited under section 31 of the :orincipal Act until such 35 
date. with effect on and from that date; and . 
(b) every case in which such possession has been taken on or 
after that date but before the commencement of this Act without the 
amount of compensation having been "aid or d'=!posited under the 
said section 31, with effect on and from the date of taking such 40 
possession. 
, ,. . 
--
14 of 1882. 
5 ot 1908, 

STATEMENT OF 'OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The State's role in promoting public welfare and economic develop-
ment has increased significantly since indepl.!ndence. Consequently, the 
State has had to acquire land on a much larger scale. While this is inevi-
table with the increase in the State's responsibility, it has to be ensured 
that the process of acquisition is imbued with consideration for the citizen 
who loses his land and who not infrequently subsists mainly, if not 
entirely, on it. Again, acquisition of landfor private enterprises ought 
not to be on the samt;! footing as acquisition· for the State or for an 
enterprise of the State; while such acquisition may at times be in the 
public interest, it should be subject to rigorous sCl'Utiny and, in any case, 
should not lead to divesting of land without prior payment of compen-
satinn. Keeping the above objects in view and considering the recom-
mendations of the Land Acquisition Review Committee which suggested 
some modifications in the scheme of the LRnd Acquisition Act, 1894, cer-
tain amendments to the Act have .been formulated. The Bill, among 
other things, seeks to amend the Act to give effect to the folloWing pro-
posals, namely:-
(i) The definition of "public purp·ose" as contained in the Act 
is proposed to be amended to include a longer illustrative list. 
retaining, at the same time, the inclusive character of the definition. 
(ii) Acquiosition of land for non-Government companies under 
the Act should henceforth be made in pursuance of Part VII of 
the Act in all cases. . 
(iii) It is proposed to provide for a. period of two years within 
which the Collector should ordinarily make his award under the Act. 
He has also been empowered to correct clerical or arithmetical 
mistakes in the award within a certain period from the date of the 
award. 
(iv) The circumstances under which the Collector could take 
possession of the land be'fore the award is made in urgent cases are 
being enlarged to include maintenance of road communication, irri-
gation, water supply and electricity. It is also proposed to provide 
that in cases of acquisition on an urgent basis, the Collector will 
tender an on-account payment of compensation representing 80 per 
cent. of the estimated compensation. 
(v) The solatium of 15 per cent. of the market value of the land 
acquired, which is payable in consideration of the compulsory nature 
of the acquisition, is proposed to be increased to 30 per cent. This rate 
has remained unchanged since the commencement of the Act in 1894. 
LikeWise, the rates of interest payable on the eXcess compensation 
awarded by the:! Court and on the cornnensation in cases where nOs-
sessj<>n of the land is taken before p~yment of compensation· are 
proposed to be increased from 6 per cent. to 9 per cent. 
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects and to make some other 
consequential and clarificatory amendments in the Act. 
NEW DELHI; RAO BIRENDRA SINGH. 
'I'he 1st April, 1982. 
9 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 14 of the .Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 2S 
of the; Land Acquisition Act, 1894, so as to increase the solatium of 1'5% 
of the muket value of the land acquired to be given in considera~ioh 
of the .'Wmpulsory nature of the acquisition to 30%. 
. 2. Clause 17 of the Bill proposes to amend section 28 of the Act to 
increase the rate of interest specified in that section for p~yment on the 
. excess of the amount 01 compensation which should have been awarded 
'by the Collector from 6% to 9%. 
3. Clause 18 of the Bill, which seeks to amend section 34 of the. Act, 
proposes to increase the rate of interest which is payable on the compen-
sation in cases where possession of .the land is taken before payment of 
the compensation or its deposit in court from 6% to 9%. It is also propos-
ed that where such compensation is not paid within one yea:rof so ,taking 
pOssession of the lann, the. rate of interest will increase to 15% per 
annum for the period ineJreess of one year. 
4. The above increase in the rates of payment of solatium and interest 
will involve additional expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India 
in cases where, land is acquJred for purposes of the Union. Since such 
acquisition is made as an(j when necessary and the additional liability 
on, account of, the increase in the above rates will vary from case to case, 
it, is not possible to estimate precisely the additional expenditure that is 
likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
5. The Bill, if enacted, is not likely to involve any other :r~urrin. or 
non-recurring expenditure. 
. 10 

6 of 1882. 
21 of 1860. 
2 of 1912. 
.. 
1. (1) 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE LAND ACQUISITION ACT, 1894 
(1 OF 1894) 
• • • • • • • • 
'I 
• 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the territories which, 
immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprieed in..Part B 
States; and 
• • • • • 
Short 
title, 
extent 
and com-
mence-
ment. 
3. In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or Peftni-
context,- tiona. 
• • • • • 
(e) the expression "Company" means a Company registered 
under the Indian Companies Act, 1882, or under the (English) Com-
pani~s Acts, 1862 to 1890, or Jncorporated by an Act of Parliament 
of the United Kingdom, or by art Indian law, or by Royal Charter 
or Letters Patent and includes a society registered under' the-
Societies Registration Act,' 1860, and _a registered society withtrl':the':1 
meaning of the Co-operative Societi~ Act, 19!12 or 'any other law '. 
relating to co-operative societies for the time being in force'Jn any 
State; 
• • • • • 
(f) the expression "public purpose" includes the provision of 
village-sites in districts in which the appropriate Government shall 
have declared by notification in the Official Gazette that it is custo-
mary for the Government to make such provision;' and' 
(g) the following persons shall be deemed persons "entitled'to 
act" as and to the extent hereinafter provided (that is to 8ay):""-
trustees for other persons beneficially interested shall be 
deemed the persons entitled. to act with reference to any such 
case, and that to the same extent as the persons beneficiany 
interested could have-~ted if free from disability; 
a married woman, in cases to which the English law is apPU"," , 
cable, shall be deemed the person sO entitled to act, and whether·· 
of full age or not, to the same extent as if she were unmarried 
and of full age; and 
the guardians of miMrs and the committees'or matiagers of 
lunlltics or idiots shall be deemed 'respectively the persons' so 
entitled to act, to the same extent as the minors, lunatics or 
idiots themselves, if free from disability, could have acted: 
II 

Publica-
tion Of 
prelimi-
narynoti-
ftcation 
and 
powers 
of ofticers 
thereupon. 
Hearing 
of objec.- ' 
tionS. 
12 
Provided that-
(i) no person shall be deemed "entitled to act" whose 
interest in the subject-matter shall be shown to the satisfaction 
of the Collector or Court to be adverse to the interest of the 
person intere;ted for whom he would otherwise be entitled to 
act; 
(ii) in every such case the person interested ~ay appear by 
a next friend, or, in default of his appearance by a next friend, 
the Collector or Court, as the case may be, shall appoint a 
guardian for the c~se to act on his behalf in tne conduct thereof; 
(iii) the prvvisions of Chapter XXXI ot the Code of Civil 
Procedure shall, mutatis mutandiS, apply in the case of persons l' ot 1882. 
interested appearing before a Collector or' Court by a next 
friend, cr by a guardian for the case, in proceedings under this 
Act; and 
(iv) no person. "enti~led to act" shall be competent to 
receive the compensation-money payable to the person for 
whom he is entitled to act unless he would have been competent 
to alienate the land and receive and give a good discharge for 
the purchase-money on a voluntary sale . 
• * * ... III 
4. (1) Whenever it appears to the appropriate Government that land 
in any locality is needed or is likely to be needed for any public pur-
pose, a 1;\otification to that effect shall be published in the Official Gazette, 
and the Collector shall cause public notice of the substance of such 
notification to be given at convenient places in the said locality. 
* • * 
III ... 
SA, (1) Any person interested in any land which has been notified 
unrler section 4, sub-section (1), as being needed or likely to be needed 
for a public p'urpose or for a Company may, within thirty days after 
the issue o'f the notification, object to the acquisition of the land or of 
any -land in the locality, as the case may be. 
(2) Every objection under sUb-section (1) shall be made to the Col-
lector in writing, and the Collector shall give the objector an opportunity 
of being heard either' in person or by pleader and shall, after hearing 
all such objections and after making such further inquiry, if any, as he 
thinks necessary, either make a report in respect of the land which hal 
been notified under section 4, sub-section (1), or make different reports 
tn respect of different parcels of _such land, to the appropriate Govern-
ment, containing his recommendations on the objections, together with 
the record of the proceedings held by him. for the decision of that Gov-
ernment. The decision of the appropriate Government on the objections . 
shall be final. 
• • • • • 

e. (1) Subject to the provisions of Part VII df this A.ct, when the Declara-
appropriate GovernmenJ; is' satisfied, after considering the report, if any, tion tha.t 
made under section 5A, sub-section (2), that any particular land is land.is d . . h require needed for a public purpose, or for a Company, a declaratIOn s all be for a pub_ 
made to that effect under the signature of a Secretary to such Govern- lie pur-
ment or of some officer duly authorized to certify its orders, and different pose. 
declarations may be made from time to time in respect of different 
parcels of any land covered by the same notification under section 4, 
suh-section ·(1), irrespective of whether one report or diffEll"ent reports 
hIlS or have been made (wherever required) under section 5A, sub-
section (2): 
Provided that no declaration in respect of any particular land 
covered by a notification under section 4, sub-section (1), published 
after the commencement of the Land Acquisition (Amendment and 
1 of 1967. Validation) Ordinance, 1967, shall be made after the expiry of three 
years from the date of such publication: 
l"of 1882. 
Provided further that no su~h declaration shall be made unless the . . 
compensation to be awarded for such property is to be paid by a Com-
pany, or wholly or partly out of public revenues or some fund controlled 
or managed by a local authority. 
(2) Every declaration shall be published in the Official Gazette, and 
shall state the district or other territorial division in which the land is 
situate, the purpose for whiCh it is needed, its approximate area, and, 
where a plan shall have been made of the land, the place where such 
plan may be inspected. 
• '" '" '" '" 
9. (1) • '" '" '" '" Notice to 
. persons (4) In case any person so interested reSIdes elsewhere,_and has no ir*rested. 
such agent, the notice shall be sent to him by post in a letter addressed 
to him at his last known residence, address or place of business and 
registered under Part III of the Indian Post Office A~t, 1866. 
• '" '" '" '" 
14. For the purpose of enquiries under this Act the Collector shall Power to 
have power to summon and enforce the attendance of witnesses, includ- sununon 
ing the parties interested or any of them, and to compel the production and 
of documents by the same means, and (so far 86 may be) in the same enforce 
manner, as is provided in the case of a Civil Court under the Code of atten-of 
C· '1 Pr ed danee IVl oc ure. witnesses 
• '" '" '" • 
and pro-
ductionof 
documente. 
17. (1) In cases of urgency, whenever the appropriate Government Special 
so directs, the Collector, th9ugh no such award has been made, may, on powers 
the expiration of fifteen days from-the publication of the notice men- in casM 
tioned in section 9, sub-eection (1), take possession of any waste or ot ur_ 
arable land needed for public purposes or for a Company. Such land shall gency'. 
thereupon vest absolutely in the Government, 'free from all encumbrances. 

Reference 
to Court. 
Collector's' 
statement 
to the 
Court. 
Matters 
to be 
consider.-
ed in 
determin- -
ingcom.. 
peIUIation. 
(2) Whenever, owing to any sudden change in the cbannel of any 
navigable river or other unforeseen emergency, it becomes necessary 
for nny Railway Administration to acquire the immediate possession of 
any land for the maintenance of theit traffic or for the purpose of makiRg 
thereon a river-side or ghat station, or of providing convenient con-
n('ction with or aceess to any such station, the Collector may, i~e­
diately after the pUblication of the notice mentioned in sub-section (1) 
and with the previous sanction of the appropriate Government, enter, 
upon' and take po&session of such land, which shall thereupon .vest abso-
lutely in the Government free from all encumbrances: 
Provided that the Collector shall not take possession of any building 
or part of a building under this sub-section without giving to the occupier 
thereof at least forty-eight hours' notice of his intention so to do, or such 
longer noticE' as may be reasonably sufficient to enable such occupier 
to remove his movable property from such building without unnecessary 
inconvenience. 
<. • • • •• • 
(4) In the case of any land to which, in the opinion of the apprOQriate 
Government, the provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) are 
applicable, the appropriate Government may direct that the ,?rovisions of 
section SA shall not apply, and, if it does 'SO direct;' a declaration may be 
made, under section 6 in respect of the land at any time after the ~>ubli- ' 
cation of the notification under section 4, sub-section (1) . 
• • • • 
18. (1) • • .. • 
(2) 'The application shall state the grounds on which 
the award is taken: 
Provided that every such application shall be made,-
• 
• 
objection to 
(a) if the person making it was present or represented before 
the Collector at the time when he made his award, within six 
weeks from the date 'of the Collector's award; 
(b) in other cases, within six weeks of the receipt of the notice 
from the Collector under section 12, sub-section (2), or within six 
months from the date of the Collector's award, whichever period 
shall first expire. 
19. (1) In making the reference, the Conector shall state for the 
information of the Court, in writing under' his hand,-
• • • • • 
(c) the amount awarded for damages and paid or tendered 
under sections 5 and 17, or either of them, and the amoJ,lnt of com-
pensation awarded under section 11; and 
• • • '. • 
23. (1) • • • • • 
(2') In addition to the market-value of the land, as above provided, 
the -eorut shall in every case award a sum of fifteen per centum on· such 
marltl!t-value, in consideration of the compulsory nature 'of the 
acquisftiort. 

, 15 
24; But the Court shall not take intocon$ideration-
... ... ... ... ... 
Sixthly, any increase Jo. the value· of the other land of the 
person interested likely to accrue from the use to which the land 
acquired will be put; or, 
Seventhly, any outlay or. improvements on, or disposal of. the 
land acquired, commenced, 'made or effected without the sanction of 
the Collector after the date of the publication of the notification 
under section 4, SUb-section (1). 
25. (1) When the applicant has made a claim to compensation, pur-
suant to any notice given unde,r section 9, the amount award.ed to 
him by the Court shall not exceed the amount so claimed or be less than 
,the amount awarded by the Collector under section 11. 
(2) When the applicant has refused to make such claim or has omit-
ted without sufficient reason (to be allowed by the Judge) to make 
. ,such claim, the amount awarded by the Court shall in no case exceed 
the amount awarded by the 'Collector. 
(.1) When the applicant has omitted for a sufficient reatSon (to be 
all('lwcd by the Judge) to make such claim, the amount awarded to 
him by the Court shall not be less than, and may exceed, the amount 
awarded by the Collector. 
... * ... ... ... 
28. If the sum which. in the opinion of the Co~rt, the Collector ought 
to have awarded as compensation is in excess of the sum which . the 
Collector did award as compensation, the award of the Court may direct 
thnt the Collector shall pay intereo3t on. such excess at the rate of six 
per .centum per ,annum from the date on whjch he took possession of 
the land to the date of payment of such excess into Court. 
... ... ... • 
Mattera 
to be neg-
lected in 
detennin-
ingcom-
pensatiott. 
Rules 
as t. 
amount 
of com-
pensa.tion. 
Collector 
maybe 
directed 
to pay 
interest 
on exceSs 
compen-
sJltion . 
34. When the 'amount of such compensation is not paid or deposited Payment 
on or before taking possession of the land, the CoUector shall pay the of interest. 
amount awarded with interest thereon at the rate of six per. eentum per 
annum from the time of so taking possession until it shall have been 
so paid or deposited . 
• • ... • • 
36. (1) * ... ... ... .. 
(2). On the expiration of the term, the Collector shall make or 
tender to the persons interested compensation for the damage (if Imy) 
done to the land and not provided for by the agreement, and shall restore 
the land to the persons interested therein: 
Provided that, if the land has become permanently unfit to be used 
for· the purpose for which it was used immediately before the com-
,mencem('nt of such term, and if the persons interested shall GO require, 
. the appropriate Government shall proceed under this Act to acquire the 
land as :if it was needed permanently for a public purpose or for a 
. Company. 
• III • • .. 
Power to 
enter and 
take pos-
session, 
and com-
pensation 
on res-
toration. 

Company 
maybe 
authorised 
teenter 
aDd 
survey. 
Indus-
trial 
comern 
to be 
deemed 
Company 
for 
certain 
purpo5'<!S. 
Previous 
consent 
of appro-
priate 
Govern-
mentand 
ex.ecution 
afagree-
ment 
necessary. 
Previous 
enquiry. 
Service 
of. 
noti.ces. 
Penalty 
for obs_ 
tructing 
acquisi-
tion of 
land. 
16 
38. (1) The appropriate Government may authorise any ~cer of 
any Company desiring tc? acquire land for its purposes to exercIse the 
p(lwern conferred by secti~n 4. 
(2) In every such case section 4 shall be construed as if 'for the words 
"for such purpose" the words "for the purposes of the CompanY" were 
substituted; and section 5 shall be cOIl'Strued as if after the words "the 
officer" the words "of the Company" . were iJ\serted. 
38A. An industrial concern, ordinarily employing not lees than one 
hunured workmen owned by an individual or by an association of indivi-
duals and not being a Gompany, desiring to acquire land for the erection 
of dwelling houses for workmen employed by the concern or for the 
provi-3ion of amen1ties directly connected therewith shall, so far as 
concerns the acquisition of such land, be deemed to be a Company for 
the purposes of this Part, and the references to Company in sections SA, 
6, 7, 17 B!ld 50 shall be interpreted as references' al-30 to such concern. 
39. The provisions of sections 6 to 37 (both inclusive) shan not be 
put in force in order to acquire land for any Company, unless with the 
previous consent of the appropriate Government,' nor unless the Company 
shall have executed the agreement hereinafter mentioned. 
.49. (1) * • • • • 
(3) Such officer may sum~on and enfo~e the attendance of· witnesses 
and compel the production of documents by the same means and, as far 
as pOS'.3ible, in the same .manner as is provided by the Code of Civil Pro-
cedure in the case of a Civil Court. 14 of 1882 . 
• • • • 
45. (1) • • • • • 
(3) When such person cannot be found, the service may be made on 
any adult male member of his family residing with him; arid, if no such 
adult male member can be found, the notice may be served by fixing 
the copy on the outer door of the house in which the person therein 
named ordinarily dwells or carries on busineso3, or by fixing a copy 
thereof in some conspicuous place in the office of the officer aforesaid 
or of the Collector or in the court-house, and also in some conspicuous 
pari; of the land to be acquired: 
Provided that, if the Collector or Judge shall so direct, a notice may 
be sent by post, in a letter addressed to the person named therein at 
his last known residence, address or place of business and registered 
under Part TIl o'f the Indian Post Office Act, 1'866, and service of it may be 
pro'.Ted by the production of the addressee's receipt. 
46. Whoever wilfully obstructs any pel"30n in doing any of the acta 
authorised by section 4 or section 8, or wilfully fills up, destroys, 
damages or displaces any trench or mark made under section 4, shall, on 
conviction' before a Magistrate, be liable to imprisonment for any term 
nct exceeding one month, or to fine not' exceeding fifty rupees, .. or to 
both. 
• • • • • 
14 of 1868. 

14 of 1882. 
50. (1) • • • • • 
(2) In any proceeding held before a Collector or Court in such cases 
the local authority or Company concerned may appear and adduce 
evidence for the purpose of determining the amount of compensation: . 
Provided that no such local authority or Company shall be entitled 
to demand a reference under section 18. 
• • • • 
53. Save in so 'far as they may be inconsistent with anything 
tained in this Act, tbe provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure 
apply to all proceedings before the Court under' this Act. 
• • • • • 
con-
shall 
55. (1) The appropriate Government shall have power to make rules 
consistent with this Act for the guidance of officers in all n!atters con-
nected with its· enforcement, and may from time to time alter and add 
to the rules so made: 
Provided that the poweJ; to make rules for carrying out the purposes 
of Part VII of this Act shall be exercisable by the Central Government 
and such rules may. be made for the guidance of the State Governments 
and the officers of the Central Government and of the State Governments: 
Provided further that every sllllfu rule made by the Central Govern-
ment shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parltanrent white it is in session fbr a total period df thirty daY8 
which may be comprised in one session or two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it 
is so laid or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree 
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so however that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule . 
.. • • • • 
Acquisi • 
tion of 
land at 
COif of 
8 local 
authority 
or 
Company. 
Codeaf 
Civil Pro-
cedure to 
apply to 
proceed. 
ings be.-
fore Court. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 

LOX SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. 
(Roo Birendra Singh, Minister of Agriculture and Rural DevelOpment 
and Civil Supplies.) 