LOK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE GOLD (CONTROL) AMENDMEtff BILL, ~969 
~-2 be/As introduced in Lok Sabha-l , - . 
1. Page 2, line 36.-
after "supervision" . omit 
-
2; Page 3, line 2,-
" ',. , 
for "s'ub-c lau_ses"l' read "sub-c).ause II 
- -
3. Page 3, line 21,-
~fter "refit:lery" .2!!l!i 
4. Page 4, line 31,-
after " e f !' ec.t '! 
5. Page 4, line 38,-
after "be I' 
6. Page 5, line 40,'; 
insert 
" " .. , 
" " , 
" II . I 
ill "person" ~ "persons" 
7. Page 6, line 4,-
i2! "appicab1e" read "applicable" 
8. Page 6, line 6,-
for "for" ~ ','after" 
" 
9. Page 6. line 7,-
for "substituted" -, 
10. Page 6, line 28,-
after "opportuni ty" orllit -
11. Page 6, line 30,-
after "be" .2mii " " , 
." " • 
, 
" 
P, T. o. 

12. Page 7, line 38,-
after "hereby" 
13. Page 8, line 5,-
- 2 -
omit -
" n , 
for "field" read "fil~d" 
- -
14. Page 8, line 9,-
after "petitions" insert 
15. Page 8, line 10,-
tI " , 
after "27 (2){ d)," insert "27 (6). n 
16. Page 8, line 15~-
after "17(2)(d)" insert 
17. Page 8, line 20.-
after "viz." insert 
li.... Page 14, line 33,-
.'1( 
omit nnot" - .. -19. Page 16,-
I 
" II 
• 
II " , 
for the exi~ting!ma~inal heading to section 88,-: ,-
"Dea lers, etc., when to be 
deemed to have abetted an 
offence." 
Sravana 4, 1 91 (seka.) 
, 

As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
2 8 'i' III 'sr~9 
BUI No. 6Z of 1%9 
THE GOLD (CONTROL) AMENDMENT BILL, [969 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Gold (Control) Act, 1968. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the Republic 
ot India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Gold (Control) Amendment Act, Short title 
l!JtI~. and com-
ment-e-
S (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 3rd day of July, ment. 
1969. I I., 
\ -
~ 011968. Z. In section 5 of the Gold (Control) Act, 1968 (hereinafter referred to Amendment 
as the principal Act). in 6ub-section (2) ,- of !ection 5. 
(i) in clause (a), the word "and", occurring at the end, shall be 
10 omitted; 
(ii) clause (b) shall be omitted. 

AmendmeDt 
of section 8. 
Amendmeftt 
ofsection 17. 
2 
3. In section 8 of the principal Act, for lSub-section (2), the following. 
sub-section shan be, and shan be deemed always to have been, subatttuted, 
namely:-
II (2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, a person may,-
(a) (i) acquire or agree to acquire the ownership, possession, S 
custotiy or control of, or 
(ii) buy, accept or otherwise receive or agree to buy, accept 
or otherwise receive, 
any ornament, unless he knows or has reason to believe that such 
ornament, being required to be included in a declaration, has not 10 
been so included; 
(b) sell, deliver, transfer or otherwise dispose of, or agree 
to sell, deliver, transfer or otherwise dispose of, any ornament, 
but shall not do so if the ornament, being required to be included 
in a declaration, has not been so included.". 15 
4. In section 17 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (2), for clause (d), the following clause shall 
be, and shall be deemed always to have been, substituted, namely:-
"(d) shall be subject to such conditions and restrictions as 
may be prescribed."; 20 
(ii) for sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be, and 
shall be deemed always to have been, substituted, namely:-
"(6) (a) No application for the issue of a licence to commence 
or carry on business as a refiner shall be granted unless the 
Administrator, after making such inquiry as he may think fit, is a, 
satisfied with regard to the following matters, namely:-
(i) the security of the premises where the applicant in-
tends to carryon business as a refiner, the suitability of such 
premises for being used as a . refinery, and the existence 
therein of arrangements for the storage of gold before and 30 
after refining; 
(ii) the existence, in such premises, of equipment for 
the manufacture of standard gold bars, ar for assaying of 
gold, and the quality and adequacy of sucli equipment; 
(iii) the existence, in such premises, of facilities for the 3' 
exercise of supervision, an~ control by the Administrator or 
any other person authorised by him in this bebalf; 
(iv) the competence of the applicant to manufacture 
standard gold bars; and 
(11) such other matters as may be prescribed. 40 
(b) No application for the renewal of a licence to carry on 
business as a refiner shall be rejected unless-
(1) the holder of such licence has been given a reason-
able opportunity of presenting his case, and 
(2) the Administrator is satisfied. that-
(i) the application for such renewal lias been mnde 
after the expiry of the period specified therefor, 01' 

(ii) the refinery does not continue to satisfy the 
matters specified in sub-clauses (i), (ii), (iii) or (v) of 
clause (a) , or 
(iii) any statement made by the applicant at the 
I time of the issue or renewal of the licence was incorrect 
or false in material particulars, or 
(iv) the applicant has contravened any term. or 
condition of the licence or any provision of this Act or 
any rule or order made thereunder or of any dther law 
IQ for the time being in force in ,so far as such 
law prohibits or restricts the bringing into or taking out 
of India of any goods (including coins, currency, whether 
Indian or foreign, and foreign exchange) or the dealing 
in such goods by way of acquisition or otherwise. 
IJ (c) NotWithstanding anything contained in clause (u) or 
clause (b), a licence to commence or carry on business as a 
refiner shall not be issue'd or renewed if the Administrator, after 
giving the applicant a reasonable opportunity of presenting his 
case, is satisfied that the entire volume of the refining business 
done, or proposed to be done, by the applicant may be conve-
niently done at 6 refinery, established or run by Government or 
by a corporation owned or controlled by Government. 
(el) Every order granting or rejecting an application for 
the issue or renewal of a licence shall be made in writing.". 
25 S. In section 26 of the principal Act, in claus~ (c), after the words "to Amendment 
a licensed dealer.", the words "or toO such other person or authority as of section 26. 
may be specified by rule made in this behalf." shall be inserted. 
30 
35 
4' 
6. In section 27 of the principal Act,- Amendment 
of section 2'1. 
(i) in sub-section (2), for clause (d), the following clause shall 
be, and shall be deemed always to have been, substituted, namely:-
"(d) iball be subject to such conditions and restrictions as 
may be prescribed."; 
(ii) for sub-section (6), the follOWing sub-section shall be, and 
shall be deemed always to have been, substituted, namely:-
"(6) (4) No application for the issue of a licence to com-
mence or carry on business as a dealer shall be granted unless 
the Administrator, having regard to such matters as may be 
prescribed in this behalf and after making such inquiry in res-
pect of those matters as he may think fit, is satisfied that the 
licence should be issued. 
~b) No application for the renewal of a licence to carry on 
business as a dealer shall be rejected unless the holder of such 
licence has been given a reasonable opportunity C1f presenting his 
case and unless the A\iministrator is satisfied that-
(i) the applicoation for such renewal has been made after 
the expiry of the period specified therefor, o'r ' 

Amen4ment 
of section 11. 
Substitution 
of new sec· 
t! on for set'. 
tion 82. 
PosseliSlon 
of primary 
,old by. 
licensed 
deall.'1". 
. -,°,1";' .. 
• ' ',. " .:;;.f-, ...•. 4-
(ii) any statement made by the applicant at the time of 
the issue or renewal of the licence was incorrect or false in 
material particulars, or 
(iii) the applicant has contravened any tenn or C01ldi~ 
tion of the licence or any provision of this Act or any rule S 
or order made thereunder or of any other law for the time 
being in force in so far as such law prohibits or restl'icts the 
bringing into or taking out of India of any goods (including 
coins, currency, whether In'dian or foreign, and foreign ex-
change) or the dea.ling in such goods by way of acquisition or 10 
otherwise, or 
(iv) the applicant does not fulfil the prescribed contiitions. 
(c) Every order granting or rejecting an application for the 
issue or renewal of a licence shall be made in writing."; 
(iii) after sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be IS 
inserted, namely:-
"(6A) Where the Central Government, having regard to the 
quantity of gold produced in India and the supply therein of gold 
through lawful channels, is of opinion that it is necessary (1't 
expedient in the interests of the general publlc so to do, it may, ao 
notWithstanding anything contained in this section, direct the 
Administrator to restrict or reduce the number of licensed dt'alers 
to such extent and in such manner as may be specified by rules 
made in this behalf: 
Provided that no such rules shall come into force until the as 
expiry of the period referred to in sub-section (3) of section 114 
and if, before the expiry of the said period, both Houses of Parlia-
ment agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses of Parliament agree that the rule should not be made, the 
rule shall come into force only in such modified form or be of 110' )0 
effect as the case may ba.". 
7. In section 31 of the principal Act, in the first proviso, for clause (i). 
the following clause shall be, and shall be deemed always to hAve been, 
substituted, namely:-
"(i) any ornament, unless he knows or has reason to believe that IS 
such ornament, being requirE.-d to be included in a declaration, has not 
been so included,". 
8. For section 32 of the principal Act, the following section shall be, 
substituted, namely:-
"32. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no licensed dealer 40 
shall have, at any time, in his possession or custody primary gold 
in any form except in the form of standard gold bars: 
Provided that Bothing in this section shall apply to primary 
gold which ia obtained in the proceSs of, or in connection with, the 
making, manufacturing, preparing or repairing of one or more articles 45 
, 

or ornaments, if the total quantity of such primary gold in the pos-
session or custody of such dealer does not, at any time, f"xceed-
(a) four hundred grammes, if he does not employ any 
artisan, 
5 (b) five hundred grammes, if he employs not more than ten 
artisans, 
(c) one thousand grammes, if he employs more than ten but 
not more than twenty artisans, 
(d) two thousand grammes, if he employs more thRn twenty 
10 artisans: 
Provided further that the Central Government may, having 
regard to the needs of the trade, volume of business and the interests 
of the general public, increase the quantitative limits specifi~d in the 
toregoing proviso. 
IS (2) Where a licensed dealer has cut a standard gold bllr and 
has transferred or delivered a part thereof to a certified goldsmith 
or en artisan for the purposes specified in section 35, he may, notwith-
standing anything contained in sub-section (1), have in his posses-
sion or custody the remnant of such bar which is left with him, and 
20 in computing the quantities specified in the first proviso to sub-section 
(1), such remnant shall be excluded.". 
9. In section 39 of the principal Act,- Amendment 
. . . of set'tion 39. 
(~) In sub-section (2), for clause (c), the followlDg clause shall 
be, and shall be deemed always to have been, substituted, namely:-
as "(c) shall be subject to such conditions and restrictions as 
may be prescribed."; 
(ii) in sub-section (4), for clause (e), the following clause shall 
be, and shall be deemed always to have been, substitute\:l, namely:-
"(e) a person who belongs to a prescribed category or class 
30 to which, in the opinion of the Central Government, the certifi-
cate may be granted."; 
35 
(i'ii) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be in-
serted, namely:-
"(4A) Where the Central Government, having regard to the 
interests of the general public, is of opinion that for the conti-
nuance or development of the industry of semi-manufacturet' and 
manufactures of gold, it is necessary 80 to do, it may, notwith-
standing anything contained in sub-section (4), by notiftcation, 
empower the Administrator to enter1X:lin applications for the grant 
of certificates referred to in sub-section (1), from person who 
possess such qualifications and fulfil such conditions as may be 
prescribed." . 
10. For seotion 46 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Substitution otnew Iee-
substituted, namely: - tion 10r 1eC-
Hon 46. 

Limitli on 
primllty 
gOld which 
an artlaan 
may have 
in hia pos-
session. 
Amendment 
of section 50. 
Substitution 
of new sec_ 
tion for lec-
tiOR 88. 
Dealers, etc., 
when to be 
deemed to 
have abetted 
an offence. 
"46. The total quantity of primary go'ld in the possession or cus-
tody, wh,etber individually or collectively, of the artisans employed by 
a licensed dealer shall not, at any time, exceed the quantitative limit 
appiooble, under sub-section (1) of section 32, to such dealer.". 
11. (1) In section 50 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) for the words "to such goods,-", the fo'llowing words shall 
be, and shall be deemed always to have been substitut~, namely:-
"suspend such licence or certificate, as the case may be, pend-
ing the completion of any inquiry or trial against the holder of 
5 
such licence or certificate, for making such incorrect or false 10 
statement or for such contJ:"avention, as the case may be: 
Provided that no such licence or certificate shall be suspended 
for a period exceeding ten days unless the holder thereof has 
been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against 
the proposed action."; IS 
(b) clause (i) shall be omitted; 
(c) for clause (ii) and the proviso occurring after that clause, 
the following sub-section shall be, and shall be deemed always to 
have been, substituted, namely: - . 
"(1A) The Administrator may, if he is satisfied, after making 20 
such inquiry as he may think fit, that the holder of any licence 
or certificate issued, renewed or continued und.er this Act has 
made such incorrect or false statement es is referred to in sub-
section (1) or has contravened the provisions of such law, rule 
or order as is referred to in that sub-section, cancel such licence 25 
or certificate, as the case may be: 
Provided that no licence Or certificate shall be cancelled un-
less the holder thereof has been given a reasonable opportunity. 
of showing cause against the proposed action.". 
1Z. For section 88 of the principal Act, the following section shall be, 30 
substituted, namely:-
"88. (1) A dealer or refiner who knows or has reason to believe, 
that any person employed by him has, in the course of such employ-
ment, contravened any provisions of this Act or any rule or order 
made thereunder, shall be deemed to have abetted an offence against 35 
this Act: 
Provided that no such abetment shall be deemed to have taken 
place if such dealer or refiner has, as expeditiously as possible, and 
in any case before the expiry of two days from the date on which 
he comes to know of the contravention or has reason to believe that 40 
such contravention has been made, intimated in writing to the Gold 
Control Officer, the name of the person by whom such contravention 
was made and the date and other particulars of such contravention. 
(2) Whoever is deemed, under sub-section (1), to have abetted 
an offence against this Act, shall be punishetl with imprisonment for 4S 

6 ot 1988. 
60t 1869. 
46 of 1868. 
5 
10 
20 
30 
7 
a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to 
tine.". 
13. For section 100 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Substitution 
substituted namely: _ O! new sec-, hon for sec-
tion 100. 
"100. (1) Every licensed dealer or refiner or certified goldsmith, Precautions 
as the case may be, shall, before accepting, buying or otherwise re- to be taken 
ceiving any gold from any person, take such steps as are specified by ~a~e~censed 
the Central Government by rules made in this behalf, to satisfy him- refine; Or 
self as to the identity of the person from whom such gold is rroposed certified 
to be accepted, bought or otherwise received by him. ,oldsmith before 
(2) If on an inquiry made by a Gold Control Officer the person acqUir~g 
from whom a licensed dealer or refiner or certified goldsmith is any ,0 . 
purported to have accepted, bought (If otherwise received any gold 
is not found at the address mentioned by the licensed dealer. refiner 
or certified goldsmith or at any other address ascertained from the 
first-mentioned address, the Gold Control Officer may call upon such 
dealer, refiner or certified goldsmith, as the case may be, to establish 
that he had taken the steps specified by the rules made uJlder sub-
section (1). 
(3) If such dealer, refiner or certified goldsmith, as the case may 
be, omits or fails, when called upon so to do, to establish that he had 
taken the steps specified by rUles made untier sub-section (1), it 
shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that such gold was 
accepted, bought or otherwise received by such dealer, refiner or 
certified goldsmith, as the case may be, in contravention of the pro-
visions of this Act. 
(4) Nothing in this section shall apply to a petty transaction. 
ExpZanation.-In this sectiun, "petty transaction" means a tran-
saction in which the total weight of any primary gold, article or 
ornament which is accepted, bought or otherwise received from the 
same person in the course of a day, does not exceed twenty-five 
grammes." . 
14. In section 114 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), clause (j) Amendment 
shall be re-Iettered as clause (k) and before clause (k) as so re-Iettered, of .ection 
3S the following clause shall be inserted, namely: _ 114. 
"(j) the types or classes of cases in which any authorisation may 
be made by the Administrator;". . 
15. (1) The Gold (Control) Amendment Ordinance, 1969, is hereby, Repeal 
repealed. and 
40 (Z) Notwithstanding such repe~l, anything done or any action taken, 
inclutling any notification, order or rule made, direction given, notice, 
licence or certificate issued, pennission, authorisation or exemption grant-
ed, whether under the Gold (Control) Act, 1968, or the Gold (Control) 
Amendment Ordinance, 1969, shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with 
4S the pl'<1Visions of the Gold (Control) Act, 1968, as amended by this Act, 
be deemed to have been done, taken, made, given, issued or gI1mted, as 
the case may be, under the corresponding provisions of the Gold (Con-
trol) Act, 1968, as amended by this Act. 
saving. 

STATEMENT OF GBJECTS AND REASONS 
l'he Bill seeks to replace the Gold (Control) Amendment Ordinance, 
lYtiY, by which the Gold (Control) Act, 1968, was amended. 
2. The Gold (Control) Act, 1968, was challenged before the Supreme 
Court in three writ petitions field by licensed dealers and/or money-lenders. 
The Supreme Court upheld the constitutional validity of the Act as a 
whole and also upheld Parliament's competence to enact the legislation. 
Numerous provisions of the Act which were specifically impugned in the 
said writ petitions also survived the challenge as tv their vali\:lity. Sec-
tions 5(2) (b), 27(2) (d), 32, 46, 88 and 100 were, however, declared by 
the Bupreme Court to be invalid. 
3. The above-mentioned prOvisions which have been declared by the 
::>upreme Court to be invalid are being substituted by new provisions 
which have been drafted having regard to the observations made by the 
Supreme Court. Certain other provisions of the Act, viz., sections 17 (2) (d) 
17 (6) ond 39 (2) (c), which are similar in nature, substance or language 
to those which have been declared by the Supreme Court to be invalid. 
are also being modified in the light of the observations made by the 
Supreme Court. Opportunity is also being taken to amend some other 
provisions of the Act, viz. sections 8(2), 26,31,39(4),50 and 114, in the 
light of the experience gained in the working of the Act. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 18th July, 1969. 
.. .. 
P. C. SETHI. 
RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE CONSTITUTION 
OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 1/47/69-GCII. (1), tiated the 18th July, 1969 from 
Shri Prakashchand B. Sethi, Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance 
to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The Vice President acting as President having been informed of the 
subject matter of the Gold (CQ'Dtrol) Amendment Bill, 1969, namely, to 
amend the Gold (Control) Act, 1968, has recommended, under clause (3) 
of article 117 of the Constitution, the Bill for consideration by the Lok 
Sabha. . , 'P')} "~'.' '''-;,' i ...... ·'~~1 
. .' . ',,~- .'/'" . .. .' 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Th~ Bipwhi~h seeks to replace the Gold (Control) Amentlment Ordi-
nan~, 1969, does not contain any provision which involve. an,. expendi-
ture' from.' the Consolidated Fund of India. The implementation of the 
~~Q~W~ ()f the BUl, WO!J,ld, however, necessitate the deployment of 
~Qgle tWl. 
2. The staff required for the implementation of the provisiON iD~lud­
~ in this,am il ajrea4y in position. The annual recurring expentliture 
9D. ~~ .. reQ.,~~jn~n~ of personnel is of the order of B.s. 30 lakha. As against 
the said expenditure, there is an annual income of Rs. 151akhs (apptoxf-
mately) . The net recurring annual expenditure OD the enforcement ot 
Gold GoQ~l II of· the oreJer of Ra. 15 lakha. 
3. The Bill would not require any addition to the staft whieh is al. 
ready in pOIition. Therefore, the Bill, if enacted, would not 1:4lvolve any 
expenditure on ... requirement of personnel and fin~ces in addj;~9n to 
what is being incurred at present on the e.ator~~t of Gold C~tf01. 
4. The BW. dCIiIs ,not involve any non-recurrinB expe~e.~, 
., . 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
The Bill provides for the fIQIDing of rules under section 114 of the 
GOld (Control) Act. 1968 with regarti to the folloWing matters, namely:-
.,. " 
(i) conditions and restrictions to which licences issued to dealers 
or refiners or certificates issued to certified goldsmiths shall be sub-
jedj 
(ii) additional JIUltters which should be taken into consideration 
before disposing of an application for the grant of a licence to .oom-
mence or carry on buSiness as a refiner; 
(iii) person or authority to whom gold. recovered during the 
course of silver refining may be disposed of; 
(tv) matters which shall be taken into eonsideration before grant-
~g or rejecting an application for the issue or renewal of a licence to 
commence or carry on business AI a dealer; 
(,,) additional category or class af person who shall be eligible to 
apply for the grant of a certificate referred to in section 39; 
(vi) qualiftcations on the possession of which and conditions on 
the fulftlment of which en application for the grant af a certiftcate 
to a person, who is not covered by any of the category specified in 
section 39(4), may be entertained; 
(vii) steps which a licensed dealer or refiner or certifted gold-
mnith should take to satisfy himself as to the identity of the penon 
from whom any gold is proposed to be accepted, bought or otherwise 
received by him; 
("U,i) types or classes of cases in which any authorisation may be 
made by ilie Admin:!strator. 
2. Clause 6 af the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section, namely sub-
section (SA), in section 27. That sub-section empowers the Central Gov-
ernment to direct the Administrator to restrict or reduce the number of 
Ucensed dealers in certain circumstances. The extent to which and the 
manner in which such restriction or reduction may be made is to be pres-
cribed by rules. Provisions have, however, been made to the effect that 
luch rules shall not come into force until iliey have been laid before Par-
liament for ilie period specifled in sub-section (3) of section 114. Parlia-
ment will thus have an opportunity to consider such rules before they 
came into force. J1 such rules are disapproved by Parliament, they 
would not come into force at all: and if they are modified by Parliament. 
they would come into force in such modified form. 
3. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of tl normal charac-
ter. 
.. 
'~""'.'~-';""''''''''''-''''-'''~'. 10 

• 
• 
ANNExuRE 
LTRACTS FROM: THE GOLD (CONTROL) ACT, 1968 
(-t5;OI' 1968) 
• • • 
. CHAPTER II 
, ,., '. 
~TRATOR Am) GOLD CONTROL OITICDS 
• • • 
• 
.; (I; . I, 
• 
5. (1). . . • . • .., ej Power ot 
, (2) The Administrator may, so fat as it appears to him to be necel- Adrniru.-
sary 01' eXpedient· for' carrying out the 'provisions of this 'Aet; /By lorder- ::':~ec. 
(4) regulate, after consultation with the Reserve Bank of India, ti::,. and 
t~ price at which any go'ld may be bought or sold, and' or . 
~:' 'f> ~ ~.< '.(6) 'r.eguI8te 'by iicences, permits 'br' othehv1~, the'ti1.anilfacture, 
• tlistributiOh, tr~port, acquiSitiOn, possession, transfer, 6isposal; 'use 
or consumption of gold . 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER III 
RESTRICTIONS RELATING TO THE MANUFACTURJ:, ACQUlSI'IiOM', , 
POSSBSSION, SALJ:, TRANSI'D 08 DELlVDY OF GOLD 
8. (1) • • • • e 
(2) A person-
Kestrlc-
tiona 
reprcUaa 
aequiaitioD 
(4) may, subject to the provisions of section 16,- 1X* •• ion 
(i) acquire or agree to acquire the ownership, pouesaioD, and 
custody or control of, or ' = 
. (ii) buy, accept or otherwise receive or agree to.' buy, accept 
or otherwise receive, or . 
(iii) sell, deliver, transfer or otherwise di~e o~, 
any ornament which is not required to be included in 11 declaration; 
(b) shall not,-
(i) acquire or agree to acquire the ownership, po8Hllion, 
custody or control of, or 
(ii) buy, accept or otherwise receive, or agree to buy,' accept, 
\. buy. or otherwise receive, or 
(iii) sell, deliver, transfer or otherwise dispose dl; or agree 
to sell, deliver, transfer or otherwise dispose of, 
any ornament which is required to be included in a declu.tIloD Wlleaa 
luch ornament has been included in a declaration which has been 
11 

12 
.... duly made by the perscm who intends to ae1l, deliver, transfer bl' 
.. otherwise dispose of such ornament. 
,·"0 
L" 
• • 
. . ..... ,,~. 
• 
• 
'ClUPnR'VI 
RI:mtas 
• 
(2). A licence issued. under this secUon,-
• • • 
• • 
• • 
• • 
(a). may contain such conditions, limitations and restrictions u 
t.be Administrator may tbinlr fit to impose 6D.d difterent .conClitions, 
llJDitaUoIll aDd reitrlctiona may' "be impOsed for anrerent clUsea of 
re~ers. . 
• • • • • 
,:;).).,(6) ,on recel~t of ~ a})ru~~OD for the lssue~r renew~ of aUcence 
UDtier. tbla aectlan. the 'AdinihJiti'ator 'may, lifter ttilldDS'suCh JDqulry. U 
any, as 'he may cOnSider necessary, by order in Mlting,either'1ssue orl 
renew the licence, or reject the application for the saUie: 
PrOvided that no licence shall be issued or renewed under this section 
unless the Administrator, having regard to the following matters, is satis-
fied that the licence should be issued or renewed, namely:-
~ (a) the number of refineries existing in the region in which the 
applicant intends to carryon business as a refiner, 
(b) the anticipated demand, as estimated by him, for refining 
facilities in that region, 
I (c) the facilities existing in that region for the assay of gold by 
~~ 'any method6ther than the toueh-stone method, 
,.. , (d) the turnover of the applicant, if he is already carrying on 
" ... 
.. 
btiBInwas a retln'er, durl:tlg two years bnmedtately ipreceding the 
date of application for the renewal of the licence, 
(e) the suitability ami security ~f the premises .where the appli-
cant intends to carry on business as refiner, and the existence there-
in of arrangements for the stoRlge of gold before and after reftning, 
;:; , (1), the existence or the probability of existence in the refinery 
or '\he' prophsed 'refinery, 'IlS . the case maybe,' of 'equ'ipment for the 
manufacture of standard gold bars and 'the ttuldity (Mid' adequacy of 
: such. equipment, 
(g) the competence of the,p~1fCint ·to"irtmt&'~ standard 
, ~ ,goN ban, 
(h) the ex'isten.ce ot' Jfaei'll ties 'in the: re1inery' !Of)'tlle" exercise of 
~ . :~on"and mntral'by the Administrator or any ·otber pe1'8On 
{ ~~lri1t1icnisedby him in this '~al1, 
(i) the existence of any refinery established or run by Govern-
ment, - .... --_. 

11 
U) the suitability af the aplSlieant, 
(k) the' 'public m1etestj ~lid 
(1) such other matters as may be prescribed. 
• • • • 
~26. ~veryperson who refines or meliS' ~ilver, inc1udirig itslf1l1oys'Silvor 
Shall-
• • • .. • 
. . ' 
I'eftfter 
to keep 
record 
(c) sell such gold within a period of thirty days from the date of ,old 
of such declaration (jJ: within such further period as, on sufficient recovered 
cause' being shown, may be allowetl by tlteAdministrator, ,to a) li'cens- frO~ 
ed refiner or, if so authorised by the AdminiStrator, . to a 1ieehsed ~~nina. 
,dealer. 
27. (1) • • 
CHAPTERVn 
DEALERS 
• 
(3) " A licence' im.red '1mder ihis. section,-
.. • • 
• • 
• • 
(d) may cOntain such conditions, liInitations and restrietions as 
the Admftiisti'ator may think fit to impose and different conditions, 
limitations and restrictions 1nay be imposed for different· classes of 
dealers. 
• • • • • 
(6) On receipt of an application for the issue or renewal of a licence 
uuder'-this section, the Administrator may, aftermakiDg suoh inquiry, if 
any, ashe may CO'Ilsider necessary, by order in writing; either issue or 
renew the' licence, or 'reject the application for the same: 
,Provi\ied that no licence shall be issued or renewed under this section 
unless the Administrator, having regard to'the following matters, is satis-
fied tlmtthe licence shoUld be issued or renewed, 'namely:-
(a) the number of dealers existins in the region in which the 
applicant intends to carry on business as ,a dealer, 
(b) the anticipated demand, as estimated by him, for ornaments 
in that region, 
(c) the turnover of the applicant, if he had been carrying on 
business as a dealer prior to the commencement of Part XIIA of the 
Defence of India Rules, 1962, during the.two years immediately pre. 
ceding such commencement, or, in the case of an application for the 
renewal of a licence, the date of the application for such renewal, 
(d) the previous experience, if any, of the applicant with regard 
to the making, manufactUring, preparing, repairing or polishing of, ar 
dealing in, ornaments, 
(e) the sUitability of the applicant, 
(f) the suitability of the premises where the applicant intends 
'to earry on buSiness as a dealer, 
Licensing 
of dealers. 

14 
(g) the public interest, and 
(h), such other matters as may be prescribed. 
• • • • • 
acquiai- 31. Save as otherwise provided in thia Act, no licensed dealer shall buy 
tioll of or otherwise acquire or agree to buy or otherwise acquire or accept or 
:~~ by a otherwise receive or agree to accept or otherwise receive any artiele, or-
er. nament or primary gold from a person who is not a licensed dealer or 
refiner: 
PrOvided that any such dealer may buy or otherwise acquire or accept 
or otherwise receive or agree to buy or otherwise acquire or accept or 
otherwise receive from a person who is not a licenaed dealer or refiner,-
(i) any ornament which is not reqUired to be included in a dec-
laration or any ornament which, being required to be inclu\ied in a 
declaration, has been 80 included, 
• -. • • • 
Provided further that where any such dealer haa delivered any article, 
ornament or primary gold to his artisan or a certified goldsmith, for the 
purpose of making, manufacturing, preparing,repairing or polishing any 
ornament, he may, after such ornament has been made, manufacturetl, 
prepared, repaired or polished, take back such ornament from the Brtilan 
or certified goldsmith, as the case may be. i" 
Posse38ion 32. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no licensed dealer shall 
oflPdrimb ary either awn or have at any time in his possession, custody or control pd-go ya . . 
licensed mary gold 10 any farm except m the form of standard gold bars: 
dealer. 
Certified 
gold-
amitha. 
Provided that such dealer may, unleu the Central Government 
(havini regard to the needs of the trade, volume of business and pubUc 
interest) otherwise directs, own or keep in his possession, custody or 
control not more than-
(a) four hundred grammes, if he tloes not employ any artisan, 
(b) five hundred grammes, if he employs not more then ten 
artisans, . 
(c) one thousand grammes, if he employs more than ten but not 
not more than twenty artisans, 
(d) two thousand grammes, if he employs more than twenty 
artisans, 
of primary gold in any form other than in the form of standard gold 
bars. 
• • 
at. (1) • • 
• 
CHAPTER VIII 
CERTIFIED GOLDSMITHS 
• 
• 
• 
(2) The certificate referred to in sub-section (1)-
• • • • 
• 
• 
• 
(c) may contain such conditkms, limitations anti restrictions, as 
the Administrator may think fit to impose and different conditioIll, 

o of 1908. 
.- ........ 
limitations end restrictionl may be imposed for different classes of 
certified goldSmiths. 
• • • • • 
(4) On anti from the commencement of this Act, the following classes 
of persons shall be eligible to apply for the grant of a certifioate, name-
ly:-
• • • • • 
(e) a person who belongs to a category or class to which, in the 
opiniO'D of the Administrator, the certificate may be granted in the 
public interest. 
E:cplanation.-A person who is engaged as a hired labourer by a certi-
fied goldsmith shall not be eligible to receive a certificate under this sec-
tion. 
• • • • • 
CHAPl'ER IX 
• • • • • 
48. The total quantity of primary gold in the posseSSion, custody or IJmits on 
control, whether individually or collectively, of the artisans employed by primary 
a licensed dealer shell not, at any time, exceed the limits specified in gOhl? h W IC an 
section 32. artiaan 
• • • • • ma)'have 
mhia 
p0888ISion. 
CHAPTER X 
'J 
CANCELLATION AND SUSPENSION Ol" LICENCES AND CERlIfiCATES 
50. (1) The Administrator may, if he has any reasonable cause to be- Cancella-
lieve that the hoMer of any licence or certificate issued, renewed or con- tion or 
tinued under this Act has made any statement in, or in relation to, any sUBPeDSion 
application for ~e issue or renewal of a licence (Jt for the issue of a cer- ~! = 
tiftcate under this Act which is incorrect or false in material particulars cate. 
or has contmvened any provisions of Part XIIA of the Defence of India 
Rules, 1962, the Gold (Control) Ordinance, 1968, or of this Act or any 
rule or order made thereunder or of any other law for the time being in 
force which prohibits, restricts or regulates the bringing into or taking 
out of India of any goods [inclutiing coins, currency (whether Indian or 
foreign) and foreign exchange] or the carrying, removing, depositing, 
harbouring, keeping, concealing, selling or purchasing such goods or the 
making of any payment in relation to such goods,-
(i) suspend sucn licence ar certificate, as the case may be, pend-
ing the completion of any inquiry or trial against the holder of such 
licence or certificate, as the case may be, f:c1r such contravention, or 
(ii) cancel such licence or certificate, as the case may be: 
Provided that no such licence or certificate shall be suspended for a 
perioti exceeding ten days or cancelled unless the holder thereof has been 

16 
gi~n a ~le o~rtunity of showing cause against. the propo.ed 
action. 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER XV 
• • • ... • 
Dealers, 88. (1) A aealer or refiner who knows or has reason to believe that any 
etc., provision. ~ 1J1i~ Act or any rule or order made thereunder has been, or 
;:e:ed is. ~iag, contr.avened, by any person employed by him in the course of 
to have such employment, shall be deemed to have abetted an offence against 
abetted an this Act. ' 
offence. 
(2) Whoever abets, or is deemed undersWrsection (1) to haVte abet-
te'd, an offence against this Act, shall be punished with imprisonment for 
a tenn which may extend to three years and shall also be lieb1e to fine. 
• ... • • • 
CHAPl'ER:X!VI 
MISCEL~VfJ 
... • ., • • ,. 
Precau.. 100. Every licensed dealer f!r refiner or certified goldsmith shall, before 
tiot\l aeeepl!ng, buying or otherwise reeeiving any gold from any person, take 
to betaken all reasortable steps to satisfy himse-Itas to the identity of such person 
:nsed and if, after an inquiry made by an otftcer Buthorised in this behalf by 
dea1er~ the Administrator, it is fuund toot such person is not either rea\:i11y traee-
cartifted able or is a fictitious pwson, it shall.: be presumeq. unless such. dealer or 
goldsmith, refiner or certified goldsmith, as the case may be, establishes that he had 
~~rihg taken all reasonable steps to sau,fy himsE:lf. &Ii to the identity of such per-
any gold. son, that such gold was bought, acquired, accepted or received by such 
licensed ~a1er Ol" refiner or certified goldsmith, as the case may be, in 
contravention of the provisions of this Act. 
Power 
to make 
ru,le&. 
• ... • • • 
IU. (1) ... ... • ... • 
(2) In particl,llar, a.nd without prejud,ice to .the foregohlg power, SUch 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namelY:-
• • • • • • 
·(i) regulating the use and ~onsuJD,ptiQn of gold Qy industrial 
users and other persons.; 
tj) .y otIier matter which is NqW.redkJ be, or 'may be, pNIt-
rJribed. 
• • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Gold (Control) Act, [968. 
" 
(Shri Prakashchani. B. Sethi, Minister oj State in the Ministry oj Finance) 