To BE INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

. 67 of 2003

THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND SECOND
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003

A i
BILL
Surther to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (One hundred and second Amendment) — Shorttitle and |
Act, 2003, commencement. i
. i
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notifica-

tion in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In article 54 of the Constitution, in the Explanation, the words “the National Capital Amendment of

Territory of Delhi and” shall be omitted. article 54,
3. Articles 239AA and 239AB of the Constitution shall be omitted. Omission of
articles 239AA :
and 239AB. H
10 4, After article 371-1 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:— Insertion of new
article 371.

“3711, (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, — Special i i
मु . provision with, i

(व) Parliament shail have exclusive power to make law- respect to the

State of Delhi,

(7 for the whole or any part of the State of Delhi with respect to
any matter specified in entries | and 2 of the State List in the Seventh }

15 Schedule and entries 64, 65 and 66 of that List in so far as they relate to the L
said entries 1 and 2; be



2

(ii) for New Delhi only with respect to any matter specified in entries
Sand 18 of the State List in the Seventh Schedule and entries 64, 65 and
66 of that List in so far as they relaté to the said entries 5 and 18;

() the executive power, in so far as it relates to—

(d entries 1 and 2 referred to in paragraph (7) of sub-clause (a) in 5
respect of the State of Delhi; and

(ii) entries 5 and 18 referred to in paragraph (४) of sub-clause (a) in,
respect of New Delhi,

é
shall be exercised by the President acting, to such extent as he thinks fit, through
the Governor of the State of Delhi; 10

(c) the President may make special provision for the reservation of
appointments or posts under the State of Dethi in favour of the Scheduled Tribes.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, the expression “New Delhi” has
the meaning assigned to it in clause (27) of section 2 of the New Delhi Municipal
Council Act, 1994. 15 45 of 1994.

(2) Clause (1) of article 342, in relation to the State of Delhi, shall have effect as if
the words “and where it is a State, after consultation with the Governor thereof,” had
been omitted therein.

(3) The President shall have executive power—

(i) to give direction to the State of Delhi for good governance and proper 20
development of that State; and

(ii) to require that the master plan prepared for the State of Delhi shall not
be implemented without his previous approval,

and such direction or requirement, as the case may be, of the President shall be binding
on the Government of the State of Delhi. 25

Expianation,—For the purposes of this clause, the expression “master plan’
means any plan which provides for Jand uses, building regulation or any other control
norms for the development of the State of Delhi.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Government of India have proposed to grant full statehood to the entire National
Capital Territory of Delhi as at present, to create a new State to be known as the State of
Delhi. Considering the requirement of the national capital, it is intended to insert a new article
371J to provide that notwithstanding anything in the constitution, the parliament shall have
exclusive powers to make laws for the whole or any part of the State of Delhi with respect to

entires | and 2 of the State List and Entries 64, 65 and 66 of that List in so far as they relate to

entries | and 2, The executive powers, in so far as it relates to entries | and 2 of the State List
in relation to the whole State of Delhi and entries 5 and. 18 of the State List in relation to only
New Delhi area shall be exercised: by the President acting, to such extent as he thinks fit.
through Governor of the State. Special power has also been conferred on the President to
protect the interest of the Scheduled Tribes in consonance with the existing constitutional
scheme. President is also empowered to give direction for the good governance and proper.
development of the State of Delhi. The constitutional amendment also provides for repealing
articles 239A and 239AB and modification in article 54 of the Constitution.

2. This Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objective.

New Devt, LK. ADVANI,
The 13th August, 2003.



Election
President.

Special
provisions
with respect to
Delhi.

Sef 226255584

ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF ENDIA.

= * * * *

54. The President shall be elected by the members of an electoral college consisting
of—

(a) the elected members of both Houses of Parliament; and
(0) the elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States.

Explanation—In this article and in article 55, “State” includes the National Capital
Territory of Delhi and the Union territory of Pondicherry.

* * * * *

239AA. (1) As from the date of commencement of the Constitution (Sixty-ninth
Amendment) Act, 1991, the Union territory of Delhi shall be called the National Capital
Territory of Dethi (hereafter in this Part referred to as the National Capital Territory) and the
administrator thereof appointed under article 239 shall be designated as the Lieutenant
Governor.

(2) (a) There shalt be a Legislative Assembly for the National Capital Territory and
the seats in such Assembly shall be filled by members chosen by direct election from
territorial constituencies in the National Capital Territory.

(b) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly, the number of seats re-
served for Scheduled Castes, the division of the National Capital Territory into territorial
constituencies (incliding the basis for such division), and all other matters relating to the
functioning of the Legislative Assembly shall be regulated by law made by Parliament.

(c) The provisions of articles 324 to 327 and 329 shall apply in relation to the
National Capital Territory, the Legislative Assémbly of the National Capital Territory and the
members thereof as they apply, in relation to a State, the Legislative Assembly ofa State and
the members thereof respectively; and any reference in articles 326 and 329 to
“appropriate Legislature” shall be deemed to bea reference to Parliament.

(3) (a) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislative Assembly shall
have power to make laws for.the whole or any part of the National Capital Territory with
respect to any of the matters enumerated in the State List or in the Concurrent List in so
far as any such matter is applicable to Union territories except matters with respect to
Entries 1, 2 and 18 of the State List and Entries 64, 65 and 66 of that List in so far as they

+ relate to the said Entries 1, 2 and 18.

(6) Nothing in sub-clause (a) shall derogate from the powers of Parliament under
this Constitution to make laws with respect to any matter for a Union territory or any part
thereof.

(c) If any provision of a law made by the Legislative Assembly with respect fo any
matter is repugnant to any provision of a law made by Parliament with respect to that
matter, whether passed before or after the law made by the Legislative Assembly, or of an
earlier law, other than a law made by the Legislative Assembly, then, in either case, the law
made by Parliament, or, as the case may be, such earlier law, shall prevail and the law made
by the Legislative Assembly shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be void:

Provided that if any such law made by the Legislative Assembly has been reserved

_ for the consideration of the President and has received his assent, such law shall prevail in

the National Capital Territory:



5

Provided further that nothing in this sub-clause shall prevent Parliament from enact-
ing at any time any law with respect to the same matter including a law adding to, amend-
ing, varying or repealing the law so made by the Legislative Assembly

(4) There shail be a Council of Ministers consisting of not more than ten per cent. of
the total number of members in the Legislative Assembly, with the Chief Minister at the
head to aid and advise the Lieutenant Governor in the exercise of his functions in relation
to matters with respect to which the Legislative Assembly has power to make laws, except
in so fai as he is, by or under any law, required to act in his discretion:

Provided that in the case of difference of opinion between the Lieutenant Gavernor
and his Ministers on any matter, the Lieutenant Governor shall refer it to the President for
decision and act according to the decision given thereon by the President and pending such
decision it shall be competent for the Lieutenant Governor in any case where the matter, in
his opinion, is so urgent that it is necessary for him to take immediate action, to take such
action or to give such direction in the matter as he deems necessary.

(5) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the President and the other Ministers
shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Chief Minister and the Ministers
shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.

(6) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the Legislative
Assembly. हि

(7) (@ Parliament may, by law, make proWisions for giving effect to, or supplement-
ing the provisions contained in the foregoing clauses and for all matter incidental or con-
sequential thereto,

(4) Any such law as is referred to in sub-clause (a) shall not be deemed to be an
amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368 notwithstanding that it
contains any provision which amends or has the effect of amending, this Constitution.

(8) The provisions of article 239B shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the
National Capital Territory, the Lieutenant Governor and the Legislative Assembly, as they
apply in relation to the Union territory of Pondicherry, the administrator and its Legisla-
ture, respectively; and any reference in that article to “clause (1) of article 239A” shall be
deemed to be reference to this article or article 239AB, as the case may be.

239AB. If the President, on receipt of a report from the Lieutenant Governor or other-
wise, is satisfied—
(a) that a situation has arisen in which the administration of the National Capital
Territory cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of article 23984 or of
any law made in pursuance of that article; or

(6) that for the proper administration of the National Capital Territory it is neces-
sary or expedient so to do,

the President may by order suspend the.operation of any provision of article 239AA or of all
or any of the provisions of any law made in pursuance of that article for such period and
subject to such conditions as may be specified in such law and make such incidental and
consequential provisions as may appear to him to be necessary or expedient for administer-
ing the National Capital Territory in accordance with the provisions of article 239 and
article 239AA.

* * * + +

Provision in
case of failure of
constitutional
machinery.

i
|
|
:
i
|
i
i
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
i



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to'amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri L. K. Advani, Deputy Prime Minister)

MGIPMAND—25491. S—13.08,2003.