1
THE MANDATORY BASIC FACILITIES FOR NEGLECTED SENIOR
CITIZENS, WIDOWS AND ORPHANS BILL, 2017
By
SHRI A.T. NANA PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for mandatory basic facilities like housing, food, water, medicine and
security to neglected senior citizens, widows and orphans.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mandatory Basic Facilities for Neglected Senior
Citizens, Widows and Orphans  Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 67 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "neglected senior citizen" means any person who has attained the age of
sixty years and has no facility for shelter or has any relative to provide shelter;
(c) "orphan" means a child who is below fourteen years of age and is without
parents or willing and capable legal or natural guardian or other relatives to take his
minimum basic care;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) "widow" means any woman who has not remarried after the death of her
husband and who does not have any facility for shelter.
3. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within six months of the
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, frame a national policy for
protection and welfare of the neglected senior citizens, widows and orphans.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish residential centres for the neglected
senior citizens, widows and orphans.
(2) Every residential centre shall have the capacity of minimum eighty and maximum
two hundred persons to live in at a time.
(3) Every residential centre shall be arranged in such a way to accommodate two
orphans, one senior citizen and one widow in one unit.
5. The appropriate Government shall—
(a) provide housing, food, water, medicine, security and the minimum resources
necessary to lead a balanced and healthy life in every residential centre;
(b) set up a domestic production unit for employment generation in every
residential centre; and
(c) provide educational facilities for orphans.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute in each State a Managing Committee to monitor, supervise and coordinate the
functioning of the residential centres established under sub-section (1) of section 4.
(2) The Management Committee shall consist of—
(i) a Chairperson;
(ii) Secretary,  Social  Welfare  Department  of  the  State  Government
concerned, member;
(iii) a senior-most senior citizen from the residential centre, member;
(iv) an oldest widow from the residential centre,member;
(v) an eminent social worker, member;
to be nominated by the appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other term and conditions of service of
Chairperson, and members of the Managing Committee and the procedure to be followed
in the discharge of its functions shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The residential centres shall have such members of staff with such terms and
conditions of services as may be prescribed, from time to time.
Definitions.
Framing a
National
Policy.
Establishment
of Residential
Centres.
Residential
centres to
have proper
facilities for
the
beneficiaries.
Constitution
of
Management
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds for the implementation of the provisions of the Act.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days,
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
fund.
Power to
make rules
5
10

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In the last one decade, the old age population in the country has risen by
39.3 per cent. This segment of population is expected to rise by 45-50 per cent in the coming
decades. Because of the continual nuclearization of families in the society, they have to
suffer from several problems on their own. There are more than a thousand old age homes
in India but they have not been able to yield expected results. In a similar way, there are also
a large number of widows in the country who are not only discriminated in their family but
also in the entire society. In several cases, they are deprived of basic support and assistance.
The necessity today is to create and promote a propitious environment whereby these
widows can live their remaining lives in a socially productive and dignified manner. There is
also a large section of the population of orphan kids who are without any support and who
live a destitute life. Most of these kids are either subjected to child labour or are addicted to
drugs or are involved in illegal organ trading.
The need is to bring these three disadvantaged sections of society under one roof of
residential centre where they can use their mutually cooperating roles in a socially conducive
manner. Widows should be encouraged to undertake the role of mother for orphan children
and neglected old citizens should play the role of guardians  for both of them. This would
make facilitate a family environment for all of them. Through these centres, along with basic
facilities such as food, shelter and clothing, an opportunity to live a more dignified life can
be given to all these three sections in the society—old age, widows and destitute children.
This arrangement would definitely make their lives happy by mutually interdependent and
emotional bonding. In these centres the neglected, suffering and deprived classes of our
society would be able to live a life free from deprivation and many other problems.
The most important reason to establish the residential centres is to create a unified
shelter for various needy sections instead of separate orphanages, widow ashrams, old age
homes, etc. Two distinctive benefits that should arise from such arrangement are that on
one hand there would be a reduction in Government spending on infrastructure, human
resources, etc. and, on the other hand, these disadvantaged groups would have an
opportunity to take care of each other and live a better life with emotional, social and mental
satisfaction.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; A.T. NANA PATIL
February 28, 2017.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for establishment of the residential centres all over the
country for use of the neglected senior citizens, widows and orphans. Clause 5 provides
that appropriate Government shall ensure residential centres to have proper basic facilities
to the beneficiaries. Clause 6 provides for constitution of  Management Committee in each
State to monitor, supervise and coordinate the functioning of the residential centres. Clause
7 provides that Central Government shall provide adequate funds for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crore may
involve as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for mandatory basic facilities like housing, food, water, medicine and
security to neglected senior citizens, widows and orphans.
————
(Shri A.T. Nana Patil, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5336LS(S3)—27-03-2017.