THE ORPHAN CHILD (WELFARE) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI PRAHLAD SINGH PATEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for welfare of orphan children and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Orphan Child (Welfare) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,  by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "child" means a person who has not completed the age of eighteen years;
and
(c) "orphan child" includes a child who is an abandoned, neglected or a destitute
child.
Bill No. 67 of 2015
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Establish-
ment of
children
homes.
Facilities to
be provided
to the orphan
children in
children
homes.
Extension of
benefits of
centrally-
sponsored
schemes
meant for
children
belonging to
the Scheduled
Caste and the
Scheduled
Tribe to
orphan
children.
Nodal officer
in every
district.
Power to
make rules.
3. The Central Government shall establish adequate number of children homes with
all basic amenities in every district of the country for the welfare of orphan children.
4. (1) Every orphan child who is admitted into the children home shall be entitled to
the following facilities free of cost,—
(a) accommodation, food and clothing;
(b) education including higher and technical education; and
(c) medical assistance.
(2) Every orphan child shall also be entitled to such other facilities as  are necessary
for his all-round development.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, all
benefits of centrally-sponsored schemes meant for the welfare of children belonging to the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall also be available to orphan children.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall designate a nodal officer in every district to
ensure that all benefits of schemes meant for welfare of children belonging to the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes reach every orphan child.
(2) The nodal officer shall, in respect of his district, submit an annual report containing
such details of welfare measures provided to orphan children, as may be prescribed by rules
made under this Act, to the Central Government.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it  is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total  period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately  following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule  should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified  form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such  modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of  anything previously done under that rule.
5
10
15
20
25

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Though there are some schemes to take care of orphan children, the situation of
orphan children in our country is still worst. There is no comprehensive policy framework for
their overall development. Therefore, this Bill proposes that all the benefits meant for welfare
of children belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled tribes be extended to
orphan children so as to ensure them a dignified life in true spirit of Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; PRAHLAD SINGH PATEL
February 10,  2015.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of adequate number of children homes with
all basic amenities for the welfare of orphan children in every district of the country by the
Central Government. Clause 4 provides for free of cost food, accommodation, clothing,
education and medical facilities to the orphan children. Clause 5 provides for extension of
benefits of centrally-sponsored schemes meant for the welfare of children belonging to the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes to every orphan child. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is likely to be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for welfare of orphan children and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Prahlad Singh Patel, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4761LS—04-03-2015.