5

As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

2.0 APR 2000

Bill No. 67 ० 2000.

THE WIDOWS’ PROTECTION BILL, 2000

By
Dr, A. D. K. JevASEELAN, M.P.

A

BILL
10 provide for protection to destitute widows and for matters connected therewith,

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows :—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Widows’ Protection Act, 2000.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir,

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) "competent authority" means the Collector of a district or such other authority
as may be prescribed and who is empowered by the Central Government for
determination and sanction of pension under this Act;

Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment

Definitions.


Appointment of
enquicy officer,

Application for
pensions,

Pensions.

(6) "destitute" in relation to a widow means a woman who has no relative or
Kinsman to support or provide her livelihood including the livelihood to her minor
children dependent on her; ~

(©) "pension" means the amount which may be sanctioned in favour of a widow
for her maintenance under this Act or any other law for the time being in forces;

(@) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and

(2) "widow" means a femiale citizen of India who has attained the age ofeighteen
years and whose husband has died after her legal marriage.

3, Any widow-—
(@ who is a destitute;
-(ii) who has no son;
(if) who has a son who but has not attained the age of twenty years;

(iv) who has a son who has attained the age of twenty years but is
incapable of earning his livelihood due to his physical and mental disability
and infirmity, shall be eligible for pension:

Provided that such widow shall not be eligible for the said pension if;
(@) she is employed in any service and receives regular salary from such service; or

(5) she holds movable and immovable property including residential house worth
such amount as may be prescribed from time to time; or

(2) she has a regular monthly income of more than four thousand rupees either in kind
or in. cash from agriculture, horticulture, animal husbandry, cottage industry, or rent from
any immovable property or from any Government pension. or

Provided further that a widow who is residing with her in-laws or parents according to
her custom or due to other circumstances and has an undivided share in the joint property of
her collaterals or brothers, sha! be eligible for such pension.

4. The Central Government shall appoint enquiry officers who shatl help the
competent authority in finalising the claims of pension made under this Act.

5. (1) A widow desirous to get pension from the Central Government for her
mainienarice may apply ta the competent authority in the prescribed form for grant of such
pensicn.

(2) On receipt of the application form, the competent authority may, either make an
enquiry or cause itto be made by an enquiry officer suber to it and after receiving the
report from such officer, may either determine the amount of pension paysibie to the applicant
or reject her application under intimation to her.

6. The competent authority may grant # cconthly pension of minimum ofrupees
two thousand toa maxiniu of rupees five thousand to a widow for her life or for such
period. as may be deemed proper, and shail draw a pension payment order accordingly
in her iavour on a Government Treasury,

7, Whenever it is found that any widow has re-married after sanction of pension, or
her son has attained the age of twenty years and has become capable ofeaming livelihood,
or the widow has not remained eligible for pension on account of any of the grounds
mentioned in section 3, the competent authority may pass appropriate ordeis for closing,
the pension of such widow.

20

25

30

40

fe}


8, Notwithstending enything contained in any other law for the time being in force, a
‘widow shall have the following rights from her major son or sons: —

(0 right to reside in the property acquired, or leased or rented by the son;
(ii) right to adequate health care; and
(iif) maintenance allowance for a decent life.

9. (7) In case a widow does not want io live with her son, she will be entitled to such
‘amount as maintenance from the son every month as may be prescribed,

(2) The amount of maintenance allowance payabie by a son to his mother who is a
dow, shall be determined after taking into account the son's income, standard of life, any
immovable property and the standard of life to which the widow enjoyed before the husband's

(3) Any person who does not pay maintenance allowance to a widow as per the
visions of sub-section (2), shall be punishable with one year imprisonment and a fine of
3 ten thousand,

10. (1) Whoever procures or abets in procuring pension by misrepresentation of facts

or by making false declaration or by giving faise information to or before the competent

authority or any enquiry officer so appointed under section 4, shali be punishable, on a
iplaint, by such competent authority or enquiry officer, as the case may be, with

iprisonment for a tern which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to
es one thousand or with both,

(2) The competent authority on the conviction of 2 widow as indicated in sub-
ction (1) shall order refund by her of suclramounts as she had already received as pension.

11. This Act shall not affect the provisions of any other pension !aw for the time being
force but any widow deriving benefit from this Act shall not be entitled to get benefit-from
ay other pension law.

12, The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
or the purpose of carrying into effe’ ‘he provisions of this Act.

Rights of
widow.

Son to provide
‘maintenance
allowance.

Punishment,

Saving

Central
Government to
make rules,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

It is generally found that a large number of Indian women belonging to lo
middle income groups become destitute after the death of their husbands. In our
widows are the most neglected persons. They are not cared properly by their
Sometimes, conditions of such widows become so. miserable due to poverty that
Persons of the society exploit their situation and make their lives poignant and disgraceful
the society. It is, therefore, expedient to liquidate this evil from the society and to provi
Pension to such widows from the State by rendering them reasonable financial assist
carrying on their livelihood honorably.

This Bills seeks to achieve this objective.

New Dein; A.D.K. JEYASI
March 16, 2000. के


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides that every destitute widow shall be eligible for a pension,
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the appointment of enquiry officers. Clause 6 of the Bill
envisages the payment of monthly pension ranging from rupees two thousand to rupees five
thousand per month (0 the destitute widows. The number of such widows in the country may
not be less that 50 lakhs. The grant of pension to such widows and payment of salary, ete. to
enquiry officers would involve a recurring expenditure of approximately rupees six hundred
crore per year. This expenditure will be met out of the Consolidated Fund of India.

It is also likely to involve a non-recurring expenditure of rupees five lakhs.


MEMORANDUM, REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the:
the provisions of the Bill. As the
Power is of a normal character.

Central Government to make rules for ing out
Will relate to detail only, the delegation of legislative


LOK SABHA

A

BILL

to provide for protection to destitute widows and for matters connected therewith.

(Dr. 4. D. K. Jeyaseelan, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4593LS—03-04-2000.