1
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI JAGDAMBIKA PAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the SeventiethYear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 67 of  2019
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2.  For section 497 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—
"497. Whoever has illicit and immoral relationship with a person who is and
whom he knows or has reason to believe to be spouse of another person, such illicit
and immoral relationship not amounting to any other offence under this code, is guilty
of the offence of adultery, and shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend upto five years, or with fine, or with both.".
Substitution
of new
section for
section 497.
Adultery.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The object of section 497 of Indian Penal Code, 1860, was to preserve the sanctity of
the marriage as the society abhors marital infidelity. According to Indian culture, marriage is
considered sacred and mutual fidelity and devotion to partner are still considered to be the
essence of marrige.
The Supreme Court of India vide judgement dated 27 September, 2018 struck down
section 497 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 as unconstitutional. The previous offence of adultery
could be committed by a man with the married woman only. The husband of a woman having
illicit and immoral relationship with other unmarried women could not be prosecuted by the
wife for adultery. This section does not penalize the illicit and immoral relationship of a
married man with an unmarried woman or a widow or even a married woman when her
husband consents to it. The offence of adultery is an offence committed against the husband
of the wife and not against the wife. Thus, the Supreme Court struck down previous section
497 as unconstitutional being violative of articles 14, 15 and 21 of the Constitution of India.
Further, the previous law draws a distinction between consent given by a married
woman without her husband's consent and the consent given by a unmarried woman. Thus
there is no doubt that this section treated a woman like a man's chattel.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 with a view to provide
that both the husband and the wife can prosecute the adulterer or adulteress, as the case
may be, of their spouse for the offence of adultery.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JAGDAMBIKA PAL
June  6, 2019.
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * *
497. Whoever has sexual intercourse with a person who is and whom he knows or has
reason to believe to be the wife of another man, without the consent or connivance of that
man, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, is guilty of the offence of
adultery, and shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to five years, or with fine, or with both. In such case the wife shall not be punishable
as an abettor.
* * * * *
Adultery.

MGIPMRND—461LS(S3)—18.06.2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri Jagdambika Pal, M.P .)