     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 67 of 2022
THE SPECIAL MARRIAGE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2022
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Special Marriage Act, 1954.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1.(1) This Act may be called the Special Marriage (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. After section 4 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 , (hereinafter referred to
as the principal Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“4A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for
the time being in force, a marriage between any two persons of same sex
may be solemnized under this Act, if at the time of marriage,—
Short title and
commencement.
Insertion of new
section 4A.
Solemnizationof specialmarriagesbetween samesex.
43 of 1954.5

2
5
10
Amendment of
section 15.
Amendment of
section 22.
Amendment of
section 23.
Amendment of
section 27.
(a) in case both the parties are male, each has completed twenty-one years
of age; or
(b) in case both the parties are female, each has completed eighteen years
of age.”.
3. In section 15 of the principal Act, in clause (a), for the words “husband and
wife”, the word “spouse” shall be substituted.
4. In section 22 of the principal Act, for the words “the husband or the wife”,
the words “of the spouse” shall be substituted.
5. In section 23 of the principal Act, in clause (1), for the words “either by the
husband or the wife”, the words “by either of the spouse” shall be substituted.
6. In section 27 of the principal Act, in clause (1), for the words “either by the
husband or the wife”, the words “by either of the spouse” shall be substituted.

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the year 2018, the Supreme Court of India struck down an archaic, draconian
legislation of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 namely section 377. Through this landmark
judgement (Navtej Singh Johar vs. Union of India), homosexuality was effectively
decriminalised. While this was a much needed, progressive leap forward, LGBTQIA
individuals still face persecution, discrimination and social stigma within society.
Justice D.Y. Chandrachud in Justice K.S. Pattaswamy (Retd.) vs. Union of India
observed that ‘family, marriage, procreation and sexual orientation are all integral to
the dignity of the individual. Above all, the privacy of the individual recognizes an
inviolable right to determine how freedom shall be exercised’.
While the determination of one’s sexual orientation has been realised, LGBTQIA
individuals are still unable to marry and create their own families. In addition,
LGBTQIA couples have no access to rights that heterosexual couples are entitled to
upon marriage, such as succession, maintenance and pensions, etc.
Therefore, it is of the utmost importance to amend the Special Marriage Act,
1954, to legalise same-sex marriage, and provide legal recognition to married
LGBTQIA couples. It will ensure that article 14 and article 21 of the Constitution are
upheld, and ensure that LGBTQIA couples are provided with the rights they are
entitled to.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                    SUPRIYA SULE
 17 January, 2022.

ANNEXURE
[EXTRACT FROM THE SPECIAL MARRIAGE ACT, 1954]
(ACT NO. 43 OF 54)
* * * * *
15. Any marriage celebrated, whether before or after the commencement of
this Act, other than a marriage solemnized under the Special Marriage Act, 1872
or under this Act, may be registered under this Chapter by a Marriage Officer in
the territories to which this Act extends if the following conditions are fulfilled,
namely:—
(a) a ceremony of marriage has been performed between the parties and
they have been living together as husband and wife ever since;
* * * * *
22. When either the husband or the wife has, without reasonable excuse,
withdrawn from the society of the other, the aggrieved party may apply by petition
to the district court for restitution of conjugal rights, and the court, on being
satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition, and that there is no
legal ground why the application should not be granted, may decree restitution of
conjugal rights accordingly.
23. (1) A petition for judicial separation may be presented to the district court
either by the husband or the wife,—
(a) on any of the grounds specified in sub-section (1) and sub-section
(1A) of section 27 on which a petition for divorce might have been presented;
or
* * * * *
27. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules made thereunder,
a petition for divorce may be presented to the district court either by the husband
or the wife on the ground that the respondent,—
(a) has, after the solemnization of the marriage, had voluntary sexual
intercourse with any person other than his or her spouse; or
* * * * *
Registration of
marriages
celebrated in
other forms.
4
Restitution of
conjugal rights.
Judicial
separation.
Divorce.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Special Marriage Act, 1954.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P .)