AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

s
an :

Lf 1 ? ‘ | 7
1 3 MAY <४०

Bill No. 67 of 2005

THE COMMERCIAL CROPS WORKERS (WELFARE) BILL, 2005
| का
SHRI ABDULLAKUTTY, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for certain welfare measures for commercial crops workers and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Commercial Crops Workers (Welfare) Act, 2005.
(2) It extends to the wioleae India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(i) "commercial crops" means and includes rubber, coffee, tea, cashew, spices,
cardamom and such other crop as may be declared a commercial crop by the Central
Government;

(ii) "fund" means the Commercial Crops Workers Welfare Fund constituted
under section 3 of this Act;

(iii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and

(iv) "workers" means workers engaged in an activity connected with the
production of commercial crop.

Short title,
extent and
commencement.

Definitions.


dl

«2
Commercial 3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a fund to be known as Commercial
Crops Crops Workers Welfare Fund. |
Workers .
Welfare Fund. (2) The fund shall be administered by a Committee consisting of:—

(i) a Chairman who shall be appointed by the Central Government;
(ii) one member to represent commercial crops growers;
(iii) one member to represent commercial crops workers; and

(iv) one representative from each of the States where commercial crops are
grown who shall be nominated by the respective State Governments.

Contribution 4, (1) The Central Government and every State Government where commercial
to the fund. — corps are cultivated, shall contribute to the fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.

(2) The Commercial crops growers shall also contribute to the fund in such ratio as
may be determined by the Central Government.

Utilisation of 5. The Fund shall be used for the following purposes:—

the fund.
(1) payment of unemployment/sustenance allowance to workers during off

season period;

(ii) free health facilities for the workers and their families in the hospitals to
be set up for the purpose;

(iil) free educational facilities to the children of workers;

(iv) payment of compensation to workers who are injured during work; |
(v) payment of compensation to families of workers who die in harness;
(vi) payment of premium of group life insurance cover of workers;

(vii) payment of disability allowance in case of workers who meet with
accidents and are not able to work;

(viii) payment of old age pension to those workers who have attained sixty
years of age and are not gainfully employed;

(ix) provision of suitable facilities like canteen, health, recreation, drinking
water, etc. at work places; and

(x) payment of bonus to workers.

Power to make 6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
rules. for carrying out the purposes of this Act. :



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Millions of workers are engaged in the commercial crops sector. There is no statutory
mechanism for their welfare. In the absence of suitable legislation, they are harassed and
denied their rightful dues and benefits.

Therefore, it is proposed to set up a fund for the welfare of commercial crops workers.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; ABDULLAKUTTY
April 13, 2005.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a fund for the benefit of commercial
crops workers. The fund shall be administered by a Committee. Clause 4 provides that —
Central Government shall contribute to the fund. Therefore, the Bill, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely that a recurring expenditure of
about rupees five hundred crore may be involved every year. A non-recurring expenditure of
about rupees one hundred crore will also be involved.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bili empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detaii only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for certain welfare measures for commercial crops
workers and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.

(Shri Abdullakutty, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—563LS—02.05,2005.