As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

{ 08 p

Bill No. 67 of 2006

THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR SMALL AND MARGINAL
TRADERS BILL, 2006
By
SHRIMATI JAYAPRADA, M.P.
A

BILL
to provide for the setting up of a National Commission to protect the interests of small
and marginal traders and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Bg it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, (7) This Act may be called the National Commission for Small and Marginal Traders
Act, 2006.

5 (2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under the Act; and

(i) “small and marginal trader” includes any person running a small business
10 like a grocery shop, pan shop, barber shop or earning his livelihood through selling
flowers, toys, children's dresses, handicrafts, cold drinks, packaged drinking water,

Short title,
extent and
commencement.

Definitions.


National
Commission
for Small and
Marginal
Traders.

State
Commission
for smail and
‘marginal
traders.

Functions of
the National
Commission.

Functions of
the State
Commission.

Central
Government
to release
funds.

2

fruits and vegetables, ice-cream, magazines and newspapers or general utilities, house-
hold items or any other item which may be prescribed and whether business is carried
from a permanent structure or not and where the total capital invested in running the
business does not exceed rupees twenty-five thousand.

3. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a National Commission for Small and
Marginal Traders (hereinafter to be referred to as the National Commission).

. (2) The ‘National Commission shall consist of—
(i) a Chairman to be nominated by the Central Government;

(ii) The Secretary, Union Ministry of Labour and Employment who shall be an
ex-officio member of the Commission; *

(iii) one representative of the Small and Marginal traders; and
(iv) two other members, to be nominated by the Central Government.

(3) The terms and conditions of service, salaries and allowances of the Chairman and
other members shall be such as may be prescribed.

4. (1) Every State Government shall set up a State Commission for Small and Mar-
ginal Traders (hereinafter to be referred to as the State Commission).

(2) Every State Commission shall consist of—
(i) a Chairman to be appointed by the State Government; and
(ii) four other members to be nominated by the State Governments.

(3) The terms and conditions of service, salaries and allowances of the Chairman and
other members shall be such as may be determined by the State Government.

5. The National Commission shall perform the following functions:—

(i) to formulate guidelines for payment of old age pension to small and marginal
traders to be paid after they attain the age of sixty years and not engaged in any gainful
activity;

(ii) to frame a scheme for constructing permanent structure for traders running
business from temporary structures or pavements;

(iii) to make recommendation to the Central Government regarding require-
ment of funds for implementation of the provisions of the Act;

(iv) to release funds to the State Commission;

(v) to take up with commercial banks the modalities for extending loans to small
and marginal traders;

(vi) to formulate an insurance scheme for small and marginal traders; and
(vii) such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central Government.
6. (1) Every State Commission shall conduct a census of small and marginal traders
within its jurisdiction;
(2) The census conducted under sub-section (7) shall provide information relating to

the type of business carried on, facilities, capital invested and required, plan for improvement
and such other information as may be prescribed; and

(3) The State Commission shall send a detailed annual report to the National
Commission.

7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation by Parliament, release the
necessary funds to the National Commission.



5

3

8. It shall be the duty of the State Commission to implement the policies and schemes
framed by the National Commission.

9. This Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law, for the time
being in force, regarding welfare of Small and Marginal Traders.

10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.

Duty of the
State
Commission
to
implement
the policies.
Act not to
be in
derogation
of any other
law.

Power to
make rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

There are innumerable small traders and businessmen spread throughout the country.
They are not wealthy and sometimes their total investment does not exceed twenty-five
thousand rupees. No bank is likely to give loans to them as they usually have nothing to

offer as guarantee. In their old age, there is no security and there is no insurance cover for
them.

It has been observed that many of them carry on business from temporary structure,
They do not even have permanent structure to sell their wares.

Therefore, in order to provide security to them in their old age and assist them in their
business, it is proposed to set up a National Commission to protect their interests.

Hence the Bill.

New Dewi; ‘ JAYAPRADA
July 25,2006.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for setting up of a National Commission for Small
and Marginal Traders. Clause 4 provides for the setting up of State Commission by every
State Government. Clause 6 provides that National Commission shall release funds to the
State Commissions to implement the provisions of this Bill. Clause 7 provides that the
Central Government shall release funds to the National Commission after due appropriation.

The expenditure in respect of State Commissions shall be borne out of the
Consolidated Funds of the respective States. However, the Central Government may have to
provide funds to the State Governments for carrying out the provisions of the Bill.

The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore is
likely to be incurred.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

ee.



LOK SABHA

A

BILL
to provide for the setting up of a National Commission to protect the interests of small
and marginal traders and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shrimati Jayaprada, M.P)

MGIPMRND—2001LS(S-3)—07.08.2006.