As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 67 of 2024
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
By
Shri Manish Tewari, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 324 of the Constitution,— 
(a) for clause (2), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
 “ (2) The Election Commission shall consist of the Chief Election Commissioner 
and such number of other Election Commissioners, if any, as the President, may, in 
consultation with the Committee of Appointments, from time to time, fix. 
Short title and 
commencement.
Amendment of 
article 324.
5
10

(2A) The appointment of Chief Election Commissioner, Election  
Commissioners and Regional Commissioners shall, subject to the provisions 
of any law made in that behalf by Parliament, be made by the President on the 
recommendations of a Committee consisting of,—
(i) the Prime Minister — Chairperson;
(ii) The Union Home Minister — Member;
(iii) the Leader of the Opposition in the Council 
of States
— Member;
(iv) the Leader of the Opposition in the House of 
the People
— Member;
(v) the Chief Justice of Supreme Court — Member;
(vi) two senior most puisne judges of Supreme 
Court of India to be nominated by the Chief 
Justice of India
— Member;
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, “the Leader of the Opposition 
in the House of the People” or “the Leader of the Opposition in the Council of 
States” shall, when no such leader has been so recognized, include the Leader 
of the single largest group in Opposition of the Government in the House of the 
People or the Council of States, as the case may be.
(2B) Notwithstanding any law made in that behalf by the Parliament, the term 
of office of the Chief Election Commissioner and Election Commissioners under 
clause (2) and Regional Commissioners under clause (4) shall be six years and 
three years from the date of assuming office, respectively. 
Provided that after their retirement the Chief Election Commissioner, 
Election Commissioners or the Regional Commissioners shall not be eligible for 
appointment to any office under the Government of India, State Governments or 
under the Constitution;”.
(b) in clause (4), for the words, “after consultation with Election Commission”, the 
words “on the recommendation of the Committee” shall be substituted; and
(c) for clause (5), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(5) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the conditions 
of service of the Election Commissioners and the Regional Commissioners shall be 
such as the President may be rule determine:
Provided that the Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioners 
and Regional Commissioners shall not be removed from his office except in 
like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court and the 
conditions of service of the Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioners 
and Regional Commissioners shall not be varied to their disadvantage after their 
appointment.”. 
3. After article 328 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“328A. (1) The regulation, monitoring and superintendence of internal functioning 
including but not limited to internal election of all registered political parties under the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951 shall be vested in the Election Commission.
(2) The Election Commission shall regulate, monitor and superintendent the 
internal election of registered political parties under clause (1) in accordance with 
their respective constitutions until a Model Internal Code is prescribed by the Election 
Commission:
Insertion of new 
article 328A.
Election 
Commission 
to regulate, 
monitor and 
superintendent 
the election 
of registered 
political parties.
5
2
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
43 of 1951
45

Provided that it shall incumbent on all registered political parties to incorporates 
Model Election Code into their respective constitutions after formulation by the Election 
Commission.
(3) If any registered political party fails to comply with the advisories, duration and 
instructions issued by the Election Commission with regard to their internal functions, 
the recognition of such political party as a State or National may be withdrawn including 
any other action as the Election Commission deems fit under section 16A of the Election 
Symbols (Reservation and Allotment Order), 1968, as the case may be.”.
5
3

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The framers of the Constitution of India made a giant leap of faith when they incorporated 
universal adult suffrage into the design of India’s founding document and enshrined it in 
article 326 of the Constitution.
In 1947 India’s literacy rate was only twelve per cent. in other words eighty-eight  
per cent. of India was illiterate. What this decision meant was that all Indian citizen’s 
irrespective of caste, colour, creed, sex, place of birth or any other disability including 
illiteracy would henceforth be qualified to participate in the great Indian democratic 
experiment that was set to unfold in 1952.
With every election since 1952 our democracy has deepened and got more broad based. 
In 1988 the voting age was lowered to eighteen years. By the 73rd and 74th amendment 
to the Indian Constitution, Parliament institutionalized democracy at the third tier or at the 
grass root level.
However there remains a very serious infirmity in the functioning of India’s democratic 
model and that is the functioning of political parties that underpin our democratic edifice. The 
internal functioning and structures of an overwhelming number of these political parties are 
very opaque and ossified . There is a need to make their functioning transparent, accountable 
and rules based. At the last count there are 2858 political parties registered with the Election 
Commission of India. Out of these 8 are national parties, 54 are state parties and 2797 are 
unrecognised parties. On the 13th of August 1996 the Election Commission had issued a 
circular to all political parties registered with it whether national, state or unrecognised that 
they must hold regular elections in accordance with their respective constitution’s. Under 
Section 29-A of the Representation of People’s Act 1951 the Commission has the powers to 
register a political party but not deregister it. 
While the Election Commission of India has superintendence, direction and control 
of elections under Part XV of the Constitution of India it has repeatedly argued before 
various Courts of Law that this does not extend to the supervision or superintendence of 
internal elections and functioning of political parties. This bill seeks to provide the Election 
Commission of India with the necessary wherewithal to regulate, monitor and superintend 
the internal functioning of all political parties registered with and withdraw recognition 
as national or state parties and to take such appropriate action under section 16-A of the 
Election Symbols (Reservation and allotment order) 1968 if they fail to comply with the 
directions of the Commission with regard to their internal functioning.
There is growing concern with regard to the independence and autonomy of the Election 
Commission. To maintain the impartiality and integrity of the Commission, it has become 
imperative that the Chief Election Commission and such other Election Commissioners as 
are deemed necessary be appointed by a Panel consisting of the Prime Minister of India, 
Union Home Minister, Leader of Opposition or Floor Leader in Lok Sabha, Leader of 
Opposition or Floor Leader in Rajya Sabha and Chief Justice of India and two senior most 
puisne judges of the Supreme Court of India.
It is also pertinent that the Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioners shall 
be given a fixed term of six years and the Regional Commissioners fixed term of three years 
from the dates of their respective appointments. They should not be removed from office 
except in accordance with the procedure laid down for the removal of a Supreme Court 
Judge. Also, after retirement they should not be eligible for any reappointment to any office 
under the Government of India, State Governments and the Constitution.
This is the second wave of Democratic Reforms that India requires.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                                                                      MANISH TEW ARI  
July 9, 2024.
4

ANNEXURE
[Extracts From the Constitution of India]
*                                  *                                 *                                  *                              *
324. (1) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of the electoral 
rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to Parliament and to the Legislature of every 
State and of elections to the offices of President and Vice-President held under this 
Constitution shall be vested in a Commission (referred to in this Constitution as the Election 
Commission).  
(2) The Election Commission shall consist of the Chief Election Commissioner and 
such number of other Election Commissioners, if any, as the President may from time 
to time fix and the appointment of the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election 
Commissioners shall, subject to the provisions of any law made in that behalf by Parliament, 
be made by the President. 
(3) When any other Election Commissioner is so appointed the Chief Election 
Commissioner shall act as the Chairman of the Election Commission.
(4) Before each general election to the House of the People and to the Legislative 
Assembly of each State, and before the first general election and thereafter before each 
biennial election to the Legislative Council of each State having such Council, the 
President may also appoint after consultation with the Election Commission such Regional 
Commissioners as he may consider necessary to assist the Election Commission in the 
performance of the functions conferred on the Commission by clause (1). 
(5) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the conditions of service 
and tenure of office of the Election Commissioners and the Regional Commissioners shall 
be such as the President may by rule determine: 
Provided that the Chief Election Commissioner shall not be removed from his office 
except in like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court and 
the conditions of service of the Chief Election Commissioner shall not be varied to his 
disadvantage after his appointment: 
Provided further that any other Election Commissioner or a Regional Commissioner 
shall not be removed from office except on the recommendation of the Chief Election 
Commissioner.
*                                  *                                 *                                  *                              *
Superintendence, 
direction and 
control of 
elections to 
be vested in 
an Election 
Commission.
5

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
(Shri Manish Tewari, M.P .)