1
THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2011
By
SHRI MOHAN JENA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. Section 28 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 shall be omitted.
Bill No. 67 of  2011
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
59 of 1960. Omission of
section 28.

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 51A of the Constitution provides for fundamental duties of every citizen. When
sub-clause (g) of article 51A provides “to protect and improve the natural environment
including forest, lakes, rivers and wild life and to have compassion for living creatures and
sub-clause (h) provides “to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry
and reforms” as fundamental duties.
Against this backdrop the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 was enacted not
only to prevent the animals from all types of cruelty, but also to protect their existence as
Constitutional obligation. On the other hand, to maintain ecological balance on the earth, the
existence of animals is necessary. However, section 28 of the Act provides exemption for
inflicting cruelty and killing to animals in the name of religion or for performing religious rites.
It is unfortunate because nowhere in the religious text books it is mentioned that killing
animals is necessary for religious ceremonies. Killing of a living being for religious purpose
is not only against the spirit of the Constitution and law, but also against the tenets of any
religion.
Now a days the cases of superstitious practice are on the rise. Persons offering Bali/
sacrifice of animals can be seen in and around certain religious places beside their homes.
Any type of sacrifice or killing of any living being before deity or in any public place has no
rationale in the modern scientific age. This primitive practice is against humanism and
civilization. Because of the presence of section 28 in the Act, the Courts/other law implementing
authority are not able to interpret the law in its right spirit and objective and deal with the
cases of cruelty against animals in right manner.
It is, therefore, proposed to omit section 28 of the Act with a view to put a complete ban
on the practice of bali/sacrifice or killing or inflicting cruelty to animals in the name of
religion.
N
EW DELHI; MOHAN JENA
August 2, 2011.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PREVENTION OF CRUEL TY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
* * * * * * *
28. Nothing contained in this Act shall render it an offence to kill any animal in a
manner required by the religion of any community.
* * * * * * *
Saving as
rsepects
manner of
killing
prescribed by
religion.

GMGIPMRND—1153LS(S3)—25-08-2011.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.
————
(Shri Mohan Jena, M.P.)