1
Short title and
extent.
THE  PETROL PUMP WORKERS (WELFARE)  BILL,  2012
By
SHRI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY, M.P.
A
BILL
to  provide for certain welfare measures for petrol pump workers and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Petrol Pump Workers (Welfare) Act, 2012.
 (2)  It extends to the whole of India.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Fund" means Petrol  Pump Workers Welfare Fund established under section 3;
(b) "petrol pump" means an outlet selling petrol, diesel, Liquefied Natural Gas,
Liquid Petroleum Gas or Compressed Natural Gas;
Bill No.  67  of  2012
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.5

2
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) "worker" means any person who is engaged in any activity connected with
the operation of petrol pump.
3.  (1)  The Central Government shall establish a Fund to be known as the Petrol
Pump Workers Welfare Fund for the welfare of  petrol pump workers in the country.
(2)  The Central Government and every State Government/Union territory
Administration shall contribute to the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3)  The owners of petrol pumps shall also contribute to the Fund in such proportion
as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
4. The Fund shall be administered by a Committee consisting of :—
(i) a Chairperson who shall be appointed by the Central Government;
(ii) one representative each from the States and Union territories to be nominated
by the respective State Governments and Union territory Administration;
(iii)  one member representing the workers who shall be nominated in such
manner as may be prescribed; and
(iv) one member representing the owners of the petrol pump who shall be
nominated in such manner as may be prescribed.
(v) The terms and conditions of the service of Chairperson and other members
of the Committee shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
5. The Fund shall be used for the following purposes, namely:—
(i) providing free health facilities to the workers and their families;
 (ii) providing free educational facilities to the children of workers;
(iii) payment of compensation to workers who are injured during the course of
their duty;
(iv) payment of compensation to the next of the kin of workers who die in
harness;
(v) payment of disability allowance to workers who are injured in accidents or
contract ailments during the course of their duty and are not able to work;
(vi) payment of old age pension to those workers who have attained the age of
sixty years; and
(vii) payment of family pension to the next of kin including minor children of
deceased worker.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or  the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Establishment
of Petrol
Pump Workers
Welfare Fund.
Administration
of Petrol
Pump Workers
Welfare Fund.
Utilisation of
the Fund.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
25
30
35
20
40

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Lakhs of workers are engaged in the work related to distribution/supply of Petrol,
Diesel, Liquefied Natural Gas, Liquid Petroleum Gas and Compressed Natural Gas, etc.
throughout the country but they are not covered under any labour law. They are not paid
even minimum wages which they deserve by virtue of their work. The condition of these
workers is worse than the contract labourers. In the circumstances, provision of certain
facilities to these workers during  their service as well as in their old age is highly desirable.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ADHIR  RANJAN  CHOWDHURY
April 16, 2012.
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a Petrol Pump Workers Welfare Fund
for the welfare of petrol pump workers in the country. It further provides that the Central
Government shall also contribute to the Fund. Clause 4 provides for constitution of a
Committee for administration of the Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure
of rupees one hundred crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore per annum is also
likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central  Government to make rules for carrying on
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for certain welfare measures for petrol pump workers and for
matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1402LS(S3)—13.07.2012.