THE COMPULSORY TEACHING OF ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION
IN EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2018
By
SHRI R AJENDRA AGRAWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of environmental education in all educational
institutions and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto .
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of Environmental Education in
Educational Institutions Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 67 of 2018
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Advisory Council" means the Advisory Council for Environmental Education
constituted under section 6;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "educational institution" means a primary or a middle or a secondary or a
senior secondary level school imparting education to children, or any college, institute
or university imparting higher education recognized by the Government or established
under an Act of the Central Government or a State Government, by whatever name
such institution is called;
(d) "environmental education" means education through which individuals gain
awareness of their environment and acquire knowledge, skills and values to enable
them to act individually as well as collectively to solve present and future environmental
problems; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify, environmental education shall be taught as a compulsory subject in all
educational institutions from such class onwards as may be determined by the Central
Government on recommendation of the Advisory Council.
4. The appropriate Government shall, immediately after issuance of the notification
under section 3, issue directions for compulsory teaching of environmental education in all
educational institutions within its jurisdiction.
5. Subject to such matters as may be prescribed, the appropriate Government shall
ensure appointment of such number of teachers with such qualifications, as may be specified,
for teaching environmental education in educational institutions.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, within three months of the coming into force of
this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an Advisory Council for
Environmental Education.
(2) The Advisory Council shall consist of such number of persons, having special
knowledge or practical experience in the field of environmental education, as the Central
Government may deem fit.
7. The Advisory Council shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) recommend to the Central Government the syllabus of environmental
education for each standard at the school and university level;
(b) recommend to the Central Government the class from which onwards
environmental education shall be taught in educational institutions;
(c) recommend to the appropriate Government the qualifications of teachers to
be appointed in educational institutions for teaching environmental education;
(d) recommend to the appropriate Government the institutions which may be
given recognition for training teachers in environmental education for the purpose of
their appointment in educational institutions; and
Compulsory
teaching of
environmental
education.
5
10
15
20
Definitions.
Appropriate
Government
to issue
directions for
compulsory
teaching of
environmental
education.
Appointment
of teachers for
imparting
environmental
education.
Constitution
of Advisory
Council for
Environmental
Education.
Functions of
the Advisory
Council.
25
30
35
40

(e) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government and the educational institution
authorities with a view to ensuring effective implementation of the provisions of this
Act.
8. Nothwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall
apply to minority institutions only if the management of such institutions convey to the
appropriate Government their willingness to include the teaching of environmental education
text books in their school curriculum.
9. The appropriate Government shall derecognize educational institutions, which does
not comply with the provisions of section 4, after giving such institution a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
11. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
12. (1)  The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Application of
Act on
minority
educational
institutions in
certain
situation.
Derecognition
of educational
institutions
for non-
compliance of
the provisions
of this Act.
Central
Government
to provide
fund.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
3

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
One of the biggest worries grappling the world today is environmental degradation.
Fast paced urbanization, industrialization and deforestation have led to enormous levels of
environmental pollution and created wide imbalances in the ecology.
Education is an important instrument through which individuals could be imparted the
awareness and consciousness to address the concerns surrounding our environment and to
act individually as well as collectively to solve the present and future environmental issues.
The Honourable Supreme Court of India in its directive of 1991 had made it compulsory
for environment education to be included in the school and college curricula. But it has been
observed that the Supreme Court's directive has not been implemented effectively so far.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to make it mandatory for environmental education to be
taught as a compulsory subject at all levels of education.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJENDRA  AGRAWAL
February 16, 2018.
4

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for appointment of environment education teachers in all
schools. Clause 6 provides for constitution of Advisory Council for environment education
by the Central Government. Clause 10 provides for payment of adequate funds to the States
for carrying out the purpose of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to give exact
estimate of expenditure, both recurring and non-recurring, which will be involved from the
consolidated Fund of India, if the Bill is enacted into a law. However, it is estimated that a
recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore will be involved per annum from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
——————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of environmental education in all educational
institutions and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajendra Agrawal, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4278LS(S-3)—28-02-2018.