THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR FARMERS BILL, 2007
By
SHRI RAM KRIPAL YADAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a National Commission for Farmers for their welfare and
overall development and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1)   This Act may be called the National Commission for Farmers Act, 2007.
(2)  It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "Commission" means the National Commission for Farmers set up under
section 3;
(ii) "farmer" means any person who cultivates land or causes to be cultivated
thereon any agricultural or horticultural product; and
(iii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 67 of  2007
5
10

2
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, set
up a commission to be known as the National Commission for Farmers.
(2) The Commission shall consist of:
(i) a Chairman having special knowledge in the field of agriculture, to be
appointed by the Central Government; and
(ii) such number of other members having such qualification as may be
prescribed.
(3) The conditions of service, salaries and allowances of Chairman and other
members of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Central Government shall make available such number of officers and
staff including experts to the Commission as may be required for its functioning.
5. The Commission shall perform the following functions:—
(i) formulate a national policy for the overall development of farmers in the
country;
(ii) formulate schemes and programmes for the welfare of farmers particularly
those living in drought prone areas and other areas prone to natural calamities;
(iii) formulation and implementation of schemes for the welfare of farmers; and
(iv) such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central Government.
6. (1) The Central Government shall set up a fund to be known as the Farmers
Development Fund to implement the provisions of this Act.
(2) The Central Government and State Governments shall contribute to the fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Act.
National Com-
mission for
Farmers.
Central
Government to
provide officers
and staff for
the Commis-
sion.
Functions of the
Commission.
Farmers Deve-
lopment Fund.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Agriculture is the backbone of Indian economy, as it is a major contributor to the
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of our country and seventy percent of our population
is dependent on this sector for its livelihood. Agriculture is also important as it ensures
food security and is a major source of raw materials for the industrial sector. However,
in the recent years this vital sector of our economy has remained neglected. Farmers
have borne the brunt of this neglect and it has resulted in a spate of suicides by farmers
across the country. The major reason of this being indebtedness, crop failure, poor
quality of seeds, spurious pesticides, plant diseases and natural calamities like floods,
drought, hailstorms, frosts, etc. On the other hand even if there is a bumper crop,
farmers fail to get remunerative price on account of shortcomings of and irregularities
committed by State procurement agencies. There are also several infrastructural
constraints in storage, distribution and marketing of agricultural produce. At present
there is no Government policy comprehensively addressing the hardships faced by the
farmers. Although both the Central and State Governments spend huge sums every
year to compensate farmers by way of relief, such measures have remained inadequate,
primarily due to lack of coordinated efforts on part of the States and Union Government.
Consequently, the plight of farmers in the country has remained largely unaddressed.
Thus, there is need to provide due security and protection to farmers. The Bill seeks to
establish a National Commission for Farmers. While the Commission is to function in
general for the protection, benefit and welfare of the farmers, it shall also formulate
schemes for the benefit and welfare of the farmers. This measure would have
considerable and positive impact on the economic progress of the country in general
and the agricultural sector in particular.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAM KRIPAL YADA V.
August 3, 2007.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a National Commission for
Farmers. Clause 4 provides that the Central Government shall make available necessary
officers and staff for the efficient functioning of the Commission. Clause 6 provides
for the creation of a Farmers Development Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is
likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to
be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a National Commission for Farmers for their welfare and
overall development and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri  Ram Kripal Yadav, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3211LS(S-3)—20.08.2007.