Bill No. 68 of 1!51. 
THE PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT (REQUIREMENT 
AS TO RESIDENCE) BILL! 19)7 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lo~ SASHA) 

811l No. " ot Its1 
TIlE PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT (REQUIREMENT AS TO 
RESIDENCE) BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN'LOK SABHA) 
A 
~. 
BILL 
M make in purauance of claUSe (3) of article 16 of the Constit"tion 
.pecial provisions for requirement as to residence in regard to 
certain classes of public employment in certain areas. 
BB it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
.. 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Public Employment (Require- Short tide 
ment as to resIdence) Act, 1957. and oom-menc:emcnt. 
~ (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. Upon the commencement of this Act, any law then in force in R~ of 
any State or Union territory by virtue of clause (b) of article 35 of exl~~i~w. 
the Constitution prescribing, in regard to a class or classes of ~equiremenU 
10 employment or appointment to an office under the Government of, d'en:' rell-
or any local or other authority within, that State or Union territory, 
any requirement as to residence therein prior to such employment 
or appointment shall cease to have effect and is hereby repealed. 
a. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Powct to 
1$. Official Gazette, make rules prescribing, in reeard to appointments :-:..= 
t~ ~e~m 
(a) any subordinate service or post under 
~vernment of Andhra Pradesh, or 
dal~ ot 
~UCl _-
the State~t fa -eertliD 
.... 

.. 
2 
(b) any subordinate service or post under the controi of 
the Administrator of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur or Tripura, 
or 
(c) any service or post under a local authority (other than 
a cantonment board) within the Telangana area of Andhra J 
Pradesh or within the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh, 
Manipur or Tripura, 
any requirement as to residence within the Telangana area or the 
Hid Union territory, as the case may be, prior to such appointment. 
(2) In this section,-
(a) "subordinate service or post" means any service or 
post appointments to whfch are not notified in the Official 
GueUe bu~, includes any service of tehsildars; 
(b) "Telangana area" comprises all the territories specified 
10 
in sub-section (1) of section 30f the. States Reorganisation IS 
Act, 1956. 37 of .95 
'arlilUBen- " All rules made under section 3 shall, as soon as may be after 
laI1 IaUriAJ they are made, be laid for not less than thirty days before each 
.f nllln. House of Parliament and shall be subject to such modifications as 
Parliament may make during the session in which they are so laid, 20 
or in' the session immediately following. 
Dvatiea ef··; 5.-Section 3 and all rules made thereunder shall cease to have 
.. ~tioSl 3 efteet on the expiration of five years from the commencement of .ad nIlea. . 
this Act, but such cesser shall not affect the validity of any appoint-
1IHUl' 'previoualymade in pursuance of the said rules. 15 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASON~ 
Clause (2) of article 16 of the Constitution provides, inter alia, 
that no citizen shall, on grounds only of residence be ineligible for, 
or discriminated against in respect of, any employment or office 
under the State. Parliament is, however, competent under clause 
(3) of the said article to regulate the extent to which it would be 
permissible for a State to depart from the above principle. In con-
sidering this aspect of the question, the States Reorganisation Com-
mission recommended that if any departure from the principle of 
non-discrimination on the ground of residence is to be authorised at 
all, it should be sucp as to cause minimum hardship and that neces-
SQI'y legislation in this regard should be undertaken. 
2. On the basis of these recommendations, provision was made in 
this behalf in paragraphs 14, 15 and 16 of the memorandwn on safe-
guards for linguistic minorities which was laid before Parliament 
in September, 1956. It was stated in the memomndum that the 
Government of India did not consider it necessary or desirable to 
impose any restrictions for any public employment and that it was 
proposed to repeal all the laws in force prescribing any requirement 
as to residence for any public employment. It was, further, stated 
in the memorandum that certain exceptions might have to be made 
for a transitional period to the general rule of non-discrimination in 
the Telengana area of the former Hyderabad State and in certain 
backward areas. - In pursuance of this decision, it is now proposed 
to repeal all the laws in force prescribing any requirement as to 
residence within a State or Union territory for any public employ-
ment in that State or Union territory. Exception, however, is being 
made in the case of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur and Tripura and 
the area transferred from the State of Hyderabad to Andhra Pra-
desh. In respect of these areas, it is proposed to prescribe residen-
tial qualifications for a limited period not exceeding five years in 
regard to non-gazetted services including the service of tehsildars. 
It is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules 
for the purpose. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve these objectives. 
GOVIND BALLABH PANT. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 3rd September, 1957. 

MEMoRANDUM REGARDiNG DELEGATED LEGISLA't10N 
Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules, in regard to appointment to certain offices in Himachal 
Pradesh, Mantpur, Tripura and the area transferred from the State 
of Hydrabad to Andhra Pradesh, prescribing any requirement as 
to residence within these territories prior to such appointment. The 
residential qualifications which are proposed to be prescribed 
would vary from service to service and from place to place. It 
would not, therefore, be possible to specify them in the Act itself. 
The rules to be made by the Central Government shall be laid 
before both Houses of Parliament and shall be subject to IUch 
modifications as Parliament may make. 
In the circumstances, the delegation of legislative powera it of a 
normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to make in pursuance of clause (3) of article 16 of the Constitution 
special provisions for requirement as to residence in regard 
to certain classes of public employm~nt in certain areas, 
» : 
(Shrl Govind Ballahh Pant, 
Minister of Home Affairs) 
G,lPD-LSI-II69LS-6-9-S7-16so 
~'. 