Bill No. 68 of 1"0 
THE BANKING COMPANIES 
(SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODt]CED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 3RD SEPTEMBER, 1960) 

LOK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
TrE BANK ll1G COMP ANIES (i:£COND AMENDl4ENT) 
BILL} ]960 
(To be/As intr()~d 10. Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 1, line 9:-
~ "Cen tal II read "Cen traJ." 
2. Page 3, line 10,-
for "statement" reed "statements" 
3. Page 4, line 23," 
after "value" iS2! 
4. Page 5, line 23,-
". " . lI.n , 
m "re-letterd" ~ tire-lettered" 
5. Page Jo, ':' 
~ in the marginal ~. fding ~'$to section 39 of the 
• Banking Camp, es Act, 1949,-
.., ) 
m "ofn cial" read tlofficiaJ." 
6. Correct line numbers on pages 1 to 3 and 8. 
NEW DELHI, 
September 2, J96~ _ 
Bhadra 11, 1882~aka) 

Bill No. 68 of 1960 
THE BANKING COMPANIES (SECOND AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Banking Companies Act, 1949. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic 
5 of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Banking Companies (Second Amend- Short title. 
ment) Act, 1960. 
2. In section 39 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949 (hereinafter Amendment 
referred to as the principal Act), for the words "notified by the Cell- of section 39· 
10 tral Government in this behelf, as stated in such application shall 
be appointed as the official liquidator of the banking company 
in such proceeding", the words "notified by the Cental Govern-
ment in this behalf or any individual, as stated in such application 
shall be appointed as the official liquidator of the banking company 
15 in such proceeding and the liquidator, if any, functioning in such 
proceeding shall vacate office upon such appointment.". 
20 
3. For section 41 of the principal Act, the following sections shall Substitution 
be substituted namely:- o.f new sec-, tlons for sec-
tion 41. 
"41. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in Preliminary 
section 455 of the Companies Act, 1956, where a winding-up order repo!t ~Y 
has been made in respect of a banking company whether before or ~~~lliqui­
after the commencement of the Banking Companies (Second 
Amendment) Act, 1960, the official liqUidator shall submit a pre-
liminary report to the High Court within two months from the 
date of the winding-up order or where the winding-up order has 
been made before such commencement, within two months from 
such commencement, giving the information required by that 
section so far as it is available to him and also stating the amount 

Notice to 
preferential 
claUnaDtI 
IIld secured 
IIld ungeCUI-
ed creditors. 
of assets of the banking company in cash which are in his custody 
or under his control on the date of the report and the amount of 
its assets which are likely to be collected in cash before the 
expiry of that period of two months in order that such assets 
may be applied speedily towards the making of preferential pay- S I of 1956. 
ments under section 530 of the Companies Act, 1956, and in the 
discharge, as far as possible, of the liabilities and obligations of 
the banking company to its depositors and other creditors in 
accordance with the provisions hereinafter contained; and the 
official liquidator shall make for the purposes aforesaid every 10 
endeavour to collect in cash as much of the assets of the banking 
company as practicable. 
41A. (1) Within fifteen days from the date of the winding-up 
order of a banking company or where the winding-up order has 
been made before the commencement of the Banking Companies I 
(Second Amendment) Act, 1960, .within one month from such S 
commencement, the official liquidator shall, for the purpose of 
making an estimate of the debts and liabilities of the banking 
company (other than its liabilities and obligations to its deposi-
tors), by no Jce served in such manner as the Reserve Bank 20 
may direct, call upon-
(a) every claimant' entitled to preferential payment 
under section 530 of the Companies Act, 1956, and 1 of 1956. 
(b) every secured and every unsecured creditor, 
to send to the official liquidator' within one month from the 
date of the service of the notice a statement of the amount 2S 
claimed by hini. 
(2) Every. notice under sub·section (1) sent to a claimant 
having a claim under section' 530 of the Companies Act, 1956, 1 of 1956. 
shall 'state that"if a statement of the 'Claim is not sent to the 
official liquidator I before the expiry of the period of one month 
from the date ·of the service" the claim shall not be treated 30 
as a claim entitled to be paid under section 530 of the Com-
panies Act, 1956, in priority to all other debts but shall be 
treated as an ordinary debt due by the banking company. 
(3) Every notice under sub-section (1) sent to a secured 
crediror shall require him to value his security before the expiry 3S 
of the period of one month from the date of the service of the 
notice and ·shall state that if a statement of the claim together 
with the valuation of the security is not sent to the official 
liquidator before the expiry of the said period, then,. the 
official liquidator shall himself value the security and such 40 
valuation shall be binding on the creditor." 

5 
:t or 1956. 10 
20 
35 
J 
4. For section 43A of the priDcipal Act, the following section shall SrubatitudoD 
• 0 new sec-be· substItuted, namely:- tion ror lec-
tion 43A. 
"43A. (1) In every proceeding for the winding-up of a bank- Preferential 
. h' d' d ha bee d h h payments to mg company were a wm lng-Up or er s n ma e, w et er dcpolitors. 
before or. after the' commencement of the Banking Companies 
(Second Amendment) Aotj r1960, within three months from the 
date of·the winding-up order Or where the winding-up order has 
been made before s.u·ch commencement, within three months 
therefrom, the pref~rential payments referred to in section 530 
of the Companies Act, 1956, in respect of which statement of 
claims have been sent within one month from the date of the 
service of the notice referred to in section41A,shall be made by 
the official liquidator or adequate provision for such payments 
shall be~ade by him. 
(2) After the preferential payments as aforesaid have been 
made or, adequate provision has· been made in respect thereof, 
there shall be paid within the aforesaid period of three months-
(a) in the first place, to every depositor in the savings 
bank account of the banking company a sum of two hundred 
and fifty rupees or the 'balance at his credit, whichever is 
less; and thereafter, 
(b) in the next place, to every other depositor of the 
banking company fifty per cent. of the balance at his credit 
. subjeet to a maximum of. two hundre<i.andfifty rupees, 
in priority to all other debts from out 6f the remaining assets of 
the banking company available for payment to general creditors: 
Provided that the sum total of the amounts paid under 
clause (a) and 'clause (b) to anyone person who in his own 
name (and not jointly with any other person) is a deposi-
tor in the savings oo.nk account of the banking .cr;>mpany and also 
a depositor in any other account, shall not exceed the sum of 
two hundred and fifty rupees. 
(3) Where within the aforesaid period of three months full 
payment cannot be made of the amounts required to be paid 
under clause (a) or clause (b) of s1.lb..section {2). with the assets 
in cash, the offici'.l.I, . liquidator. shall pay within. that period to 
every depositor under clause (a) or, as· the case may be, clause 
(b) of that SUb-section on a pro rata basis so much of the 
. amount due to- the I depositor. under that clause as the official 
liquidator is able to pay with tho~' assets-;' and shall'pay the rest 

4 
of that amount to every such depositor as and when sufficient 
assets are collected by the official liquidator in cash. 
(4) After payments have been made first to depositors in 
the savings bank account and then to the other depositors in 
accordance with the foregoing provisions, the remaining assets S 
of the banking company available for payment to general cre-
ditors shall be utilised for payment on a pro rata basis of the 
debts of the general creditors and of the further sums, if 
any, due to the depositors; and after making adequate provi-
sion for payment on a pro rata basis as aforesaid of the debts of 10 
the general creditors, the official liquidator shall, as and when 
the assets of the company are collected in cash, make payment 
on a pro rata basis as aforesaid, of the further sums, if any, 
which may remain due to the depositors refer~d to in clause 
(a) and clause (b) of sub-section (2). IS 
(5) In order to enable the official liquidator to have in his 
custody or under his control in cash as much of the assets of 
the banking company as possible, the securities given to every 
secured creditor may be redeemed by the official liqoidator-
(a) where the amount due to the creditor is more than 20 
the value of the securities as assessed by him or, as the case 
may be, as assessed by the official liquidator, on payment 
of such value; and 
(b) where the amount due to the creditor is equal to 
or less than the value of the securities as so assessed, on 2S 
payment of the amount due: 
Provided that where the official liquida'tor is not satisfied 
with the valuation made b:v the creditor, he may apply to the 
High Court for making a valuation. 
(6) When any claimant, creditor or depositor to whom any 30 
payment is to be made in accordance with the foregoing provi-
sions, 'cannot be found or is not readily traceable, adequate 
provision shall be made by the official liquidator for such 
payment. 
(7) For the purposes of this section, the payments specified 35 
in each of the following clauses shall be treated as payments 
of a different class, namely:-
(a) payments to preferential claimants under section 
53D of the Compani~ Act, 1956; J of 19S6. 

1 of 1956. 
5 
10 
IS 
S 
(b) payments under clause (a) of sub-section (2) to 
the depositors in the savings bank account; 
(c) payments under clause (b) of sub-section (2) to 
the other depositors; 
(d) payments to the general creditors and payments 
to the depositors in addition to those specified in clause (a) 
and clause (b) of sub-section (2). 
(8) The payments of each different class specified in sub-
section (7) shall rank eq1!lally among themselves and be paid 
in full unless the assets are insufficient to meet them, in which 
case they shall abate in equal proportion.". 
5. In section 44A of the principal Act, after sub-section (6), the Amendment 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- ~~~tion 
"(7) Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this section shall 
affect the power of the Central Government to provide for the 
amalgamation of two or more banking companies in national 
interest under section 396 of the Companies Act, 1956: 
Provided that no such power shall be exercised by the 
Central Government except after consultation with the Reserve 
20 Bank.". 
3' 
6. Section 45 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered and re-Iet- Insertio~ of 
tered as section 44B of that Act and after that section as so re-num- ~~~ section 
bered and re-Ietterd, the following section shall be inserted in Part 
III of the principal Act, namely:-
"45. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing Fower of~­
provisions of this Part or in any other law or any agreement, for ~rv: 1 ~~ 
the time being in force, where it appears to the Reserve Bank ccnt:'tS bov-
that there is good reason so to do, the Reserve Bank may apply :U'!=~nf~f 
to the Central Government for an order of moratorium in respect business by • 
f th b k· banking o e an mg company. company 
and to pre-
. . pare ~cheme 
(2) The Central Government, after consIdermg the applica- of reconsti-
tion made by the Reserve Bank under sub-section (1), may make tuti01n or arna gama-
an order of moratorium staying the commencement or continu- lion. 
ance of all actions and proceedings against the company for a 
fixed period of time on such terms and conditions as it thinks fit 
and proper and may from time to time extend the period so 
however that the total period of moratorium shall not exceed 
six monthi. 

(3) Except as otherwise provided by any directions given by 
the Central Government in the order made by it under sub-section 
(2)or at any time thereafter, the banking company shall not 
,during the period of moratorium make any payment'to <lny depo-
sitors or discharge any liabilities or obligations to any other $ 
creditors. 
(4)' During the period of moratorium, if the Reserve Bank 
is satisfied that-
(a) in the national interest; or 
(b) in the interests cf the depositors; or 10 
(c) in order to secure the proper management of the 
banking company; or 
(d) in the interests of the banking system of the country 
as a whole, 
it is necessary so to do, then, notwithstanding anything contain- IS 
ed in this Act or in any other law or any agreement or instru-
ment for the time being in force, the Reserve Bank may pre-
pare a scheme-
(i) for the reconstruction of the banking company, or 
(ii) for its amalgamation with another banking company, 20 
with such constitutiJn, with such capital, assets, powers, rights, 
interests, authorities and privileges, with such liabilities, duties 
and obligations and on such terms and conditions as may be 
specified in the scheme. 
(5) The scheme may provide for the appointment of a new 25 
Board of directors-
(a) o~ the banking company on its reconstruction, or 
(b) of the other banking ccmpany with which it is 
amalgamated 'in accordance with the scheme, 
and the authority by whom, the manner in which, the period 30 
for which, and the other terms and conditions on which, such 
appointment shall be made, shall be as provided in the scheme. 
(6) The scheme aforesaid may contain such consequential, 
incidental and supplemental provisions as may, in the opinion of 
the Reserve Bank, be necessary to give effect to the reconstruc- 35 
tion, or, as the case may be, the amalgamation, 'and may also 
provide for the reduction of the interest or rights which the 
members or creditors have in or against the banking company 
before its reconstruction or its amalgamation with the other 
banking company, to such extent as the ReserVe Bank considers 040 

5 
10 
35 
., 
necessary in the public interest or in the interests of the meM. 
bers and creditors or for the maintenance of the business of the 
banking company. 
(7) (a) A copy of the scheme prepared by the Reserve Bank, 
shall be sent in draft to the banking company and in the case of· 
amalgamation, also to the other banking company with which it 
is proposed to be amalgamated for suggestions and objections, if 
any, within such period as the Reserve Bank may specify for this 
purpose; and 
(b) the Reserve Bank may make such modifications, if any. 
in the draft scheme as it may cbnsider necessary in the light of 
the suggestions and objections received from .the banking com-
pany or in the case of amalgamation, from both the banking com-
panies or from any members or creditors thereof. 
(8) The scheme shall thereafter be placed before the Central 
Government for its sanction and the Central Government may 
sanction the scheme without any modifications or with such modi-
fications as it may think necessary; and the scheme as sanctioned 
by the Central Government shall come into force on such date 
as the Central Government may specify in this behalf and shall, 
as from that date, be binding on the banking company or com-
panies concerned and also on all the members and creditors 
thereof. 
(9) Copies of every scheme made under this section shall be 
laid before both Houses of Parliament as soon as may be after 
the scheme has come into force.". 
7. In section 45L of the principal Act, after sub~section (2), the Amendment 
following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely: - of lCCtion 
4SL . 
"(3) Where a scheme of reconstruction of a banking com-
pany or its amalgamation with another banking company has 
been sanctioned by the Central Government under section 45 
and the Central Government is of opinion that any person who 
has taken part in the promotion or formation of the banking 
company or has been a director or auditor of the banking com-
pany should be publicly examined, that Government may apply 
to the High Court for the examination of such person and if on 
such examination the High Court finds (whether a fraud has 
bf"en committed or not) that that person is not fit to be a director 
of a company or to act as an auditor of a company or to be a 
partner of a firm acting as such auditors, the Central Govern-
ment shall make an order that that person shall not, without 
the leave of the Central Government, be a director of, or in 

any way, whether directly or indirectly, be (!oncerned or take 
part in the management of any company or, as the case may be, 
act as an auditor of, or be a partner of a firm acting as auditors 
of, any company for such period not exceeding five years as may 
be specified in the order. S 
(4) Where a scheme of reconstruction of a banking company 
or its amalgamation with another banking company has been 
sanctioned by the Central Government under section 45, the 
provisions of section 543 of the Companies Act, 1956. and of I of I9S6t 
section 45H of this Act shall, as far as may be, apply to the 10 
banking company as they apply to a banking company which 
is being wound up as if the order sanctioning the scheme of 
reconstruction or amalgamation, as the case may be, were an 
order for the winding-up of the banking company; and any 
reference in the said section 543 to the application of the official IS 
liquidator shall be construed as a reference to the application 
of the Central Government." 
Amcndmcn t 8. In section 50 of the principal Act, for the word and figures 
of ecction So. "and 36", the figures, letter and word "36, 43A and 45" ~hall be subs-
tituted. 
Amendment 9. In section 51 of the principal Act, for the figures "45", the 
ofsection 51. figures and letter "44B" shall be substituted. 
Certain 
~~ 
to be 
governed 
by original 
provisions. 
10. The amendments made in the principal Act by section 3 and 
section 4 shall not apply to, and in relation to, the winding-up of a 
banking company where any preliminary dividend has been paid 
in the course of such winding-up before the commencement of this 
Act, but the provisions of the principal Act as they stood immediately 
before such commencement shall apply to, and in relation to, such 
windini-UP· 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The procedure now prescribed under the Banking Companies 
Act, 1949 read with the Companies Act, 1956 for the liquidation of 
banking companies is somewhat elaborate, and in the absence of any 
provisions in the law indicating the time-schedule according to which 
certain payments may be made to the depositors, a great deal of 
hardship is caused to such depositors, who have to wait for 
considerably long periods for realising the sums due to them. It is 
proposed, in order to facilitate the expeditious payment of certain 
minimum amounts in such cases, that the procedure relating to the 
liquidation of banking companies should be suitably modified. 
2. Section 43A of the Banking Companies Act now provides for 
the payment of a sum of Rs. 100 i~ the case of each savings bank 
depositor as a preferential claim from out of the assets which are 
available for distribution among the creditors of a banking company 
generally. In view of the rise in prices since the relevant provision 
was first incorporated in the Act, it is considered desirable that this 
minimum payment should be increased to Rs. 250. It is also pro-
posed that after this payment has been made, the depositors other 
than those with savings bank accounts should be paid an amount 
equal to fifty per cent of their deposits or Rs. 250 whichever may 
be less, as a further preferential payment. 
3. The opportunity provided by these amendments has also been 
utilised to simplify the provisions of the law relating to the grant 
of moratorium in respect of banking companies which may be ex-
periencing difficulties and to facilitate the formulation and imple-
mentation of schemes of reconstruction or amalgamation in respect 
of such companies. 
MORAR.TI DESAI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 31Bt August, 1960. 
, 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE BANKmG CO~ANIES Act, 1949 
[10 Of 1949] 
• • • • • 
~aerYe be 31. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 38A of this Act 
om~~ ~ui- or in section 448 or section 449 of the Companies Act, 1956, where in 1 of 1956• 
dator. any proceeding f-or the winding up by the High Court of a banking 
company, an application is made by the Reserve Bank in this behalf, 
the Reserve Bank, the State Bank of India or any other bank notified 
py ~he Central G~vernmen~ in this behalf, as stated in such applica-
tio~ shall be appointed as the official liquidator of tbe b~g com-
Pliny in such proceeding. 
• • • • • • 
a.,rt of ~l. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in section 
UquicUtof. 455 of the Companies Act, 1956, where a winding up order is made in 1 of 1956. 
respect of a banking company, the official liquidator shall submit a 
preliminary' report to the High Court within two months from the 
pate of the order giving the information required by that section so 
far as it is available to him, to enable the High Court to order the 
pa,~"nt ()f a pre\il1l~nllry diviqend If suft\cient ass~ts ~e ~vai~~ble. 
• • • • • • 
PrefereatJ.l ~A. (1~ W ~vf:P' ~roc~e~~~g fo~ the windm~ .~p of a ~~g 
~~: company, after the preferential payments referrect tP. m f!ectiol?: 530 
tora. of the Companies Act, 1956, have been made, or adequate provision to I of 1956-
the ~t~f~ctioll. of ~~ High Court for such payments has been made, 
there shall be paid, to every depositor in the savings bal)k acc.ount of 
the banking company, a sum of one hundred rupees'~r the balance 
at his credit, whichever is less, in priority to a.ll other 4~bts from out 
of the remaining assets of the banking company available for pay-
ment of general creditors. 
(2) The aforesaid payments shall rank equally among themselves 
and be paid in full, unless the assets are insufficient to meet them, 
in which case they shall abate in equal proportion. 
• • • • • • 
10 

II 
.5L. (1) Whe.r~ ~ application for sanctioning a compromise or Public cum-
afl'ang~ent in ~f!pect of a ~ing company is made under section ~tion of 
I of 19S6. 39l of tl1~ Comp~i~s Act, 1956 or wnere such sanction has b~en given :dI~~~~ c~ 
and the Higl1 Co~ is of opinio~, whether on a report of the Reserve :n~~ct ~I 
Bank or othefWi~e, th~~ any pE:lrsop who has ~aken part in the pro- compll11 
motion or formation of the banking company or has been a director ~er 
or auditor of the banking company shotild be publicly examined, it !';r=- Of 
may direct such examination of such person and the provisions of mCDt. 
section 45G shall, as far as may be, apply to the banking company as 
they apply to a banking company which is being wound up. 
(2) Where a compromise or arrangement is sanctioned under 
I of 1956. section 391 of the Companies Act, 1956 in respect of a banking com-
pany, the provisions of section 543 of the said Act and of section 45H 
of this Act shall, as far as may be, apply to the banking company as 
they apply to a banking company which is being wound up as if the 
order sanctioning the compromise or arrangement were an order for 
the winding up of the banking company. 
2) of I9SS. 
• • .. .. .. .. 
50. No person shall have any right, whether in contract or other- Ce~~ 
. t t· fl· d • f th claims .or WIse, 0 any com pens a lon or any oss mcurre oy rp.ason 0 "' e campen.-
operation of any of the provisions contained in sectIons 10, 12A, tion barrod. 
16, 35A, 35B, and 36 or by reason of the compliance by a banking 
company with any order or direction given to it under this Act. 
51. Without prejudice, to the provisions of the State Bank of India Arpnca~lon 
Act, 1955, or any other enactment, the provisions of sections 10, 13 ~r::fs:: to 
to 15, 17, 19 to 21, 23 to 28, 29 [excluding sub-section (3)], 31, 34, 35, ~e St1c 
36 [excluding clause (d) of sub-section (1)], 37, 45, 46 to 48, 50, 52 ~~ 0 ad 
and 53 shall also apply, so far as may be, to and in relation to the ~cr DOt!-
State Bank of India or any othell" banking institution notified by the banta. 
Central Government in this behalf as they apply to and in relation 
to banking companies: 
Provided that-
(a) nothing contained in clause (c) of sub-section (1) of 
section 10 shall apply to the chairman of the State Bank of 
India or to a general manage,r of any subsidiary bank in so far 
as the said clause precludes him from being a directOll" of, or 
holding an office in, any institution approved by the Reserve 
Bank; 
(b) nothing contained in section 19 shall apply to the hold-
ing by the State· Bank of India of shares in the capital of any 
such subsidiary bank; and 

(c) nothing contained in section 46 shall apply to any ofticer 
of the Central Government or the Reserve Bank or the State 
Bank of India, nominated or appointed as director of the State 
Bank of India, or any such subsidiary bank or any other banking 
institution notified by the Central Government under this section. 
Explanation.-The expression "subsidiary bank" in this sec-
tion shall have the same· meaning as in section 2 of the State 
Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 . 
• • • • • • 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Banking Companies Act, 1949. 
(Shri Morarji Desai, 
Minister oj Finance.) 