As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
-, JUN 1977 
.. 
I"~ 
• ....:""'.1. .'~. ~ ... 
••• "6' " .. Bill No. 68 of 1871 
THE GOLD (CONTROL) AMENDMENT: BIll, l'YI I ' 
r 
A 
BILL 
furtheT to amend the Gold (ContTol) ' Act, 1968. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-second' Year of the' 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Gold (Control) Amendment ,Act, 
1971. 
-j' , 
Shorttitll 
and com-
mence-
S (2) It shall be deemed to have come into forae on the 20th day of May, ment. 
1971. 
1968. Z. In section 71 of the Gold (Control) Act, 1968 (hereinafter referred 
"' .• ~ I' 
to as the principal Act),-
(i) for 8ub-section (1), the foll.wing sub-section shall be; and 
10 shall be deemed always to have been, substituted, namely:-
"(1) Any gold in respect of which any provision of this Aet 
or any rule or order made thereunder has been, or is beinlJ, or is 
attempted to be, contravened, to~~,.· with any package;' cover-
ing or receptacle in which such gol \'Ij found, shall be liable to 
confiscation: 
Provided that where it is established to the satisfaction of the 
oftlcer adjudging the confiscation that such gold or other thing 
belongs to a person other than the person who has, by any act or 
omission, rendered It liable to conftscatlon, and such act or 
omission was without the knowledge or connivance of the person 
to whom it belongs, it shall not be ordered to be confhlcated but 
Amend. 
ment 
of lI8C-
tion 71. 

Amend-
ment of __ 
tiOn 73. 
Re-open-
lng of past. 
conftsca.. 
Uont. 
2 
such other action, as is authorised by this Act, may be tae 
against the person who has, by such act or omission, rendered it 
liable to confiscation."; 
(ii) for sub-sections (2), (3) and (4), the fallowing sub-sections 
shall be substituted, namely: - S 
"(2) Where any package, covering or receptacle referred to 
in sub-section (1) contains any other goods, such contents shall 
also be liable to confiscation. 
(3) Where any gold is liable to confiscation under sub-section 
(1), it shall be so liable notwithstanding any change in its form, 10 
and where such gold is mixed with other goods in such manner 
that it cannot be separated from those other goods, the whole of 
such goods, including the gold, shall be liable to confiscation. 
(4) On and from the commencement of the Gold (Control) 
Amendment Act, 1971, the proviso to sub-section (1) shall also IS 
apply to any gold or other thing which is liable to confiscation 
under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) .". 
3. In section 73 of the principal Act, the word "twice" shall be, and shall 
be deemed always to have been, omitted. 
. (4) (1) Where any order ma~, before the eommencement of this 20 
Ad,lor" theeonfiscation of any gold or other thing or giving option 
to pay he in lieu· therenf if! sueh that it eould not have been made if the 
principal Act, as amended by this Act, were in force on the date on 
which the said order was made, the ofQeer eompetent under section 78 to 
adjudge sueh eonfiscatlon shall, on an applieation made to him by the 25 
person aggrieved by such order, let :aside the order of eodseation or. as 
the case may be, the ol'der giving option to pay fine fine in lieu of con-
fiscation, and also any order Imposing penalty in addition to eonfiscation 
or giving option to pay fine in lieu thereof, and make a fresh adjUdication 
In aceordance with the pro'visiODS of the prineipal. Act, as amended "Y 30 
this Act. 
(2) The power referred to in sub-section (1) shall be exercised by the 
oftlcer specified therein in relation to the final order of adjudication of 
confiscation or giving option to pay fine in lieu thereof or imposing any 
penalty, whether or not such flnal order was made in appeal under sec- 3S 
tion 80 or in revision under section 81 or section 82. 
(3) Every application referred to in sub-section (1) shall be made 
within ninety days from the commencement of this Act or within such 
further time, not exceeding ninety days, as the officer specified in that 
sUb-6ection may. on suftlcient cause being shown, allow. 40 
(4) Where, and ill 50 far a..,.DY order for the cODfiacatloD of any "old 
or other thing, or W olitionKiven 'to pay ftne in lieu of conflseation~ or 
imposing any penalty is modified or reversed, the omeer specified in 
Bitb-sectlon (1) shall make an order for sueh refund or restitution as thtl 
l'!ircumstances of the case may require: 45 
_.---
Provided that where the restitution of any gold or other thing is not 
practicablte, the said authority shall make an order for the payment to the 
person to whom such restitution is to be made. the market value of such 

1 
gold or other thing, as on the date on which the fresh adjudication is 
made. ~ 
(5) Nothing in this section shan apply to any confiscation made, option 
given to pay tine in H.eu of confiscation, or penalty imposed under Part 
, XII-A of the Defence of India Rules, 1962. 
5. Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, any 
confiscation made, penalty imposed or fine levi...<>d under the Gold (Con-
45 of 1968. trol) Act, 1968, before the commencement of this Act shall, in so far as 
it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have 
10 been made, imposed or levied in accordance with the provisions of the 
Gold (Control) Act, 1968, as amended 'by this Act. 
a of 1971. 8. (1) The Gold ~ontrol) Amendment Ordinance, 1971 is hereby re-
pealed. 
IS (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done, any action taken or 
any order made under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been 
done, taken or made under the corresponding provisions of the Gold 
45 of 1968. (Control) Act, 1968, as ame,nded by this Act. 
Valida-
tion. 
Repeal 
and 
savin, •. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
By two Writ Petitions and two Civil Appeals, the legislative compe-
tence of Parliament to enact the Gold (Control) Act, 1968, was challeng-
ed before the Supreme Court. In addition, the constitutional validity of 
certain provisions of the Act, namely, (i) section 8(1) which imposes a 
ban on the possession of primary gold, and (ii) sections 6, 16, 58, 71, 74 
and 86 which respectively provide for submission of returns by pawD-
brokers, filing of declarations, search, confiscation, imposition of penalty 
and prosecution for non-declaration of gold, was also challenged. The 
Supreme Court by a judgment, delivered on the 30th March, 1971, up-
held the vires of the Gold (Control) Act, 1968 and also upheld the con-
stitutional validity of all the sections, except that of section 71, which 
were impugned before that Court. 
2. Th.~ invalidation of section 71, which provides for the confiscation 
(If gold in relation to which any provision of the Act has been contraven-
ed, would have prevented the Government from achieving the central 
object of too law, namely, prevention of the circulation of the smuggled" 
gold, by the administration of the Gold (Control) Act, 1968. The Gold 
(Control) Amendment Ordinance, 1971, was, therefore, promulgated by 
the Pre:::ident. By that Ordinance, it has been provided that where in 
relation to any gold any provision of the Act is contravened, the gold, 
if belonging to the offender, would be liable to be confiscated, but where 
such gold belongs to an innocent person and not to the offender, such 
gold shall not be ordered to be confiscated but such punitive action, as 
is provided in the Act, may be taken against the offender for the contra-
vention of the law. 
3. In view of the observations made by the Supreme Court, the maxi-
mum fine which could be imposed in lieu of confiscation, under section 
73, has also been reduced to a sum not exceeding the value of the gold. 
4. Since the amendment of section 71 has been made retrospective, 
provisions have been made in the Ordinance for the reopening of past 
adjudications of conft-cation and for fresh adjudication in the light of 
the provisions of the Act, as amended by the said Ordinance. Provisions 
for restitution or refund, where necessary, have also been made in the 
Ordinance. 
5. The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance. 
NEW Da.m; 
The 23rd Mati, 1971. K. R. GANESH. 
PRESIDENTS RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F.144\10\71-GC.II, dated the 26th May, 1971 from 
Shrt K. R. Ganesb, Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance (Vitta 
Mantralaya men Rajya Mantri) to the Secretary, Lot Sabha.] 
The President having been infornl.ed of the subject matter of the 
Gold Control (Amendment) Bill, 1971, has recommended, under clauses 
(1) and (3) of article 117 of the Constitutidll, the introduction and consi-
oeration of the Bill by the Lok Sabha . 
• -- , 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill seeks to replace the Gold (Control) Amendment Ordinance, 
1971. It would not require any addition to the staff which is already in 
position. Therefore, the Bill, if enacted, would not involve any recur-
ring expenditure on the requirement of personnel and finances in addi-
tion to what is being incurred at present on the enforcement of Gold 
Control. •• 
2. Clause 4 of the Bill, however, provides for reopening of cases, as 
a consequence of which, in certain cases, it may become necestary either 
to restitute gold Or other thing that may have been confiscated 1:.1 the 
past, or where such restitution is not possible, to pay the market value 
of such gold or other thing. It may also become necessary to refund the 
fine in lieu of confiscation of gold or other thing or penalty imposed in 
the past. It is, however, not possible to anticipate accurately the net ex-
penditure which would be involved in this process. However, expendi-
ture so involved is not likely to exceed, in any case, rupees 5 lakhs. 
.' 
-

Confisca. 
tion of 
,old. 
Power to 
live 
option to 
pay fine 
in lieu 
of confill-
eation. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE GOLD (CONTROL) Act,1968 
45 OF 1968 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER XIII 
CONFISCATION AND PENALTIES 
71. (1) Any gold in respect of which any provision of this Act or any 
rule or order made thereunder has been, or is being, or is attempted to 
be, contravened, shall be liable to confiscation. 
(2) Any package, covering or receptacle (including its other contents) 
in which any gold liable to confiscation under sub-section (1) is found 
shall also be liable to confiscation. 
(3) Where any gold liable to confiscation under sub-section (1) Is 
mixed with other gQ()ds in such manner that such gold cannot be sepa-
rated from those other goods, the whole of such goods shall be liable to 
confiscation. 
(4) Any gold which is liable to confiscation under sub-section (1), 
shall be so liable notwithstanding any change in its form . 
• • • • • 
'l3. Whenever any confiscation is authorised by this Act, the officer 
adjudging it may, subject to such conditions as may be specified in the 
order adjudging the confiscation, give to the owner thereof an option 
to pay in lieu of confisc3tion such fine, not exceeding twice the value of 
the thing in respect of which confiscation is authorised, as the said officer 
thinks fit. 
• • • 
6 
• • 
I 
,.~. 

LOK SABHA 
.-.~ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Gold (Control) Act, 1968. 
\ 
[Shri K. R. GQII8Sh, 
Minister of Stale in the 
Ministry of Finance (Vitta 
MantraIaya men Rqjya Mane")] 