LOK SABHA 
-
,CORRIGENDA 
to 
. , 
THE CENTRAL EXCISES BILL, 1969 
eTR be/As introduced in Lok SabhaJ 
1. Page (iii), line 5 from bot~?m,~ 
for "PENALITIES" 
2. Page (iv), last line .. -
read "PENALTIES" 
-
3. 
4. 
i.2.r "disposal to" read -
Page 1, in the title,-
~ " ILL" read "BILL" 
Page 8, line 2,~ 
after "va lue" for " " .' . 
"disposal of" 
read - " " , 
5. Page 8, in the marginal heading to clause 14,-
for nexisa:bl~" ~ "excisable" 
6. Page 12, line 37,-
ill "Tar ff" ~ ''Tariff'' 
7. Page l8,~ 
for lirte 21, read ~ 
-
"officer, after holding such inguiry 
as he deems fit, may grant a licence" 
8. Page 23, in the m.~rginal heading to clause 56,-
f.g£ "licence" !.i!S "lincens€e" 
9. Page 23, line 37,. 
ti2! "occassioned" read "occasioned" 
10. Page 23, line 43". 
for - "legitimae" read - " legit imat e" 
.~ 
P.T .0. 

- ·2 -
11. Page 26, in the marginal heading to clause 67,-
i2I ndealth" ~ "dealt" 
12. Page 27, line ,16,-
13. 
14. 
.... fof~: ... ~'.~.l?e:~r.'~ ... read "appear" 
Page 27, line 19,-
~'" "not" . -\ead "no" 
.' 
Page 27, line 23,-
"any" 
'. i ' 
read '"and" -,..-
15. Page 31, -
for line 11, read -
. , 
I. J , .. , 
... 
~,:~. ,~ 
"Provided that whei e the owner or the 
person-in-charge of such goods" . 
16. Page 35" line 7,.-
- .' i2£' "sectoin" ; ~ "section" 
17. Page 35,' line$ ~9 and 40,.-
"made such" read "make such" -
18 • P aa e 45, l:1ne 24 , ~ 
for "abligor" ~ "obligor" 
19. Page 46, line 21,-
for ,: "requird" -', read - "requ ired" 
20. Page 47, in the marginal heading to clause 127,-
for "Mistakes and clerical errors" -
read "mistakes and errors" -
I. " I 
21. Page 47, for the marginal heading to clause 128,-
1 "...,' ,'I : • . " ; 
., ... · .. 1".... . '}I , , 
~ "Service of decision, order,et~." .. , ' , -' 
22. Page 48, lin~, 6, ':" .. 
~ " j' :', f 
.. 
for "undr·· read "under" 
• 
F .T .0. 
;, 

- 3 -
23. Pa(Je 50, in marginal h~-ad:ing to c.laus:e' 13~, .. 
ill "rules ahd,ootifib.~tionS!':; read ~, 
"rules, ,no1:>ifications",. 1 
24. Page 51 ,\ lin~, 12v~:: ".' .;.. .. ",. 
\ , 
for 
- "sha 1'" re ad,' "sh~ 11" 
---~ . 
.' r. ~ , , 
25. Page 52, line 24, The"IFirst 'Sc,~,~dule, columi} 2,-
"Khandasri" ~ead·."KhandSari" - . 
26. Page 53, line ts; colurtin 3,.~ 
for ltd fferent" !ill. , ' .. 'ldifferent'" 
27. Page 53, line' 42",,:,co lumn ' 2, ~ .' 
for 11 smoing " .lli2 "smOking" -
28. Page 54, line ,la, "column ' 2,-. 
for "no II read "not'" .. 
r ., 
-
29. Page 54, line 52, column 3,- .' , 
for "kilolitere" -read "kilolitr~~ 
- -
30. Page 59, line 15. co:ltimn.:~ ..... 
afill "and" insert ""alt· .',' 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34. 
Page 59, line 51 column 2.~: " 
!!!:' "arificiI11" '~ad . "artificial" 
-
Page 60, line 8,. ~<;Qlumn: ,~,~-
f.2.E "~ vaore" ~ "~valorem" 
Page 60, line 19, .. :columo, c3',_ I:', 
for "twenty 'em" •... '. , c·' • 
~ "Twerity:t~e~:~:t:e·nt. :~:yaiofem."·;I' 
Page 60, .,lines 23 and "24""cci:ltimn '2,-
, ., .. , I,,'j .,. . -.' l' 
"vulcanisd'* . "read" "wlcanised'" 
35. Page 61, line 44,cohlmn 3';~ :'" " 
for "..2.2 vaalorem~"" ~,,~: val~:rem.'" 
35A. ·Page 61, line 60,c01umn 2.~ , 
for "wreight" read "weight" - -
.,;, 
1-' • .' .';. .......... -,. 
P.T ,0, 

Page 63, line 13, column 2,- , 
for n aules" read "rules" 
37. Page 63, line 36, column 2,-
for 
-
II embro1dary" read " embroidery" 
38. Page 63, 11ne 37, column 2,-
for "bvt" read "but" 
39. Page 64, line 3, column 3,-
for "or she" ~ "for the" 
40. Page 64, line 40 
for") 1 1t" 
column 2 -, :, 
read" I~ (11) 
41. Page 64, 11ne 47, c~1umn 2,-
1f 1t" 
for "40%" read "40 per cent. II 
42. Page ~5, line 4, column 2,-
omi t Itorlt 
-
43 Page 65, 11ne 5,., column 2, ~ 
. '," 
before "of" 1ns-ert-' 'II orn 
. 
44. Page 65, 11ne 27, column 3,-
~ .. : 
for "pert" read " perlt 
45. Page 65, l1ne 34, column 3,-
for "ad "valo'rm" - read n!!2:' valorem" 
46 Page 65, l1ne 35, column 2,-
, ", 
for "GLASSWAER" read "GLASSWARE" -. , 
47. Page 66, Line ll,'column 2,~ 
for ~1ncludng" read 1~1ne1fld' ng" - -, ' 
48. Page 66, line 18, colUmn 3,-
for "hund edi.' read "hUndred lt 
-
49. Page' 66 ,lihe 43," column' 3;-: 
for -
Itp1,slt read 
-
",plus" 
(P. T. 0.) 

- 5 -, 
50. Page 66, line 45, column 3,-
after 'ltiron" read "or" 
-
51. Page 66, : line 46', column 3,-
after "the" read "case mayll 
52. Page 67, line 8, column 3,-. 
tor "metrl" read tl metrlc· t 
53. Page 69, l1.ne 411 column 2,';' 
for IIshlps," "ships i It read -
54. Page 69, 11ne 50, column 2,-
for - Itmechanlcllyft "mechanically' read 
55. Page 78, 11ne 6,-
for It char gas II read II changes" 
56. Page 79, 11ne 11 from bottom,-
for "rs pect" read "res pect" 
. 
57. Page 81, 11ne 11 from bOttom,-
.fQ!: "clausen read' "clauses" 
58. Page 89, 11ne 4,-
for ''In'' read It on" -
59. Page 89, 11ne 16 from bottom,-
for uall read "at" 
60. Page 93, 11ne 17 from bottom,-
for II spe 2cifying lt read "specifying" 
61. Page 101, lfne 21,'" 
, ' 
forncerified u read "verified" -
62. Page 105, li:1c 8,-' 
"lubricant" Tnrld '''lubricants· .......... ,,.... .. _. 
63. Page 105. line 33, colurrt:l 2,'" 
ill "mi er.al'l . !:~.~:.~ Mmineral-
(P. T. 0.) 

- (: -
64. Page 109, line 16, column 2,-
ill "LIQUIFIED" ~, "LIQUEF1r:I?" 
65. Page 110, line 16 from bottom, column 2,-
for "wheteher" read "whether" -
66. Page 110, line 24 from bottom~ column 3,-
for "of" read "or" 
---:0-' 
67. Page Ill, line 6 from bottom, column 2,-
for "485" , read "48 s 11 
-
68. Page Ill, line 7 from bottom, column 2,-
for "485 " read "48s" ..,-- -: 
69. Page Ill, line 17 from bottom, column 2,-
i2!nExpatlantion" read "Explanat ion" 
.~ 
70. Page 112, line 5 from bottom, column 2,,-
omit "than II 
-
71. Page 116, line 3, column 3,-
for "naya paise" ~ "naye paise" 
72. Page 116, line 28, column 2,-
i.!2£ "through" ~ "trough" 
73. Page 116, line 31, column 2,-
i.£.£ tlplate" ~ "plates" 
74. Page 116, line 44, column 3,-
"ase" read "case" -
75. Page 119, Ii n= 8 from bottom, column 2,-
for - "weig}:lt - tlifting", read - "weight - lifting" 
#-' .' P.T .0._ 

- 7 -
76. In the docket page,-
ill "Shri parkashchand B. Sethi," 
"Shri Prakashchand B. Sethi, " 
77. Correct line numbers on pages 27, 29, 
59, 61, 62, 63, 65 and 67. 
NEW DELHI; 
July 31. 1969 
Sravana 9, 1891 (Saka) 
read --
30, 32, 33, 35, 

, . .1.,e 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
" ," ."" 
f', ~. 
,~t· ~ 
t .)\.i J 
DIU No. 61 or 1_ 
THE CENTRAL EXCISES BILL. 1969 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMIN ARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
OFFICERS Of' CENTRAL EXCISE 
3. Classes of officers of Central Excise. 
4. Appointment of officers of Central Excise. 
S. Powers of officers of Central Excise. 
6. Entrustment of functions of Centnil Excise Officers to certain 
other officers. 
CHAPTER III 
LEVY AND COLLEcTION OF DUTY 
7. Duties set forth in the First Schedule to be levied. 
8. Duty on excisable goods falling under more than one' item or 
more than one sub-item of the same item of the First Schedule. 
9. Duty on excisable goods produced or manufactured in the course 
of, or incidental or ancillary to, any process of production (lr 
manufacture. 
10. Valuation of excisable goods foor purposes of ad valoi'em duties. 
11. Power to fix tariff values. 
12. Inclusion of value or exclusion of weight of bobbin, wrapper, 
etc., for usessment. 
13. Charge of duty on manufactured or composite articles. 
14. Liability for payment of duty and allowance for changes in bulk 
etc., of excisable goods. 
15. Date for determination of rate af duty and tariff valuation. 
16. Removal of excisable goods generally. 
17. Certain excisable goods to be removed only on assessment by 
proper officer. 
]8. Removal of excisable goods without payment of duty for deposit 
in a warehouse, etc. 
19. Duty on excisable goods manufactured at the place where t he1 
are intended to' be consumed. 
20. Restrictions on removal of excisable goods. 
11M (B) LS-l. 
t .... ~.".. ............ ".".. ..,.. '"""","., 
§ Lil,r:llY I{cfrn'w" " I nl 
~ ~\'rv;('(' 
w 1(1, ,""~:aro" : ... , ... "_:1 

eii) 
CLAUSES 
21. Remowl of excisable goods without payment of whole or part of 
duty for manufacture of articles or on deferment of payment of 
duty. 
22. Provisional assessment of duty. 
23. Special procedure for payment of duty in certain cases. 
24. Duty already paid to be set oft in certain cases. 
25. Removal of excisable goods as samples for tmde, etc. 
26. Best judgment assessment. 
27. Denaturing and mutilation of excisable goods. 
28. Growers of tobacco and coffee and licensees under the Act to 
maintain accounts and submit returns. 
CHAPTER IV 
EXEMPTION, REMISSION, REFUND AND REBATE OF DUTY 
29. Power to exempt from duty. 
30. Remission or refund 'Of duty on excisable goods which have be-
come unfit for consumption, marketing, etc. 
31. Rebate of duty on return (1f excisable goods to the place of manu-
facture, etc. 
32. Rebate of duty on excisable goods exported. 
33. Export of excisable goods in bond. 
34. Rebate of tluty on excisable goods used in the manufacture of 
articles which are exported. 
35. Rebate of duty under sections 32 and 34 not to be allowed in 
certain cases. 
36. Whole or part of claim for rebate of duty under sections 32 and 
34 to be disallowed in certain cases. 
CHAPTER V 
DECLARATION AND LICENSING OF CERTAIN OPERATIONS 
37. Persons growing tobacco or coffee to make declaration. 
38. Certain operations to be subject to licence. 
39. Grant and renewal of licences. 
40. CanceUation and suspension of licences. 
41. Power to exempt. 
CHAPTER VI 
W AREHOtTSING 
42. Excisable gO<*is not to be deposited in a wllI'ehouse or removed 
therefrom or otherwise dealt with except as provided by or 
under the Act. 
43. POWft to re~1ate warehousing of excisable goods and removal 
of such goods from one warehouse to another. 
44. Licenaing of warehouses. 
46. Grant of warehouse licence •. 
46. Renewal of warehouse licence&. 

(iii) 
CLAtJDS 
47. Warehousing bond. 
48. Regulation of deposit of excisable goods in a warehouse. 
49. Period for which warehoused goods may remain in a warehouse. 
SO. Owner's right to tieal with warehoused goods. 
51. Manufacturing operations in relation to warehoused goods. 
52. Bond for removal of warehoused goods from one warehouse to 
Mother. 
53. Proof of re-warehousing to be furnished. 
M. Removal for home consumption, etc., of excisable goods III 
transit to a warehouse. 
55. Re-assessment. 
56. Responsibility of warehouse licensee. 
57. Deficiency in warehoused goods. 
58. Payment of duty, penalties, etc., in certain cases. 
59. Power to cancel warehouse licences. 
60. Warehoused goods to be removed in certain cases. 
61. Excisable goods may be lodged in Customs warehouse. 
CHAPTER VII 
SEARCH, SEIZURE AND ARREST 
62. Central Excise Officers to have access to place or premises for 
certain purposes. 
63. Power to search place or premises. 
64. Power to stop and search conveyance or animal. 
65. Power to arrest. 
66. Searches and arrests how to be made. 
67. How persons arrested ere to be dealt with. 
68. Procedure to be followed by officer-in-charge of pOlice station. 
69. Inquiry how to be made by Central Excise Officers agafDst 
arrested persons forwarded to them under section 67. 
70. Power to summon persons to give evidence am! produce docu-
ments in inquiries under the Act. 
71. Seizure of confiscable property. 
72. When seizure or arrest is made, reason in writing to be given. 
73. Custody of documents, etc. 
74. Sale of confiscable property seized under the Act in certain 
cases. 
CHAPTER VIII 
CONFISCATION AND IMPOSITION OF PENALITlES 
75. Confiscation of excisable goods. 
76. Confiscation of land, building, etc., in certain cues. 
77. Confiscation <1f packages and their contents and goods used for 
concealing offending goods. 

(iv) 
CLAUSES 
78. Confiscation of offending g·oods notwithstanding any change in 
form thereof. 
79. Confiscation of sale proeeeds of confiscable property. 
00. Penalty for non-compliance with the requisition made under 
section 64. 
81. Penalty for acts rendering excisable goods liable to confiscation. 
82. Penalty for opening 'doors, locks, etc., of a warehouse in certain 
cases. 
83. Penalty for fraudulently obtaining set-off, exemption,' etc., 0 [ 
duty. 
84. Penalty for not accounting for excisable goods. 
85. Penalty for improper maintenance of 6ccounts, making false 
declaration, etc. 
86. Penalty in other cases. 
87. Adjudication of confiscations and penalties. 
88. Issue of show-cause notice before confiscation. 
89. Option to pay fine in lieu of confiscation. 
90. Property on confiscation to vest in Central Government. 
91. Disposal of confiscated property. 
92. StoRlge and upkeep charges in respect of property confiscated 
and redeemed. 
93. Confiscation or penalty not to affect other punishments. 
CHAPTER IX 
APPEAL AND REVISION 
M. Appeal. 
95. Deposit, pending appeal, of duty levied or penalty imposed. 
98. Revision by Board. 
97. Revision by Central Government. 
CHAPTER X 
O .... I!'.NCES AND PJtOSECUTIONS 
98. Offences and penalties. 
99. Punishment for connivance at offences. 
100. Vexatious search, seizure, etc., by Central Excise Oft\c..-er. 
101. Failure of Central Excise Officer in duty. 
100. Offences by companies. 
loa. Cognt2JBJlce of offences. 
104. Burden of proof in certain cases. 
105. Presumption as to documents in certain cases. 
106. Power of courts to order forfeiture. 
107. Courts to notify befoTe disposal to dutiable or offending goods. 

(\,) 
CHAPTER XI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
CLAUSES 
108. Claim for refund of duty, fees or charges. 
]09. Notice for payment of duty, fees or charaes. 
110. Recovery of sums due to Government. 
111. Regulation of transport of excisable goods. 
] 12. Power to define Central Excise Area. 
113. Power to take samples. 
114. Owner or person-in..charge to perform operations incidental to 
examination of goods. 
115. Liability of principal and agent. 
116. Liability of agent appointed by the person-in-charge 'Of convey-
ance or animal. 
117. Amendment of documents. 
118. Procedure for sale. of goods and application of sale-proceeds. 
119. Power to require certain class of persons to furnish bond. 
120. Form and conditions of bonds. 
121. Provision of accommodation at factory or warehouse. 
122. Delegation of powers. 
123. Officers required to assist Central Excise Officers. 
124. Owners or occupiers of land to report manufacture of contra-
band excisable goods. 
125. Protection of action taken under the Act. 
126. Powers of adjudicating officer and appellate and revising autho-
rities. 
127. Correction of clerical mistakes and errors. 
128. Service of decision, order, etc. 
129. Instructions to subordinate authority, etc. 
130. Construction of references to laws not in force in Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
131. Appearance by authorised agent. 
132. Genera} power to' make rules. 
133. General power to make regulations. 
134. Publication of rules and regu"ations and laying before Parlia-
ment of rules, notifications and orders. 
135. Repeal of Act 1 of 1944 in so far as it relates to excisable goods 
other than salt and savings. 
136. Power to remove difticulties. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 

5 
10 
IS 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
Bill No. 6!. of 1969 
THE CENTRAL EXCISES BIll., 1969 
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law relating to Central duties oj excise. 
BE it ena~ted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year o,f the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Excises Act, 1969. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
Short 
title, ex-
tent and 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government commen-eement. may, by notificatidn in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(1) "assessment" means assessment of duty made by the proper 
oft\cer under this Act and includes-
(a) re-assessment of duty made by such officer under this 
Act; 
(b) provisional assessment of duty made by such officer 
under section 22; 
Defini-
tion •. 

2 
(c) best judgmcnt asscssment of duty made by such ot1icer 
under section 26; and 
(d) any order of assessment made by such officer under this 
Act in which the duty assessed is nil; 
(l!) "Board" means the Central Board of Exci~ and Custom:> 5 
constituted under the Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1969; 54 of lta, 
(3) "broker" or "commission agent" means a person who in the 
ordinary course of business makes contracts for the sale or purchase 
of excisable goods for others; 
(4) "Central Excise Officer" means an officer of Central Excise 10 
appointed under section 4 and includes an officel' of the Central 
Government or a State Government to whom the functions of an 
officer of Ce.ntral Excise are entrusted under section 6; 
(5) "Collector of Central Excise" includes a Special and an Ad-
dlti,mal Collector of Cl'ntral Excise; l'i 
(6) "confiscable property" means any goods, land, building, 
plant, machinery, material, conveyance or animal or any other thing 
liable to confiscation under this Act; 
(7) "conveyance" includes a vessel, an aircraft and a vehicle; 
(8) "curer" means a person curing tobacco or coffee whether of 20 
ms own growing or grown by others and includ~s a person curing 
such tobacco or coffee by the labour of his relatives, dependents or 
other pel'BOns whether in his employment or not; 
(9) "curing", in relation to tobacco or coffee, includes wilting, 
drying. fermenting and any other process for rendering tobacco or ?5 
coffee fit for marketing or manufacture; 
(10) "dutiable goods" means any excisable goods on which duty 
is payable but has not been paid; 
(11) "duty" means a duty of excise leviable under this Act and 
includes- 30 
(i) any sum assessed to be payable under section 23 or 
1'ection 28, and 
(ii) any such duty assessed as n.il; 
(12) "examination". in relation to any excisable good:;, includes 
counting, testing, measurement and weighment thereof; 35 
(13) "excisable goods" means goods set forth in the First 
Schc.dule; 
(14) "export", with its grammatical variations and cognate ex-
pressions. means taking out of India to a place outside India and 
includes taking of goods as stores on board any vessel or aircraft 4) 
hound for a place outside India; 
(15) "factory" means any premises (including the precincts there-
of), wherein or in any part of which excisable goods are manumc-
tured, or wherein or in any part of which any manufacturing process 
conne::cted with the production of such goods is being carried on or 45 
is ordinarily carried on, and includes a place approved by the Collec-
tor of Central Excise under section 18 wherein or in any part of 
which the excisable goods manufactured in such premises are de-
posited without payment of duty; 

10 
IS 
25 
30 
35 
!' , 
3 
(16) "grower" means a person growing tobacco or coffee whether 
by his own labour or by that of his relatives, depentients or' oth~ 
persons whether in his employment or not or by that of his tenants; 
(17) "home consumption", in relation to any excisable goods, 
means consumption of such goods within Indi6 for any purpose and in-
cludes use of such goods for manufacture of any article (whether 
chargeable with duty or not) in India; 
(.l8) "India" includes the territorial waters of India; 
(19) "licensee" means a person who holds a valid licence under 
this Act; 
(20) "manufacture" includes any process incidental or ancillary 
to the completion of manufacture of any excisable goods, and-
(1:) in relation to tobacco as defined in Item No. II.I of the 
First Schedule, includes the preparation of cigarettes, cigars, c~e­
roots, biris, Cigarette or pipe or hookah tobacco, che\l'ing tobacco 
and snuff; 
(ii)in relation to patent or proprietary medicines as defined 
in Item No. V.S of the First Schedule and in relation to cosmetics 
and toilet preparations as defined in Item No. V.9 of that Sche-
. tiule, includes the conversion of poWder into tablets or oapsules, 
the labelling or re-Iabelling of containers intended for consumers, 
re-packing from bulk packs. to retail packs and the adoption 
of any other treatment to render the product marketable to 
consumers; 
(iii) in relation to goods comprised in Item No. VI.6 of the 
First Schedule, includes sizing, beaming, warping, wrapping, 
winding or reeling, or anyone or more of these processes and 
the conversion of any form of the said goods into another form 
of such goods; 
and the word "manufacturer" shall be construed accordingly and 
shaU include not only a person who employs hired labour in the pro-
duction or manufacture of excisable goods, but also any person who 
engages in their production or manufacture on his own account; 
(21) "offending goods" means any excisable goods liable to con-
fiscation under this Act; 
(22) "person-in-charge" means,-
(a) in relation to a vessel, the master of the vessel; 
(b) in relation to an aircraft, the commander or pilot-in-
charge of the aircraft; 
40 (c) in relation to a railway train, the conductor, guard or 
other person baving the chief direction of the train; 
(d) in relation to any other conveyance, the driver or other 
person-in-charge of the oonveyance; 
(e) in relation to a factory or warehouse or any other pre-
45 mises, the person who has immediate control over the affairs of 
the factory or warehouse or over the other premises; 
(23) "prescribed", except where it occurs in the expression 
"prescribed by regulations", means prescribed by rules made under 
this Act; 

Clauea 
of officeI'! 
(.If Cen-
tral Ex_ 
cise. 
(24) "private warehouse" means a warehouse for depositing 
exciflable goods, without payment of duty, which belong to the owner 
of the warehouse or are held by him as a broker or commission 
agent; 
(25) "proper officer", in relation to any functions to be perfor- S 
med under this Act, means the Central Excise Officer who is assign-
ed those functions by the Board or the Collector of Central Excise; 
(26) "public warehouse" means a warehouse other than a. prl-
wte warehouse; 
(27) "regulations" means the regulations made by the Beard 10 
under this Act; 
(28) "ru]es" means the rules made by the Central Government 
under this Act; 
(29) "sale" and "purchase", with their grammatical variations 
and cognate expressions, mean any transfer of the pol:lsession of goods IS 
by one person to another in the ordinary course of trade or business 
for ('ash or deferred payment or other valuable consideration; 
(30) "tariff value", in relation to any excisah]~ goods, means 
the tarift value thereof fixed under section 11; 
(3]) "Tax Recovery Officer" means-
(i) a Collector; 
(ii) an Additional Collector or any other officer empowel'ed 
to effect recovery of arrears of land revenue Oi' other public 
demand under any law relating to land revenue or other public 
demand for the time being in force in the State as may be 2S 
authorised by the State Government, by general or special noti-
fication in the Official Gazette, to exercise the powers of a Tax 
Recovery Officer under this Act; 
(iii) any Gazetted Officer of the Central Government, who 
may be authorised by the Central Government, by general or 30 
special notification in the Official Gazette, to exercise the powers 
of a Tax Recovery Officer under this Act; 
(32) "value", in relation to any excisable goods, means the 
value thereof determined in accordance with the provisions of 
section 10; 3S 
(33) "warehouse" means a place for depositing excisable goods 
(without payment of duty) and for which a licence has been granted 
under section 45 or renewed under section 46; 
(34) "warehoused goods" means dutiable goods deposited in a 
warehouse. 
CHAPTER II 
OFFICERS OF CENTRAL EXCISE 
3. There shall be the following classes of officers of Central EXCise, 
namely:~ 
40 
(a) Collectors of Central Excise; 4S 
(b) Appel1ate Collectors of Central Excise; 

, , 5 . \ . . .-'" 
(c) Deputy Collectors of Central Excise; 
(d) Assistant Collectors of Central Excise; and 
(e) such other classes of officers of Central Excise as may be 
appointed for the purposes of this Act. 
5 4. (1) The Central Government may appoint such persons as it thinks 
fit to be officers of Central Excise. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), tile Cen-
tral Government may authorise -the Board, a Collector of Central Excise 
or a Deputy or Assistant Collector of Central Excise to appoint ofBcers 
10 of Central Excise below the rank of Assistant Collector of Central 
Excise. 
(3) The Collector of Central Excise shall have jurisdiction in res-
pect of such areas or places as the Central Government may, by noti .. 
fication in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf. 
IS (4) An officer of Central Excise, other than the Collector of Central 
Excise, shall have jurisdiction in such areas or places as the Board may, 
by order, specify in this behalf. 
5. (1) Subject to such conditions and limitations as the Board may 
impose, an officer of Central Excise may exercise the powers and dis-
20 charge the duties conferred or imposed on him by or under this Act. 
(2) An officer of Central Excise _ may exercise the powers and dis-
charge the duties conferred or imposed by or under this Act on any 
other officer of Central Excise who is lower in rank to him. 
(3) Notwithstanding any'thing contained in this section, an Appellate 
25 Collector <Yf Central Excise shall not exercise the powers and discharge 
the duties conferred or imposed on an officer of Central Excise other than 
those specified in Chapter IX and section 126. 
6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, entrust either conditionally or unconditionally to any oftlcer of 
30 the Central or State Government any functions of an offlcer of Central 
Excise under this Act. 
CHAPTER III 
LEVY AND COLLECTION OF DUTY 
7. (1) Subject to the other proviSions of this Act, there shall be levied 
35 and collected duties of excise on all excisable goods which are produced 
or manufactured in India, as, and at the rates, set forth in the First 
Schedule. 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply in respect of aU 
excisable goods which are produced or manufactured in India by, or on 
40 behalf of, Government, as they apply in res~ct ot excisable goods which I 
ere not produced or manufactured by, or on behalf of, Government. 
Appoint-
ment of 
oiftcers of 
Central 
Excile. 
Power. 
ot oiftcel'8 
of Cen. 
tral Ex-
cise. 
Entrust. 
m.ent of 
functions 
of Centra) 
Excile 
Officers to 
certain 
other 
amcen. 
Dutie.aet 
torthln 
theFil'8t 
Schedul(' 
to be 
levied. 

Duty on 
excisable 
goods 
fallinl 
under 
more 
than 
one item 
or more 
than 0118 
sub..item 
of the 
same 
item of 
theFinR 
Schedule. 
Duty on 
excisable 
gOOeD 
produced 
or manu-
factured 
in the 
couneof. 
or incl-
deDtalor 
anclllar7 
to,~ 
process of 
production 
ormanu-
facture. 
Valuation 
of excis-
able 
goodafor 
PUJ'POI-
of ad 
"alarem 
duU .. 
6 . . ..... 
8, Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the duty under 
section 7 shall, in the case of excisable goods falling under more than 
one item or more than one sub-item of the same item of the First Sche-
dule, be charged at the rate which yields the highest amount of duty. 
9. Without prejudice to the provisions of se.ction 8, the duty under 5 
section 7 shall be assessed, in respect of all excisable goods which 
are -produced or manufactured in the course of, or incidental or an-
cillary to, any process of production or manufacture of any goods (whether 
chargeable with duty or not) at such stage of the process as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this 10 
bebalf. 
10. (1) Where under this Act, duty is chargeable on excisable goods 
with reference to value, such value shall be d~emed to be-
(a) the noTmal price thereof, that is to say, the price which such 
goods woul'd fetch at the time when they are removed for home con- IS 
sumption from the factory or, as the case may be, from the ware-
house, on a sale in the open market between the buyer and the seller 
independent of each other; <Yr 
(b) wh~re in respect of any excisable goods, the normal price 
thereof is not IQScertainable as provided in clause (a), the nearest 20 
equivalent of such price determined in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 
(2) The provisions of this section shall apply only in respect of those 
excisable goods for which a tariff value has not been prescribed under 
section 11. 3$ 
(3) The Central Government may make rules for the purpose of giv-
ing effect to the provisions of this section and, in particular, for requir-
ing the manufacturer or any other licensee or any other person-
(a) to furnish to the proper officer such information, in such 
form and in such manner as may be specified in such rules; and 30 
(b) to produce before the proper officer any books of account 
or other documents of whatever nature relating to the manuf~cture. 
sale or purchase of excisable goods by such manufacturer or other 
licensee or person. 

................. -. ~ " '. , 
.J' .' T 
Explanation I.-For the purpose of sub-section (1) ,-
(a) the noinuu price of any excisable goods shall be determined 
on the following assumptions, oomely:-
(i) that such goods are treated as having been delivered to 
S the buyer at the factory or, as the case may be, at the ware-
house; 
(ii) that the seller will bear the freight, insurance, commis-
sion and all other costs, charges and expenses incidental to' the 
sale anti delivery of such goods at the factory or \3S the case may 
10 be, at the warehouse; 
15 
20 
25 
30 
(iii) that the buyer will bear any duty or tax charteable 
on such goods; 
(b) a sale shall ,be deemed to be a sale in the open market het-
ween the buyer and the seller independent of each other, if-
(i) the price is the sole consideration; 
(ii) the price is not influenced by any commercial, .finan-
cial or otlier relationship, whether by contract or otherwise, 
between the seller or any person assctciated in business with the 
seller and the buyer or any person associated in business with 
the buyer, other than the relationship created by the sale of 
the goods to be valued; and 
(iii) no part of the proceeds of the subsequent sale, use 
or disposal of the excisable goo<;ls accrues either directly or in-
directly to, or for the benefit of, the seller or any person asso-
ciated in business with him; 
(c) where the excisable goods to' be valued are manufactured 
in accordance with any patented invention or a trade mark, the 
normal price shall be determined on the assumption that the price 
covers the right to use the patent or trade merk in respect of such 
goods. -
Expla7Ultion II.-Two persons shall be deem~ to be associated in 
business with each other if, whether directly or indirectly, either of 
them has any interest in the business or property of the other or both 
have a common interest in any business or property or some third per-
35 son has an interest in the business or property _ of both of them. 
11. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 10, if the Central 
Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expetlient in the public in-
terest so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix tariff' 
values or alter any tariff value for the time being in force for any excls-
40 able goods enumerated either specially or under general headings in the 
First Schedule as chargeable with duty ad valorem, having regard to the 
trend of market price of such or like goods and the tluty shall be cbarge-
able on such gooods with reference to the tariff values as so fixed (Jr 
altered. 
45 (2) Different tariff values may be fixed for different classes or des-
criptions of the same excisable goods. 
(!) In this section "market price", in relation to any excisable goods, 
means the wholesale price of such goods in the ordinary course of trad~ 
In India. 
Power 
to ftz 
tarU! 
valu. 

InclUBioD 
of value 
orexclu-
sian of 
weight of 
bobbin, 
wrapper, 
etc., for 
asses-
ament. 
Chargeo! 
dutYOD 
manufac-
tured or 
composite 
articles. 
Liability 
for pay_ 
ment 01. 
duty and 
allowancl!' 
forchan-
ges in 
bulk. 
etc., of 
exisable 
goods. 
U. (1) Where. under this Act, any excisable goods are charaeable 
with duty with reference to value or, as the case may be,tariff value. 
and if such goods are wrapped or packed or are contained in a box, bottle 
or other container or are wound on a bobbin, pirn, spool, reel or 
warp beam, the value or tariff value shall, unless the Central Govern- S 
ment for any reason directs otherwise by notification in the Official 
Gazette in respect of any such goods or class of such goods specifieti 
therein, include the value of the wrapper or package in which such goods 
are wrapped or packed or of the box, bottle or other container in which 
such goods are contained or of the bobbin, pirn, spoo'l, reel or warp beam 10 
on which such goods are wound. 
(2) Where under this Act, any excisable goods are chargeable with 
duty :...4th reference to weight, such weight shall not include the weight 
of the wrapper, package, box, bottle or other container in which such 
goods are wrapped, packed or contained or of the bobbin, pirn, spool, IS 
reel or warp beam on which such goods are wauna unless the Ceritral 
Government for any reason directs otherwise by notification in the 
Official Gazette in respect of a~y such goods or class of such goods speci-
fied therein. 
(3) For the purpose of this section, the wrapper, package, box, bottle 20 
or other container Or the bobbin, pirn, spool, reel or warp beam shall 
be deemed to be subject to the same rate of duty as tlle excisable goods 
wrapped, packed or contained therein or wound thereon. 
13. (1) If any article (whether chargeable with duty or not) contains 
as part, ingredient or component, any dutiable goods, duty shall be 25 
charged in respect of each such dutiable goods according to the quantity 
appearing to the proper officer to have been used in the. manufacture of 
the said article or, as the case may be, the value thereof: .. 
Provided that before any duty is charged under this sub-section on 
such dutiable goods, the person affected thereby shall be given a reason- jv 
able opportunity of being heard in the matter: 
Provided further that the tiuty charged on the article, if chargeable 
with duty, shall be in addition to the duty charged in the aforesatd 
manner on account of the said dutiable goods contained in such article 
as part, ingredient or component, as the case may be. 35 
(2) The provisions of this section shall apply only in respect of such 
article or articles as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, specify in this behalf. 
14. Every person who produces, cures or manufactures any excisable 
goods or who deposits excisable goods in a warehouse, shall, subject to 40 
the other provisions of this Act, pay the duty or duties leviuble on such 
goods at such time and in such manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the Central Government may, having regard to the 
normal trade practice, hygroscopic or evaporative nature of the excisable 
goods or other relevant considerations, make rules providing for allow- 4S 
ance for changes in bulk thereof or evaporation loss therein, as the case 
may be, for determining the liability of such person for payment of duty 
on the excisable goods produced, cured, manufactured or deposited by 
him. 

S 
10 
9 
15. The rate of duty and tariff valuation, if any, applicable to any 
excisable goods shall be the rate and valuation in force--
(a) in the case of excisable goods removed on payment of tiuty 
from a factory m warehouse, on the date of the actual removal of 
such go'Ods from the factory or warehouse, as the case may be; 
(b) in the case of excisable goods removed on payment of duty 
from the premises of a curer, on the date on which the duty thereon 
is assessed; and 
(c) in all other cases, on such date or dates as may be determin-
ed in accordance with the rules having regard to the probable time 
at which the excisable goods may have been used for home consump-
tion. 
16. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no excisable goods shall 
be removed by any person from any place where. they are produced, 
IS cured or manufactured or from any premises appurtenant thereto which 
may be specified by the Colle.ctor of Central Excise in this behalf, for 
home consumption, export or use for manufacture of any article (wheth-
er chargeable with duty or not), in or outside such place or premises 
unless such person-
20 (a) has determined the duty leviable on such goods and has 
paid the duty so determined in such manner as may be prescribed; 
and 
(b) has complied with such other conditions as may be prest'rib-
ed. 
2S (2) If it is found subsequently that the duty determined and paid in 
respect of any such goods under sub-section (1) has not been correctl~ 
determined or paid, the goods may, without prejudice to any other actioD 
to which such person may be liable under this Act, be assessed by the 
proper officer to the correct amount of the duty leviable thereon and if the 
30 duty first determinetl and paid falls short of, or is in excess of, the duty 
thus assessed, such person shall pay the deficiency or be entitled to a 
refund, as the case may be. 
17. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that no person shall remove or use such excisable goods 
3S or any excisable goods for such purpose, as may be specifie.d therein, 
from or in any place or premises referred to in section 16, until such 
goods have been examined and assessed by the proper officer on presen-
tation by such person of an application in such form and in such manner 
as may be prescribed by regulations and the duty thereon has been paid 
40 by such person and the. written permission of the proper officer has been 
obtained by him on such application for such removal or use: 
Provided that SUCR. goods may, prior to the examination thereof, be 
assessed by the proper officer on the information contained in the. applf-
cation and the duty so assessed may be paid, but if it is found subsequent-
45 lyon examination of the goods that they have not been correctly assess-
ed, they may, without prejudice to any other action to which such per-
son may be liable under this Act, be re-assessed to duty and if the duty 
first assessed and paid falls short of, or is in excess of, the duty finally 
assessed, such person shall pay the deficiency or be entitled to a refund, 
SO as the case may be. 
.Date tOt 
determi-
nation of 
rate of 
duty. 
and tarlft· 
valuation. 
Removal 
of exclJ-
abl .. 
goods 
generally. 
Certain 
exeiaable 
lOodsto 
be re-
mOVed 
only on 
aHeBS-
ment b)' 
proper 
offlcer. 

~emova1 
ofexci ... 
able 
goods 
without 
payment 
of duty 
fordepo-
sit in a 
ware-
house, 
etc. 
Duty on 
excisable 
goods 
manufac-
tured at 
the place 
where 
they 
are in_ 
tended 
to bec:on_ 
su.rned. 
Restric-
tions on 
removal 
of ex cis-
able 
goods. 
10 
18. (1) Any excisable goods may be removed, without payment of 
duty, from any place or premises referred to in section 16, for deposit in 
a warehouse in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VI or, subject 
to such conditions as may be prescribed, in such other place as may be 
approved by the Collector of Central Excise. 5 
(2) Where any excisable goods deposited under sub-section (1) are 
removed from the warehouse or other place. referred to in that sub-sec-
tion, the provisions of sectiO'Il 16 or, as the case may be, of section 17, shall 
apply in' relation to the removal of such goods from such warehouse or 
other place as they apply in relation to the removal of excisable goods 10 
from any place or premises referred to in section 16. 
19. Where any excisable goods are manufactured at the place at which 
such goods are intende.d to be consumed, duty on such goods shall, imme-
diately after such manufacture, be charged with reference to the quantity 
thereof estimated by the proper officer (after giving the manufacturer a IS 
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter) to have been manu-
factured or, as the case may be, with reference to thei'! value. 
20. (1) No excisable goods shell be removed from a factory or ware-
house after five o'clock in the afternoon on the date of presentation of 
the annual or any supplementary budget of the Central Government to 20 
Parliament: 
Provided that the Central Government may, on an application made 
to it in this behalf by the manufacturer or, as the case may be, the owner 
of warehoused goods, by order, allow, if it considers it necessary so to 
do, the removal of such goods from the factory (1r warehouse after ~5 
five o'clock in the afternoon of the aforesaid date subject to such manu-
facturer or owner complying with such conditions, if any, as may be 
specified in the order: 
Provided further that where such manufacturer or owner is allowed 
to remove the goods under the preceding proviso, he shall pay the duty 30 
at the enhanced rate, if any, which may be applicable to the goods if 
they had been removed on the day immediately following the date of 
presentation of the annual budget or, as the case may be, of the sup-
plementary budget. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), no excis- 35 
able go'ods to which the provisions of section 17 apply shall be removeti 
from a factory or warehouse-
(i) beyond the hours fixed by the Collector of Central Excise for 
such removal; or 
(U) on Sundays and public holidays, 40 
I!xcept with the permission of the proper officer, under such conditions 
and on payment of such fees, as may be prescribed: 
Provided that where in Q factory or wareOOuse, any day other than 
a Sunday is observed as a weekly holiday, ·the provisions of this sub-
section shall have effect as if in clause (ii), for the expression "Sundays", 45 
the expression "weekly holidays" were substituted. 

5 
11 
21. If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or ex-
pedient in the public interest so to do, it may, by notification in the Offi-
cIal Gazette, allow-
Removal 
ot excI.-
able 
good8 
without 
(a) such excisable goods, as may be specified in the notification, payment 
to be removed from any factory or warehouse without payment of of whole 
the whole or part of the duty leviable thereon, for manufacture of 01' part of 
such articles as may be so specified and subject t'D' such con'ciitions as duty for manufac. 
may be prescribed: ture of 
articles or Provided that if such excisable goods are not used in the manu- on defer-
10 facture of such artic~es or are not accounted for in the prescribed' ment of 
manner, the manufacturer of such articles shall pay the duty levi- pay~nt of 
able or, as the case may be, the difference between the duty leviable duty 
IS 
20 
and the duty, if any, already paid in respect of the goods not so 
used or not so acC()unted for; 
(b) the deferment of payment of the whole or part of the duty 
leviable on such excisable goods as may be specified in the notifica-
'tion, which are removed or intended to be removed from any factory 
or warehouse, by such period as may be so specified and subject to 
such conditions, as may be prescribed, as regards payment of the 
duty so deferred and the interest chargeable thereon, 
22. (1) Where, with respect to any excisable goods to which the pro- Pro vi-
visions of section 17 apply,- sional usaeu-
25 
(a) the proper officer is satisfied that the manufacturer, curer or 
owner of such goods is unable to produce any document or furnish 
any information necessary for the assessment of duty on such 
goods; Or 
(b) the. proper officer deems it necessary to subject such goods 
to any chemical or other test for the purpose of assessment of duty 
thereon; or 
30 (c) the manufacturer, curer or owner of such goods has produc-
ed all the necessary documents and furnished full information for 
the assessment of duty, but the proper officer deems it necessary 
to make further inquiry (including an inquiry to satisfy himself 
about the due observance of any prescribed conditions in respect of 
35 such goods after their removal) for assessing the duty, 
then, the proper officer may, on presentation by the manufacturer, curer 
or owner of such goods, of the application re.quired under that section: 
direct that the duty due on such goods shall, pending the production of 
such documents or furnishing of such information or completion of such 
40 test or inquiry, be assessed provisionally if such manufacturer, curer or 
owner, as the case may be, executes a bond for the payment of the defi-
ciency, if any, between the duty to be finally assessed and the duty pro-
visionally assessed and paid: 
Provided that the proper officer may permit such mauufacturer, curer 
45 or owner to execute a general bond for all provisional assessments ".vhlch 
the proper officer may, for any prescribed period, make under this sec-
tion in relation to such goods of the manufacturer, curer or owner, as the 
case may be, 
mentof 
duty, 

Spec~l 
proce-
durefor 
paymellt 
of duty 
in certai. 
caiell. 
Dlity 
&lrtdr 
paid to 
be set o. 
in certaiJa 
ca ... , 
, . 
12 
(2) When the duty leviable on such goods is assessed finally, thi 
amount paid in pursuance of the provisional assessment under sub-sec-
tion (1) shall be adjusted against the duty finally assessed and if the 
duty provisionally assessed and paid falls short of, or is in excess of, the 
duty finally assessed, such manufacturer, curer or owner, shall pay the S 
deficiency or be entitled to a refund, as the case may be. 
23. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied in the case of any excis-
able goods that it is necessary m: expedient in the public interest so to do, 
it may, by rules, provide for the discharge cf liability for 'duty on such 
goods on payment of a certain sum by '.!lny class of producers, curers or, 10 
as the case may be, manufacturers thereof, the procedure to be followed 
in this behalf (including the removal of such goods frem the place of cur-
ing, production or manufacture) and the time and manner of payment 
of tht' said sum. 
(2) The. sum referred to in sub-section (1) shall be fixed for a period IS 
(not excet:ding one year) to be specified in the rules and, in fixing such 
sum, due regard sha] be had to the following matters, namely:....,.-
(a) the average quantity or, as the case may be, the average 
value of such excisable goods likely to be produced, .cured or manu-
factured by such class of produ.:ers, ell 'ers or manufacturers during 20 
the aforesaid period; 
(b) the kind an'd quality 0'1 equipments and materials used Ly 
such class of producers, curers or manufactuft'rs for the producti(ll, 
curing or manufacture of such excisable goods and the nature of the 
excisable goods produced, cured Of manufactured; 25 
(c) the period for which the production, curing or manufacture 
of such excisable goods is carried en or rem'.lins suspended by such 
class of producers, curers 'O"r manufacturers during the aforesaid 
period j an'd 
(d) any other relevant consideration which the Central Gov- 30 
ernment thinks fit in the circumstances of the case. 
24. (1) If the Centrlill Government is satisfied that it is necessary or 
expedient in the public interest so to do, it may, by notification in the 
OffiCial Gazette, direct that credit may be allowed to such extent and 
subject to such conditions and limitations and at such time and in such 3S 
manner as may be prescribed, of the duty paid under this Act or of the 
duty paid under section !J.A of the Indian Tar' If Act, 1934, on such 32 of im. 
materials, component parts or ingredients as may be specified in the 
said notification and as are used in the manufacture of such excisable 
goods (hereinafter in this section referred to as th~ finished excisable 40 
product) as may be so specified. 
(2) The amount ot duty credited in accordance with :mb~section (1) 
shall be set off at such time and in such manner as may be prescribed 
against the duty assessed under this Act on the finished excisable pro-
duct. 
(3) Where any excisable goods are removed from a factory or ware- -45 
house after payment of the duty leviable thereD:l at the rate in force on 
the date of such removal and such auods are deposited in another factory 
or warehouse with the written permission of the Collector of Central 
Excise and the goods so deposited are subsequently removed from the 
other factory or warehouse, tlteR,- S;} 

13 
(a) duty shall be charg~ble on such goods at the rate in force 
on the date of the subsequent removal thereof; and 
('b) the duty alrea\iypaid thereon on their first removal shall 
be set off in such manner as may be prescribed again~t the duty 
S assessed thereon under clause (a). 
(4) The provisions of sub-section (3) shall apply only in respect of 
such excisable geods as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf. 
%5. The proper officer may permit the removal as samples of such 
10 excisable goods as he thinks necessary for trade, busine:;s, exhibition or 
test, from any factory or warehouse if the manufacturer or, as the case 
may be, the owner of the goods complies with such cotlditions as may 
be prescribed. 
26. (1) If any persO'n who-
RemovaJ 
of excisa_ 
ble good, 
aSlam.. 
pIes for 
trad ... 
~tc. 
IS 
Best jucl-
ment 
(a) produces tobacco or coffee without a declaration as requir. assesi. 
20 
ed by section 37; or lIlent 
(b) cures tobacco or coffee or manufactures any excisable goods 
in contravention of any provision of this Act; or 
(c) being a licensee, disposes of any excisable goods (in rela-
tion to which the licence has been granted or renewed) otherwise 
than in the prescribed manner; or 
(d) being a producer of tobacco or coffee or a licensee, !aUs to 
account, in accordance with the provisions of this Act, for any excis-
able goods produced, cured, manufactured, warehoused or otherwise 
dealt with by him, . 
the proper officer shall, after givini a reasonable opportunity to such 
person of being heard in the matter, determine the quantity or value, af; 
the case may be, of the goods produced, cured, manufactured or disposed 
of or not so accounted for, to the best of his judgment and assess the 
30 duty leviable thereon and thereupon such person shall pay the duty so 
assessed within such period as may be prescribed. 
(2) The assessment made under sub-section (1) shan be Without 
prejudice to any other action to which such person may be liable under 
any other provision of this Act. 
35 27. The Central Government may, by rules, provide for the denatur- Denatur_ 
ing or mutilation of any excisable goods which are ordinarily used for in. and 
more than one purpoSf" so as to render them unfit for one or more of mutilatioR 
such purposes, and where any such goods are so denaturt'd or mutilated, :~ci.8bl~ 
they shall be chargeable with duty, if any, at such rate as would be gppli- lood!!. 
40 cable jf such ~s had been cured or manufactured in the denatured or 
mutilated form. ' 
28. (1) Every grower of tobacco or coffee and every licf-nsee under Grower' 
this Act shall maintain such accounts and submit 'Juch returns of the of tobae· 
tobacco or coffee produced or, as the case may be, of the excisable goods co and 
045 cured; manufactured, held in stock, removed for home consumptkln or co~~~_ 
export or otherwise disposed of in such manner antt in such form a. ~ ... 
may be prescribed by regulations, UJl4 ... ~~ 

Act to 
maintain 
accountll 
and BUb.. 
mit re. 
turn&. 
Power to 
exempt 
from 
duty. 
14 
(2) If the Board is satisfied that it is necessary so to do for the proper 
levy and collection of duty on any excisable goods, it may, by notiftca-
tion in the Official Gazette, direct that the manufacturer thereof shall 
maintain accounts and submit returns of-
(a) the components, ingredients or other materials used in any ~ 
process of production or manufacture of the said goods; 
(b) the bye-products, intermediate or residual products of pro-
duction or manufacture of the said goods; and 
(c) the containers, packages or receptacles used ior the disposal 
of the said goods, 10 
in such form and giving such details as may be prescribed by regulations. 
CHAPTER IV 
EXEMPTION, REMISSION, REFUND AND REBATE OF DUTY 
29. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or 
expedient in the public interest so to do, it may, by notification in the 15 
Official Gazette, exempt excisable goods of any specified description or 
excisable goods produced, cured or manufactured by any class of pro-
ducers, curers or manufacturers from the whole or part of the duty levi-
able thereon subject to such conditions, as may be ~pecified in the said 
notification, and to be fulfilled before or after removal from any place 20 
or premises referred to in section 16, or from a warehouse or from any 
other place approved under section 18. . 
(2) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or 
expedient in the public interest so to do, it may, by special order, exempt 
any excisable goods from the whole or part of the duty leviable thereon, 2S 
under circumstances of an exceptional nature to be stated in such order 
and subject to such conditions as may be specified therein. 
(3) If, after any goods have been manufactured,-
(4) any duty is levied on such goods, or 
(b) the duty on such goods is altered, or 
(c) any notification exempting such goods from the duty levi-
abIt~ thereon is cancelled or modified, 
and such goods are used in the manufacture of any eXCisable goods, any 
exemption from duty under this section in respect of the excisable goods 
30 
so manufactured, may be subject to the further condition that duty shall 3S 
be paid in such manner and at such time, as may be prescribed, on the 
goods so used es if the goods were manufactured after such levy, altera-
tion, cancellation or mO'diflcation. 
(4) Any exemption under this section may be granted so as to have 
retrospective effect. 40 
(5) Where any alteration is made either in the description of any 
excisable goods or in the rate of duty lflviable thereon, by any Bill to 
give effect to the financial proposals of the Central Government or by 
any Central Act. then, every notification issued under sub-section (I) 
and every order made under sub-section (2) with respect to such goods 45 
before such alteration, shall, unless such notification or order is modi-
fied or rescinded, continue in force and be deemed to have been issued 
or made with reference to the altered description thereof or the altered 
rate of duty leviable thereon. as the ca.4le may be: 

U~ 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any such 
notification or order-
(a) under which the rate of duty payable on such goods is higher 
. than the rate of duty leviable thereon consequent on such alteration; 
5 or 
(b) where no duty is leviable on such goods consequent on such 
alteration. 
30. The Central Government may, by rules, provide for remission of 
the duty leviable or for refund of the duty already ?aid on any excisable 
10 goods which have become unfit for consumption or marketing, or have 
been lost or destroyed owing to any natural or accidental cause or due 
to any other cause considered unavoidable in the process of manufacture 
of such goods: 
Rem»-
sion or 
refund 01 
duty on 
excisable 
,ooda 
which 
have be-
comeUD-
Provided that no such remission or refund shall be allowed after the At for 
15 excisable goods arc removed from the factory or warehouse, ~s the case conaump. 
may be. tion, 
market. 
ing. etc. 
31. If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or 
expedient in the public interest so to do, it may, by notification in the 
Ofticial Gazette, direct that any excisable goods specified therein may 
20 be returned-
(a) to the same place where they were manufactured or such 
other place as may be specified in the said notification, for re-condi-
tioning, re-manufacture or removal of defects so as to render such 
goods fit for consl1mntion (j,. marketing, or 
25 (b) to the same place where they were manufactured for des-
truction, if such ('xcisable ~oods have become for any reason unfit 
for consumption or marketing and are not capable of being re-condi-
tioned OT re-manufactured or are otherwise not amenable to any treat-
ment so as to render such goods fit for consumption or marketing, 
30 and that rebate of the duty, if any, paid thereon shall be allowed to 
such extent as may be specified in the said notification and ~;ubject to 
such conditions as may be prescribed. 
32. (1) Where any excisable goods are exported, the duty, if any, 
paid thereon shall, subject to the provisions of sections 35 and 36 and 
35 the rules made under sub-section (2), be repaid as rebate to the expor-
ter of such goods: 
Provided that where the Central Government is of opinion that the 
duty paid on any class of excisable goods to be exported is not ascertain-
able, it may, having regard to the average duty likely to have been 
.~o paid on such goods (which may be determined in the prescribed 
manner), by notIfication in the Official Gazette, direct that the rebate 
on the export of such goods shall be allowe'd only at such rate as may 
be specified therein. 
(2) The Central Government may make rules for the purpose of 
45 giving effect to the provisions of sub-section (1) and, in particular, such 
rules may provide for-
(a) the time-limit within which excisable goods may be ~xport­
ed aftC' payment of duty; 
Rebateot 
duty on 
retumo~ 
exciaabl~ 
goods to 
the place 
~manu·· 
facture, 
etc. 
Rebateal 
duty on 
excisable 
,oodaez,;. 
ported. 

hporto f 
excisable 
goodl 111 
bond· 
Rebate 
of duty 
onexe. 
able 
ioodau.... 
ed in the 
manufac-
tureD' 
articles 
which are 
exported. 
16 
(b) the identification of excisable goods to be exported as the 
goods on which duty had been paid; 
(c) the manner in which and the authority before which and 
the time-limit within which the claim for rebate may, together with 
the proof of export of excisable goods, be filed; , 
(d) the manner of determining the average duty likely to have 
been paid on any class of excisable goods. 
33. (1) Any excisable goods may be removed from a factory or ware-
house for the pUrpose of export without payment of duty-
(a) if the manufacturer of such goods; or 10 
(b) if the licensee of a private warehouse in which such gOO'ds 
are depOSited; or 
(c) where the exporter is not the manu~cturer of such goods 
or the licensee df a private warehouse in which such goods are de-
posited, jf such exporter, 15 
executes a bond for ~uch export and complies with such other conditions 
(including any condition as regards the time-limit within which the 
goods may be so exported and the time-limit within which the proof of 
such export may be furnished to the proper officer), as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the proper officer may permit such manufacturer, 20 
licensee or eX'pO'I'ter, '85 the case may be, to execute a general bond for 
such export for any prescribe'd period. 
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to excisable goods on the ex-
port of which no rebate is allowed under section 35. 
34. (1) Where it appears to the Central Government that in respect of 25 
any class of articles manufactured in India and exported, a rebate should 
be 91l0wed of .1he duty paid on any class of excisable goods used in the 
manufacture of such class of articles, the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that such duty shall, subject 
to the provisions of sections 35 and 36 and the rules made under sub- 30 
section (2), be repaid as rebate in respect of such class of articles to the 
exporter thereof. 
(2) The Central G<Yvernment may make rules for the purpose of liv-
ing effect to the provisions of sub-section (1) and, in particular, such 
rules may provide for- 35 
(a) the payment of the rebate equal to the omount of duty 
actually paid on excisable goods used in the manufacture of such 
class of articles or the average tluty likely to have been paid on ex-
cisab1e goods used in the manufacture of such class of articles either 
by manufacturers generally or by any particular manufacturer; 40 
(b) the manner of determining the,Qverage duty likely to have 
been paid on excisable goods used in the manufacture of such c)qu 
of articles either by manufacturers generally or by any particular 
manufacturer; 

(c) the time-limit, after manufacture, within which the articles 
may be exported; 
(d) the production of such certificates, documents end other evi-
dence in support of each claim of rebate as may be necessary; 
5 (.e) requiring the manufacturer to eive access too every part of 
his manufactory to any Central Excise Officer specially authorise\:i 
in this behalf by the Assistant Collector of CentAll Excise to enable 
such officer to inspect the processes of manufacture and to verify by 
actual check or otherwise the statements made in support of the 
10 claim for rebate; 
(f) the manner in which and the authority before which and the 
time-limit within which the cl1aim for rebate may, together with the 
proof oi export of the articles, be filed. 
35. (1) No rebate of duty shall be allowed under section 32 or untier Rebate of 
, duty UJ'I-15 section 34,-
• i M.ual der sec-
price of which is less tiona 3J 
20 
(a) in respect of any goods the market 
than the amount of rebate due thereon; 
(b) where the rebate due in respect of any goods (other than 
the goods which ere exported by post) is less than five rupees. 
(2) If the Central Government is satisfie'ci that any class of goods is 
in short supply in India, or that after export of eny class of goods, such 
goods are likely to be imported into India, or that it is necessary or 
expedient in the public interest so to do with respect to any class of 
goods (including goods on any class of vessels), it may, by notification 
2S in the Official Gazette, direct that on export of such class of goods, either 
generally to aJ destinations or to such destination or destinations, as 
may be specified therein, no rebate shall be granted under section 32 or, 
as the case may be, under section 34. 
(3) In this section, the expression "goods" means excisable goods and 
30 includes the articles referred to in section 34. 
36. Where any excisable goods or articles made therefrom are not 
exporte'ci within the time-limit prescribed under section 32 or, as the 
case may be, under section 34, or the proof of export of such goods or 
articles is not furnished within the time-limit prescribed under section 
35 32 or, as the case may be, under section 34, the proper officer may, after 
giving a reasonable opportunity to the exporter of being heard in the 
matter, by order, disallow the whole or any part of the claim for such 
rebate under section 32 or under section 34. 
_ . .f ~ 
CHAPTER V 
DECLARATION AND LICENSING OF CERTAIN OPERATIONS 
37. No person shall himself or by any other person on his behalf en~ 
gage in the growing of tobacco or coffee upon any land except after mak-
ing a declaration in respect of such land to the proper officer in such 
form, and e<mtaining such particulars, and in such manner, as may be 
45 prescribed. 
anq 3"-
not to 
beallo'W-
ed in cer-
tain cases. 
Wlioleor 
part 01 
claim tor 
rebate of 
duty un-
der~ 
tionllS2 
and 34tn 
be diaal-
10wediro 
<'ertaiJ'l 
caaea 
Persons 
growing 
toba~ 
Or coffee 
to make 
declara-
t1cm. .1 

certain 
opera. 
tionatf\ 
belUb,. 
jed to 
licehce. 
Grant 
and re_ 
newalof 
licences. 
Cancella-
tIoDaDd 
1UlJ)eD-
lIloDof 
licences. 
HI 
Sa. No person shell himself or by any other person on his behalf en:; 
gage in-
(a) the curing, production or manufacture of any excisable 
goods including the manufacture of articles specified in any notifica-
tIon issued under clause (a) of section 21, ar 
(b) the production or manufacture of such component parts or 
ingredients, or such containers of any excIsable goo'ds as may be spe-
cIfied by the Central Government, by notification in the OfficIal 
Gazette, or 
(c) the wholesale purchase or sale (whether on his own account 
or as a broker or commission agent) or the storage, otherwise than 
in a warehouse, of tobacco or coffee, 
except under the authority and in accordance with the terms and con'Cli-
tIons of a licence granted under section 39. 
5 
10 
39. (1) Any person desiring to engage him.;elf or by any other person 15 
on nis behalf in any of the operations referred to in sectiO'n 38, shall make 
an application for the necessary licence to the proper officer (hereafter 
in this Chapter referred to' as the licensing officer), in such form and 
containing such particulars as may be prescribed. 
(2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the licensing 2') 
licensee, be renewed by the licensing officer or such other officer as 
to the applicant for such perio'd, subject to such conditions (including 
any condition as to execution of a bond), in such form and containing 
such particulars and on payment of such fees, as may be prescribed: 
Provided that different fees may be prescribed for different classes 25 
of licences. 
(3) A licence granted under this section may, on application by the 
licensee, be renewed by the licensing officer or such other officer as 
the Board may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this be-
half. for such period and on payment of such fees, as may be prescribed. 30 
(4) No application made under this section shall be rejected unless the 
applicant has been given a re·asonable opportunity of being heard in the 
matter. 
40. (1) The licensing officer or, where the licensing officer is lower 
in rank than an Assistant Collector of Centrol Excise, the Assistant Col- 35 
lector of Central Excise to whom the licensing officer is subordinate, 
may, without prejudice to any other action that may be taken against the 
licensee under this Act, canc~l a licence granted or renewed under sec-
tion 39-
(a) if he is satisfied tht3.t any statement made in the application 40 
for grant or renewal of the licence is incorrect or false in material 
particulars or that the licensee has failed to comply with any of the 
conditions of the licence or has contravened any of the provisions 
of this Act or any rule, OF 
(b) if the licensee is convicted of an offence punishable untier 45 
sectiOn 165A ()'i. the Indien Penal Code: 45 of 1860. 
PrOVided that no licence shall be cancelled under clause (a) unless 
a reasonable opportunity has been given to the licensee to shoW cause why 
the licence should not be cancelled. 

\;' 
II 
U} FendiDa a c1eciaion whether .a licence should be cancelled under 
aub-aection (l>' the licenaing officer, or, where the licensing officer· is 
low. iR rank thaa an Assistant Collector of· Central Excise, . the Assist-
. ant Colleatm-of Centnll Excise to whom the licensini olBcer i8 subo.rt:li. 
, nate may, by order, suspend the licence for such period or periods not 
exceeding. two months in the aggregate as he may think fit: 
Provided that the Collector of Central Excise may, by order, extend 
the period of suspension ordered by the lieensing officer or the Anistant 
Collector of Central Excise, as the case may be, by a further period or 
10 periods not exeeeding one month in the aggregate· as he may think fit. 
15 
41. If .the Board is satisfied that it is necessary or expetiient in the 
public interest so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
exempt any class of persons or any class of excisable goods from the 
operation of all OT any of the provisions of section 37 or seetioD 38. 
CHAPTER VI 
WAREHOUSING 
ft. No excisable goods shall be deposited in a warehouse or, where 
luch goods have been so deposited, be removed therefrom for home con-
IUmption or for export or to another warehouse or be otherwise dealt 
10 with except as provided by or under this Act. 
4.3. Lf the Ccnual Government is satisfied that it is n~S8ry or ex-
pedient in the public interest so to do, it may, by notification in the Offi-
cial Gazette, specify the excisable goods which may, subject to such limi-
tations and conditions, as may be specified therein,-
(a) be deposited in a warehouse without payment of duty; or 
(b~ be removed from one warehoUie to another without. pay-
ment of duty. 
'" No pctSOIl ·skaU.. himielf or· by . any other per~on on . his beh.al1 
... blUb • w~ except,uJ1Cierthe auth<:trity and In accortlance wlth 
,0. the tarma· .acl CeDdttloDl of a licence pnted under ,ec:tion 4~. . 
1188 (B) LS-4. .. 
Power to 
exempt. 
Excisable 
goods not 
to be de... 
posited 
ina 
ware-
house 
orre-
moved 
there-
from or 
nt.her-
wisp 
dealt 
with ex-
cept 9.J 
provided 
by or 
under the 
Act 
Power to 
regulate 
ware-
housing 
of excis-
able 
goods 
and re-
moval of 
such 
goods 
from one 
ware-
house to 
anOther. 
Licensln, 
nfware • 
houset. 

Gr.antot 
ware--
~UH 
lleeneel. 
Renewal 
of ware-
bOUle 
neenees. 
Ware .. 
housin, 
bond. 
~uIa­
tlon 0« 
depMt 
efacba-
b~lOOds 
•• 
.~ 
iOllM. 
20 
45. {l) Any person desiriJll to establish, himself or by any otber ~n 
on his behalf, a warehouse shall make an appUeatidil for the neeesnty 
lieence to the proper' offieer (hereafter in this' section and see~M ~ 
and' 69 referred to as the lieensing oftlcer), in sueh form atld cemtlihiftl 
lUeh particulars as may be prescribed. c . , " '. s 
(2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the liCensin& 
ofIlcer may. after holding such inquiry as he deema fit, '&raM a Ueence 
havin, regard to the following facton, namely:-
(a) the suitability of the premises, where the warehouslt is p'ro-
posed to be established, for being used ti a warehouse; I G 
(b) the number of warehouses operating in the village, town or 
city where the warehouse is propOsed to be e8tablished'; and 
(c) such other factors 86 may be prescribed. 
(3) Every licence granted under this section shall be on ~ymeJlt .f 
such fees as may be prescribed: IS 
Provided that different fees may be 'pre~ribed for different classes of 
warehouses. 
(4) Every licence granted un~er this section shall be for such period. 
subject to such conditions and in such fu'rm and shall contain such l'Irti-
culars. as may be prescribed. " 2$ 
(5) No application made under this section shan be rej'ecteti un}e,. the 
applicant has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the 
matter. 
46. (1) A licence granted under section 45 may, on application by the 
licensee, be renewed by the licensing ofticer or such other offtcer as the 25, 
Board may, by notification in the Ofticial Gazette, specify in this behalf, 
for such period and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed. 
(2) No applieation mede under this section shall be rejected unless the 
applicant has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heartl in the 
mili~ ~ 
47. (1) Every licensee of a public or a private warehouse shall exe-
cute a bond in respect of the excisable gOO'ds deposited in his warehouse. 
(2) Every owner of excisable go~s desiring to deposit such goods in 
a public: warehouse shall also execute 'a bond et the time of each tmch 
deposit: 35 
Provided that the proper <1fticer may permit such owner to execute a 
general bond :for such deposits for any prescribed period. 
48. (1) Subject to the prOvisions of sub-section (2), no excisable 
ioods shall be deposited in a warehouse unless-
(a) the bond or bonds as required under section 47 has or have ~ 
been executed, and 
(b) such goods, except in such cases as may be prescribed. have 
been presented by the owner thereof to the proper ofticer and such 
ofticer has assess«l them to' duty and made an order ~rmitting the 
. deposit of such goods in the warehouse without payment of duty. 45 
(2) The Board may. by' n01 ification in the oMclbl Gazette.di~ that 
suell wei.able iCods, as maybe specifted l41ete1n, tIb.n;~(1t; ·be t!epdllted 
in a warehouse after such perictdssmtay be sb q.et!tfted, 'fro~ 'the'dtite ( 
", I 

:it 
(J!tD.~tlo,n ot ~in, or manuiaqtW'e t as the case may be, and, where 
wc1l tl.te ;,s not ascertainable, from such date as may be prescribed: 
Provided that in specifying the period aforesaid, the. Bo,.rd shall han 
due reprd to thl'! natufl'! of the excisable ,oods 80' specifiled, 
5 . "':' Any wareh6used aoods may be left in the warehouse in which 
they were deposited or in any warehouse to which they mi,ht have 
been subaequently removed till the expiry at three years after the date 
on which they were first deposited in the warehouse: 
Period 
torwbJch 
WlU'e~ 
baued 
loocbt 
Dla7l"e-
mJlin ia a 
ware_ 
house. 
Provided that for any good and suftlcient. reason theaforeaaid period 
10 ,of thr~ years may be extended by such authority and for such further 
, . period or periods, as may be prescribed. 
50. (1) The owner of warehoused goods may, subject to $uch condi-
timls as may be prescribed, sort, separate, pack or re-pack such goods 
and make such alterations therein as may be nece.ssary for their disposal 
~', (by 981e or otherw'1se) orftno their preservation. 
,(2) After the goods have bee.n so sorted, separated, packe'd, re-pacW 
or subjected to any alteration as aforesaid, the proper officer may, on the 
request of the owner thereof, cause or permit any refuse or damaged 
aoods remlQining after such sorting, separation, packing, re-packing or 
20 alteration to be destroyed and remit the duty thereon. 
51., (1) The Board may, by notification)n the Official Gazette, direct 
that, in relation to such warehoued go~ as may be specified therein, 
the owner thereof may conduct such manufacturing operations in the 
warehouse, as may be 80 spec1fted, subject to such restrictions, and condi-
25 .. tions (including a condition as to the payment of the duty on the said 
warehoused goods and on the excisable goods, if any, produced as a re-
sult of any of the said manuJacturing oper~tions) as may be prescribed. 
(2) The proper officer may remit the duty on the refuse or waste 
ariama out of any operation referred to in sub-section (1) to such extent 
30 and in such manner as may' be prescribed. 
Owner's 
nlht to 
deal wJtIl 
ware.. 
housed 
~odll. 
Manu-
faeturin, 
opera-
tions in 
relation 
to wlU'e-
houled 
,oods. 
6; (1) Before ~ warehoused goods are removed from one ware-
hoUle toanotber. the consignor or the consignee of such goods .hall exe-
cu~ a bond. ·for the due arrivaJ and re-warehouaina thereof at the wire-
house of destination, within such time as the proper ofAcer directs and 
35 such bond shall not be discharged until-
Boa4 tor 
remonl 
ofw .... 
hoaaed 
Iooda 
from oae 
1VIU'ehoule (0:) such goods are produced before. the Central Excise Officer- to 
in-charae of the warehouse of destination and are duly warehoused another. 
therein; or 
(b) auch ,oods are othl'!rwise accounted for to the satisfaction 
... " &f the proper otftcer, ' 
aor until the full duty due upon any deficiency in IUch ,oods not 10 ac-
counted tOl' hu been paid: 
:Pro'lid~ th'at the proper otllcel' mAy permit such oonsignor or con-
.tP~·to "~ute a ,eneraa bond for the removal of any warehoused 
4' IObd."~ one warehou.e to another for any prescribed period and for 

Proof of 
re-ware-
housinl 
to be 
furnished. 
Removal 
for home 
COIUlUDlp-
tkm, etc., 
of ezcls-
able ,oods 
In tranJlt 
to a ware-
hoo!le. 
.... '. 
22 
the due arrival and re-warenO\l8ing· the1'eOiat the -'l1'ehoUR of cleIttu-
tioD within such time as such offieerdlrectt. 
(2) For the purposes of this section and aec:tion sa,-
(a) "consignor" means,-
(i) where the warehoused goods are to be removed from a , 
pubiic warehouse, the owner of such goods; 
(ii) where the warehoused goods are to be removed from • 
private warehouse, the licensee of Nch warehOU8l!'; 
(b) "consigne'e" meansj-
(i) where the warehoused goods are to be removed to a 10 
public warehouse, the owner of such goods; 
(ii) where the warehouse!d goods are to be removed to a 
private warehouse, the licensee of such warehouse. 
53. (1) Where any warehoused goods ure removed from one ware-
house to another under section 52 by the consignor or consignee, the I, 
consignor shall furnish the proof of re-warehousing ,of the, goods at the 
warehouse of destination to the' Central Excise OIIleer-m.<harge of the 
warehouse of removal in such manner and within such time, as may be 
prescribed. 
(2) If the consignor fails to furnish the proof of re-warehousing re- ao 
quired under sub-section (1), or intimation of suoh re-w.arehGusiQg bas 
not been received by the Central Excise Oftlcer-in-charge of the warehouse 
of removal from the Central Exeise Officer-tn-charge of thewarebouse of 
destination, the consignor shall, upon a written demand ,lMiDg made by 
the former officer, pay the duty leviable on 'suehgoods within ten days 2S 
of the notice of demand, and if the duty is not 10 paid, then, without pre-
judice to any other action to which the consignor may be liable under 
this Act, the consignor shall not be permitted to make any further re-
movals of any warehoused goods from one warehouse to, auother until 
the duty is pai'd. or the proof a so furnished or the intimation is 80 30 
received. 
(3) Where sl\ch duty has been paid, it shall be Pefunded to the con-
signor either on his furnishing such proof to, or on receipt dfsuch Inti-
mation by, the Central Excise Officer-m-charge of the WBTehouse of 
removal. 
54. The Whole 'or part of any excisable goods-
(a) which are removed for deposit in a warehouse, or 
-' 
(b) which have been permitted to be removed or are removed 
from one warehouse to another, 
35 
may with the permission of the proper officer, at any time before they' 40 
have been deposited or, as the case may be, re-warel\ousec;l, be re-
mcweci by . the owner thereof, for home cODSup1ption Qr,e~po11, or reJD9val 
to any other W8nmouseaap wIt wiu". ... if sucbgpdds Qav'~. been remov-
ed from a warehouse: 

23" 
PIoWded . that where any such goods are held in containers and }att 
only''thereDf is to be removed as aforesaid,. that part shall consist of one 
orlllOl'eeomplete containers. 
55. (1) II, after any excisable goods are deposited in a warehouse,-- Re-assess-
ment. 
5 (a) any alteration is made in the rate of duty leviable thereon, 
or in the tariftvaluation (if any) applicable thereto, or 
(b) such goods are sorted, separated or subjected to any other 
process which causes the goods or any part thereof to become liable 
to duty at a rate other than that at which they were assessed at the 
10 time of deposit in the warehouse, 
such goods shall be re-assessed by the proper officer in accordance With 
the rate sO altered or, as the case may be, the rate to which the goods 
become so liable. 
(2) Where tire rate of duty leviable on any eXcisable goods is deter-
15 mined by the use to which such goods are to be put after removal from 
the warehouse, tbeyshall in the same manner as provided in sub-secti< n 
(1), be re~9dby the proper officer in accordance with the rate 
appropriate to such use, if such rate be different from the rate at which 
they were assessed when they were deposited in the warehouse. 
20 51. (1) Every ,licensee of a warehouse shall- Responsi-bility of 
(a) in respect of the excisable goods deposited in his ware- l~arehouse 
h 'bl f h' h lcence. ouse. be re5ponSI e or t elr reception t erein and delivery there-
from, and for their safe custody while deposited therein, according 
to the quantity or weight reported by the Central Excise Officer who 
assessed duty on such goods, allowance being made for wastage and 
losses, if any, admissible under this Act; 
(b) produce before the Central Excise Officer (who is entitled 
to have access to the warehouse), on a requisition made by such 
officer in this behalf, any excisable goods deposited therein which 
have not been lawfully authorised to be removed therefrom; and 
(c) 80 stow every package or parcel of the excisable goods 
deposited therein that easy access may be had thereto. 
(I) No owner of excisable goods shall be entitled to claim from the 
-Central Government or from any licensee of a public warehouse, com-
35 pensation for any loss or damage occurring to the goods while they are 
beinB de;POsited in or removed from such warehouse Unless it is proved 
that such loss or damage was occassioned by the wilful neglect of a 
Central Excise' ()ft\cer or, as the case may be, of such licensee. 
,57 •. If, at"ny time, after any excisable goods have been warehoused ~eflciency 
40 and before they are lawfully remov.m from the warehouse, such goods ~n w;;-e-
are found to be missing or deficient and it is not shown to the satisfac- g:'~. 
tion 4f thep~per officer that .their absence or defiCiency can be account- . 
ed for by natural waste or other legit,mae cause, then, without W,'eju-
dice to any other action to which the licensee of the warehouse may be 
45 UlIJei'tftllder this Act,'ttie proper officer -may' require such l~f'hsee,' to p~y, 
,.wfthin 'a .. pftlbd odf foUrteen days oftne date 'an which tht 'gob<is'w-ere 

Pa)'mellt 
ot duty, 
penalties. 
etc., in 
certain 
easel. 
Power 
to cancel 
warehouse 
licence •. 
Warehous-
ed ,oods 
to be re-
moved in 
certala 
caaea. 
'" 
found to be missing or deficient or such longer period .. , the properoftl .. 
cer may alloW, the duty leviable on the missing goods or on the whole 
or any part of the defiCiency, as such ofticer may deem fit and there\lpoll 
such licensee shall be bound to comply with such re.quisition. 
58. In any of the following cases, that is to say,- S. 
(a) where any warehoused goods are deposited, removed or 
otherwise deait with in contravention of section 42, or 
. (b) where any warehoused goads have not been removed from 
a warehouse on the expiration of the period allowed under section 
49, Ie 
the proper officer may demand the full amount of duty due on the goods 
together with all penalties and other charges payable in respect thereof 
under this Act and the owner of such goods shall, within a period Dot, 
exceeding fourteen days of such demand, or such longer period as may 
be allowed by the proper officer, pay such duty, penalties and otaer IS 
charges. 
5 •. The licensing officer or, where the licensing omcer is lower in 
rank than an Assistant Collector of Central Excise, the Assistant Collec- ~ ~ 
tor of Central Excise to whom the licenSing officer is subordinate, may ; 
cancel a licence granted under section 45 or renewed under section 46-' '20 
(a) if the licensee has contravened any of the provisions of tMs 
Act or any rule or has failed to comply with any of the conditions of 
the licence; or 
(b) for any other good and sufficient reason: 
Provided t~at no licence shall be cancelled under this iect1~n unless 25 
a reasonable opportunity has been given to the licensee to show caijse 
why the licence should not be cancelled. 
60. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where a,ny 
goods have been deposited in a warehouse in pursuance of a notification 
issued under section 43 and, as a consequence of the ~ancellation or ~Qdi- 30, 
fication of such notification, such goods cease to be goods that may be 
deposited in a warehouse, the owner of the warehoused ,goods-: 
(i) shall not be, entitled to abatement of duty or allowance In 
respect of such goods, for deficiency of quantity, strength or quaU~y 
occurring after such cesser; '1)5 
. (ii) shall, within fourteen days of such cesser or ,such lon~& 
per10d as may be allowed in this behalf by the proper oft\cer, Temi3ve 
such goods for h9me consumption or export. as the case may', be; 
and ' 
(iii) shall not be entitled' to claim from the Central Governmt'lit <40 
any compensation due to such cesser. '. t-
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where the li.ce 
for any warehouse. is cancelled under section 59,-
(a) where such warehouse is a private wlI"ehouse, Ule ~, f. 
thereof shall not be entitled to ,.abatement of d\ltJ ~ ,a1low~ce •. 4' 

25 
reapect of such goods, for deficiency of quantity, strength or quaUty 
oeetJrrin,« after cancellation of such licence; and 
(b) where such warehouse is a public warehouse, the owner of 
the warehoused goods, or where such warehouse is a private ware-
S house, the licensee thereof, shall, within fourteen days of such can-
cellation or 6uch .longer period as may be allowed in this behalf by 
the p,J,"oper officer, remove such goods to another W\U"ehouse, or re-
move them for home con::.umption or export, as the calie may be; 
and 
10 (c) tq..e holder of such licence shall not be entitled to claim from 
the Central Government any compensation due to the cancellation 
of such licence. 
61. (1) Any excisable goods, specified under section 43, may be depo- Excllable 
sited in a warehouse licensed or appointed under the Customs Act, 1962, &oodi mq 
[5 and approved by the Collector of Central Excise for the purpose. . ?e loc:lte4 
10 CUI-
lO 
(2) The provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations shall ap- toms h 
ply in relation to the excisable goods permitted to be deposited un ler ware ou.e., 
sub-section (1), as they apply in relation to the excisable goods deposited 
in a warehouse licensed under this Act. 
CHAPTER VII 
SEARCH, SEIZURE AND ARREST 
62. For the purpose of verifying any return submitted under this Act Central 
or any rule or of informing himself as to any particulars which hei8e 
are necessary for discharging his functiQns under this Act or any omcers 
lS rule, any Central Excise Officer authorised by the Collector of Central !~c!:v~o 
Excise in this behalf- place or 
. pr~ 
(a) shall have free access oat all reasonable times to any place or for -cer-
premises where any excisable goods are produced, cured, processed, am par-
deposite'd, used, stored or sold or where such component parts, mate- poae .. 
~o rials, ingredients or containers in relation to any excisable goods, as 
may be prescribed, are made, processed, stored or dealt with in any 
other manner; 
(b) may inspect any building, plant, machinery, stocks or ac-
counts in the said place or premises; 
35 (c) may require the owner or person-in-charge of the said place 
or premises to furnish such information relating to the production, 
disposal or stocks of any goods in the said place or premises as such 
officer may deem fit, and make a physical check of such stocks; 
(d) may, at all reasonable times, check the records (whether 
presCribed by regulations under section 28 or not) relating to the 
." 't,· • goods received or stocked in, or removed from, or processed or 
manuMctured in, the said place or premiSE'S, or the goods trans-
'ferred within a factory to that part of the premises, if any, in which 
. they' are to be used for manufacture of any article (whether charse-
able with duty or not) or for further manufacture. 4S 

Power to 
search 
place Or 
premises. 
Power to 
stop and 
search 
convey-
ance or 
animal. 
Power to 
arrest. 
Searches 
and arrests 
how to 
be made. 
26 
63. Where the proper officer has reason to believe. tha~ ~y offend-
ing' goods or any documents or other things .which in his o~n wiD 
be useful for, or relevant to, any proceeding under this Act, are sec-
reted in any place or premises, he may search such place or premises 
for. any such goods, documents or other things. , 
64. (1) Where the proper officer has reason to believe that any con-
veyance or animal has been, is being, or is about to be, USed in the 
removal of any offending goods, he may require the person.in-charge 
of the conveyance or animal-
(a)to land, where such conveyance is an aircraft; or 10 
(b)to stop. in any other case, 
and may thereafter-
(i) rummage and search the conveyance; or 
(ii) examine and search any goods in the conveyance or on 
·the animal; or I~ 
(iii) search such person-in-charge for any document relating to 
such goods; or 
(iv) break open the lock of any door or package for exercising 
the powers conferred by clauses (i) and (ii) , if the keys are with-
held. 20 
(2) If '(my such person-in-charge fails to comply witn such requisition, 
such offir~r may liS\" n11 lawful means for forcing-
(a) to land, where such conveyance is an aircraft; or 
(b) to stop. in any other case. 
65. Anv Centrnl Exci!'!e Officer duly empowered hv the Central Gov- :a, 
ernment. by notification in the OffiCial nlizette. in thir-; behalf may arrec;t 
any person whom he has rea<;on to believe to be liable to punishment 
under this Act. 
66. All searches and arrests made unde.r this Act shall be Ca£rjed out 
in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Cr;minlil Prf')('edure. 30 . .,.,. 
1898, relating respectively to searches and arrests made under that Code: rot 1898. 
Provided that the provisionc:; of the ~aid Code, relating to searches 
shall, so far as may be, apply to searches under this section subject to the 
modification that sub-sect;on (5) of section 165 of that Code shall have 
effect as if for the word "Magistrate", wherever it occurs, the words 35 
"Collector of Central Excise" were substituted. 
How per- .. 6'%. Every person arrested undeI' thic; Act shall be forwaruedwithout 
sons ar. . d~a..y. .tothe nearest C~tral Excise Officer empowered by the Cenm.. 
re.:':d are "Government. ,by potification. in t~ Offi.cilll Gazette, to send persons so 
~:alth ,,·auested to a MaJ;!istrate, or, if. there is no .suf;h Central Excise Offict"r 40 
with. within a reuonable distaRce. to the officer-in-charge of the nearest 
police station. 

5 of 1898. 
27 
G&. The oftlcer-in-charge of the pc1Hce station to whom any person is Proce-
forwarded under section 67, shall either admit him to bail to appear be- dure to be 
fore the Magistrate having jurisdiction, or in default of bail forward followed 
him in custody to such Magistrate. ?Y officer-
m-charge 
of police 
station. 
S 69. (1) W:1en any person is forwarded under section 67 to the Central Inquiry 
Excise Officer referrL'J to in that section, such Officer shall proceed to in- how to 
quire into the charge against him. be made 
by Central 
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1) I the Central Excise Officer may Excise 
exercise the same powers and shall be subject to the same provisions as ~~~::: 
10 the officer-in-charge of a police station may exercise and is subject to un- a:rested 
der the Code of Criminal Pr(lcedure, 1898, when investigating a cognizable persons 
case: forwarded 
IS 
20 
Provided that-
(a) if the Central Excise Officer is of opinion that there is suffi-
cient evidence or reasonable ground of suspicion against the atcused 
person, he shall either admit him to bail to apear before a Magistrate 
having jurisdiction in the case, or forward him in custody to such 
Magistrate; 
(b) if it appears to the Central Excise Officer that there is not 
sufficient evidence or reasonable ground of suspicion against the 
accused person, he shall release the accused person on his executing 
a bond, with or without sureties as the Central Excise Officer may 
direct, to appear, if any when so required, before the Magistrate hav-
ing jurisdiction, and shall make a full report of all the particulars of 
the case to his official superior. 
(3) All officers exercising any powers under section 67 or section 68 
or this section shall so exercise th~ir powers as to ensure that every per-
son who is arrested and detained in custody is produced before the nearest 
Magistrate having jurisdiction within a period of twenty-four hours of 
such arrest excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place 
30 of arrest to the court of the Magistrate. 
to them 
under 
lection 67. 
70. (1) Any Central Excise Ofticer duly. empowered by the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette in this behalf, shall Power 
ho 'd h·d to sum-have power to summon any person w se atten ance e conSI ers neces- mon per-
35 sary either to give evidence or to produce any document or other thing IOns to 
in any inquiry which such officer is making for any of the purposes of this give evi-
Act. dence and 
produce 
.. . . documents E:rplanction.-In this sub-section, "InqUIry" does not Include an inqUIry in In-
for the purpose of adiudging any confiscation or penalty under this Act quiries 
40 whether the officer adjudging the confiscation or penalty makes the in- under the 
quiry himself or through any other oftlcer. Act. 
(2) A summons to produce documents or other things may be for the 
'Production of certain specified documents or thin~ or for the production 
of an documents or thinRs of a certain description in the possession or 
45 under the control of ,the person summoned. 
I J88 (D) LS-S 

Seizure 
of con-
fis('able 
property. 
28 
(3) All persons so summoned shall, subject to the provisions of section 
131 be bound to attend and to state the truth upon any subject respecting 
which they are summoned and produce 'inch documents and other things 
as may be required: 
Provided that the exemptions under sections 132 and 133 of the Code S 
of Civil Procedure, 1908, shall be applicable to requisitions for attendance 5 of 1908. 
under this section: 
Provided further that no such person shall be compelled under this 
section to answer any question or make any statement tending to incri-
minate himself. 10 
(4) Every such inquiry shall be deemed to be a "judicial proceed-
ing" within the meaning of section 193 and section 228 of the Indian 45 gf 1800. 
Penal Code. 
71. (1) The proper officer may seize any confiscable property: 
Provided that where in the opinion of such officer it is not practicable 15 
for him to take physical possession of such property or for any other 
good -and sufficient reason, he thinks it necessary so t'O· do, he may serve 
on the owner or person-in-charge of such property an order that such 
owner or person-in-charge shall not alienate, part with, remove or other-
wise deal with such property, except with his previous permission. 
(2) Where any confiscable property is seized under sub-section (1), 
and no notice in respect thereof is given under clause (a) of section 88 
within six months of such seizure, such property shall be returned to the 
person from whose possession it was seized: 
20 
Provided that the Collector of Central Excise may, for any good and 25 
sufficient reason, extend the said period of six months by such further 
period or periods not exceeding six months in the aggregate, as he may 
think fit. 
(3) Where, in respect of any confiscable property, an order referred 
to in t~e proviso to sub-section (1) l,las been s~rve.d on the owner or t.he 30 
pC'Tson-m-charge of such property, and no notice In respect thereof is 
given under clause (a) of section 88 within six months of the date of 
the service of such order, then, that order shall be deemed to have been 
vacated on the expiry of the said period: 
Provided that the Collector of Central Excise may, for any good and 35 
f.ufficient reason. extend the said period of six months by such further 
neriod or periods not exceedin~ six months in the a.l!~regate as he may 
think fit.. 
(4) The proper officer may also sei1.e any document or otber tbing 
which in his opinion will be useful for. or re!evant to, any proceeding 
under this Act or any rule. 4 ') 
(5) The person from whose custody any document is seized under 
sub-section (4),' shall be entitled to make copies thereof Or take extracts 
therefrom in the presence ofa Central Excise Oftlcer. 

72. When any confiscable property or any document or other thim{ When 
11 seized or any person is arrested under this Act, the omcer making such seizure 
.seizure or arrest shall, on demand of the owner or person-in-charge of ?r arreat 
t.he property or of the documl;!llt or other thing so seized, or of the per- 11 mad~. 
t d ' h' 40 .. _ ·ti f h f h reason 111 5 son cO Circes e ,gIve 1m a stal4:'Ulent in wn III 0 t e reason or suc writine 
r.eizure or arres\.. to be 
given. 
73. The Central Excise Officer empowered under sub-section (1) of Custody 
Section 70, or the proper officer exercising any powers under sub-section of dts°CU-t , , men ,e c. \,4) of scctlOn 71, may retain in his custody any document or other thing 
[0 produced before him or seized by him, which in his opinion will be use-
ful for, or relevant to, any proceeding under this Act or any rule, for a 
period not exceeding twelve months or if, before the expiry of the said 
period of twelve months, any proceeding has been commenced-
IS 
(0) under &ection 88, until the disposal of that proceeding (in-
cluding the proceeding, if any, under section 94 or section 96 or sec-
tion 97); 
(b) under Chapter X, until the document or other thing has been 
~1:-oduced before 01' filed in the court. 
74, Notwithst,mding anything contained in this Act, the proper officer ~le of 
may, ciuring the pendency of any proceeding under this Act, sell, by pub- I!onfiacable ZO lie auction 01' otherwise- property 
30 
35 
seized 
(i) any cunfiscable property, other than land or building or an under 
<Inim~.l, seized under thi:s Act if ht! is of opinion that such property The Act. 
, f ' h bl h d t h t' l' bl t :n certam IS 0 a pens a e or azar ous na ure or suc proper y IS 18 e 0 cases. 
deterioration; 
(Ii) any confiscable property, being an animal, seized under this 
Act if the owner or person-in-charge thereof fails to provide from 
day to day for its upkeep, 
CHAPTER VIII 
CONFISCATION AND IMPOSITION OF PENALTIES 
75. The follOWing excisable gootls shall be liable 
namely:-
to conliscation, Conftaca· 
tion of 
, ezcilable 
(a) tobacco or coffee grown on land in respect of which prior dec- goods. 
lar8tion ha.s not been made under section 37; 
(b) any excisable goo'ds produced, cured or manufactured or any 
tobacco or coffee purchased, SO'ld or stored without a licence as re-
quired under section 38 or in contravention of any term or condition 
,of such licence; 
(c) any excisable goods which are removed. or attempted to be 
removed from any place or premises referred. to in section 16 or from 
any place approved under section 18 or are used or attempted to be 
used in any such place or premises in contravention of any provision 
of this Act or any rule; 
(d) any excisable goods allowe\i to be removed. under section 21 
without payment of duty or on part payment of duty and in respect 
of the removal of which any conditlon has Dot been fulftll~; 

Conftsca-
tion of 
land, 
building, 
etc., in 
certain 
cases. 
so 
(e) any excisable goods which are deposited in a warehouse or are 
removed therefrom <lr are droIt with therein in contravention of any 
provision of this Act or any rule; 
<I) any excisable goods transported in contravention of the rules 
made under section 111; S 
(g) any excisable goods removed from one factory to another 
under section 112 or dealt with in contravention of any condition or 
restriction imposed under that section; 
(h) any excisable goods, the duty on which is payable by affixina 
banderols or wrappers or labels on booklets or on boxes or other con- IC 
tainers containing such goods, if found in possession of a dealer in 
such goods, not being bandel'olled, wrapped or labelled in 
the prescribed manner; or the banderol, wrapper or label <Jf which is 
cut or torn; or the booklets or the boxes or other containers so ban-
derolled, wrapped or labelled bear any mark or appearance indicat- IS 
ing that they have been opened or tampered with; 
(i) any excisable goods exempted from duty under section 29 
subject to the fulfilment of any condition and such condItion is not 
fulfilled. 
76. Without prejudice to any other provision contained in this Chapter 
where any producer, curer or manufacturer of any excisable goods or 
any person being the owner af any excisable goods deposited in a ware-
house,-
(a) engages in the production, curing, manufacture or deposit of 
~: 
such goods without a licence as required under this Act, or 25 
(b) removes such goods in contravention of the provisions of thil 
Act or any rule, or 
(c) does not account for all such goods produced, cured, manu .. 
factured or deposited by him, or 
(d) contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any rule with 30 
intent to evade payment of duty on such goods, 
then-
(i) any land, building, plant, machinery, material, conveyance, 
animal or any other thing used in connection with the production, 
. curing, manUfacture, deposit, removal or I:lisposal of such goods, and 3' 
(ii) all excisable goods on such land or in such building, produced, 
cured or manufactured with such plant, machinery, material or other 
thing, 
belonging to such producer, curer, manufacturer or owner, as the case 
may be, shall be liable to conflscation. 

31 
.. 7. (1) Where any o!T:ending goods are found in any package, the Contlsea-
package along wi th such goods and any other goods in that package shall tion of 
also be liable to confiscation. packages 
and their 
(2) Any goods used for concealing the offending good3 shall also be contents 
5 liable to confiscation. and goods USed for 
concealing 
offending 
goods. 
78. (1) Any offending goods may be confiscated notwithstanding any Confisca-
change in their form. tion of 
offending 
(2) Where the offending goods are mixed with any other goods in goods not-
such manner that the offending goods cannot be separated from such withstand. 
10 other goods, the whole of the goods shall be liable to confiscation: ing any change in 
such decision M order for distr'Jsal in such manner a~ it may direc" form 
proves to the satisfaction of the officer adjudging the conftscati~n under thereof. 
section 87 that he had no knowledge or reason to believe that the gooe;; 
included any offending goods, only such part of the goods, the value of 
IS which is equal to the value of the offending goods, shall be liable to 
confiscation. 
'19. (1) Where any confiscable property is sold by th~ owner or per- Contlsca-
son-in-charge thereof in contravention of an order served on him under tion of 
the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 7l, the sale proceeds of such sale pro-
2.:> property shall also be liable to confiscation. ceedfiss ofbl con ca e 
(2) Where any confiscable property is sold by the proper officer un- property. 
der section 74, the sale proceeds thereof shall also be liable to confiscation. 
80. If the person-in-charge of any conveyance or animal fails to com- Penalty 
ply with tt,e requHtion made by the proper officer under sub-section for non-
;.5 (1) of section 64, such person-in-charge shall be liable to a penalty not compliance 
exceeding five thousand rupees. Withi thitie requ 8 on 
3S 
81. Any person-
made 
under sec-
tion 6«. 
Penalty 
(a) who, in relation to any excisable goods, does or omits to do !~~d~:, 
any act, which \lct or omission would render such gootls liable to exeaable 
confiscation under section 75 or abets the doing or omission of such goods 
an act OI liable to , conftJcl-
(rb) who acquires possession of, or is in any way concerned in 
transporting, depositing, keeping, concealing, selling or purchasing, 
or In any other manner dealing with any excisable goods which he 
knows or has reason to believe are liable to conH3cation under sec-
tion 75, 
shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding three times the value of such 
,oOds or live thousand rupees, whichever 1S greater. 
tlon. 

Penalty 
for open-
ine doors, 
locka, etc., 
of a ware-
house in 
certain 
cases. 
Penalty 
for frau-
dulently 
obtaining 
set-off, 
exemption, 
etc., of 
duty. 
Penalty 
for not 
accounting 
for ex-
cisable 
goods. 
Penalty 
for im-
proper 
mainte. 
nance of 
accounts, 
making 
false 
declara-
tion, etc. 
Penalty 
In other 
cuet. 
32 
U. Any person who, being the licensee of a warehouse or the owner 
of warehoused goods, himself or by any person in his employ or with 
the connivance of any person-
(a) opl:lns or attempts to open any of the doors of a warehouse 
which under any rule are required to be locked, or opens or attempts 5 
to optm any of the locks of a warehouse or makes or obtains access 
into a warehouse, except in the presence of a Central Excise Officer 
acting in his duty as such, or 
('b) does not open such doors or locks when required to do so by I-
a Central Excise Officer entitled to have access to the warehouse or 
upon demand made by such officer, or 
(c) neglects to stow the warehoused goods so that easy access 
may be had to every package or parcel thereof, 
shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding five thousand rupees. 
83. Any person who frau~ulently obtains or attempts to obtain any 
set-off, exemption, remission, refund or rebate of duty or any part there-
of under this Act, shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding three times 
the amount of duty involved or five thousand rupees, whichever is 
greater. 2. .. 
84. Any person who in contravention of ·.lny provision of this Act or 
any rule fails to account fOT the excisable goods produced, cured, manu· 
factured or owned by him, or 'deposited by him in a warehouse, or 
obtained by him for any purpose specially permitted by any provision 
of this Act or any rule shall for every such failure be liable to a penalty 
not exceeding three times the value of such goods or five thousand ~ ) 
rupees, whichever is greater. 
85. Any person-
(a) who fails to maintain accounts or submit returns or furnish 
information or make a declaration when so required under any pro-
vision of this Act or any rule or regulation, or 30 
(b) who makes a false or fraudulent entry in any of his accounts 
or returns or furnishes a false informetion, or makes a false declara-
t!on where such accounts or returns or information or declaration 
are or is required to be maintained or furnished or made under any 
provision of this Act or any rule or regulation, or 3S 
(c) who abets the commission of any of the acts referred to in 
clauses (a) aud (b), 
shall be liable for every such commission or, as the case may be, sucb 
abetment 10 a penalty not exceeding five thou:mnd rupr.es. 
•. Any person who contravenes any provision of this Act or any 40 
rule OT abets any such contravention, or who fails to comply with any 
provision of this Act or any :,ulc with which it was his duty to comply, 
shall, where no express penalty for such contravention or failure is 
elsewhere provided in this Act, be liable to a penalty, not exceeding five 
thousand rupees and the goods in respect of which the contravention or 4~ 
failure is established shall be liable to confiscation. 

33 
'T. In every ease under this Chapter In which any property is Uablt Adjudica. 
to conftscation or any person is liable to a penalty, such confiscation ot tion of 
penaltr may be adJudged- conftt;ca-
tiOri8 arid 
(a) by a Collector of Central Excise, without limit; penalt1el. 
~ (b) by such other Central Excise Officer as the Central Govern-
ment JnI.1y, by notification in the Ofttcial Gazette, specify in this be .. 
half, subject to such limits as may be specified in that notifi~ation_ 
88. No order confiscating any property or imposing any penalty on !slUe of 
any pe::'i>on, shall be made under this Chapter unless,- show 
cause 
10 (i) where the order relates to confiscation of any property, the notice 
person-in-charge of such property and, where !'uch p~rson-in-charge before 
is not the owner of such property, the owner there:")!; or confisca-
tion. 
(ii) where the order relates to the imposition of any penalty, 
the pp.r~on on whom such penalty is to be imposed; 
1.5 is g;ven-
(a) a written notice stating the grounds on which it is proposed 
to confi!Scate such property or to impose such penalty; and 
(b) a reasonable opportunity of making a representation in writ-
ing within such tirr c as may be specified in the notice agaim:t the 
20 f'Tnunrlc: of ('onflscation or imposition of penalty mentioned therein 
and of being heard in the matter: 
Providec'l. that the notice referred to in clause (a) and the represen-
t[lb':l rdt~rred to in clause (b) may, at the request of the person or 
persons concerned. be oral. 
25 r:,. (' t "\·'."·'·~r· ~ , .. :: p:·('pcr!:v i:, ennn<';c:1tcrl 'Jnr1er fhi: Act, the Option 
officer adjudging ~uch confiscation may give to the owner of such pro- to p~y 
r.:I.'r:: ~:'~ (',:;,~!; to ',~:'.V in 1,"\.: of confiscation wch fine as the said officer fi1,ne lnf . • . leu 0 
thinks ftt: I. : conflsca-
Provided that such fine shan not exceed the market price of the prO- tion. 
30 perty confiscated on the date on which such confiscation is adjudged. 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that any fine in 
lieu of confiscation imposed under sub-section (1), shall be in addition to 
the duty -.lOd charges, if any. payable in respect cf such propert~· under 
this Act. 
90. (1) When any property is confiscated under this Chapter, such Property 
3S property shall thereupon vest in the Central Government. on con-
fiscation 
(2) The officer adjudging the confis~tion shall take and hoM posses- to vest 
sion of the confiscated property. in Central 
Govern-
ment 
91. Where confiscation of any property has been adjudged under sec- Disposal 
40 tion 87 and. the option of paying a fine in lieu of such con~scatjon bes not of con-
been cxerr:~f'("l lw th'.' ~'},'!1rr Gf stich prnfl'rty under ~~('bon 119, th~n- fisc.ted . property. 
(a) if no appeal has been filed under section 94 against the Grder 
rnnfisc1tine: !>uch property withir., the period pre~cribed therefor; or 

Storage 
and up-
j{cep 
charges in 
respect of 
property 
confiscated 
and re-
deemed. 
Conftsca-
tion or 
penalty 
not to 
affect 
other 
punish-
ments. 
Appe8.1. 
(b) if such an appeal having been filed has been rejected; 
such property shall be sold, destroyed or otherwise disposed of in such 
manner as the officer edjudging such confiscation may direct: 
Provided that during the pendency of any such appeal, the appellate 
authority m3y, after giving the appellant a reasonable opportunity of 5 
being heard in the matter, direct the officer adjudging such confiscation 
to sell, destroy or otherwise dispose of such property in such manner as 
may be specified by that authority. 
9Z. Where confiscation of any property has been adjudged under section 
87 and the option of paying a fine in lieu of such confiscation has been 10 
exercised by the owner of sueh property under section 89, then, -the officer 
adjudging such confiscation mey require such owner to pay such main-
tenance, storage, upkeep or other charges for such period (not beyond the 
date on which the property is returned to the owner thereof) as such 
officer may direct and thereupon such owner shall be liable to pay such 15 
charges. ~ " '.,.. ...... 
93. No confiscation made or penalty impo'Sed under this Chapter by a 
Central Excise Officer shall pre,'ent the il'flicti01~ of Gny pnni1'lhment to 
which the person affected thereb~' i:: l!lbJc un~c:' !In',' other proYision of 
this Act or under any other law. 20 
CHAPTER IX 
ApPEAL AND REVISION 
94. (1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order made under 
this Act (other than an order made under section 131) or any rule may, 
within three months from the date of the communication to him of such 25 
decision or order,-
(a) where the decision or O'rder has been made by a Collector 
of Central Exci~e, appeal to the Board; and 
(b) where the decision or order has been made by an officer 
of Central Excise lower in rank than a Collector of Central Excise, 30 
appeal to the Appellate Collector of Central Excis£': 
Provided that the appellate authority may. if it is satisfied that the 
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from pre!';entinl~ the appeal 
within the aforesaid period of three months, allow it to be presented 
within a further period of three months. 3S 
(2) The appellate authority may. after giving a reasonable oppor-
tunity to the appellant to be heard, if the appellant so desires, atld making 
or cauc:ing to be made such further inquiry as may be necessary, make 
such order as it thinks fit-
(a) confirming. modifying or annulling the decision or order 40 
appealed against; or 
(b) setting aside the decision or order appealed against and 
referring the case back to the Central EXCise Officer who made 
such decision or order for disposal in such manner as it may direct: 

35 
Provided that an order enhancing any penalty or fine in lieu of con-
flscat!o'n or an order confiscating any property of greater value shall 
1fot· b~made under this section unless the appellant has been giveh a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter: 
5 Provided further that where the appellate authority is of opinion 
that any duty has not been levied or has been short-levied, no order 
levying or enhancing the duty shall be made under this sectoi~ uruess 
the person affected by such levy or enhancement is given a notice to 
show cause against the same within the time-limit specified in section 109. 
10 (3) Every order made in appeal under this section shall, subject 
to any order that may be made by the Central Government under 
section 97, be final. 
95. (1) Where a decision or order appealed against relates to any Deposit, 
duty levied in respect of excisable goods which are not- under the con- pendin, of 
IS trol of any Central Excise Officer or where such decision or order relates ~~ral. 
to any penalty imposed under this Act, any person desiring to appeal levi~ 
against such decision or order shall, pending the appeal, deposit with or penal~ 
the proper officer the duty levied or the penalty imposed: ( imposed. 
Provided that where in any particular case the appellate authority 
20 is of opinion that the deposit of the duty levied or penalty imposed will 
cause undue hardship to the appellant, it may dispense with such 
deposit either unconditionally or subject to such conditions as it may 
deem fit. 
2S 
30 
(2) If upon such appeal, it is decided that-
(cz) no duty or penalty should have been levied or imposed; or 
(b) the duty or penalty levied or imposed is in excess of that 
what should have been levied or imposed, 
then, . the proper officer shall refund to the appellant-
(i) in a case falling under clause (a), the whole of the duty or 
penalty levied or imposed, and 
(ti) in a case falling under clause (b), the dUty or penalty 
le\l'ied or imposed in excess. 
98. (1) The Board may, of its own motion or on the application of ReviIioa 
any aggrieved person, call for and examine the record of any proceed- by Board 
~ ing in which e Central Excise Officer has made any decision or order 
u~ thiB Act (not being an order made in appeal under section 94-
or an order made under section 131) for the purpose of satiSfying itself 
as to the legality or propriety of any such decision or order and may, 
after making or causing to be made such inquiry as is necessary, made 
such order thereon as it thinks fit: 
40 Provided that no order enhancing any penalty or flne in lieu of con-
fisc$,tion or confiscating any property of greater value shall be made 
under this section unless the person affected by such enhancement or 
confiscation has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in 
the matter: 
.fSProvicled further that where the Board is of opinion that any duty 
", baa-not been levied or has been short-levied, no order levying or enbanc-
Vt' iDI the qutyshall be made UDder this section unless the person a1!ected 
by such levy or enhancement is given a notice to show cause against the 
same witbin the time-limit specified in section 109. 

36 
(2) Except in the case referred to in the second proviso to sub-section 
(1), no decision or order made by a Central Excise Officer shall be 
revised by the Board whether of its own motion or on the application 
of any aggrieved person after the expiry of two years from the date of 
the said decision or order. S 
Revision 1'1. (1) The Central Government may, on the application of any 
by Central person aggrieved by-
Govern-
ment. (a) any order made under section 94, or 
(b) any order made under section 96, otherwise than on the 
application of any aggrieved person, or 10 
(c) any order made on the application of any aggrieved person 
under section 96 where the order is of the nature referred to 1n 
the first proviso to sub-section (1) of that section, 
after making or causing to be made such inquiry as is necessary, annul 
or modify such order. IS 
<J> An application under sub-section (1) shall be made within I1x 
months from the date of the communication to the applicant of the 
order against which the application is made: 
Provided that the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that the 
applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from presenting the appUca- ao 
tion within the aforesaid period of six months, allow it to be presented 
within a further period of six months. 
(3) The Central Government may of its own motion, after maklDg 
or caUSing to be made such inquiry as is necessary, annul or modify any 
order made under section 94 or section 96. as 
(4) No order enhancing any penalty or fine in lieu of confiseation 
or confiscating any property of greater value shall be made under this 
IeCtion-
(a) in any case in which :m order made under section M or 
Rection 96 has resulted in the enhancement of any penalty or 8ne SO 
in lieu of confiscation or has resulted in the confiscation of property 
ot greater va]ue; and 
(b) in any other case,-
(i) after the expiry of two years from the date of the order 
sought to be modified; and 
(ii) unless the person affected thereby has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
35 
(5\ Where the Central Government is of opinion that any duty has 
not been levied or has been short-levied, no order levying or enhanc:iDI 
the duty shall be made under this section, unless the person a1!ected 4D 
bYluch levy or enhancement is given a notice to show cause .,aiDIt Uae 
same within the time-limit specified in section 109, 

s 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
37 
CHAPTER X 
OFFENCES AND PROSECUTIONS 
II. Without prejudice to any action that may be taken under this OftcCIII 
Act, if any person- and 
(CI) makes, signs or uses, or causes to be made, signed or used, 
any declaration, statement or document in connection with any-
thing done under this Act or any rule or regulation, knoWing or 
having reason to believe that such declaration, statement or docu-
ment is false in any material particular, or 
(b) intentionally obstructs any Central Excise Oftlcer in the 
exercise of any power conferred by Lhi.s Act or any rule, or 
(c) is, in relation to any excisable goods, in any way knowingly 
concerned in any evasion of any duty chargeable thereon, or 
(d) acquires posseSSion of, or is in any way concerned in manu-
facturing, transporting, removing, depositing, keeping, concealing, 
selling or purchasing, or in any other manner dealing with any 
excisable goods which he knows or has reason to believe are liable 
to confiscation under this Act, 
he shall be punishable,-
(i) in a case referred to in clause (a) or clause (b), with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with 
fine, or with both; and 
(ii) in a case referred to in clause (c) or c1aus,e (d), with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with 
fine, or with both. 
penaltiel. 
II. Any owner or occupier of any land, or any agent of such owner Puniah· 
or occupier in charge of the management of that land, who wilfully ment for 
connives at any offence against any provision of this Act or any rule co~vance 
h if b . h bl ·th·· f at oueneel. shall, for every suc 0 ence, e pums a e WI Impnsonment or a 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
100. (1) Any Central Excise Officer or other officer exercising powers Vexatious 
under this Act or any rule who- search, seizure, 
(a) without reasonable ground of suspicion searches or causes etc., by 
to be searched any place, premises or conveyance; or ~n~ral ..,. ... cUle 
Oftlcer. (b) vexatiously or unnecessarily detains, searches or arrests any 
person; or 
(c) vexatiously 01' unnecessarily seizes the property of any per-
son on pretence of seizing or searching for any goods liable to con-
fiscation under this Act; or 
(d) vexatiously or unnecessarily attaches or sells any property 
under this Act; or 

Failure of 
Central 
Excise 
0fBcer 
in duty. 
38 
(e) commits, as such officer, any other act to the injury of any 
person, without having reason to believe that such act is required 
for the execution of his duty, 
shan, for every such offence, be punishable with fine which m~ ~t~ 
to two thousar.d rupees. , 
.. (2) Any person wilfully and maliciously giving false infOl'J,llation and 
so causibg an arrest or search to be made under tbi~ ~ct sball be pwush-
able with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two lf~ or 
wm,.. fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with bo~ 
101. (1) Any Central Excise Officer who ceases or refuses to perform 10 
or withdraws himself from the duties of his office, shall, unless he'·has 
obtained the express written permission of the Collector of Central 
Excise or has given to his superior officer two months' notice in wri,ting 
of his intention so to do or has other lawful excuse, be punishable with 
i~prisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine IS 
which may extend to three months' pay, or with both. 
(2) Any Central Excise Officer who-
(a) enters into, or acquiesces in, any agrecment to do, or 
(b) abstains from doing, or 
(c) permits, conceals or connives at, 
any act or thing, whcreby any duty is or may be evaded, shall be pun-
ishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, 
or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both. 
20. 
(3) If any Central Excise Officer discloses any particulars learnt by 
him in his official capacity in respect of any goods, land, building, plant, 2S 
machinery, material, conveyance., animal, or any other thing, he shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with 
both: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any disclo- 30 
sure. of such particulars by any Central Excise Ofticer-
(a) in the discharge in good faith of his duties as such offtcer; 
(b) in compliance with any requisition made by any officer or 
authority under any law for the time being in force; 
(c) to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India for the 3S 
purpose of enabling the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India 
to discharge his functions; 
(d) to any other officer or authority under this Act or ~y other 
law for the time being in force, if the Central Excise Officer is satis-
fied that the disclosure of such particulars would be relevant to, or 40 \ 
necessary in connection with, any proceeding or action which may 

3. 
be or has been instituted or taken under this Act or web other 1.,,: 
or 
(e) for statistical purposes. 
102. (1) Where an offence under this Chapter has been committed by 01fencfJI 
S a company, every person who, at the. time the offence was committed, by com-
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct pan1es. 
of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be. guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly: 
10 Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any such punishment if he proves that the offence 
was committed without his knowledge or that he. exercised all due dili-
gence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an 
IS offence punishable under this Chapter has been committed by a com-
pany and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the con-
sent or connivance of, Or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, 
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such 
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be 
20 guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
pumshed accordingly. 
25 
E:tplanation.-For the purposes of this section-
(a) "company" means a body corporate and includes a firm or 
other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
103. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under section Cogm· 
98 or section 99 except with the previous sanction of the Collector of zance of 
C tr I E . offences. 
en a XClSe. 
(2) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under section 100 
30 or section 101,-
(a) where the offence is alleged to have been committed by a 
Central Excise Officer not lower in rank than an Assistant Collector 
of Central Excise~ except with the previous sanction of the Central 
Government; and 
(b) where the offence is alleged to have been committed by a 
35 Central Excise. Officer lower in rank than an Assistant Collector of 
Central Excise or by a person other than a Central Excise Officer, 
except with the previoUS sanction of the Collector of Central Excise. 
1M.. Where any person is prosecuted for contravening any provision Burden of 
of this Act 01' any rule, which prohibits him from doing an act with- proof in 
40 O\1t a licence, an authorisation or a permit, the burden of proving that he certain 
had the requisite licence, authorisation or permit, as the case may be, cues. 
shall be on him. 

PreJUmP-
tion .. to 
documents 
in certain 
cases. 
Power of 
courts to 
order for-
feiture. 
106. Where any document is produced by any person under this Act 
or has been seized under this Act from the cU8tody or control of any 
person and such document is tendered by the prosecution in evidence 
against him, the court-
(a) shall, unless the contrary is proved by any such person, S 
presume-
(i) the truth of the contents of such documents; 
(ii) that the signature and every other part of such docu-
ment which purports to be in the handwriting of any particular 
person or which the court may reasonably assume to have been 10 
signed by, or to be in the handwriting of, any particular person, 
is in that person's handwriting, and in the case of a document 
executed or attested, that it was executed or attested by the 
person by whom it purports to have been so executed or attested; 
(b) shall admit the document in evidence, notwithstanding that 
it is not duly stamped, if such document is otherwise. admissible in 15 
evidence. 
106. Any court trying an offence under this Chapter may order the 
forfeiture to Government of any excisable goods in respect of which the 
court is satisfied that an offence under this Chapter has been commit-
ted, and may also ortier the forfeiture of any receptacles, packages or 20 
coverings in which such goods are contained and the animals or the 
vehicles, vessels or other conveyances used in carrying such goods, and 
any implements or machinery used in the manufacture of such goods. 
Courts to 107. Where any dutiable goods or offending goods are produced before 
notify any court or are in its custody in connection with any offence committed 25 
before under any other law, the court shall, before passing any order regarding 
dispooal of the disposal of such goods, give. l10tice in writing to a Gazetted Officer 
dutiable of Central Excise having jurisdiction, about the production or custody of 
Or offend- d h h d ing goods. such goods and after hearing him an t e person w 0 pro uced such 30 
goods or from whom the custody of such goods was taken, pass an order 
if it deems fit for the transfer of the goods to such officer to be proceeded 
with according to this Act. 
CHAPTER XI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Claim for 108. (1) Any person claiming refund of any duty, fees or charges paid 
refund of under this Act or any rule, may make an appliClBtion for refund of such 
duty. fees duty, fees or charges to the proper officer before the expiry of one year 
Or charges. from the date of payment of the duty, fees or charges, as the case may 
35 
be: 40 
provided that the aforesaid period of one year shall not apply where 
any \iuty has been paid under protest: 
Provided further that the Central Governtnent may ,permit an appli· 
cation for such refund to be made after the expiration of the aforeSaid 
period of one year if it is satisfied that the applicant had suf'ftcient cause 4" 
for not making it within that period or that undue hardship will other· 
wise be caused to the appUcant. 

Ea::planation.-Where any duty is paiti provisionally under section 22 
the period of one year shall be computed trom the date of adjustment of 
the duty after the final assessment thereof. 
(2) If on receipt of such application the proper officer is satisfied that 
5 the whole or any part of the duty, fees or charges paid by the applicant 
should be refunded to him, he may make an order accordingly. 
(3) Where, as a result of any order made in appeal or other proceed-
ing under this Act, the refund of any duty, fees or charges become due 
to any person, the proper officer shall, notwithstanding anything con-
tained in sub-section (1), refund the amount to such person without his 
having to make any claim in that behalf. 
(0 109. (1) Where any duty, fees or charges leviable or levied under this Notice 
Act or any rule has or have not been levied or has or have been short- tor 
15 
20 
levied or erroneously refunded owing to- payment of 
(a) misconstruction of this Act or any rule, notification or order ::e?'o 
made or issued thereunder or inadvertence or error on the part ot Charie~. 
any Central Excise Officer; or 
(b) collusion or wilful mis-statement or suppression of facts by 
any licensee or the agent or employee of such licensee; or 
(c) any other reason, 
the proper officer may,-
(i? in a case referred to in clause (a), within one year; and 
(ii) in a case referred to in clause (b) or clause (c), within five 
years, 
from the relevant date, serve a notice on the person from whom such 
duty, fees or charges is or are recoverable requiring him to show cause 
to the Assistant Collector of Central Excise why he should not pay the 
amount specified in the notice. 
(2) The Assismnt Collector of Central Excise, after considering the 
zs representation, if any, made by the person on whom notice is served 
under sub-section (1), shall determine the amount of duty, fees or charges 
due from such person (not being in excess of the amount spe('ified in the 
notice) and thereupon such person shall pay the amount so determined 
within thirty 'days from the date on which he is required to pay such 
amount or within such extended period as the Collector of Central Ex-
30 ciae may, in any particular case, allow. 
35 
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the expression "relevant date" 
means,-
(a) in a case where duty is not levied. the date on which the 
Central ExciSe Officer makes an order for the removal <1f the goods 
or, where the goods have been removed without such an order, the 
date of tietection of such removal; 
(b) in a oaBe where duty is provisionally assessed under section 
.22, the date of adjustment <1f duty after the final assessment thereof; 
(c) in a case where duty has been erroneously refunded, the 
date of such refund; 
(d) in a case where the appellate authority referretl to in !lCC-
don 94 has referred any case back to the Central Excise Officer under 
clause (b) of sub-section (2) of that section, the date on which the 
order for such reference was pasled by the appellate autherity; 

Recovery 
of sums 
due to 
Govern-
ment. 
(e) in any other case, the date at payment of the duty, fees or 
charges. 
110. (1) Where any duty, penalty, fees or charges payable by a person 
under this Act or any rule is or are not paid, the proper ofBcer-
(a) may deduct, or require any other Central Excise Officer to S 
deduct, the amount so payable from any money owing to such per-
son which may be under the control of the proper officer or, as the 
case may be, such other Central Excise Officer; or 
(b) may recover, or require any other Central Excise Oftieer to 
recover, the amount so payable by attachment and sale of theexcililble 10 
goods belonging to such person; or 
(c) may, in accordance with such rules as may be made in this 
behalf, attach and subject to the provisions of section 118 sell-
(i) any plant, machinery, material, goods (whether excisable 
or not), conveyance, animal or any other thing used in connection IS 
with the manufacture, storage or disposal of the excisable goods 
in respect of which such duty, penalty, fees or charges is or are 
payable and which may be in the possession or control of such 
person (but not belonging to any other person), 
(ii) the goods (whether excisable or not) or preparations 20 
made, produced or manufactured with such plant, machinery or 
material which may be in the posseSSion or control of such person 
(but not belonging to any other person). 
(2) If the amount so payable is not recovered in the manner pres-
cribed under sub-section (1), the proper officer may forward to the Tax "s 
Recovery Officer a certificate under his signature specifying the amount 
due from the person liable to pay the same and the Tax Recovery Officer, 
on receipt of such certificate, shall proceed to recover from such person 
the amount speCified therein by one or more of the modes mentioned 
below in accordance with such rules as may be made in this behalf- 30 
(a) attachment and sale of movable property of such person; 
(b) attachment and sale of immovable property of such person; 
(c) appointing a receiver for the management of the movable 
and immovable property of such person. 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (2), 3S 
if the amount so payable is not recovered in the manner prescribed 
under sub-section (1), the proper officer may prepare a certificate signed 
by him specifying the amount due from the person liable to pay the same 
and send it to the Collector of' the district in which such person resides or 
conducts his business and the said Collector, on receipt of such certifi- 40 
cate, shall proceed to recover from such person the amount specified 
therein as if it were an arrear of laad revenue. 
(4) Where the terms of any bond or other instrument executed under 
this Act provide that any amount due under such bond or other instru-
ment may be recovered in the manner laid down in clause (4) or clause 45 
(b) of sub-section (1), or in sub-section (2), or in sub-section (") the 
amount may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, be re-
covered in accordance with the provisions of clause. (4) or clauae (b) 
of 8\l~ion (1) or; al the cue may be, of sub-section (2)' or of .ub-
section (3). $0 

43 .. 
111. The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the tramport RelUlation· 
of any excisable goods or class of such gao'ds whether by land, water or of trans-
air so far as such regulation is necessary for the levy and collection of port of 
duty on such goods or class of such goods under this Act. :xo::.b1e 
5 112. The Central Government may, if it considers necessary or ex- Power to 
pedient in the public interest so to do, by notification in the Offi.- define 
cial Gazette, declare any area comprising more than one factory manu- e-:ntra1 ex-
facturing one or more of such excisable goods as may be specifted in the else area. 
notification, to be a Central Excise Area, and, in any area so declared it 
10 may permit the said excisable goods to be removed from one factory' to 
another without payment of duty for further manufacture or processing 
thereof subject to such conditions and restrictions (including the require-
ment of a licence and the fees, if any, payable therefor), as regards 
possession, storage, sale or transport of the said excisable goads within 
15 the said area, as may be prescribed. 
113. (1) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf. a Central Power to 
Excise Officer may, at any time, in the presence of the owner or the take . h f d samples. 
20 
25 
person-m-c arge 0 any goo s, take samples thereof,-
(a) which he is empowered by this Act ar the rules to examine; 
or 
(b) which are on premises where goods coorgeable with duty 
are manufactured, prepared or subjected to any process; or 
(c) which, being excisable goods, are held by any person as 
stock for his business, or in a warehouse, or as materials for manu-
facture or processing. 
(2) After the purpose for which the sample was taken, is carried out, 
such sample shall, if practicable, be restored to the owner or person-in-
charge thereof, but if the owner or person-in-charge fails to take delivery 
of the sample within three months of the date on which it was taken, it 
30 may be disposed of in such manner as the Collector of Central Excise may 
direct. 
(3) Where it is not practicable to restore the sampl~ to the owner or 
person-in-charge under sub-section (2), the market price thereof shall be 
paid to such owner or person-in-charge. 
(4) Where such owner or person-in-charge is not satisfied with the 
3S result of examination of any sample taken under this section, he shall 
be entitled to get the sample re-examined by such authority and on pay-
ment of such fees IlS may be prescribe'd. 
(5) No duty shall be chargeable on any sample of goods taken under 
this section which is consutned or destroyed during the course of test or 
40 examination thereof. 
114. All operations necessary for making any goods avai1~ble. for exa- Owner .or 
mination by the proper officer or for facilitating such exammation shall perlOD-lIl-
f h th case may be char,e to 
be performed by •. or at the expense 0 , t e owner or, as e ' perform 
the person-In-charge of the goods. operation. 
4~ . Incidental 
to exami-
nation of 
IO~· 

Liability 
ot 
principal 
and 
alent. 
Liability 
of agent 
appointed 
by the 
person-in-
charge of 
convey-
ance ot' 
animal. 
44 
111. (1) Where this Act or any rule requires anything to be done by 
the owner of any excisable goods or a licensee it may be done on his be-
half by his agent I 
(2) Any such thing done by an agent of the owner of any excisable 
goods or a licensee shall, unless the contrary is proved, be deemed to 5 
have been done with the knowledge and consent of· such owner or li-
censee so that in any proceeding under this Act, the owner or licensee, 
as the case may· be, shall also be liable as if he himself had done the 
thing. t 
(3) Where any person is expressly or impUedly authorised by the 10 
owner of any excisable goods or a licensee to be his agent for any or all 
of the purposes of this Act or any rule, such person shall, without pre-
judice to the liability of the owner or licensee, be deemed to be the owner 
or licensee, as the case may be, for such purpose or purposes. 
116. (1) Where this Act or any rule requires anything to be done by IS 
the person-in-charge of a conveyance or an animal, it may be done on his 
behalf by his agent. 
(2) An agent appointed by the person-in-charge of a conveyance or 
an animal and any person who represents himself to any Central Excise 
Officer as Gn agent of any such person-In-charge, and is accepted as such 20 
by that officer, shall be liable for fulfilment in respect of the matter in 
question of all obligations imposed on such person-in--charge by this Act 
or any rule and to penalties and confiscations which may be incurred in 
respect of that matter. 
Amend- 117. The proper officer may, in his discretion, and upon payment of 2S 
ment of. such fees as may be prescribed, authorise any oocument, after it has been 
documents. presented to him, to be amen~ed or supplemented if he is satisfied that 
Procedure 
for sale 
of goodil 
mdappli-
9tit9ft at. 
lali!- • 
~eW.· 
such document is incorrect or incomplete and there is no fraudulent in-
tention: 
Provided that except in cases to which the provisions of section 15 or 30 
section 22 or section 55 apply, no amendment in the application or trans-
port document or certificate for removal of any excisable goods from the 
pltace of production, manufacture or storage, shall be authorised to be 
amended after such goods have been removed for home consumption, or 
deposited in a warehouse, or exported, otherwise than on the basis of 3S 
documentary evidence whicll is proved to the satisfaction of the proper 
officer to have been in existence at the time such goods were removed, 
depOSited or exported, as the C'3se may be. 
118. (1) Where any goods (including plant and machinery), not being 
seized or confiscated goods, are to be sold under any provision of this Act, 40 
they shall, after notice to the owner thereof, be sold by public auction 
qr by tender or with the consent af the owner in any otlier manner. 
(2) The proceeds of any sale made under sub-section (1) shall be 
applied-
(a) firstly to the payment of the expenses of tne sale; 4S 
(b) next to the payment of the freight anti other charges, if any, 
payable in respect of the goods sold to the carrier, if notice of such 

45 
freiaht or other charges has been aiven to the person havinl cus-
tody of the goods; 
(c) next to the payment of the duty, if any, on the goads sold; 
(d) next to the payment of the charges in respect of the 100ds 
S sold due to the person having custody of the sootls; 
(e) next to the payment of any amaunt due from the owner of 
the goods to the Central Government under this Act or any rule; 
and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the owner of the goods. 
119. In any case where this Act does not expressly require the execu- Power to 
10 tion of a bonti, the Board may, by notification in the Official Gazette, require 
require such class of persons, as JXl8y be specified in the notification, to :r.= 
furnish a bond with security or surety for the due observance of any Pt erst OM 
f h . 0 ur-o t e prOVIsions of this Act or any rule. nisb 
bond. 
120. (1) Any bond required to be furnished under this Act- Form and 
IS (a) shall be in such form as may be prescribed, and if no form :~ti~' 
has been prescribed in such other form as may be specified by the n. 
20 
2S 
Board by notification in the Official Gazette; 
(b) shall be in such amount (not exceeding the duty due on 
the excisable goods) and with such security or surety or sureties as 
the proper officer may think fit; 
(c) may be a continuing bond which shall remain binding not-
Withstanding any renewal or variation of the licence granted under 
this Act and, in every such case, the liability of the surety or sureties 
shall be co-extensive with that of the abligor or obligors and the 
liability of such surety or sureties shall not be discharged if such 
renewal or variation in the licence is with the knowledge of such 
surety or sureties; and 
(d) may, for any good and sufficient reason, be cancelled at 
any time by the proper officer. 
30 (2) In the event of death or insolvency of the surety or sureties 
or where the amount of the bond is inadequate, the proper officer may 
demand a fresh bond and may, if the security furnished for the bond is 
inadequate, demand additional security. 
(3) The proper officer may permit any person or class of persons to 
3S execute one bond in such form, in such amount and with such security 
or surety or sureties as such oftlcer may think fit, in lieu of any two 
or more bonds which such person or class of persons is required to 
execute under any provision of this Act or any rule. 
121. Every person manufacturing any excisable goods to which the Provision 
40 provisions of section 17 apply and every licensee of a warehouse in which of acCODl-
sueh excisable goods are deposited, shall provide and maintain for the modation 
use of the Central Excise Officers in attendance at the factory in which at tact0I7 
be th or ware· such excisable goods are manufactured or, as the case may ,at e hOU8e 
warehouse in which such excisable goods are deposited, such office . 
45 accommodation (including furniture), as may be prescribed, within the 
factory or warehouse premises, and he shall, if so required by the Collec-
tor of Central Excise, provide suitable lodging conveniently situated to 
the factory or warehouse premises, as the case may be, at a rent not 
exceeding ten per cent. oi the pay of each such officer so, provided with 
50 the lodginS:. 

Provided that where the limit of rent specified above for such lodging 
falls short of the rent prevailing in the area, the rent payable may be 
increased by an amount not exceeding twenty rupees in each case. 
De1eeation 122. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
of powers. Gazette, direct that subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified 5 
in the notification,-
Oftlcera 
required 
to aaaist 
Central 
J:xclae 
Offtcera. 
Owner'" 
or occu-
pieri of 
land to 
report 
maflu-
facure of 
contra-
band ex-
oilBble 
10odl. 
Protection 
of action 
taken 
under the 
Act. 
(a) any power exercisable by the Board under this Act (other 
than the power under section 41 or section 48 or section 51) shall be 
exercisable also by a Collector of Central Excise empowered in this 
behalf by the Central Government; 10 
(b) any power exercisable by a Collector of Central Excise 
under thia Act shall be exercisable also by a Deputy Collector of 
Central Excise or an Assistant Collector of Central Excise empower-
ed in this behalf by the Central Government; 
(c) any power exercisable by an Assistant Collector of Central IS 
Excise under this Act shall be exercisable also by a Gazetted 
Central Execise Officer (lower in rank than the Assistant Collectol' 
of Central Exise) empowered in this behalf by the Board. 
123. All otBcers of Police and Customs and all officers of Govern-
ment engqeti in the collection of land revenue, and all village officers 20 
are hereby empowered and requird to assist the Central Excise Officers 
in tile execution of this Act and the rules. 
W. Every owner or occupier of any land, and the agent of any such 
owner or occupier, in charge of the management of that land, if con-
traband excisable goods are manufactured thereon, shall, in the absence 25 
of reasonable excuse, be bound to give notice of such manufacture to a 
Magistrate, or to an officer of the Central Excise, Customs, Police or 
Land Revenue Department, immediately the fact comes to his knowledge. 
125. (1) No suit, prosecution Or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the Central Government or any officer of the Central Government or a 30 
State Government for anything which is done, or intended to be done, 
in good. faith, in pursuance of this Act or any rule. 
(2) No proceeding other than a suit shall be commenced against the 
Central Goyernment or any ofticer of the Central Government or a 
State Government for anything purportinlS to be done in pursuance 35 
of this Act or any rule without giving the Central Government or such 
ofllcer 8 month's previous notice in writing of the intended proceeding 
8Ild of the cause thereof, or after the expiration of three months from 
the accrual of such cause. 
Power. of 118. (1) Every officer or authority making any adjudication or hear- 40 
adjudlcat- Ing aD)' appeal or exercising any powers of revision under this Act shall 
tnl omc.r have all the powers ot a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
aDd -weld - 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely: - D of 1Il0l. late an 
remiDI authortla (I) IWDDlOniDi and enforcing the attendance of wltnesse.; 

5 of 1898. 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any 
court or office; 
(d) receiving evidence on affidavits; and 
S (e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or 
documents. 
(2) Every officer or authority making any adjudication or hearing 
any appeal or exercising any powers of revision under this Act shall 
be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 480 and 482 
10 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. 
(3) Every officer or authority making any adjudication or hearing 
any appeal or exercising any powers of revision under this Act shall 
have the power to make such orders of an interim nature as such officer 
or authority may think fit and may also, for sufficient cause, order the 
15 stay of operation of any decision or order. 
127. (1) Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in any decision or order Correction 
made by the Central Government, the Board or any Central Excise of clerical 
Officer under this Act or any rule or errors arising therein from any :Jtakes 
accidental slip or omission may, at any time, be corrected by the Cen- clerical 
20 tral Government, the Board or such Central Excise Officer or his succes- errors. 
sor-in-office, as the case may be. 
(2) Every correction of any mistake or error under sub-section (1), 
shall be intimated, as soon as may be, by the authority or officer making 
such correction to the person affected thereby. 
25 128. Any decision or order made or any summons or notice issued Service 
under this Act, shall be served- of order, 
decision, 
(a) by tendering the decision, OTder, summons or notice, or etc. 
sending it by registered post, to the person for whom it is intended; order, 
or 
(b) if the decision, order, summons or notice cannot be served I t ns ruc-in the manner provided in clause (a), by affixing a copy thereof to tion to 
Be·me conspicuous part of the factory or warehouse or other place of ~~~~~'!!: 
business or usual place of residence of the person for whom such thority 
decision, order, summons or notice, as the case may be, is intended. etc. 
3S 129. (1) All officers and persons employed in the execution of this 
Act and the rules shall observe and follow the orders, instructions and 
directions of the Board. 
(2) Every Central Excise Officer employed in the execution of thi. 
Act shall also observe and follow such instructions as may be issued to 
40 blm for his guidance by the Collector of, Central Excise within whose 
jurisdiction he performs his functions. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2), no orders, instructions or directions shall be given so as to 
Interfere with the discretion of the oiB.cer adjudging any conAacation or 
penalty under section 87 or of the Appellate Collector of Central Excise 
4.5 hearing any appeals under section 94. 

Construc-
tion of 
references 
to laws 
not in 
force in 
Jammu 
and 
Kashmir. 
Appear-
ance by 
authorised 
agent. 
130. Any reference in this Act to • law which is not in force in the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir shall, in relation to that State, be COlli-
trued as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that 
State. 
1~. (1) Any person who is entitled or required to attend before a 5 
Central Excise Officer in connection with any proceeding undr this Act 
or before any officer or authority making any adjudication, or hearing 
any appeal or exercising any powers of revision under this Act, except 
when required to attend perl:Jonally, for examination or to give evidence, 
or to produce a document or any other thing, may, subject to the other 10 
provisions of this section, attend by an authorised agent. 
(2) Every such agent shall be authorised in writing by such person to 
appear on his behalf. 
(3) No person-
(4) who has been dismissed or removed from Government IS 
service after the first day of April, 1938; or 
(b) who has been convicted of an offence connecte.d with any 
proceeding under this Act; or 
(c) who has become an insolvent, 
shall be qualified to appear as an authorised agent under sub-section (1),20 
for all times in the case of a person referred to in clause (a), for such 
time as the Collector of Central Excise may, by order, determine in the 
case of a person referred to in clause (b), and for the period during 
which the insolvency continues in the case of a person referred to in 
clause (c). 
(4) If an authorised agent is found guilty of misconduct in his pro-
fessional capacity as such agent, the Collector of Central Excise or the 
Board may, by order, direct that such agent shall thenceforward be dis-
qualified to appear as an authorised agent under this Act. 
25 
(5) Any order under subiJection (3) or sub-section (4) shall be sub- 30 
ject to the follOWing conditions, namely:-
(4) no such order shall be made in respect of any authoriled 
agent unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity ot beinl 
heard in the matter; 
(b) any authoriled agent against Whom such order is made; 3S 
may. within one month of the makittg of the order, appeal to the 
Board where the order is made by the Collector of Central Excise, 
and to the Central Government where the order is ma.de by the 
Board, to have the order cancelled; and 
(c) no such order shall take effect until the expiration of one 40 
month from the making thereof, or, where an appeal has 'been . pre-
ferred, until the disposal of the appeal. 

• 
132. (1) Without prejudice to any power to make rules contained General 
elIewhere in this Act, the Central Government may make rules con- power to 
sistent with this Act generally to carry out the purposes of this Act. make 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
S foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
(a) the time at which and the manner (including affixation of 
bander01s, wrappers or labels) in which the duty or duties leviable 
on any excisable goods shall be paid; 
10 (b) the allowance for changes in bulk of, or evaporation loss 
in, excisable goods for determining liability for the payment of duty 
thereon, of any person who produces, cures or manufactures such 
goods or who deposits such goods in a warehouse; 
(c) the determination of the date or dates for the purposes of 
15 application of rate of duty or tariff valuation under clause (c) of 
section 15; 
(d) the conditions subject to which excisable goods may be 
deposited without payment of duty in a place, other than a ware-
house, approved by the Collector of Central Excise under section 
20 18; 
(e) the extent to which, the conditions and limitations subject 
to which, th'e time at which and the manner in which, credit of 
duty shall be allowed and set-off thereof shall be made under sec-
tion 24; 
25 <f) the conditions subject to which, and the procedure in accord-
ance with which, the proper officer may permit the removal of 
samples of excisable goods under section 25: 
(g) the declaration required under section 37, the form thereof, 
the manner in which it shall be made, and the particulars it shall 
30 contain; 
35 
(h) the form of application for licence under section 39 or section 
45, the form of licence to be granted under section 39 or section 45 
or renewed under section 39 or section 46 and the particulars which 
such application and licence shall contain; 
(i) the conditions and restrictions regarding possession, storage, 
sale or transport of excisable goods in any area declared to be a Cen-
tral Excise Area under section 112; 
(i) the regulation of removal of excisable goods from the place 
where they are produced, cured, manufactured or stored or sub-
jected to any process of productwn, curing or manufacture and 
their transport to or from the premises of a licensed person, or a 
warehouse, or to a market; 
(k) the regulation of the packing of excisable goods, includIng 
snarktngs on 6uch goods and the containers thereof; 
rul-. 

General 
power to 
make 
regula-
tions. 
Publica-
tion ot 
rules and 
regula-
tions and 
laying 
before 
Parlia-
ment of 
rules and 
notifica-
tions 
and 
orders. 
Repeal of 
Act 1 of 
1944 in so 
far as it 
relates to 
excJaable 
goods 
other 
than salt 
and 
!!avinp. --
(I) the fees to be levied in respect 01-·· 
(i) the removal of excisable goods from a factory or war .. 
house under sub-section (2) of section 20; 
(ii) the licences granted or renewed under section 39 or 
section 45 or section 46 or section 112; 5 
(iii) the re-examination of samples under section 113, 
(iv) the amendments of documents under section 117; and 
(v) the furnishing of duplicates of documents; 
(m) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
~. (1) The Board may luake regulations consistent with this Act 10 
and the rules generally to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
(a) the form of application for removal of excisable goods under 1$ 
section 17; 
(b) the form of, ar.d the de.tails to be included in, the accounts 
and returns required to be maintained and submitted under sec-
tion 28. 
134. (1) All rules and regulations made under this Act, shall be pub- 20 
lished in the Official Gazette. 
(2) Every rule made under this Act and every notification issued 
under sections 9, 11, 12, 13, 17, 21, 24, 29, 31, 32, 34, 35, 41, 43, 48, 51, 65, 
67, 70, 112, 119, and 120, and under items Nos. 1.5 and III.2 of the First 
Schedule and every order made under section 29, shall be laid, as soon 2$ 
as may be after it is made or issued before each House of ParliBlpent 
while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be com-
prised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately 
following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 30 
notificaton or order, or both Houses agree that the rule or order should 
not be made or the notification should not be issued, the rule or notifi-
cation or order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 35 
anything previously done under that rule or notification or order. 
135. (1) The Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, in so far as it relates 
to excisable goods other than salt, is hereby repealed, that is to say, the 
said Act shall be amended in the manner specified in the Second Sche-
dule. 40 
(2) NotWithstanding the repeal of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 
1944, in so far as it relates to excisable goods other than salt, under sub-
section (1)-
(a) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been 
done or taken (including any rule, notification, order or notice made 4$ 
I of 1944. 

10 of 1897. 
Or issued, or any appointment or declaration made, or any llce!'l\:_, 
penni_on or exemption granted, or any aSBeSIDlent made, or any 
confiscation adjudged, or any duty, fees or charges levied, ·ur any 
penalty or fine imposed, or any forfeiture, cancellation or discharge 
5 . of any bond ordered) under the said Act shall, in so tar as it relates 
to excisable gooda other than salt and is not Inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken' under 
the correiponding provisions of this Act; 
(b) any document relating to excisable goods other than salt and 
10 referring to the said Act shall be const.rued as referring to this Act 
or to the corresponding provision of this Act. 
(3) This Act sha I apply to all excisable goods other than sait which 
are subject to Central duty of excise at the commencement of this Act 
notwithstanding that such goods were produced, cured, manufactured, 
IS stored or otherwise dealt with before such commencement. 
(4) Where, in relation to any excisable goods other than salt, the 
period prescribed for any application, appeal, revision or other proceed-
ing under the said Act had expired on or before the commencement of 
this Act, nothing in this Act shall be construed as enabling any such 
20 application, appeal or revision to be made, or a proceeding to be institut-
ed, under this Act by reason only of the fact that a longer period there.-
for is prescribed or provision is made for extension of time in suitable 
cases by the appropriate authority. 
(5) The provisions of section 50 or, as the case may be, of section 51, 
2S shall apply to all excisable goods other than salt warehoused before the 
commencement of this Act as if the operations permissible under those 
sections were carried out after such commencement. 
(6) Any duty, penalty, fee or charge payable in respect of any excis-
able goods other than salt under the said Act may be recovered in the 
30 manner provided under this Act but without prejudice to any action 
already taken for the recovery of such duty, penalty, fee or charge under 
the said Act. 
(7) 'the. mention of particular matters in sub-sections (3), (4), (5) 
and (6) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the general application 
35 of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, with Tegard to the effect 
of repeals. 
136. (1) If any difficulty arises in giVing effect to the provisions t)f Power tu 
this Act, particularly in relation to traaaitiott from the enactment repeal- remove 
ed by this Act to the provisions of this Act, the Centra:l Government may, diftl-
40 by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, make such cultle •. 
provisions, not incouistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to 
it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the dttlculty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the. e.xpiration of 
two years from the commencement ~ this Act. 
4S (Z) Every order made undeF sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as 
may be. after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it Is ttl 

52 
..-lon for a tot.l period of thirty days which may be comprised Ul one 
MSlion or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
'ellion in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both 
BOUles agree in making any modification in the order or both Houses 
agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have S 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(Su section 7) 
Item No. DescriptioD of goods 
(I) (2) 
I. FOOD 
1.1. SUGAR, PRODUCED IN A FACTORY 
ORDINARILY USING POWER IN THE 
COURSE OF PRODUCTION OF SUGAR-
I 
"' 
10 
Rate of duty 
(3) 
15 
"Sugar" means any form of sugar in which 
the 8Ucroae content, if expressed 88 a 
percentage of the material dried to 
constant weight at onc hundred and 30 
fivc degrees of Centigrade thermometer 
1.2. 
would be more than ninety. 
(I) Sugar other than Khandaari or Palmyra Nineteen per cent. ad va'ortl1l. 
(2) KhandasrlstJpr-
that is to say, sugar in the manufacture of Ten per cent. adva/Of'Im. 25 
which neither a vacuum pan nor a vacuum 
evaporator is employed. 
(3) Palmyruupr-
that is to say, sugar manufactured from iq-
gery obtained by boiling the juice of the 
"palmyra palm". 
Nil. 
CONFECTIONERY AND CHOCOLATES Biahty paise per kilogram. 
IN OR IN RELATION TO THE MANU-
FACTURE OF WHICH ANY PROCESS IS 
ORDINARILY CARRIED ON WITH 
THB AID OF POWER, NAMBLY:-
(I) Boiled sweets, toffees, caramds, 
candies. nuts (including almonds) and 
fruit kernels coated with sweetening 
agent, and -chewing gums. 
(2) Chocolates in buIlt or in the form of Ilabs, 
tablets, bars, pastilles or croquettes, 
whether or not containing nuta, fruit 
kernels or fruits. 
PJtEPARBD OR PRESBRVBD FOODS PUT Ten per CIIlt. ad valoIWM. 
UP IN UNIT CONTAINERS AND ORDI. 
NARILY INTENDED FOR SALE, IN-
CLUDING PREPARATIONS OF VEGE-
TABLES. FRUIT, MILK, CllRBALS. 
FLOUR. STARCH, BIRDS' EGGS, MEAT, 
~lT~&~sA~l~ftg~8s.F~g+ 
OTHERWISB SPBCIFIED. 
---_. _._----- ----
30 
45 

10 
25 
3S 
4S 
so 
-
Item No. 
-
(I) (2) (3) 
1.4. COFFEE.cured-
"Coffee" means the seed of the coffee tree Eighty-five rupee. per quintal. 
(cofJlfJ), whether with or without husk, 
whether cured or uncured, but does nOt 
include the seed while still attached to 
the tree. 
1.5. TEA-
H.I. 
""Tea" includes all varieties of the product 
known commercially as tea, and 11180 
Include. green tea. 
(I) Tea, all varieties except package tea falling 
within sub- item (2) of this I tern. 
r2' Package tea, that is to say, teapacked inay 
. kind of container containing not more than 27 
kilograms net of tea. 
Not exceeding sixty-six ~ 
per kilogram al the Central 
Government may, by noti-
fication in the OlBcial Gazcttb, 
fix: 
Provided that d ffemlt rate. 
L may be fixed for tea produced 
in different areas having r"Jprci 
to the Iverap sale price of 
such tea for home consump-
tion or export and other 
: relevant cOnsiderations. 
FortY-six paise per kiloanm. 
plus the duty for the time beina 
leviable under lub-item. 
(I) of this Item, if not already 
paid. 
II. BEVERAGES AND TOBACCO 
TOBACCO-
"Tobacco" means any form oC tobacco, whether 
cured or uncured and whether manu-
factured or not, and includes the leaf, 
stalks and sterna of the tobacco plant, 
but does not include any part of a tobacco 
plant while Btill attached to the earth. 
A. UNMANUFACTURED 2TOBACCO-
(1) if flue cured and used in the manufaturc 
of cigarettes. 
Per lti1ocram. 
Three rupees and fifty paise. 
(2) if flue cured and used for the manufacture Twenty-seven rupees and fttty 
of smomg m~s for pipes and ciga- paise. 
rettcs. 
(3) if flue cured and not otherwise specified 
(4) if other than flue cured an.d uaed for the 
manufacture of (a) Clgarettea or 
(b) amoking mixtures for pipes and 
c:iprettCl. 
(5) If other than flue cured .md not actually 
uaed for the manufacture of (a) ciaarcttea 
or (b) Imokin, mixtures for pipes and 
cigaretteB or W bidI-
(i) steml of tobacco larpr than 6' 35 
milliIDctrel in size; 
(iI") duato!tobacco; 
if) . tobIccO cured in wbole leaf form aDd 
nacbd or tied in bUDdles, hanb or 
&uncbea or in the form of twiatI 
or coDa. 
Two rupees and fifty palle. 
Two rupees and eiahty-ftv. paiN. 
One rupee aad ... .,-
paise. 

------- ------ --------~---
Item No. Description of aood. Rate of duty 
(I) (2) (3) 
------------------------~-----------------
(6) if other than flue cured and not otherwise Two rupees and 8fty paise. 
specified. 
(7) if used (or agricultural purposes 
(8) stalks 
B. MANUFACTUiED TOBACCO-
(I) Cigars and cheroots o(which the value-
(i) exoeedslts. 2, a nundreJ 
Nil 
TWe(lty-five paise. 
Per hundred 
Twenty-one rupees. 
s 
(ia) exceeds Rs. 15 a hundred, but does 
Dot exceed Rs. 25 a hundred. 
Twelve rupees and seventy-five lO 
paise. 
(iii) ox;ce~j, Rs. 5 a hundre i, but j()!$ 
no: exceed RI. IS a hundred. 
(iv) exceeds R&. I' 25 a hundred, but 
docs not exceed Rs. 5 a hundred. 
(2) Ciaarettes • 
Four rupee, and fifty paise. 
One rupee and twenty paise. 
One hundred and twenty-five 
per cent. ad valorem. 
(3) Biris in the manufactUre of which any Three rupees per thousand. 
process has been conducted with the 
aid of macilinea operated with or without 
the aid of power. 
III. MINERAL FUELS, LUBRICANTS AND RELATED MATliRIALS 
Ill. I - M()TOR SPIRIT-
Moto~ spirir, thaI is to say,-
IS 
20 
25 (i) any mineral oil (excludina crude mineral) 
oil) which has its Bashing point below I 
~eventy-six degrees of Pahrenheit', thor-
mometer, and which, either by itself or 
in admixture with any otller substance, ~ 
is suitable for use a. fuel for internal 
combustion engines; and 
Six hundred and twenty rupee. 30 
per ki.\olitre at fifteen dearet. 
Of Centigrade thermometer. 
(ii) power alcohol) that is to say, ethyl alcohol I 
of any grade ~includin~ such alcohol when I 
denatured or otherwise treated), WhiCh'J 
either by itself or in admixture with 
anr other substance, is suitable for 
being used as aforeaaid. 
Explanation 1.-"Mineral oil" meanl an oil con-
,listing of a single liquid hydrocarbon ora 
liquid mixture of hydrocarbons (except for 
associated impuritiel) derived (rom petro-
leum, coal, shale, peat or any other bituminous 
substance, and includes any similar 011 
proJuced by synthesis or otherwise. 
Explanation II.-"Flashing point" shall be 
determined in accorJance with the test. ape-
cified in this behalf in the rulea made under 
the Petroleum Act, 1934 (30 of 1934). 
JIl.:2 . KEROSENE-
Kerosen~ .. that is to laYI any mineral oil (ex.. Two hundred and tho! t y-fi Vt • 
c1uC1tn1 mineral colZa oil and t~~tine rupeel per kilo1itere at fifteen 
substitute) which his a ftame hetgbtof deli- ,Of Centigrade therme· 
eightec'n miw.etrel or marc and i. ',IMler. 
ordinarily ueed .. IIll iUumiaant in oil 
burning lamps. 
~,--.-------
3S 
4S 
50 
55 

s 
10 
IS 
20 
:as 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
(1) 
Description of goode 
(2) 
&pi<lntJtion I.-The expression "mineral oil" has 
the meaning assigned to it in Explanation 1 
to Item No. III. I. 
I1xpl nation I1.-"Plame height" shall be determinod 
in the apparatus known 88 the smoke point 
lamp in the manner specified in this behalf 
by the Central Government by notification in 
the Official Gazette. 
--------_. -
Rate ofdutJ 
" 
(3) 
1II.3. REFINED DIESEL OILS AND VAPORIZING 
OIL·-
that is to say, any mineral oil (excluding mi-
Reral colza oil and turpentine substitute), 
which has its flashing point at or above 
seventy-six degrees of Fahrenheit's 
thermometer, and satisfies either of the 
following requirements :-
(i) the oil has a flame height of ten milli-
metres or more but less than eigh-
teen millimetres; or 
(il) the oil has a flame height of less than 
ten millimetres but has a viscosity 
of less than one hundred seconds 
by ReJwood I Viscometer at one 
hundred degrees of Fahrenheit', 
thermometer, and contains less than 
one quarter of one per (".ent. by 
weight of any bituminous substance. 
(I) Refin!d diesel oils 
(2) Vaporizing oil 
Pour hundred aad elabty-nine 
rupees per kiIoUIre at flftccn 
degrea of CeDtiarade ther-
mometer. 
Four bundred aDd eiabty-ninc 
rupees per kilolitre at fIAeeD 
dep-ees of CentJarade tbermo-
meter. 
Explanation.-The expressions "mineral oil" , 
"flashing point" ,and "flame height" have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in 
Explanations 1 and II to item No. 111.1. aRd 
in Explanation 11 to item No. 111.2. 
DIESEL OIL, NOT OTHERWISE SPBCI- Cae h.uatdNd and .lxty~t 
FlED, that is to say, any mineral oil which- rupcoa and twenty-five pelle 
(i) has a flame height of less thaD ten miDi- ~ ~ ....... !~ depeea 
metres i ............ - ~etcr. 
(i,) contains one quarter of one per cent. 
or more by weight of any _ bitwninous 
substance i aad 
(ii,) POSICSSes a viscosity of lei. than one 
hundred seconds by Redwood I ViIco-
meter at one hundred desreea of Pahren-
he¥'. thermometer. 
Bxplanalion.- The expressions "mineral 
oil" and "ftarnc height" have the mClJloo 
inaa respectively assigned to them in 
&phlNltitm 1 to item No. Ill· I. and ill 
&p/lJnQlitm 11 to item No. III, 2. 

58 
." ,-
lteIIl No~ Descrlpticm of ,ooda Rate of dQt)' 
(I) 
I1l.s· 
.~) 
(2) (3) 
FURNACE OIL, that is to say, any mineral oil Seventy-five rupees and forty-
which- five paise per ItUolitte at 
fifteen deareel of Centiarade 
(I) has a flame height of lesl than ten milli- thermometer. 
metres; 
(ia) contains one quarter of one per cent. or 
more by weiaht of any bituminou8 ,ub,-
tance ; and 
(iii) possesses a viscosity of one hundred 
seconds or mOle by Redwood I Viac:o-
meter at one hundred degrees of PahreR-
heit's thermometer. 
Explanat1ora.- The expressions "mineral oil" 
and "flame height" have the meanings res-
pectively assi&ned to them in &planatiora I to 
Item No. 111'1. and in Bxplanarilm II to Item 
No. 111.2. 
III· 6. ASPHALT, BITUMEN AND TAR-
(I) Asphalt and bitumen (includina cut- Thirty per cent. ad fJtJlOf'lm. 
back bitumen and asphalt) natural or 
produced from petroleum or ebale. 
s 
10 
20 
(2) Tar distilled from coal or lignite, and Thirty per cent. ad fJalor"". 
other mineral tars, inc1udina partially 
distilled tan and blends of pitch with :l 5 
creosote oils or with other coal tar dis-
tillation products. 
ALL PRODUCTS DERIVED FROM RE- Twenty per cent. ad .alor,m. 
FINING OF CRUDE PETROLEUM OR 
SHALE (WHETHER GASEOUS, 
LIQUID, SEMI-SOLID OR SOLID IN 
FORM), NOT OTHERWISE SPECIFIED, 
INCLUDING REFINERY GASES, LUB-
RICATINGOILAND GREASES, WAXES 
ANDCOKB. 
IV. VEGETABLE OILS AND FATS 
IV· I. VEGETABLE NON-ESSENTIAL OILS, all One hundred and ten rupees and 
IOrts, in or in relation to the manufacture of twenty-five paise per metric 
which any proeesa is ordinarily carried on with tonne. 
35 
the aid of power. 40 
IV''::. VEGETABLE PRODUcr-
"Veaetable product" means any vesetable oil Ten per cent. tMl fJ4l0J'lm. 
or fat which. whether by itself or in 
admixture with any other 'substance, hal 4S 
by hydrosenation or by any other procca 
been hardened for human consumption. 
V. CHEMICALS 
V'I. PIGMENTS. COLOURS, PAINTS, ENAMELS.! 
VARNISHES, BLACKS AND CBLLULOSJ1 
LACQUBRS-
A. (I) Pigments. colours, ~ts and enamels-
(i) Zinc oxide, red lead. white lead and tita- Nineteen r Jl)eeS and .yenty-ftve 
nium dioltide white. paise per quintal. 
'0 
(ia) Aluminium pulle Seventy-five paise per Itilosram. 55 
(2) Dry colours, name1h the foUowma: lead Seventeen rupees and twenty-
chromes and Brunswick areca. fin: paise per qUinntal. 

s 
10 
~o 
35 
40 
4S 
57 
Item No. Deacription of aoodl Rate of dutJ, 
(I) 
Y·:::. 
Y·3· 
v .•. 
V·s· 
V.6. 
V.7. 
(3) Water paint&-
(.) Dry distemper including cement-baaed 
water paints. 
(it) Oil-bound distemper 
III 
(m) Water piament finishea for leather 
(w) Plastic emulsion paint 
(4) Oil paints and enamels-
(.) Tinting paste (Blue) 
(it) Stiff paints 
(m) Ready-mixed paints and enamels 
(5) DispeRed Organic pigments ordinarily 
ueed for the printing of textiles, whether in 
the form of powder, paste, or in emulsion. 
SeVUltcSl rupee. and twenty-
five paile per quintal. 
Thirty rupeea and fifty paille 
per quintal. 
Forty-two paille per litre. 
One rupee and five paiJe per 
litre. 
Seventy-five paise per kilosram. 
Nineteen rupees and fifty peiIe 
per quintal. 
Sixty-five paise per litre. 
Two rupee. and fifty paise per 
kilogram. 
(6) Piamenu, coloun, paints and enamels, not Seventeen rupees and twenty-
otherwise specified. five paille per Quintal, if IOld 
by wciaht; 
B. Varnishes and blacks-
(I) Varnishes . 
(:::) Bituminous and coal-tar blacks 
C. Cellulose lacquers-
Fifty-Six paise per litre, if 80ld 
by volume. 
Thirty-five paiae per littf'. 
Eighteen paille per litre. 
(1) Nitrocellulose lacquers, clear and pigmented One rupee and fifty paise per 
and nitrocellulose ancillaries in liquid form. litre. 
(z) Nitrocellulose ancillaries in semi-solid and Fifty paise per kilogram. 
pasty forms. 
(3) Cellulose lacquen, not otherwise specified 
SODA ASH 
CAUSTIC SODA, WHETHER IN A SOLID 
FORM OR IN LYE. 
SODIUM SILICATE 
GLYCERINE. 
SYNTHETIC ORGANIC DYESTUFFS 
(INCLUDING PIGMENT DYESTUFFS) 
AND SYNTHETIC ORGANIC DERIV A-
TIVBS USED IN ANY DYEING PRO-
CESS. 
sYNTHETIC ORGANIC PRODUCTS OF A 
KIND USED AS ORGANIC LUMINO-
PHORES; PRODUCTS OF THE KIND 
KNOWN AS OPTICAL BLEACHING 
AGENTS, SUBSTANTIVE TO THE PI-
BRE. 
One rupee and forty paise per 
litre. 
Five per cent. ad va/Drem. 
Five per cent. ad valorem. 
Twenty-five per cent. ad va/qrmf. 
Seventeen rupees per quintal. 
Flfteen per .. Cent •. ad va/orem. 
Fifteen per cent. lid wUorem. 

58 
---------- ----------_.-- .. - -
Item No. 
(I) 
V.I. 
Desaiption of aoods Rat\.' of duty 
(2) 
PATENT OR PROPRIETARY MEDICINES Ten per cent. ad vaIDr"". 
NOT CONTAINING ALCOHOL, OPIUM, 
INDIAN HEMP OR OTHER NARCOTIC 
DRUGS OR OTHER NARCOTICS OTHER 
THAN THOSE MEDICINES WHICH 
ARB BXCLUSIVELY AYURVEDIC, UN-
ANI, SIDHA OR HOMOEOPATHIC. 
_z...ao" I.-"Patent 01" proprietary medicines" 
means any drug or medIcinal preparation, in 
whatever form, for use in the internal or exter-
nal treatment of, or for the prevention of ail-
ments in, human beings or animals which bears 
either on itself or on its container or both, a 
oame which is not apecified in a monograph 
in • Pbarmacopoea. Formulary or other pub-
lications notified in this behalf by the Central 
Government in the Official Gazette, or which 
is a brand name, that is, a name or a registered 
trade mark under the Trade and Merchandise 
Marks Act, 195& (43 of 1958), or any other 
mark such as a symbol, monogram, label, sig-
nature or invented words or any writing which 
i. uaed in relation to that medicine for the pur-
pose of indicating or so as to indicate a connec-
tion in the course of trade between the medi-
cine and some perllOn having the right either 
as proprietor or otherwise to use the name or 
mark with or without any indication of the 
identity of that penon. 
5 
10 
IS 
30 
Explanation II.-"Alcohol", "Opium", "Indian 
Hemp", "Narcotic Drugs" and "Narcotics" 
have the meanings respectively assigned to 
them in section 2 of the Medicinal and ToileL 35 
Preparations (Ezcise Duties) Act, 1955 (16 of 
1955). 
V.9. COSMETICS AND TOILET PREPARA- Twenty-five per cent. ad valorem. 
TIONS NOT CONTAINING ALCOHOL 
OR OPIUM, INDIAN HEMP, OR OTHER 40 
NARCOTIC DRUGS OR NARCOTICS, 
NAMELY:-
(i) Preparations for the care of the skin including 
beauty creams, vanishing creams, cold creams, 
make up creams, cleansing Creams, akin 
foods and tonics, face powden, baby pow-
dcn.toUetpowden and talcum powdcn;. 
(if) Hair lotion, cream and pomade. 
&planation.-"Alcohol", "Opium", "Indian 
Hem~', "Narcotic Drugs" and "Nar-
cotics have the meanings respectively 
as8igned to them in 5ection Z of the Medicinal 
and Toilet Preparations (ExciSe Duties) Act, 
1955 (16 of 1955). 
45 
SO 
V.10. NITRIC, HYDROCHLORIC AND SUL- Ten per cent. ad valorem. S 5 
PHURIC ACIDS (INCLUDING FUMING 
ACU)S AND ANHYDRIDES THERBOF), 
ALL SORTS. 
V.II. COMPRESSED, LIQUEFIED OR SOLIDIFIED 
GASES, THE FOQ.OWING, NAMELY:- 60 
(r) Oxygen Ten per cent. ad valor,m. 
(2) Chlorine Ten per cent. ad va/or.",. 
(3) Ammonia Ten per cent. ad ua/orem. 
(4) Carbonic acid (Carbon dioxide) One rupee per kilogram. 
(5) Rcfriprant 18Se8, not otherwi.e specified, Twenty per cent. ad valo,..",. 65 
auch .. IUiphur c1icWde and freon. 
------.----------------------------------,----------

10 
IS 
20 
35 
4S 
59 
! ., 
Item No. , ' Description of goods Rate of duty 
(3) 
~,----------------------------------~------------------V.12. FBRTILISBRS, ALL SORTS, BUT BX- Ten per cent. tJd val0Mft0 
, "CLlJDINO NA'l7URAL, ANIMAL OR 
VBGETABLB FBRTILIZBRS 
WHBN NOT CHBMICALLY TRBATBD. 
V.I30 "SOAP" means all varioties of the pJOduct 
known commercially II 1OIlp-
(I) Sal~, in ar In relation' ta the manufacture 
ofwbichanyprocess is ordinarily carried on 
with the aid of pGwer at of steam for heating-
(ia} other sarts • 
• Siz and ~ half per cent. tJd fIrIl«M. 
.' Niae1ll14·a half per cent. ad 
valorfm. 
(2) SoaP. in ar in relaticm ta the manufacture af Six and halfpcr cont. ad~. 
which no Pr9CeS8 has been carried an with the 
aid of power ar af steam far heatin,. 
. V.'IIJ.ARTIlHCIALORSY'NTHB fIC RBSINS AND !n!irt1iJeu:ent. adoaloMlt. 
PLASTIC MATBRIALS. AND ARTICLBS 
TIlBRBOF-
(x) Artificial arsyntheticresinsand plastic mate· 
rials in any form, whether 8olid, liquid or puty, 
or IS powder, ,ranules or flakes. or in the form 
of moulding powdeR, the followinl namely:-
(i) Condcnsation,Pol,.-oondensation and 
Poly-additionproduc:ts, whether or not 
modified or polymerised includin, phcno-
pilatl,Aminoplasts, Alkyds, PolyUlethane. 
Polyallyl Bsters and other Unsaturated 
Polyesten; 
Cia) Polymcrisation and Copolymerisation 
products inc;luding polythyiene and Poly· 
tetrahaloethyiene. Polyisobutylene, Poly· 
.tyrene. Polyvinyl' chloride> Polyvinyl 
acetate. Polyvinyl ·ohloNaoetate - and 
other Polyvinyl . derivatiVl:8,·Pdy.wdca, 
Polyacrylic . and Pelymethacrylio dCrifttivee 
and Coumuooe-lD<lIDe I'C8W ; and 
(iii) Cellulose acetate {iI\dudins' di-oreri-
acetate), Cellulose acel8III butyrate and 
CellulOllC propionate,.' (JeIIulote ' "1£CItIte. 
propionate, Bthyl"6lCIlulosc Ud 'lcuyl 
oellulOlC, whether J!:r.iciaed -01 Doc, 
and plasticiledOe1l Ditrate. 
(2) Artic;Ies madci of plastics, all sortS, lnc:ludina 
tubes, rods, sheets, folla"ticP, other ~ 
Iar or profile shapa, wbether JamjnatedOr not, 
and whether riii!l' OiBeUb1e, iDdJadlo, Jay-
Oat tubinp ind PolYVinYl obloddc. ~. 
Bx61~ioll.-Forthe purpOllC OfBUb-i~g:, ., 7'Plastica •• means the varioUs ariflclal or. 
tic resins or plastic material included 'in sub-
itaD (I). 
ORGANIC SURFACB-ACTIVB AGBNTS Tell pet c:eJU. till ~ 
(OTHBR THAN.S~)i"SUltF~. . AC-TIVE PRBPA.aA.TI S·;.om; .YlASBING 
PRBPARATIONS... . ... THB1Coa 'JiOT 
CONTAINING SOAP. 
-~OPIlANB, THAT IS, ANY' FILM OR Twelltyper'CeIU.tIIl ....... 
SHBBT OF.RBGBNBRATBD CBLLULOSB. , . 
-----.------------------------------._----------

eo 
;" 
Item No. Description of ,oods Rate of duty 
--------------------------------------------------------------
(2) (3) 
~,---------------------------------------------------------
VI. MANUPACTURED GOODS CLASSIPIED CHIEPLY,BY MATERIAL 
VI. I. TYRES-
"Tyte" means a pneumatic lyre in the manu-
facture of which rubber i. used, and includes 
the inner tube and the outer cover of such a tyre. 
(I) Tyres for motor vehicles • Fony per cent. ad CI/JON 
S 
(2) Por cycles (other than motor:cycles)-
(4) t)'reI • Sixty paise per tyre or fifteen per 10 
cent. ad ClaIor"", whichever 
is higher. 
Vb. 
VI.4. 
(b) tubes Thirty paise per t\lbe or fifteen 
per cent. ad valor",., whichever 
is higher. 
(3) All other tyres • • Fifteen per cent. ad wlorem. 
RUBBER PRODUCTS, THE FOLLOWING, 
NAMELY:-
(I) Lata foam lPODIe Twenty ~ I r. em 
IS 
(a) Plates, aheets and strips unhardened, whe- Twenty per cent. ad Clawem. ao 
ther vulcanised or not, and whether combin-
ed with any teXtile material or otherwise. 
(3) Piping and tubina. of unhardened wl- Fifteen per cent. ad valor",.. 
canied rubber. 
(4) Transmission, conveyor or elevator belts Fifteen per cent. ad Clalor",.. 
or belting, of vulcanised rubber. 
PLYWOOD, BLOCKBOARD, LAMIN-
BOARD. BATTEN BOARD. HARD OR 
SOFT WALL BOARDS,OR INSULATING 
BOARD AND VENEERED PANELS ; 
WHBTHER OR NOT CONTAINING ANY 
MATERIAL OTHER THAN WOOD; 
CELLULAR WOOD PANELS; BUIL-
DING BOARDS OP WOOD PULP 
OR OP VEGBTABLB FIBRE. WHE-
THER OR NOT BONDED WITH NATU-
RAL OR ARTIPICIAL RESINS OR 
WITH SIMILAR BINDERS; AND ARTI-
PICIAL OR RECONSTITUTED WOOD 
BEING WOOD SHAVINGS, "WOOD 
CHIPS, SAW DUST. WOOD PLOUR OR 
OTHER LIGNEOUS WASTE AGGLO-
MERATED WITH NATURAL OR ARTI-
FICIAL RESINS OR OTHER ORGANIC 
BINDING SUBSTANCES, IN SHEETS, 
BLOCKS, BOARDS OR THE LIKE-
(I) Plywood for Tea-chesu :when cut to size Ten per cent. ad fJGlor,,,,. 
in panels or ,hoob and packed In sets. 
(2) All othen 
PAPER. all aorta (includina puteboerd, nUlI-
board, Itrawboard and cu-dboard), in or in 
relation to the manufacture of which any/IO" 
c:eaa it ordinarily carried on with the ai . of 
powel'-
Fifteen per cent. ad flaU1rIm. 
Per kiloaram. 
as 
30 
35 
45 
,0 
(I) Ciprette tlaue • One rupee. 
-----------------------------------------------" 

Item No. 
(I) 
s 
10 
15 
VI.6. 
30 
35 
VI.,. 
45 
SO VI.8. 
60 
l' 
81 
Dcecription of goode Rate of dUlY 
(2) (3) 
(2) Blotting, toilet, target, tissue other than Fifty paiee. 
cigarette tissue, teleprinter, typewritinl, 
manifold, bank, bond, art paper, chrome 
paper, tub-iized paper, cheque paper, atamp 
paper, cartridge paper,'parchment, and coated 
board (including art board. chrome board 
and board for playing cards). 
3) Printing and writing paper, packing and Thirty-five palae. 
wrapping paper, strawboard and pulp-
board, includin# grey board, corrugated 
board, duplex and triplex boards, other 
IOrta. 
(4) All other kinds of paper and paper board Fifty paiIe. 
not otherwitre specified. 
RAYON AND SYNTHETIC FmRES AND Forty-five rupees per Idlop'lD'l. 
YARN. 
~lq"atio".-"Jl.ayon and synthetic tibres and 
yarn" .hall be dccmed to Include !JIan-made 
ftbroa and yam made out af!JIan-mllde ftbr~. 
COTrON TWIST, YARN AND 1lIRJ!AD, 
AlL SORTS, sized or unsized, tn .u 
form. including akeins, hlDb, cops, conet. 
bobbinl, pims, spools, reels, cheetrel, ball. or 
on warp beams. in or In relation to the 
manuflcture of which'any ~roces. is ordina-
rily ~ on with the lid of power-
(I) of c:ounts 29 or more • 
Ca) of counts lee, than 29 
• Six rupeea and ftfty palte per 
ki1opn. 
• One rupee per 1d10JUDl. 
EzpLmatio" 1.-"Count" means the size of grey 
yarn expressed u the number of 1000 metre 
banb per one-balf Idlogram. 
&,plaltation ll.-F or multiple fold yarn, "count" 
means the count of the bllic single yarn. 
WOOLLBNYARN, ALL SORTS INCLUDING 
mITrING WOOL. in or in relation 
to the manufactUre of which any proceas 
is ordinarily carried on with the aid of 
power-
(J) worsted yam-
(i) of 488 counts and more 
(ia) of less than 485 counts. 
(2) Others . 
Explanation,-"Count" means the size of single 
yarn expressed II the number of 560 yard 
hanb per pound. 
COTION FABRICS-
"Cotton fabrics" means all varieties of fabrics 
manuiactured either wholly or partly from 
cotton and includes dhoties, SBreC8, chidden, 
bed-sheetB, bed-spreads, counter-panea, table-
:laths, embroidery in the piece, in strips orin 
motifs and fabrics impregnated or coated with 
preparations of celluloae derivatives or of 
other artificial plastic materials but does Dot 
iacludc any such fabric if it cODtainl-
(.) 40 per cent. or more by wreight of wool; 
(ia) 40 per cent. or more by weight of silk; or 
Twenty per ceut. ad "a/omn. 
Fifteen per CleDt. ad f)QQ/onm. 
Seven and a half per cent. 
ad 1IGlorwtI. 

Item No. 
(I) 
62 
DeIc:rIptfon of goods 
(2) 
(is, 60 percent. or moreby' weight of rayon or 
ardficial silk : 
Provided that in the case of embroidery in the 
piece, in strips or in motifi and fabrl~ impreg-
nated or coated with preparations of cellulose 
derivatlvea.or of,ot.bar.a,rtificial pluticmaterills, 
the percentages referred . W In (.) to (is) 
above shall be in relation to the base fabrics 
which are embroidered or impregnated or 
coated, 88 the case may be-
A. Cotton fabria«iler than (.) embroidery .in 
the piece, in atrips or in motifs, and (it) fabrics 
impregnated or coated with preparations of 
cellql~,~",tivea. or. of other artificial .. 
plaatic materl8ls,-
'1· 
Rateofcm, 
s 
10 
IS 
(x) Coating, suiting, ~so". corduroy, 
pberdine, bed-ford, satbl, denim,'lappet, 
lace, knitted fabric, tapestry, furnisliin g 
fabric including jacqW!f~ .curta.i.n,. d~tb, . 
gadlapet, mattress fabdc,terrJ' towel In-
cluding turkish towel, terry towelling , 
cloth including turkiSll towelling' cloth, 
blanket, C8DV88, duck, filter cloth, 
tracing cloth and bukram cloth. 
Twelve and a, half per cent. lid 20 
fJa1orem. 
(2) Others-
(0) Cotton.~ superfine-
thE, is)'o '18Y. .bncs in which the ·Bighty paisclICII'ltluareaetre. 
average count of yarn is 488 or more. 
(6) Cotton fabrics, ftne-
thad8 to 88y, fabrics in which the averqe Eighty paise per aqaare metre. 
count of yarn is 3ssoc,more but i_. 
than 488. 
(c) Cotton fabrics, medilQ-i\._ 
that iB to aay, fabrklll·ln which· the SiJrty J)8ise 'perl4lure metre. 
average count of yam it 268 or more 
but ia leas than 3Ss. 
(4) Cotton fabrics, medium-B-
that il'to.aay, ·fabrics in which the SixtyJl8iae'PC"'quue metre. 
a~,,cpua.·ef yam i8 178 or more· , 
but ia leia than 26a. 
(.) COtteft·fabrlea. coarse-
25 
30 
35 
that i. to ny, fabrica in which the av~aae Sixty paise per aquarc . .mre. 4S 
count of yam i8 leas than ~71. 
(J) Cotton fabrics not otherwise specified. Ei~ .~"Ie p~·~lI,letre., ,. 
B. Embroidery, in the piecll, in'ltripa. or in . The 'cNty i far . the ~ belq 
motifl, in or in relation to the mapul'aa1KC of 'leviable.on tobIt. bate fabriai. 
which any prOCCll i8 ordinarily. au:riod on if not aJradtr·peid..., twenty SO 
with the IIid of power. per cent.· lid -....... 
C. CottOD fabric:I imPIClllUltldOl coated·with The duty.for the time beina 
preparation8 of cellulOse derivatina· 01' of Jevilble Oft tile t.c fabrlc:a, 
Other arti&iaI p1utic materills. if not already paid, "", 
. twenty .... , .. per ClIIIlt. 114 
fJalorim •. __ --__________________________________________ 55 

s 
10 
IS 
20 
2S 
Item No. 
(I) 
63 
Deacription of goods 
(a) 
. ' . , 
~~ 1_"~ fWiQl'h' meIDl, ,fa~ .. 1!l1lli... '1IDder ~ttOm A of t iI'Item wbich ., 
eubtcCwd t,Q tb,e ~~s ofembrojd..-y, or 
which areimp~ptea u coated with~­
tioDi of c:eIluiose 'derniveB or of other plaitic: 
materials. 
Bspldltlltiora II.-"Count" melDlOOUDt of.grey 
)'alD. 
L,lanarion Ilt.-For the purpose of de term in-
In, the average count of yarn, the follOWing 
aulea shall apply, namely~-
(a) yam used in the borders or aelvodgee shell . 
be ignored; 
(6) for multiple-fold yam, the count of the 
basic lingle yarn shall·be tUen'1DCi t:De .. 
number of end. per 2S' 4miUimewea ill tile .'. 
reed or the number ofp __ per,a!' "miIu..,,' . 
metres, a8 the caae may be, shall be multi..-,.' . 
plied by the number of plies in the yarn ; 
(c) in the c:aI4I.of,fabrica manufacturacl.fIom, 
cotton and other yarns, the other yarns, 
ahall.fIX· thc-afomcsaiGl purposc,be~, . 
to be cotton -JdD ; 
(4) tbeaf.a:IP J;OUDt.shall be obtained by " 
applyiDg the following formula, namely :-
Rate of duty 
"(Count of warp X number of ends per 2S' 4 JDillimctres in the ,r004).+CCDt,alu' iIf 'ftft X 
ftUDlber of pic:b per as' 4 millimetres), 
30 (Number of ends per 2S' 4 millimelrcs in the reed) + (Number of picks per 2,' 4 mntimetra), 
the result being rounded oft', wherevel' necessarY. bytreattDg aQ~~ ~1a . .QMd1I1fc-more 
81 one. and disregarding any fraction which ia.letI~ thm, ono.~f.~ . 
3S 
45 
50 
SILK FABRICS-
"SiUt Cabrica" means aU varietid-eff.bdcs'IDIIDU-
fac:tured either whony or partly from .Uk and 
includes embroidary in the piece. in strips 
or in motifs bvt docs not·iaIIede-ay 1AI8b. 
fabric-
(a) ifitcontain. 40 percent. OlImON"~' ' 
of wool; 
(ia) if it contains cotton or_lJidU-.U!k Ql' . 
bothland less than 40 per cent. by Weicht 
of ailk ; 
(;;') if it CODtaiDa no cotton.aD6 lJO, arti&iel .• • nk and leu than 40 per cent. by WeiJht 
of sUk; or 
(iv) if manufactured on • haAliI._!d: 

ItcmNo. 
(I) 
V 1.10. 
VI.n. 
64 
Detcription of goods Rateof dutJ 
3 
(2) Bmbroidery. in the piece, in strips or in The duty or she time ~ leviable 
motif., in or in relation to the manufacture on the base fabrics. if Dot already S 
of which any process is Ordinarily carried paid, ,If II twenty per cent. ad 
on with the aid of power. f)(J/orWIJ. 
ExplallQliotl.-"Baae fabrics" means fabrics 
taning under sui).item (I) of this Item which 
are subjected to the process of embroidery. 
WOOllEN FABRICS-
"Woollen fabrics" means all varieties of fabrics 
manufactured wholly of wool or which contain 
40 ~ cent. or more by weight of wool and 
includes blankets. lobis, ~. shaWls and 
embroid~ryin the piece. in striPS or in motIfs: 
Provided that in the case of embroidery in the 
piece, in strips or in motifs, the percentage 
~fcrred to above ahall be in rotation to thebaac 
fabrics which are embroidered-
10 
IS 
~ . 
(I) Woollen fabrics, other than embroidery Six and JI quarter JICl' cent. 20 
in the piece. in strips or in D'lOtiCa. ad fXJlt1I'",.. 
Tbedutyfor the time being leviable 
on the base fabrics, if not 
already paid, ,114 twenty per 
(2) Embroidery, in the piece. in Btrip. or in 
motifs, in or in relation to the manufacture 
0( which any process is ordinarily carried 
on with the aid of power. <:eDt. ad~",.. 2, 
&/llarttJtion.-"Base fabrics" means fabrics fall-
in, under lui).item (I) of this Item which 
are subjected to the P1'OCclS of embroidery. 
RAYONORARTIFICIALSIDK FABRICS-
"'Rayon or artificial.Uk fabrics" means all varIe-
tiel of fabrics manufac:tured either wholly or 
partly from ra~n or artificiallilk and includes 
embroidery in the piece. in 8trips or in motifs 
and fabrics imj)regnated or coated with prepara-
tiODS of oeIluiOIe derivatives or of other arti-
ficial plastic materials. but does not include 
any such fabric--
(,) if it contains 40 per cent. or more by weight 
of WOOl; 
) i it con os 40 per cent. or more by 
weight of silk ; 
(ii,) if it cmttains cotton and less than 60 per 
cent. by weight of rayon or llI'tificial atlk; 
or 
(10) if it contains no cotton and leBB than 40 
per cent. by weight of wool and leas than 
40% by weight of rayon or artificial 
silk: 
Provided that in the case of embroidery in the 
piece, in strips or in motifs and fabrics impreg-
nated or coated with preparations of cellulose 
derivatives or of other artificial plastic mate-
rial., the percentqes referred to in (,) to (iv) 
above ahall be in relation to the base fabrics 
which are embroidered or imprepated or 
coated. as the case may be-
(I) Rayon or artificialaUk fabrics other than Seven paise per square mette. 
(I) embroidery in the piece. in strips or in 
~o 
3S 
45 
so 
SS 

~.~I~'~----_----------------------------------------------= 
Item No. 
5 
10 
s 
20 VI.12. 
25 
VI.13. 
30 
VI.I4-
35 VI.15. 
VI.d. 
45 
Description of goods 
motifs, and (ia) fabrics Imprepated or co.t-
cd or with preparations of ~J1uloec deri-
vatives of other artificial plastic materials. 
(2) Bmbroidery, in the pieQe, in strips or in 
motifs, in or in relation to the manufacture 
of which any process is ordinarily carried 
on with the aid of power. 
Rate of duty . 
The dUty for thetimebeinlleviable 
on the bale fabrics, if not 
already Paid, plld twenty per cent. 
ad fI'J/orwm. 
(3) Fabrics imfreanatcd or coated with pre- The dutY for the time beina levi-
parations 0 cellulose derivatives or of Other able OD the t.e fabrics, if DOt 
artificial plastic materials. already paid, pi", twenty-five 
per cent. ad valomrl. 
&plQnation.-"Base fabrics" means fabrics fall-
rng under sub-item (I) of this Item which are 
lubjected to the process of embroidery 
or which are impregnated or coated with 
preparations of c:e1lulose derivatives or'of other 
plastic materials. 
JUTE MANUFACTURBS (INCLOOING 
MANUFACTURES OF BIMLIPATAM 
JUTE OR OF MASTA FIBRE), ALL 
SORTS-
(I) Hessians Five hundred and fifty rupeee 
per metric tonne. 
u) All other descriptions of jute manufac- Three hundzcd' and fifty rupceI 
tures not otherwise specified (includin~ pert metric tonne. 
cloth, bags, twist, yarn, rope and twme). 
T&XTILB 'FABRICS IMPREGNATED OR Twenty-five per cent ad oaIorIIII. 
COATED WITH PREPARATIONS OF 
CELLULOSE DERIVATIVBS OR OF 
OTHER ARTIFICIAL PLASTIC MATE-
llIALS, NOT OTHERWISB SPECIFIED 
CEMENT, aU varieties 
OLASS AND GLASSW ABR-
(I) sheet glass and Plate &lass • 
(a) Laboratory glassware 
(3) Glass shells, lIIass globes and chJmneya 
for I amps and lanterns. 
Ten per cent. ad flalDmII. 
Five per ceDt. ad f1CIloMn. 
Ten per cent. tid f1alomn. 
<4) Other glassware including tableware • Fifteen per cent. ad vaIIImIt. 
CHINAWARB AND PORCBLAINWARB, 
ALL SORTS-
(I) Tableware 
(a) Sanitar)'Ware 
(3) Olazed tile. 
(4) Not otherwise specified 
~.-"Chinaware" indudes all &lazed 
Claywate but does not include terrICOtta. 
Fifteen per cent. ad ~ 
Fifteen per cent. ad fNIIDrwII. 
Ten per cam. ad f1tII6mII. 
Ten per ~.t. ad DtJ/omII. 

Item No. . .c, Description of gooda Rate of duty 
(I) 
VI.17. 
(z) 
ASBBSTOS-CBMBNT. ~y;. t;:!;§.,. ALL Ten pu ~t. ad valor"". 
SORTS, INCLUDING, ,~T Aj)jU COR-
RUGA THO SHBlttS, ·l>IPBS AND11JBBS 
ANDTILBS. S 
,: VLII. . i; SIL'VBR Seven paiae per every teD IZ'IDII. 
VLJ9. IRON IN ANY CRUDB FORM including pig Forty-five rupees per metric 
/. ken; left, boo, moIlc!a Uon·ormmCllt'iD any tonne • 
. I'· ~'ehtIpc or me. 10 
VI~ STBBL INGOTS inc1udng atecl melting scrap. Seventy-five rupeea pel metric 
tonne. 
VI.ZI. COPPBR AND COPPBR ALLOYS CONTAIN-
ING NOT LESS THAN IlIPTY PERCENT. 
BY WEIGHT OF COPPER- IS 
(I) In an1 crude form including ingots, bars, One th9uaand and five hundred 
blocb, slabs, billets, shOll and pellets. rupees per metric tonne. 
(3) Wire bars, wire I'OdI and caatiDp, aot other- One t001IIIIla and five hundred 
wite .pecijied. rupeelJper metric tonne. 
,{s)'AIa&M6c:w.., the following namely, plates, Twotbqonan d rupees pel metric 20 
.. ,.-..,~. stripa and foils in any form or .ize tonne. 
1'\\:r,1Ib2.' ;, -4RONORSTBBL PkODUdrS, THE-POLLOW-
lNG, NAMBLY:-
(I) Semi-finished atetl indIJd;""bloomsi billetej pifty"~ per metric tonne 2S 
aJaba, ahcct, bars, tit! 'baftUdIwe bars. ' ft6u . tbe-'esciae duty for the 
time beini leviable on atcc1 
inaots. 
(a) Ban, rocia, coils, wiles, joists, girders, ansJes, Fifty rupeea per metric tonne 
dwmela, tees, beams, zcda, tIOUah. p~ and plus the excise duty for • ~ 30 aU other rolled, forged or cxtrudN" "'8bapea ,.' 'tila <:.beiI:it I leviable r dDf stcoI 
and 1CCti0Dl, DOt otherwise Ipccificd. inaots. 
.' (3) PIatca and ahects (includiDi uni:oatcd platcl Three hundred rupcca per 
. , ... aad __ ia&eaded for tinning and fOI'llll.luch . . .. 1IIeU'ie ~e plus the cx.cisc 
u ridaes, dwmcls, rain water pipes and their duty for the time beiDa kviablc 3S 
... ~ JlllldeJrom plate"wlbeeta.but not '~I. iqoll. 
1ncluai~_IQW __ Ul·n., platcl and sheets after tiDDiDt). and 
hoopa, aU IOrta, other than skdp and atrips. 
.. \ 
Pifteen percent. ad valorlrft ~ s 
the CXQiac. duty for the t1me 
. . be~ 'levilble on pig iron r 4S 
... ted ........ the e m~y 
be • 
. ' (6) All other steel c:utinp, DOt otherwise apeci6cd Five per ~ ad v'" s:: 
the CXCI8C c1uty for the 
. /. ·betDli~ OD ateel iJl&OCI. 50 

Item No. 
(I) 
VI.23. 
5 
10 
VI.24· 
IS 
20 
25 
8'T 
Description of goods Rate of duty 
------------------------------------------
ZINC-
(1) Unwrouaht, including iDIots, cakes, ban, PiTe hUDdrcd rupees per metric 
bloclcs, hard or soft slabs, billets, platcs, catha. tonne. 
des, anodes, pellets, spelter, dross, ashes and 
broken zinc. 
(z) Manufacturea, the following, namely, plates, Eight hundred rupees per metri 
lbeets, cirdes, strips and foila in any fonn or tonne. 
size. 
(3) Pipes and tubes 
ALUMINIUM-
Ten per cent. ad valDrlm. 
(1) In any crude form includina in(lOtl, ban, Nine hundred and fifty rupees 
blocks" slabs, billets, shots and pellets. per metric tollDe. 
(2) Wire bars, wire rods and caatinp, not other- Nine hundred and fifty rupees 
wise specified. per metric tonDe. 
(3) Manufactures, the following, namely, plates, One thousand four hundred and 
sheets, circles and strips in any form or size, fifty rupees per metric: tonne. 
not otherwise specified. 
(4) Foil., that is a product of thickneas (excluding Two thousand rupees per metric 
any baclttng) not exceedtng o' IS nullimetres. tonne. 
(5) Pipes and tubes, other than c)..'truded pipes Twenty per cent. ad "..". 
and tube •. 
(6) Extruded shapes and sections including ex- Twenty per cent. ad valor.",. 
truded pipes and tubes. 
VI.:I.5. LEAD unwrought, including ingots, pigs, bloclcs, Five hundred rupees per metric 
VI.z6. 
30 
VII. I. 
35 
anodes, slabs, cakes, and cast sticks. tonne. 
TIN PLATE AND TINNED SHEETS IN- Three hundred and HVeIlty-five 
CLUDING TIN TAGGERS, AND CUT- rupees per metric tOODe. 
TINGS OF SUCH PLATES, SHEETS OR 
TAGOBRS. 
VII. MACHINERY AND TRANSPORT EQUIPMENT 
INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINES, AU. 
SORTS, NAMELY:-
(I) Those designed for use as a prime mover Ten per cent. ad fJalt1f'"". 
for transpon vehlclcs and have been liven 
for that purpose some special shape, 
Si7.e or quality which would not be 
essential for their usc for any other 
purpose. 
(2) Others Five per c:ent. ad valor"". 
VII. oZ. REFRIGERATING AND AIR-CONDITION-
ING APPLIANCES AND MAClUNERY, 
ALL SORTS, AND PARTS THEREOF-
45 
so 
(I) Refr!Jerators and other refrigeratina Thitty per cent. ad fJa!or,,,,. 
appliances, which are ozdiDarily told or 
o1fercd for u1e u re.dy asscmbfcd llllita • 
• uch as ice malreI:I, bottle coolen, diJplay 
cabinetl and water .coolen. 
(2) Air-conditiOJ!lCn :md other air-condition- Thiny per cent. ad fIalqr,m. 
in. appliances, wb.ich are otdinanIy , 
sold or oft'ered Cor. II reedy aaem-
bled unita, including pacltqe type air-
conditioners and evaporative type of 
coOlers. 
-------

68 
Item No. Description of ,oods Rate of duty 
(I) 
VII.). 
VII. 4. 
VII.s. 
VII.6. 
YI1.7 
(3) Parts of refr*ratina and air-condition- Forty per cent. ad valorem. 
in, appliances and machinery, aU lorta. 
ELECTRIC MOTORS, ALL SORTS AND 
PARTS THEREOF, NAMELY:-
(I) those desi,ned for usc in circuits of less 
than 10 amperes and at a preesurc not 
exceed in, 250 volts. 
(2) those designed for use in circuits at a pres-
sure exceeding 400 volts, and 
Fifteen per cent. ad. ~alorem. 
(J) with a rated capacity not exceedin, 10 Ten per cent. ad valor"". 
H.P. 
(;,) exceeding 10 H.P . Five per cent. ad ~,,,.. 
s 
.. 
(3) all others Fifteen per cent. ad valmwn. IS 
(4) parts of electric motors Fifteen per cent. ad valor,m. 
&planaticm.- This item does not include 
moton specially designed for use in 
gramophone ur record playen and all 
pam of such motors. 20 
POWER DRIVEN PUMPS (INCLUDING Twenty per cent. ad valor,m. 
MOTOR PUMPS, TURBO PUMPS AND 
MONOBLOC PUMP SETS) FOR LIQUIDS, 
WHETHER OR NOT FITTED WITH 
MEASURING DEVICES. 
ELECTRIC BATTERIES AND PARTS THERE-
OF-
(I) Dry . 
(2) Storaae 
Fifteer per cent. ad valor,m. 
Fifteen per cent. ad valor,m. 
(3) Parts of storace batteries, the following, Seventeen and a half per ceDt. 30 
namely, containna, coven and plates. ad flalorem. 
ELBCTRIC LIGHTING BULBS AND 
FLUORESCENT LIGHTING TUBBS-
(I) Vacuum and gas-filled bulb. 
(2) Fluorescent tubes 
(3) Sodium and mercury vapour discharae 
lamps. 
(4) All sorts. not otherwise specified. 
ELECTRIC FANS, including air circulators 
but excIudin, those which are designed for use 
in an indultnal system as parts indispensable 
for its operation and have beeD liven for 
that purpose some special shape or quality 
which would not be ClIsential for their use for 
any other purpose-
(I) Table, cabin, carriage, pedestal and 
air circulator fans, not exceeding 40.6 
cnntimetres. 
(2) All other fanl '. 
Eleven per cent. ad fJa1ornn. 
Twenty-two per cent. ad VQIorIfII. 3S 
Six per cent. ad valorem. 
Sixteen per cent. ad Wllor"". 
Six per cent. ad valor"". 
Eilht and I half per cen'. 
ad lJakrmt. 
4S 
so 

89 
'-----.-----------------------------------------------------
ltanNo. 
(1) 
VII.S. 
S 
VII.9· 
10 
VII.lo. 
IS 
20 
25 
30 
VII.II. 
35 
40 
45 
VII.Il. 
so 
5S 
60 
Description of goods Rate of duty 
(2) (3) 
WIRELESS RECEIVING SETS, ALL SORTS, Tv.enty per cent. ad fJa/qrem. 
INCLUDING TRANSISTOR SETS AND 
RADIOGRAMS, WITH OR WITHOUT 
LOUDSPEAKER. 
PARTS OF WIRELESS RECEIVING SETS Five rupees each. 
(INCLUDING PARTS OF TRANSISTOR 
SETS AND RADIOGRAMS), NAMELY, 
ELECTRONIC VALVES AND TUBES, 
TRANSISTORS AND SEMICONDUCTOR 
DIODES. 
ELECTRIC WIRES AND CABLES, ALL 
SORTS, NOT OTHERWISE SPECIFIED-
(1) Insulated wires and cables of copper, 
alwniniwn or other metals and alloys, 
whether sheathed or unsheathed, the 
conductor of any core of which, not 
being one specially designed as a pilot 
core, has a sectional area not exceeding 
I' S square millimetres in the case of 
copper, or not exceeding 2' S square 
milhmetres in the case of alwniniwn 
or of not more than equivalent con-
ductivity as of copper In the case of 
other metals and alloys. 
(2) All others 
&planation.-The expression "Electric 
wires and cables, all sorts" used in this 
Item shall not include square or rect-
angular conductors, whether insulated 
or not. 
Fifteen per cent. ad tolcr,,,,. 
Five per cent. ad fJGlCWffll. 
DOMESTIC ELECTRICAL APPLIANCES, Ten per cent. ad va/cm'l. 
NOT OTHERWISE SPECIFIED. 
Explanation [.-"Domestic electrical ap-
pliances" means electrical appliances 
normally used in the household and 
similar appliances used in hotels, rest-
aurants, hostels, offices, educational 
institutions, hospitals, train kitchens, 
aircraft or ships, pantries, canteens, 
tailoring establishments, laundry 
SQoPS and hair dressing saloons. 
Explanation I/.-Interchangeable parts 
or auxiliary devices accompanying an 
appliance to make it suitable for 
various purposes shall be assessed to 
duty along with the appliance. 
MOTOR VEHICLES-
.. Motor vehicles" means all meehanicUy 
propelled vehicles adapted for uae 
upon roads, and includes a chassis and 
a trailer; but doe. not include 8 
vehicle running upon fixed rails. 
1) Auto-cycles, motor cycles, scooten, One hundred and se\·enty.fivc 
auto-rickshaws and any other tbree- ru~ees each or se\"CII and I 
wheeled motor vehicles. half per cent. ad fia/or"", 
whichever is hilher. 
(2) Motor vehicles of not more than 16 
H.P. by Royal Automobile Club 
(R.A.C.) rating. 
One thousand rupees each or 
ten per cent. IJIl tl4dor"", 
whichever is biiber. 

'10 
Item No. Description of ,oods Rate of duty 
(2) 
(3) Motor CUI of more than 16 H.P. Three thOUlland rupees eKh ar 
by Royal Automobile Club (a.A.C.) fifteen per alDt. ad vIIlormr. 
rating, construCted or adapted to whichever i, bither. 5 
carry not more than nine penon,. 
(4) Tractors, including arricu1tural Ten per cent. ad ' • .'a/vretll. 
tractors. 
(5) Motor vehiciell, not otherwisespcdfied. Two thousand five hundred 
rupees each or twelve and [0 
• half per cent. ad tJlJlor'm~ 
whichever i. biaher. • 
V)) .13. 
E-tplal%auon.-Por the purposes of this 
Item, where a motor Vehicle is mounted, 
fitted or fixed with any weight liftins, 
earth moving and ,iDillar lpec:illieed 
material handlinl equipment, then 
web equipment, other than the 
chassis, shall not be taken into account. 
L'YCLES, PARTS OF CYCLEs OTIIER 
THAN MOTOR CYCLES, NAMBLY-
(I) free wheels. Two rupees each. 
(2) rims Four rupeea each. 
vm. MISCELLANEOUS MANUFAC11JRIID ARTICLES 
VIlI.I. FOOTWEAR AND PARTS nmREOF in 
or in relation to the manufacture of which 
any process is ordinarily carried on with the 
aid of power-
(I) Footwear Ten per cent. wi val", ••. 
(2) Parts offo()twcar 
l!Jtplanaucm.- "Footwear" ind.\ldea aU 
varieties of footwear. whether known 
as boots, shoes, sandals, c:harrals, 
or by any other name. 
"m.2. CINEMATOGRAPH FILMS-
(I) Unexposed 
(a) Bxposed-
(.) Newt-reds aDd aborts nOl eJlCftdiDg 
,oometrn-
(d) of a width of )0 nilllimetres or hiaher. 
(II) below 30 mmlmetrea in width • 
(ii) 'atare 61ms, 1Idftr'dlement ihonll, 
and films not othenriae sped6ed-
(II) of a WIdth of 30 mlJllmetrea 
or hilber. 
(6) below 30 millimetr.. in width. 
---- ------. ----_._---- ._-... __ .... _. 
Fifteen per cent. ad valorem. 
Two paise per metre. 
Fifty paise per metre. 
Thirty paise per metre. 
IS 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
4S 

5 
10 
15 
30 
35 
45 
50 
55 
Item No. 
(I) 
vm.3· 
Dcacription of goods 
(~ 
GRAMOPHONES, INCLUDING RECORD 
PLA YBRS, RECORD PLAYING DECKS 
AND RECORD CHANGBR 
DBCKS, WHETIlER MECHANICAL-
LY OR ELBCTRICALLY DRIVBN, 
WInI OR WITHOUT AN IN-BUILT 
SYSTEM OF SOUND REPRODUCTION 
OR AMPLIFICATION (ACOUSTIC, 
BLECTRONIC OR TRANSISTORISBD). 
AND PARTS ANDACCBSSORIES TIlERE-
OF NOT ELSEWHERE SPECIFIED, AND 
GRAMOPHONE RECORDS, ALL SORTS-
Rate of duty 
(I) Gramophones. record players. record Twenty per cent. ad vakwelll. 
playing decks or record ehanlft' decks. 
(2.) Parts and accessories of Il'amophones. ThiTI y per cent. ad valor",!. 
record players, record playing decks 
or record chanaer decks. 
(3) Gramophone records, all sorts, other Fifteen per ~'Cnt. tJd f,tIlor"IJ. 
than matrices. 
(.1) Matrices flIT records, impressed. Thin), per~nt. ad fJal.wmJ. 
(s) Gramophone needles or styli-
(I) "boDy made of steel 
(i.) othen. Twenty-five rercent. ad tJakw.,'I. 
MATCHES-
"Match" includes a firework in the form of II Sixl)'-fivc PWbC frr C"CIY 1000 
match; and, where a match-stick baR more matchcto ,'r frIK.1ion thertof. 
heads than one capable of being ignited h~' 
striking, each fluch head shall be deemed to bt 
a match. 
VIII. 5. MECHANICAL LlGHi'ERS-
vm.6. 
VIII.,. 
VlJU. 
VIIJ.9· 
"Mechanical lighter" menns any mcchnnkal Thnc rupee~ per Iight"l. 
or chemical contrivance for causing ignition 
which is portable and which operates by pro-
ducing a spark or ft8me whether by itsc:1f or 
when brought into contact with ps, and includes 
a mechanical Iishter i •• ued from a factory 
in an incomplete state or requiring for it5 
completion the addidon of a flint. 
STBBL FURNITURE MADE PARTI..V OR Twcnt~ perrellI. ad t'akw(1l1. 
WHOLLY. OF STBBL IN OR IN JU!LA. 
nON TO nm MANUFACIURB OF 
WHICH ANY PROCESS IS ORDINARI-
LY CARRIBD ON 'WITH nIB AID OF 
POWBR, WHBnIBR IN ASSEMBLED 
OR UNASSBMBLED CONDmON. 
CROWN CORKS WITH OR WITHOUT 
WASHERS OR OTHER FITIINGS OF 
OORK,RUBBER,POLYBTHYLBNEOR 
ANYO'IlIBR MATERIAL. 
P!LI'BR PRooP CAPS FOR PACKAGlN~ 
ALL . soaTS. WJ11I OR. WJ11IO 
WASHBBS OR onmR FITTINGS OF 
COIUt, RUBBBR\~LY!'I'Im.J!NE OR ANY011iER ~ JAl-
WOOL TOPS 
One pai .. each. 
One peillC!lCh. 
Fift nlfCH per kilellam. 

Levy and 
collection 
of duty 
on salt. 
Manufac-
ture of 
salt and 
salt-petre 
to be 
1mbject to 
licence. 
72 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 135) 
AMENDMENTS TO THE CENTRAL EXCISES AND SALT .ACT, 1944 (1 OF 1944) 
Long titZe.-Omit "to Central duties of excise and". 
Preamble.-Omit "to Central 'duties of excise on goods manufactured 
or produced in certain parts of India and". 
Section I.-In sub-section (1), omit "Central Excises and". 
Section 2.-(i) Omit clauses (a), (c), (d), (e) and (k); 
(ii) for clause (f), substitute-
'<f) "manufacture" includes the collection, removal, pre-
paration, steeping, evaporation, boiling or anyone or more of 
these processes,' the separation or purification of salt obtained in 
the manufacture of saltpetre, the separation of salt from earth or 
other substance sa as to produce alimentary salt, and the exca-
vation or removal of natural saline deposits or efflorescence; antl 
the word "manufacturer" shall be construed accordingly and 
shall include not only a person who employs hired labour in the 
producti<m or manufacture of salt but also any person who en-
gages in its production or manufacture on his own account if 
the salt is intended for sale;'; 
(ii\) for clause (h), substitute-
'(h) "salt" includes swamp salt, spontaneous salt, and salt 
or saline solutions made or produced from any' saline substance 
or from salt earth;'; 
(iv) in clause (j), for "Central Government", substitute "Gov-
ernment". 
Section 3.-For section 3, substitute-
"3. There shall be levied and collected in such manner as may 
be prescribed a duty on salt manufactured in any part of India at 
s 
10 
IS 
20 
25 
the rate fixed annually by a Central Act.". 30 
Omit section 4. 
Section 6.-For section 6, substitute-
"6. The Central Government may, by notification in the OfBcial 
Gazette, provide that, from such date as may be specified in the notI-
fication, no person shall, except under the authority and in accora- 3S 
ance with the terms and conditions of a licence granted under thlS 
Act, engage in the manufacture or any process of the manufacture 
of salt or salt-petre.". 

73 
Omit section 8. 
Section 9.-In clause (a), omit "or of section 8, or of a rule matte 
under clause (iii) of sub-section (2) of section 37". 
Section 10.-(i) for "any goods" substitute "salt"; 
S (ii) for "such goods are", substitute "such salt is"; and 
(iii) for "the goods", wherever occurring, substitute "the salt". 
Section H.-For "excisable goods", substitute "salt". 
Section 12.-Far section 12, substitute-
"12. The Central Government may, by notification in thE: ()ftlcial Applica-
10 Gazette, declare that any of the provisions of the Central Excises tion of the 
Act, 1969, relating to the levy of and exemption fl'O'm excise duties, provisions 
rebate of duty, warehousing, offences and penalties, confiscation, and cOf thte . ~~ 
procedure relatmg to offences and appeals shall, with such modift- Excises 
cations and alterations as it may consider necessary or desirable to Act, 1969, 
IS adapt them to the circumstances, be applicable in regard to like to salt. 
matters in respect of the duty imposed by section 3 on salt.". 
Section I6.-For "excisable goods are", substitute "salt is"; and in the 
marginal heading, for "excisable goods", substitute "salt". 
Omit Chapter IV. 
20 Chapter V.-In the heading, omit "RELATING TO SALT". 
25 
Section 37.-(1) In sub-section (2)-
(a) in clause (i), for "duties of excise", substitute "duty on salt"; 
and for "the duties", substitute "the \:luty"; 
(b) for clause (ii), substitute-
"(ii) prohibit absolutely, or with such exceptions or sub-
ject to such conditions as the Central Government thinks fit, the 
manufacture, or any process of the manufacture of salt, except 
on land or premises approved for the purpose;"; 
(c) omit clause (iii); 
30 (d) in clause (iv), for "excisable goods from the place where 
produced, stored or manufactured or subjected to any process of pro-
duction or manufacture 8l1d their transport", substitute "salt from 
the place where manufactured or stored or subjected to any process 
of manufacture and its transport"; 
3S (e) for clause (v), substitute-
"(v) regulate the manufacture ar any process of 
facture, the possession, storage and sale of salt;"; 
menu-
(f) in clause (viii), for "goods", wherever occurring, substitute 
'"salt"; 
(g) omit clause (ix); 

,.. 
~ 74 
(h) for clause (x), substitute-
"(x) impose on persons engaged in the manufacture, storage 
or sale of salt, the duty of furn~shing information, keeping re-
cords and making returns, and prescribe the nature of such in-
formation and the fonn of such recortis and re~, the' parti_ 5 
culars to be contained therein, and the manner in which they 
shall be verified;"; 
(i) omit clause (xi); 
(j) in clause (xii), omit the proviso; 
(k) in clause (.xiii), omit "or section 28"; 
(l) for clause (.xiv), substitute-
"(:riv) authorise and regulate the iD8pection of salt facto-
ries and provide for the taking of samples, and for the making 
of tests, of any substance produced therein, and for the inspection 
10 
or search of any place or conveyance used for the manufacture, 15 
storage, sale or transport of sal~;"; 
(m) in clause (xvi), fot' "goods which are", substitute "salt 
which is"; 
('tt) in clause (xvii), for "any gomis", substitute "salt". 
(2) In sub-section (3), for "any article", substitute ·'salt". 
(3) Omit sub-section (4). 
Omit the First Schedu.le and the Second Schedule. 
20 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 was enacted twenty-five year. 
a80· It was a war-time measure enacted to regulate excise duty on a 
few commodities and is a concise Act which leaves almost everything to 
the ruIea to be made thereunder. The Act provides that the provi-
siol18 relating to levy, collection, etc., of customs duty under the Customs 
law may be adapted for the levy, collection, etc., of excise duties. Although 
from 1947, there is no duty on salt, the manufacture, supply and distri-
bution of this commodity are being regulated under the provisions of the 
aforesaid Act. j 
2. Now that excise duty is being levied on a large number of commo-
dities, the provisions of the Central EXCises and Salt Act, 1944 have be-
come inadequate. The Central Excise Reorganisation Committee also 
have recommended that the law should be made comprehensive by in-
cluding in it all substantive provisiGns which \1t present form part of 
the Central Excise Rules, 1944, (Jr: are in the form of adaptations from 
the Customs law. The Committee have further recommended that the 
proposerd law should not contain any provision relating to salt. 
3. Government, therefore, consider it necessary to consolidate and 
amend the existing law relating to Central duties of excise . 
•. The provisions of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 are being 
suitably amended, as in the Second Schedule of the Bill, so as to confine 
the provisiOns thereof to salt alone. 
5. Chapter IV of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 which deals 
with restrictions on transport of excisable goods by sea, applies at pre-
sent to tobacco only. Government consiti{'r that the provisions of this 
Chapter, being of little practical importance, need not be retained. Gov-
ernment further consider that section 8 and the SeC<1Ild Schedule of the 
Act which impose restrictions only on possession of tobacco, need not 
also be retained for the aforesaid reason. 
e. The First Schedule of the Bill provides far the description of ex-
mabIe goods and the rates of duty leviable thereon. This Schedule 
clOiely follows the existing First Schedule of the Central Excises and 
Salt Act, 1944 except that-
(i) the item relating to salt has been omitted; 
(ii) all other items have been re-numbered; and 
(iii) in item 1.5 relating to tea, as so re-numbered, a proviso sub-
stantially reproducing the provisions of rule 96F of the Central Ex-
cise Rules, 1944, has been added to the effect that different rates of 
duty may be ftxt*! by the Central Government for different areas 
having regard to the sale price of tea in internal and external mar-
kets and other relevant considerations. 
7. The present Bill leeks to achieve the above objects. 
75 
1188 (B) LS-11. 

8. The notes on clauses explain the more important provisions of the 
Bill. 
NEW DELHI; P. C. SETHI. 
The 19th Ju.ly. 1969. 
RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 274 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F. 11/1/69-CERC, dated the 19th Jul,.,1969 from 
Shri Prakashchand B. Sethi, Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance 
to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The Vice-President acting as President having been· infonTK!d c. of the 
subject matter of the Central Excises Bill, 1969, recommends· under 
article 117(1) and (8) read with article 274(1) of the Constitution of 
India, the introdudion in, and the consideration by, the !.ok 8abha of 
the said Bill. I 

Notes on clauses 
(In these Notes, the expression "CERC report" means the report of 
the Central Excise Reorganisation Committee and the expression "the 
existing Act" means the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944.) 
Chapter 1 
Clause 2 is the definition clause. It follows generally the definitions 
which form part of the existing Act or the Central Excise Rules, 1944, or 
which have been adapted from the Customs Act, 1962 or which are of 8 
formal nature to make the proposed provisions intelligible. The \:!efini-
tion of "factory" in sub-clause (15) has, however, been modified to make 
it explicit that it includes place or places wherein excisable goods, on 
manufacture, may be deposited without payment of duty pending their 
remov~l out of the factory. " 
Chapter II corresponds to Chapter II of the Customs Act, 1962. Clauses 
3 to 6 provide for classes of officers of Central Excise, their aWOintment, 
their powers and entrustment of their functic 1S to certain other officers. 
Chapte1' III 
Clause 7.-1t replaces section 3 of the existing Act. References to salt 
have been omitted. It has been made explicit that the levy and collection 
of the duties will be subject to the other provisions contained in the Bill. 
The provision~ relating to tariff values in section 3 of the existing Act 
have been put in clause 11 of the Bill. 
Clause 8 is new and it provides for the basis for charging duty on ex-
cisable goods falling under more than one item <1r more than one sub-
item of the same item of the First Schedule. 
Clause 9 is new and it provides for assessment of duty on excisable 
goods produce'd or manufactured in the course of or ancillary to any pl'O'-
cess of production or manufacture at the specified stage of such process 
aftd on specified excisable goods only. 
CZquse 10.-It seeks to substitute the existing basis of ,'aluation, 
namely, wholerole cash price of an article of like kind and quality, by 
that, of,.the "normal price" that is to say, the price which it would fetch 
on a .Sale in the open market betwe.en the buyer and the seller independ-
,..eAt .. ofeech other. Also, the proviSions in the clause an\:! those proposed 
in clause 11 in relation to' tariff values have been made mutually exclu-
sive. (Compare CERC report, ChRpter In, paragraphs 23 to 29, pages 43 
to .44 . an,d Chapter II, paragraph 25, page 39). 
'. Clause n.-It reproduces the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) 
~f section 3 of the existing Act with the further stipulation that tariff 
wIues will be fixed having regard to trend of market price. 
ClatLScp 12 is new and it seeks to provide for inclusion or exclusion of 
~'Iue or"'\~ht of wrapper, etc., in which the excisable goods may be 
wrapped or contained, for assessment of duty . 
." 

78 
Clause 13 is new and it provides for assessment of duty on excisable 
parts, ingredients or components of a manufactured or composite article. 
(Compare CERC report, Chapter II, paragraph 26, page 32). 
Ctau.'1e 14.-1n addition to incorporating the provisions of rule 7 of the 
Central Excise Rules, 1944, power has been taken to prescribe by rules 
allowance for charges in bulk of, or for evaporation 108s in, excisable 
goods for determining the liability of a person for payment of duty on 
such goods produced, cured or manufactured or deposited by him. 
Cla'USe 15 seeks to inCOTporate the provisions of rule 9A of the Cen-
tral Excise Rules, 1944, relating to the date for determination of rate of 
duty or tariff valuation in respect of excisable goods removed on pay-
ment of duty from a factory or warehouse or curers' premises. The 
date for determination of such rate or tariff valuation in other cases will 
be regulated by rules. 
Cla'USe 16 provides for self-assessment and self-rem owl procedure in-
troduced in 1968 for certain excisable goods as the normal pattern of 
excise control. 
Cla'USe 17 empowers the Central Government to require removal of 
certain excisable goods to be specified on physical verification by the 
proper officer. 
Cla'USe 18 seeks to enable excisable goods, on production or manufac-
ture, to be deposited without payment of duty in a warehouse or in any 
other place of storage approved by the Collector of Central Excise, pend-
ing their removal on payment of duty. 
Cla'USe 19 is new and it provides for the manner in which duty may be 
assessed and collected on excisable goods, e.g., U. Foam, air-conditioning 
machinery, etc., manufactured at the place of the consumer. 
Clame 20 deals with r.estrictions on removal of excisable goods. Sub-
clauses (1) and (2) correspond respectively to the provisions of sub-rule 
(2) and sub-rule (1) of rule 224 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944. Sub-
clause (1) further makes it explicit that where excisable goods are re-
moved after 5 p.m. on the Budget day, they will be charged at the en-
hanced rate, if any, under the Budget proposals. The provisions relating 
to restrictions on removal, beyond the hours fixed by the Collector of 
Central Excise and on Sundays and public holidays, in sub-clause (2) 
will, over and above the restrictions contained in sub-clause (1), applY 
to those excisable goods to which the proviSions of clause 17 apply. 
Clause 21 provides for removal of excisable goods without payment of 
the whole or part of duty (a) for specified industrial processes (compare 
rules 192 to 196. Central Excise Rules, 1944) and (b) on deferment of 
payment of the whole or part of the duty assessed. [Compare rule 49 (3) , 
Central Excise Rules, ~944J. 
Clause 22 incorporates the provisions of ru!e 9B of the C.ntNI Emil! 
Rules, 1944, relating to provtsional assessment of duty. The clause fie 
modelled closely on the lines of the corresponding provisions of section 
18 of the Customs Act, 1962. . \, -

Clause 23.-It provides for schemes commonly referred to as the Com. 
pounded Levy Schemes, that is to say, schemes Whereby manufacturers on 
payment of fixed sums related to average production for specified periods 
are relieved of most excise formalities. At present such schemes apply 
to manufacturers of excisable goods such as Khandsari Sugar (vide rules 
92A to 92F, Central Excise Rules, 1944); fabrics on powerlooms (vide 
rules 961 to 96MMMMM, ibid.); cotton and Woollen yam (cf. rules 96V 
to 96X, ibid.); Electric Battery parts (vide rules 96Y to 96ZZZZ). 
Clause 24.-It substantially incorporates the provisions of rule 56A of 
the Central Excise Rules, 1944, whereunder credit of excise duty or, as 
the case may be, of the additional duty of customs, paid on materials, 
component parts, etc., to be specified, is allowed to the manufacturers 
to be set off against the duty that may become due on the finished excis-
able goods at the time of removal from the factory, etc. The Object is 
to lighten the burden of cumulative eXCise duties or additional duty of 
customs without the formalities of inbond movement or manufacture, in 
cases where it is considered expedient so to do. 
Clause 25 is new and it is designed to facilitate removal of samples of 
excisable goods by manufacturers, etc., for trade, business, exhibition or 
test. 
Clause 26.-It provides for duty to be assessed by the proper officer 
according to the best of his judgment in certain cases, e.g., where tobac-
co or coffee is produced without requisite declaration or any excisable 
goods are cured, manufactured or disposed of in contravention of the 
provisions in the Bill or are not accounted for in accordance with such 
provIsions. Somewhat similar provisions at present exist in rule 37A 
and rule 173K of the Central Excise Rules, 1944. 
Clause 27 is new and it provides, subject to certain safeguards, for re-
lief of duty in respect of excisable goods which are ordinarily used for 
more than one purpose and the rate of duty varies with such purpose. 
The clause is modelled closely on the provisions of section 24 of the 
Customs Act, 1962. 
Clause 28 is new and it provides at one place for powers, which are 
at present scattered over the Central Excise Rules, 1944, for requiring 
growers, curers, manufacturers, owners of war~houses and other licensees 
to maintain such accounts and submit such returns as may be prescribed 
by regulations. Accounts or returns of raw materials, comp(ment parts 
or ingredientS will be required only in rspect of such excis9ble ~:J;}ds as 
may be speclfted by notification. 
Chapter IV 
Clause 29.-Sub-clauses (1) and (2) correspond respectively to sub-
rules (1) and (2) of rule 8 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944, deaUng with 
powers to exempt from duty. It has been made explicit that dUty ex-
emptions will be in public interest. Sub-clauses (3), (4) and (5) are 
new; sub-clause (3) relates to the power to grant relief from duty on 
excisable ftnished products in the manufacture of which pre-e:x:cise stock!l 
of excisable goods have been used and the duty, though prescribed for 
excisabl.e goods at the raw-material stage as well as at the finished pro-

~o 
·duat stage, is in.teDded to be levied at one stage onlYi sub-claUH (4) pro-
vides for giviAg retrospective effect to any duty exemption which w.i1l 
be given in lucha manner that there is no windfall gain to the manu-
facturers who may have passed on the duty burden to the purchasersi 
and sub"'ClaW1e (5) provides for the continuance of certain notifications 
and orden relating to exemption from duty. 
Clame 30 provides for remission of duty on excisable goods which 
have become unfit for consumption or marketing or have peen lost (jJ: 
destroyed owing to natural or accidental cause or due to any other 
cause considered unavoidable in a process of manufacture .. Provisions 
for this purpose at present exist in rules 27 (4), 49 (2), 147 ami' 149 of the 
Centl'31 Excise Rules, 1944. 
Clause 31 provides for return of excisable goods to the factory of 
manufacture or to such other place as mny be specified by notification 
for the .purpose of reconditioning, re-manufacture Or removal of defects 
and, if such goods are for any reason unflt for consumption or marketing, 
for destruction. In respect of the goods so returned, the duty already 
pail;! will be rebated to such extent and subject to such conditions as may 
be prescribed. Similar provisionsexm: at present in rules 86, 97, 97A and 
100 of the Central Excise Rules, '1944. 
Cl.ame 32.-1t is based on rule 12 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944. 
A!J recommended byCERC in Chapter VII, paragraph 18, page 84 of their 
report, the grant of rebate of the duty paid on the excisable goods ex-
ported out of the country has been made mandatory subject to the pro-
hibitionsandrestrictions under clause 35 and to furnishing proof of export 
under clause 36. 
Clause 33 incorporates the provisions at present contained in rules 13 
and ]4 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944, relating to export of excisable 
goodsfn bond without payment of duty. 
Cl4use.34.-Provilions for grant of rebate of duty on excisable mate-
daIs used in ··mamlfacture of goods which. .ar~~ exported are contJIined in 
rule 12A of the Central Excise Rules, 1944. To facilliate appJication of 
common procedures far grant of rebates of excise duties and of tiraw-
backs of etJstoms duties, the c1a\Ule has been drafted closely on the lines 
of section·!75· of the Customs Act, 1962. 
Clause 35 is new and it provides for the refusal of rebate of excise 
au ty in. c~tain cases. 
Clause 36 is new and it incorporates the provisions of rule 12 of the 
Central Excise Rules, 1944, for disallOWing rebate far failure of the ex-
porter to export or furnish proof of export within the prescribed time-
limit. 
Chapter V 
ClcJme37.-The requirement of prior declaration for gfowing of to-
bacco orcoilee, which was hitherto r.e.gulated by rule 15.of the Central 
Extise RtHes,1044, is .praposed. to be. incorporated .. in the Act itself. 

81 
Claus!! 88 ...... 1t mOle or less corresponds to section & et the ..... tibg 
Act. 
Clause 39.-It incorporates the provisions of section 7 of the existing 
Act and also seeks to remove certain lacunae. 
Clause 40.-It incorporates the proviSions of rule 181 of the Central 
Excise Rules, 1944. It has been made obligatory that the person whose 
licence is to be cancelled shoul'cl be ¢ven reesonable opportunity to show 
c~use why the licence should not be cancelled. Provision has also been 
made for a time-limit of two months (with power to extend it. by a fUl:'-
ther period of one month) for which a licence may be suspended. 
<.:lause 41 is new and it authorises the Board to exempt any cJass of 
eKcisable goods or class of persons from the licensing provisions. Such 
exemptions, at present, are regulated by executive instructions. 
Chapter VI 
New; warehousing provisions contained in Chapter VII of the Central 
Excise Rules, 1944, are partly rules framed under section 37 (2) (mit) 
of the existing Act and partly adaptations from the repealed Sea Cus-
toms Act, 1878. These were designed for application to W1I!lanufactured 
products such as tobacco and coffee. Extension of excise coverage to 
petroleum products later necessitated grant of warehousing facilities for 
these products. The provisions now proposed are more broad-based for 
application both to manufactured and unmanufactured products, and 
have been modelled on the parallel provisions in the Customs Act, 1962. 
Clauses 42 to 61 of this Chapter are explained below. 
Clause 42.-This clause provides that no excisable goods shall be 
deposited in a warehouse or, where such goods have been so deposited, 
be removed therefrom for home consumption or for export or to another 
warehouse or be otherwise dealt with except as provided by or under 
tbe Act. The clause i8 on the lines of section 71 of the- Customs Act, 
1962 and rule 144 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944. 
Clause 43.-It continues the existing provisions in rule - 1st of- ·the 
Central Excise Rules, 1944, whereby only such excisable goods, as, are 
specified in a notification, can be warehoused or removed. from one wm:e-
house to another. 
Clause 44, 45 and 46 deal with the grant and renewal of warehOUSe:! 
licences. Both public and private warehouses will be licensed hereaftl!r;· 
Clause 47 provides for the execution of bonds bywQl'ehb1i1te 1teensees 
itt r~et of warehoused goodS and is based on rule 140of,the Central 
Excise Rules, 1944. 'lbeform of bonds and the conditiOtlS thereof 
wHl be prescribed by rules. 
Clause 48.-Sub-c1ause (1) of this clause provides for the condi~ons 
Stlbject to whiCh, any exCisable goods may be deposited in a warehouse 
and is based on rule 141 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944-
SUba'Clatl'lte (2) is new and it" pl'dVldes for a time-llmltbeyon~'Wh1cb 
t1te excisable goods shall not be deposited in a warehouse. 

CZ4uae 4Q~Under rule 145 of the Central ExQise RUles, 1944, excisable 
goods are allowed to remain in a warehouse uniformly for a period of 
three years with powers for the Collector of Central Excise to extend 
this period by a further period of two years in the aggregate. Under the 
proposed clause, while a period of three years will continue to be the 
norma~ warehousing period, such period can be extended for good and 
sufficient reason by such authority and by such period as may be pres-
cribed. 
.~ ... 
CZa'd.8e 50 substantially reproduces rule 143 of the Central Excise 
Rules, 1944 relating to' the owner's right to deal with warehoused goods. 
Clause 51 is new and it provides for allowing manufacturing operations 
in relation to WQl'ehuused goods and for the grant of remission of duty 
on refuse or waste, if any, arising out of such operations. (Compare sec-
tion 65, Customs Act, 1962). 
Clauses 52 and 53 are based on the provisions of rules 152, 153, 154, 
156A and 156B of the Central Excise Ru.es, 1944, for regulating removals 
of warehoused goods without payment of duty from one warehouse to 
another. .; .:'1;&i 
CZause 54 is new and it provides that excisable goods initially removed 
for deposit in a warehouse or removed from one warehouse to another, 
may, before deposit or re-warehousing, be cleared for horne consumption 
or export or diverted for deposit in another warehouse. 
Cl.au.Be 55 reproduces the provisions of rule 159 of the Central Excise 
Rules, 1944, enabling re-assessment of warehoused goods in certain cir-
cumstances. 
Clause 56.-This clause provides for-
(a) the responsibility and obligations of warehouse licensee in the 
matter of receipt, storage and custody of warehoused goods, and 
(b) rights of the owner of such goods for compensation for 
damage. 
(Compare rule 148 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944.) 
Clause 57.-It corresponds to rule 160 of the Central Excise Rules, 
1944, which has been recast so as to clearly place the onus on the licensee 
of the warehouse for the deficiency found therein. A time-limit has been 
prescribed for payment of duty demanded in respect of the deficiency, if 
any. 
Clause 58 incorporates the prOvisions of rule 160 of the Central 
Excise RUles, 1944, in so far as they relate to goods improperly removed 
from a warehouse or are not removed from a warehouse within the pres-
cribed warehousing period. Provision has been made for a time-limit 
within which the owner of such goods will have to pay the duty due. 
Clause 59.~This ,:llause provides for cancellation of warehouse licences 
in certain circumstances. '. 
Cl4~e 60 inc9rporates the provisions of rule 140 of the Central 
Excise :auIes, 1944, in so far as they relate to the refusal of abatement 
of duty or allowance on account of deficiency of quantity, strength or 

83 
,J>q 
quality occurring in the goods aft~r cancellation of licence for a ware-
h~us~; of rulE' 145A requirmg the owner to remove the goods warehoused 
eIther for hom~ consumption or for export within a specified period and 
of rule 181 agamst payment of compensation to the licensee fOr rea:>on of 
such cancellation. 
Clause 61 reproduces the provisions of rule 150 of the Central Ex-
cise Rules, 1944, for deposit of excisable goods in a Customs warehouse. 
Chapter VII 
Chapter III of the existing Act, inter alia, deals with the powers of 
Central Excise Officers to arrest and the procedure to be followed there-
for. The powers to search premises or to seize things, etc., are derived 
by way of adaptations from the Customs Act, 1962. Such adaptations in 
practice have proved cumbersome. Clauses 62 to 74 seek to group at 
one place the powers of search, seizure and arrest as follows:-
Clause 62.-1t incorporates the proviSions of rule 197 of the Central 
EXCise Rules, 1944. The Central Excise Officers are also being empowered 
to inspect any account whether prescribed or not. 
Clause 63.-It substantially incorporates the provisions of rule 201 of 
the Central EXCise Rules, 1944, in so far as they relate to search·of pre-
mises. It is modelled generally on the lines of section 105 (1) of the 
Customs Act, 1962. 
Clause 64.-It substantially incorporates the proviSions of rules 200 
and 201 of the Central Excise Rules 1944 relating to stoppage and search 
of conveyance or animal. It is modelled on the lines of section 106 of the 
Customs Act, 1962. 
Clause 65.-It seeks to incorporate the provisions of section 13 (1) of 
the existing Act in relation to powers of arrest. Sub-section (2) of 
section 13 in the existing Act, which confers powers on Central Excise 
Officers to arrest persons who refuse to give their correct name or resi-
dence, has been omitted, being unnecessary. 
Clause 66.-1t incorporates the provisions of section 18 of the existing 
Act in regard to the manner in which searches and arrests are to be made 
with the modification that in relation to searches, report thereof is to be 
made to the Collector of Central Excise instead 01 to the Magistrate as 
in section 105 (2) of the Customs Act, 1962. 
Clauses 67 and 68 seek to incorporate the provisions of sections 19 
and 20 of the existing Act in regard to disposal of persons arrested and 
the' procedure to be followed by the Oftleer-in-charge of police ,station. 
Clause 69.-1t seeks to reproduce the provisions of lIection 21 of the 
existing Act in regard to inquiries made by Central Excise Officers against 
arrested persons. Sub-clause (3) is new and is based on the correspond-
ing provisions of section 16 (3) of the Medicinal and Toilet Preparat1?ns 
(Excise Duties) Act, 1955. It will be' obligatory for the officers actIng 
under clause 67 or 68 to produce the arrested persons before the nearest 
Magi'ltrste within a period of twenty-four hours of arrest excluding the 
time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the court of 
the Magistrate. [Compare also article 22 (2) of the Constitution]. 

Clause 70 corresponds to section 14 of the existing Act and it prevides 
fer the summoning of persons t.o. give evidence, etc., in inquiries under 
the Act. 
Clause 71 is new and it substantially incorporates the proVlslons of 
section 110 of the Customs Act, 1962 hitherto adapted under section 12 of 
the existing Act for application to Central Excise cases in respett of 
seizure of confiscable property including documents. Where, however, 
it is impossible for the Central Excise Officer to take physical possession 
of the goods, conveyance, animal, etc., he may issue notice to the owner, 
etc., not to remove, part with or otherwise deal with the goodS, convey-
ance, animal, etc., except with his previous permission subject, of course, 
to suitable safeguards against possible abuse. 
Clause 72 is new and it requires the officer making a seizure or arrest 
to furnish, on demand, reasons in writing for the seizure or arrest. [Com-
pare CERe report, Chapter II, paragraph 32 (vi), page 34 and article 
22 (1) of the Constitution.] 
Clause 73.-1t 'provides for custody and retention of documents, etc., 
produced in response to summons issued under clause 70 or seized under 
clause 71. [Compare CERC report, Chapter II, paragraph 32 (v), page 34]. 
Ctause 74 provides for sale, during the pendency of any proceeding, 
of confiscable property if such property is of a perishable or hazardous 
nature and where such property is an animal, if the owner thereof fails 
to provide for its upkeep from day to day. The clause makes it explicit 
that such property, if land or building, shall not be 80 sold. 
ptapter VIII 
Clause 75 is new and it groups together various contraventions which 
would render excisable goods liable to confiscation. Further, infringe-
ments of licenSing provisions which at present are actionable in a court 
of law have been brought within the ambit of departmental adjudication. 
[Compare CERC report, Chapter il, paragraph 32 (iii), page 33]. 
Clauae 76.-lt substantially incorporates the provisions of section 37 (4) 
of the existing Act relating to confiscation of land, buUdinas, etc., in 
certain cases. 
Clause 77 is new and it incorporates the provisions of section 118 (con-
fiscation of packages and their contents) and section 119 (confiscation of 
goods used for concealing smuggled goods) of the Customs Act, 1982t 
which are at present applied to Central Excise cases under section 12 
of the existing Act. 
Clause. 78 and 79 are new and they incorporate the corresponding pro-
vilt01ll of section 120 (confiscation of smuggled goods notwith.tandin. 

85 
any change in form, etc.) and section 121 (confiscation of sale proceedt 
of smuggled goods) of the Customs Act, 1962. These provisions are at 
present applied to Central Excise cases under section 12 of the existing 
Act . 
. Clause 80 is new and it incorporates the penal provisions of sub-rule 
(2) of rule 200 of. the Central Excise Rules, 1944, for failure to stop a 
conveyance or ammal when so required by proper oftlcer (compaN 
clause 64) but the penalty proposed has been enhanced. 
Clause 81.-It is new and provides for penalty for certain acts. The 
existing limit of Rs. 2000 is proposed to be enhanced to Rs. 5000 or three 
times the value of goods whichever is greater. [Compare CERC report, 
Chapter II, paragraph 32 (iv), pages 33 to 34]. 
Clause 82 is new and it substantially incorporates the provisions of rule 
151 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944 relating to offences with respect 
to warehousing. 
Clause 8a.-1t is new and provides for penalty for fraudulently obtain-
ing exemptions, etc., of duty. 
Clause 84 provides for penalty for not accounting for excisable goods. 
The provisions of rule 223A of the Central Excise Rules, 1944, have been 
recast on the lines of the corresponding provisions of section 116 of the 
Customs Act, 1962. 
Clause 85.-It incorporates the provisions of section 9 of the existing 
Act relating to failure to furnish the required information or to furnish-
ing of false information and of rule 226 of the Central l!.xcise Rules, 1944, 
in the mAtter of improper maintenance of accounts. The maximum 
penalty proposed i3 Rs. 5000 in either case. 
Clame 86.-1t incorporates substantially the provisions of seCtiOIl 
37 (3) of the existing Act and rule 210 of the Central Ex,cise Rules, 1944 
except thRt the limit on penalty has been enhBl'lced from Rs. 2000 to 
lb. 5000. 
Clause 87.-1t incorporates the provisions of section 33 of the existing 
Act with the modificatioft that in respect of Central Excise Officers other 
than the Collector of Central Excise, the adjudicating powers will be 
specifted by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette. 
Clause 88 is new and it seeks to incorporate the provisions of section 
124 (issull of show-cause notice before conftscation of goods, etc.) of the 
Custom.'1 Act, 1962, which are applied at present to Central Excise cases 
under section 12 of the existing Act. 
Clause 89.-Sub-clause (1) of this clause reproduces section 34 of the 
existing Act. Sub-clause (2) which is based on sub-section (2) of section 
125 of the Customs Act, 1962, is intended to make it explicit that any 
ftne in Ji.E!U of confiscation will be in addition to any duty and charges 
payable in respect of the property involved. 

86 
Clause 90.-It incorporates the provisions of rule 211 of the Central 
EXCISe Rules, 1944 to the effect that property on confiscation is to vest 
in Centra! Government. 
Clause 91.-It incorporates the provisions of rule 212 of the Central 
Excise Rules, 1944, relating to disposal of confiscated property in respect 
of which option to pay fine in lieu of confiscation has not been exercised. 
It also provides that during pendency of an appeal, the appellate 
authority may, after giving the appellant a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard in the matter, direct the officer adjudging such confiscation 
to sell, destroy, etc., such property in such manner as may be specified 
by that authority. 
Clause 92.-It incorporates the provisions of rule 212A of the Central 
Excise Rules, 1944, relating to storage and upkeep charges in respect of 
property confiscated and redeemed. 
Clause 93 is new. As in section 127 of the Customs Act, 1962, the 
award of any confiscation or penalty by a Central Excise Officer will not 
prevent the infliction of any punishment under any other provision of 
the Act or under any other law. 
Chapter lX 
Clause 94.-Sub-clauses (1) and (2) seek to revise sub-section (1) of 
section 35 of the existing Act to the effect that-
(i) appeals against orders passed by Central Excise Officers 
lower in rank than the Collector of Central Excise will lie, as in 
Customs, to separate Appellate Collectors. Appeals against orders 
passed by such Collector will, however, continue to lie to the Cen-
tral Board of Excise and Customs; 
(ii) the appellate authority has been empowered to extend on 
sufticient cause being shown the period within which an appeal may 
be filed; 
(iii) the existing provision that an order in appeal shall not have 
the effect of enhancing any confiscation or penalty is being omitted; 
(iv) before enhancing duty, etc., the appellate .authority mu"t 
give "reasonable opportunity" of being heard to the personconcem. 
ed; and 
(v) prOvision has been made for the appellate authOrity to refer 
thE! Clue back to the adjudicating officer and to give directions for 
ciisposal. 
Sub-clause (3) repeats the provisions in sub-section (2) of !'ection 35 
of the existing Act without any change. The clause, as a whole, has 
been bro~ght in line with the provisions in section 128 of the Customs 
Act, 1962. 
Clause 95.-The clause provides that if a person aggrieved by any 
d"cis;on or order desires to appeal against it, he shall deposit the 
amount of duty, etc., pending such appeal. (Compare section 129, 
Customs Act, 1962.) 
, Cl.ause96 is new and it incorporates the provisions of section 130 of 
the Customs Act. 1962. relatin~ to powers of the Board to review deci-
sions, ~tc. [Compare CERC report, Chapter II, paragraph 32 (vii), page 
341. 

", 
C~U8e97.-Tp.is clause provides for revision by Central Go~e~ninent. 
(Compare section 131 of the Customs Act, 1962). 
Chapter X 
Clause 98 seeks to revise section 9 of the existing Act. It specifies the 
offences for purpOses of prosecution. For offences of serious nature, the 
punishment proposed is imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years or fine or both. For less serious offences, the punishment· pro-
posed is imprisonment for a term which may extend to six monthS or 
fin,e or both. The clause has been drafted on the lines of the corresporid~ 
ing provisions of sections 132, 133 and 135 of the Customs Act, 1962. 
Clauses 99 and 100.-·-These clauses repeat without change the provi-
sion& of section 17 and section 22 of the existing Act relating respectively 
to punishment for connivance at offences and to vexatious search, seizure, 
etc., by Central Excise Officers. 
Clause 'lOl.-1t provides for punishment of Central Excise Omce~s 
who fail to perform their duty. Sub-clause (1) reproduces the provisions 
of section 23 of the existing Act. Sub-clause (2) incorporates the corres-
ponding provisions of sub-section (1) of section 136 of the Customs 
Act, 1962 relating to connivance by Officers of CustO'ms at offences. Sub-
clause (3) reproduces the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 136 of 
the Customs Act, 1962 and of rule 232 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944, 
reklting to unauthorised disclosure o'f information by officers with the 
modification that in certain specified circumstances the Central Excise 
Officers may disclose information learnt in their official capacity. 
Clause 104 is new; it places the onus on the person concerned to 
prove that he possessed the reqUisite licence, authorisation (lr perlnit. 
Clause 105 is new; it seeks to incorporate the provisians 01. section 
139 of the Customs Act, 1962, in respect of presumptions as to documents. 
Cl4U1e 10~I.-It seeks to repro'duce without change the provi~i0f!s of 
section 10 of the existing Act relating to power of courts to order for· 
feiture. 
Clause 107 is new; it requires the courts to inform the gazetted offtcer 
of Central Excise concerned before disposal of any dutiable goods or 
offending goods produced before them in connection with any offence 
under any other law. [Compare CERC report, Chapter II, paragraph 
32 (1), page 33]. 
Chapter XI 
Clause 108 is new and it provides for. claim for refund of duty fees or 
charges. It is modelled on section 27 of the Customs Act, 1962. Compared 
to the existing rule 11 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944, the clause seeks 
to make the following changes:-
(a) .tb~ time-limit wbichbas been enhanced. from three mont~s 
to one year (with further powers to extend it 111 cases of undUe 

88 
hardship) will govern all refunds and not merely refunds of amountl 
paid through inadvertence, error or misconstruction; 
(b) the said time-limit of one year will not apply where the duty 
haa been paid under protest; 
(c) refunds arising out of orders passed in appeal or other pro-
ceeding will be made without claim. 
Clause 109 is new and it seeks to incorporate the provisions of section 
28 of the Customs Act, 1962. AB against the provisions of the existing 
rules 10 and lOA of the Central Excise Rules, 1944 the clause has been so 
worded as to apply also to duties, charges or fees Mt levied. Provision 
has been made for giving to the person concerned an opportunity to show 
cause before requiring him to pay any amount short-levied or not levied. 
The time-limit for issue of the notice has been fixed as one year in ordi-
nery cases and as five years where frau\:i is suspected. 
Clause 110 seeks to revise section 11 of the existing Act to the effect 
that-
(i) any sum in arrear may be recovered by deducting from the 
amount, or by attachment and sale of the goods, which may be in the 
hands of the Central Excise Officer having jurisdiction over the person 
concerned or in the hands of any other Central Excise Officer. Even 
plants, machinery, etc., belonging to the person from whom such sum 
is due may be attached and sold for exacting the dues; 
(ii) if the sum is not so recovered, the Central Excise Officer 
will proceed for its recovery through Tax Recovery Officers who 
may attach and sell the movable or immovable property of the per-
son, or appoint a receiver for the management of the property. 
(Compare section 222 of the Income Tax Act, 1961); 
(iii) as in Custonu;, if the terms of any instrument, e.g., bond 
executed in connection with excise duties so provide, any amount 
due under such instrument may be recovered by deducting from the 
amount in the hands of the Central Excise Oftlcer or by attaehment 
and sale of excisable goods, if any, belonging to such person or 
through Tax Recovery Officers. (Compare section 142, Customs Act, 
1962). 
Clause 1H.-It incorporates SUbstantially the provisions of clause 
(tv) of sub-section (2) of section 37 of the existing Act, relating to trans-
port of excisable goods. 
Clause 112 is new and it provides for powers to define Central Excise 
Area for facilitating manufacture of specified excisable goods and for that 
purpose to regulate possession, storage, sale or transport of excisable 
goods within any such area. 
Clause 113.-Sub-clause (1) incorporates the provisions of rule 56 af 
the Central Excise Rules, 1944. The provisions have been broad-based 
so as to enable sampling of both the manufactured an'd unmanufactured 
products which are required to be examined by a Central Excise Officer 
or which are subjected to processing, or which are held in stock in a 
warehouse, for business or for manufacture of excisable goods. 

89 
~ub-clauses (2) and (5) are based on the corresponding provisions of 
sectlon 144 of the Customs Act, 1962, relating respectively to return of 
samples to the owner after their purpose is over and remission of duty 
in the samples which are consumed or get destroyed during the course of 
any test or examination. 
Sub-clause (3) provides that where it is not practicable to return the 
sample to the owner, etc., the market price thereof is to be paid to him • 
. Sub-clause (4) provides for retest of samples on payment of the pres-
cnbed fees. 
Clause 114 is new and it incorporates the provisions of section 145 ot 
the C~to~ ~ct, 1962, relating to the obligation of the owners to perform 
operatIons mCldental to examination of goods. 
Clause 115 is new and it incorporates the provisions of section 147 of 
the Customs Act, 1962, relating to liability of the principal and agent. 
Clause 116 is new and it incorporates the provisions of section 148 of 
the Customs Act, 1962, relating to liability of the agent appointed by the 
person-in-charge of conveyance. 
Clause 117 is new and it incorporates substantially the provisions of 
section 149 of the Customs Act, 1962, in respect of amendment of doC\l-
m~nts. 
Clause 118 is new and it incorporates the provisions of section 130 of 
the Customs Act, 1962, to enable sale of excisable goods not being seized 
or confiscated goods. 
Clause 119 is new and it empowers the Board to require bonds, where 
necessary, for securing the dues on excisable goods. 
Clause 120 is new and it provides for the conditions and form of bonds. 
1 t also provides for acceptance of one bond in lieu of any two or more 
bonds which a person or a class of persons is required to execute. 
Clause 121 is new and it incorporates the provisions of rule 229 of the 
Central Excise Rules, 1944, relating to prOvision of accommodation a 
factory or warehouse, with the modification that the prOvisions will apply 
only to factories or warehouses where excisable goods to which the pro-
visions of clause 17 apply are manufactured or deposited. Owners of 
these factories or warehouses may also be asked to provide residential 
accommodation for Central Excise Officers. 
Cl4use 122 is new and it incorporates the proviSions of section 152 of 
the Customs Act, 1962, for authorising a Central Excise Officer to exercise 
functions assigned to his immediate superior. 
Clauses 123 and 124.-These clauses seek to reproduce without change 
the proviSions of sections 15 and 16 of the existing Act. 
Cl4use 126 is new and it vests the adjudicating officer, and appellate 
and revising authorities with powers of Civil Court for certain matters. 
Such oftlcer or authority will be "Civil Court" tor purp~ses of sections 
480 and 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 and Wlll have powers 
to pass orders of interim nature and stay orders. 

,00 
,~ '.,' 
Clause 127 is new and it incorporates the provisions of section 154 of 
the Customs Act, 1962, relating to correction of clerical errors, etc. 
Clause 128 is new. The existing provisions of rule 205 of the Central 
Excise Rules, 1944, relating to service of orders, decision, etc., have heen 
recast on the lines of the corresponding provisions of section 153 of the 
Customs Act, 1962. 
Clause 129 is new and it seeks to make the instructions, etc., issued by 
the Board or the Collector of Central Excises binding on the Central 
Excise Officers. (Compare section 119 of the Income-tax Act, 1961). 
It has been made explicit that no orders, instructions, etc., will be 
given so as to interfere with the discretion of the adjudicating oftlcer or 
the Appellate Collector of Central Excise. 
Clause 131 is new and it provides for appearance by authorised agents 
in proceedings before Central Excise Officers and appellate and revising 
authorities on the lines of section 288 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clauses 132 and 133.-Section 37 of the existing Act authorises the 
Central Government to make rules for carrying into effect the purposes 
of the Act. The clauses now proposed seek to authorise the Central 
Governinent and the Central Board of Excise and Customs to make rules 
and regulations respectively for carrying into effect the purposes of the 
Act. 
Clause 134.-This clause provides for laying before Parliament of 
rules and certain important notifications. 
Clause 135 is new and it provides fOr repeal of the existing Act, in 
so far as it relates to excisable goods other than salt, and saves certain 
actions taken under that Act. The clause also provides for the conti-
nUlBnce of the existing Act in matters relating to salt. 
The First Schedule.-It is the same as the First Schedule in the exilt-
lng Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 except for the following changes-
, , , 
(i) item 5 of the First Schedule of the existing Act relating to 
&alt has been omitted and all other items have been re-numbered; 
(ii) in item No. 1.5 relating to Tea, provision has been made on 
the lines of the provision of rule 96-F, Central Excise Rules, 1944, 
for fixing zonal rates of duty. 
The Second Schedule.-It specifies the amendments necessary to 
continue the existing Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, in So far u it 
relates to duty on salt. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Cl,u.. 4, read with c1aule 3, of the :Bill empowers the Central Gov. 
ernment to appoint officers of Central Excise for the purposes of the 
Act. 
2. Clause 110 of the BiU provi'des for recovery of the arrears at excise 
d~,1ees, etc., through Tax Recovery Officers. Under clause 2(31), "Tax 
Recovery Offioer" means--
(i) a Collector; 
fii) an Additional Collector or any other dlcer empowered to 
effect recovery of arrears of land revenue or other public demand 
under any law relating to land revenue or other public demand for 
the time being in force in the State as may be authorised by the State 
Government, by general or special notification in the Official Gazett,e, 
to exercise the powers of a Tax Recovery Officer under the Act; 
(iii) any Gazetted Officer of the Central Government, who may 
be authorised by the Central Government, by general or specia~ 
notification in the Ofticial Gazette, to exercise the powers of a Tax 
Recovery Oftlcer under the Act. 
3. Clause 123 of the Bill provides that all officers of Police and Customs 
and all ofticers of Government engaged in the collection of land revenue 
and all village oftlcers shall assist the oftlcers of Central Excise in the 
execution of the Act. 
4. When the Bill becomes law and is brought into operation, the 
existing machinery will be utilised for the execution of the Act. How-
ever, Appellate Collectors will heve to be appointed for hearing appeals 
under clause 94 of the Bill. At present it is proposed to appOint four 
Appellate Collectors. 
5. From the financial point of view, therefore, apart from the existing 
Itaft employed on the levy and cellection of excise duties. the only new 
feature is the appointment of four Appellate Collectors. In other words, 
the Bill involves no greater financial obligation than what is already 
involved in the administration Qf excise duties under the existing Central 
Excises and Salt Act, 1944, except in the matter of Appellate Collectors. 
6. In the year 1968-69, the number of Gazetted Central Excise Officers 
was about 1613 and that af the other establishment (including Class IV) 
was about 30,011. For the year 1968-69, the expenditure budgeted for 
the administration of excise duties is about &. 13.49 crores (voted) and 
Rs. 50,000 (charg-d). The said amount of Rs. 13.49 crores incJudes 
Rs. 44,000 payable to some of the States for collection of arrears of excise 
duties. No sum is payable to the officers of Police and Customs, vlllage 
omcers, etc., for assisting the officers of Central Excise in the execution 
of the Act. The additional expenditure on the appointment of four 
.1 

92 
Appellate Collectors Includina their .tenographers will be about 
Rs. 1.40,800 per year as follows:-
. , 
i 
A. Recurring Expenditure 
<I) Appellate Collector. 
(b) Stenolrapilen 
(c) Incidental expenses 
contingencies. etc. 
No. 
Annual 
emoluments 
RI. 
" x 2&,200 
"x 8,000 
Colt 
RI. 
1,00,800 
20,000 
20,008 
Total 1.40,800 
B. Non-recurring Ezpenditur. ,-"iil 
Nil • ..... 

MEMoRANDuM iooARDING fiELEGATEb LEGISLATION 
Clause 132 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
. rules to carry out the purposes of the Act. Sub-clause (2) of this c:ause 
catalogues the matters with respect to which rules may be made. These 
matters, inteT alia, include the time at which, the manner in which, the 
duty or duties leviable on any excisable goods shall be paid; the condi-
tions subject to which excisable goods may be deposited without payment 
bf duty in a place approved by the Collector of Central Excisel the extent 
to which, the conditions and limitations subject to which, the time at 
which and the manner in which, the credit of duty shall be allowed ani 
the set-off thereof shall be nade; and the form of application lor licence. 
the form of licence to be granted or renewed and the par~iculars which 
such application and licence shall contain. 
2. Besides clause 132, certain clause5 like claUies 10, 32, etc., also I'ha~,e 
provision empowering the Central Government to make rules regarding 
valuation of goods for purposes of excise duty, the grant of rebate 
of duty on excisable goods exported, etc. 
3. The matters referred to above, with respect to which rules are to 
be made, are matters relating to detail and as such the delegation of 
the legislative power is of a normal character. 
4. Clause 133 empowers the Central Board of Excise and Customs to 
make regulations consistent with the Act and the rules. The matters 
with respect to which regulations may b:! made have been specified 
in sub-clause (2) of that clause. Under the said sub-clause (2), regula-
tions may be made by the Board with resp::t to the rorm of application 
for removal of excisable goods and the form of the accounts anti returIlJ 
to be submitted by manufacturers, etc. Th:!se are also matters of detaD 
and as such the delegation of the legislative power is of a normal 
character. 
5. Certain clauses of the Bill like clauses 9, 12, 13, 17, ete., empower 
the Central Government to issue notifications spe2cifying the excisable 
goods to which the provisions of these clauses will apply. Since the 
conditions of production or manufacture of various excisable goods differ 
widely, it is hardly practicable to specify the excisable goods in the clauses 
themselves. The delegation of the legislative power in these clauses is 
thus also of a normal character. 
6. The Bill alEo contains provisions whereby the Central Government 
is empowered to reduce the rigours of excise formalities or the burdea 
of excise duty in cases of genuine hardship. Thus, clause 11 empowers 
it to fix tariff values in respect of excisable goods which are chargeable 
with ad valorem duty; clause 21 empowers it to specify excisable gooda 
which may be removed without payment of duty for manufacture or 
on deferment of payment of duty and clause 24 empowers It to allow 
credit at excise duty or, as the case may be, of the additional duty unffer 
the Indian Tariff Act, 1934, paid on materials, component parts or 
ingredients to be specified in a notiftcation and as are used In the manu-
facture of specl1ied excisable goods. Further, clause 29 empowers the 
~ ... --' .-...... ~ 

Central Government to exempt either generally or speciaiiy exeisabit 
goods from the whole or part of the duty leviable thereon and such 
exemptions may be granted so as to have retrOspective effect. It is not 
possible to specify in the Bill itself the excisable goods with respect to 
which the powers under these clauses may be exercised However, guid-
ing lines for the exercise of powers under these and similar other dRuses 
have been specified in the clauses themselves. The delegation of the 
legislative power in these clauses is also of a normal charader. 
7. Clause 136 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
orders for the removal of difficulties in giving etfect to the provi8ions of 
the Act. Such orders should be consistent with the provisions of the 
Act and shall not be made 'after the expintion of two years from the 
commencement of the Act. 
8. Under clause 134, all rules made under the Act and all notifications 
issued under the :various clauses of the Bill, such as clauses 9, 11, 12, 
13, etc., will be laid before Parliament. 
9. Under sub-clause (2) of clause 136, all orders made by the Central 
Government under sub-clause (1) thereof removing di!lculties will also 
be Mid ·beforeParliament. 

ANNExtiR~ 
!xrucrs FROM THE CENTRAL EXCISES AND SALT ACT, 1944 
(1 OF 1944) 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to Central duties of 
excise and to salt. 
[24th February, 1944.] 
WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to 
Central duties of excise on goods manufactured or produced in certain 
parts of India and to saltj 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER I 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944. Short 
• • • • • title, ex-lent and 
c0m-
mence. 
ment. 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or Deflni. 
context,- tiona. 
.. 
(a) "broker" or "commission agent" means a person who in the 
ordinary course of business makes contracts for the sale or purchase 
of excisable goods for othersj 
• • • • • 
(c) "curing" includes wilting, drying, fermenting and any process 
for rendering an unmanufactured product fit for marketing or manu-
facture; 
(d) "excisable goods" means goods specified in the First Schedule 
a!'! being subject to a duty of excise and includes salt; 
(e) "factory" means any premises, including the precincts thereof, 
wherein or in any part of which excisable goods other than salt 
are manufactured, or wherein or in any part of which any manu-
facturing process connected wilh the production of these goods is 
being carried on or is ordinarily carried on; 
(j) "manufacture" includes any process incidental ~r ancillary to 
the completion of a manufactured product; and 
(i) in relation to tobacco, includes the preparation of 
cigarettes, cigars, cheroots,biris, cigarette or pipe or hookah 
tobacco, chewing tobacco or snuff; 
.-
(ii) in relation to salt, includes collection, removal,prepara-
tion, steeping, evaporation, boiling, or anyone or more of these 
processes, the separation or purification of salt obtained in the 
manufacture of saltpetre, the separation of salt from earth or 
other substance so as to produce elementary salt, and the excava-
tion or removal of natural saline deposits or efflorescencej 
'..,. Ii 
(iii) in relation to patent or proprietarymedldnes 81 defined 
. in Item No. 14Eof the :First Schedule and in relation to eotmetlta 
and toilet preparations as defined in Item No. 'IfF af tat 
Sehedule, includes the conversl&n of powder tntotabl148; or 
capsules, the labelling or re-Iabelling of~ontalDel'l·iAteade4jor 
gS 

Duties 
'peciJled 
in the 
ftrst 
Schedule 
to he 
lev1ed. 
.... 
consumers and re-packing from bulk packs to retail packs or tit. 
,adoption of any other treatment to render the product marketabll! 
'to the ronsUniers; 
(iv) in relation to goods comprised in Item No. 1M of the 
tirst Schedule, includes sizing, beam!ng, warping, wrapping, 
winding or reeling, ot ~ny one or more of these processes, or 
the converiion of any form of the said goods into another form 
of sueh goods; 
and the word "manufacturer" shall be construed accordingly and 
shall include not only a person who employs hired labour in the 
production or manufacture of excisable goods, but also any person 
who engages in their produotion or manufacture on his own account; 
• • • • • 
(h) "sale" and "purchase", with their grammatical variations and 
cognate expressions, mean any transfer of the possession of goods by 
one person to another in the ordinary course of trade or business for 
cash or deferred payment or other valuable consideration; 
• • • • • 
(j) "salt factory" includes-
(i) a place used Or ~.ntended to be used in the manufacture 
of salt and all embankments, reservoirs, condensing and evapora-
ting pans, buildings and waste places situated within the limits 
of such place as defined. from time to time by the Collector of 
Central 'Excise; 
(ii) all drying grounds and storage platforms and storehouses 
appertaining to any such place; 
(iii) land on which salt is spontaneously produced; 
and a "private salt factory" is one not solely owned or not solely 
worked by the Central Government; 
(k) "wholesale dealer" means a person who buys or sells excis-
able goods wholesale for the purpose of tradr. or manufacture, and 
fllcludes a broker or commission agent, who, in addition to making 
contracts ffJr the sale or purch8SE' of excisable goods for others, 
stocks such goods belonging to others as an agent for the purpose 
of sale. 
CHAPTER II 
Lzvy AND COLLECTION OF btt'.Mt 
3. (1) There shall be levied and collected in such manDer as may be 
prescribed duties of excise 00. .ul excisable goods other than ,;.alt which 
are produced or manufactured in India and a duty on salt manufactured 
in,O&' imported by land into, any part of India as, and at the rates, set 
ferth in theFint Sche<lule. 

87 
(IA) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply in respect of all 
excisable goods other than salt which are produced or manufactured in 
India by, or on behalf of, Government, as they apply in respect of goods 
which are not produced or manufactured by Government. . 
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the OftIcial 
Gazette, fix, for the purpose of levying the said duties, tariff values of 
my articles enumerated, either specifically or under general head-
ings, in the First Schedule as chargeable with duty ad valorem and may 
alter any tariff values for the time being in force. 
(3) Different tariff values may be fixed for different clall8ee or descrip-
tions of the same article . 
• • • • • 
4. Where under this Act, any article is chargeable with duty at a rate Determi-
d d t th I nation of epen en on e va Ue of the article, such value shall be deeme4 to value 
be-- I' - I , '-':\,iWl\ f th ' Ii 'It,.. or e 
purpose. 
(a) the wholesale cash price for which an article of the like of duty. 
kind and quality is sold or is capable of being sold at the time of the 
removal of the article chargeable with dUty from the factory or any 
other premises of manufacture or production for delivery at the ,lace 
of manufacture or production, or if a wholesale market does not 
exist for such article at such place, at the nearest place -where such 
market exists, or 
(b) where such price is not ascertainable, the price at which an 
article of the like kind and quality is sold or is capable of being lold 
by the manufacturer or producer, or his agent, at the time of the 
removal of the article chargeable with duty from such factory or 
other premises for delivery at the place of manufacture or production, 
or if such article is not sold or is not capable of being sold at such 
place, at any other place nearest thereto. 
E:rplaMtimt.-In determining the price of any article under this 
section, no abatement or deduction shall be allowed except in respect of 
trade discount and the amount of duty payable at the time of the removal 
of the article chargeable with duty from the factory or other premises 
L\foresaid. ..!..-...-" . 
• • • • • 
I. The Central Government may, by notitlcation in the Offtcial Gazette, Certain 
provide that, from such date as may be specitled in the notitlcation, no opera. 
person shall, except under the authority and in accordance wlt11 the ~O:~ject 
terms and conditions of a licence granted under this Act, engage fn- to licence. 
(a) the production or manufacture or any process of the produc-
tion or manufacture of any specitled goods included in the First 
Schedule or of saltpetre or of any specitled component parts or 
ingredients of such goods or of specified containers of such goods, or 
(b) the wholesale purchase or sale (whether on his own account 
or as a broker or commission agent) or the storage of any specitled 
goods included in the First Schedule. 
• • • • • 

Restric-
tion on 
possessiOn 
of goods 
specified 
In the 
Second 
Schedule 
Oftencea 
and 
penaltie8. 
Power Of 
Courts to 
order for-
feiture. 
Recovery 
of awns 
due to 
Govern-
ment, 
Applica_ 
tionof 
the pro-
viaions 
of Act 8 
of'l8'18 to 
Central 
ElIclae 
Dutiea. 
Owners 
oroccu-
piers of 
land to 
report 
\ 
I. From such date sa IOay be specifiecl in this behalf by the Central 
GOverJUlleQt by ~flcati«m in the Oftlcial Gazette, no person shall, except 
as provided by rules made under this Act, have in his possession any 
goods specifieci in the Second Schedule in excess of such quantity as 
may be prescribed for the purposes of this section as the maximum 
amount of such goods or of any variety of such goods which may be 
possessed at anyone time by such a person. 
e. Whoever commits any of the following offen_a, namely:-
(a) contravenes any of the provisions of a notification iuud 
ua,*, seotion 6 or of sect~n 8, or of a rule made under clause (iii) 
of sub-section (2) of section 37; 
• • • • • 
10. Any Court trying an offence under this Chapter may order the 
forfeiture to Government of any goods in respect of which the Court is 
satisfted that an offenee under this Chapter has been committed, aDd may 
also order the forfeiture of .any receptacles, packages or coveri. in 
wbich. sllch goods are contained and the animals, vehicles, vessels or 
Qther con,veyancejJ used in carrying the goods, and any implements 01' 
machinery ueed in the manufacture of the goods. 
U. In reepect of duty and any oth£ swns of any kind payable to the 
Centl'al Gwerament 11nAiw any of the provisions of this Act or of the 
rWes mMe thereUDder, the otllcer ~powered by the Central Board of 
Excise and Customs constituted under the Central Boards of Revenue 
Act, 1963 to levy such duty .1' require the payment of such sums may 
'deduct the amount so payable from any money owing to the person tram 
whom such sums may be recoverable or due which may be in his hands 
or under his disposal or control, or may recover the amount by attach-
ment and sale of excisable goods belonging to such person; aDd if the 
amount payable is not so recovered he.may prepare a certificate signed 
by him specifying the amount due from the person liable to pay the same 
and send it to the Collector of the district in which such person resides 
or conducts his business and the said Collector, on receipt of such certi-
ficate, shall proceed to recover trom the said person the amount specified 
therein as if it were an arrear of land revenue. 
11. The Central Goyernment may, by notification ill the 0ftlcia1 Gazette, 
declare that any of the provisions of the Sea Customs Act, 1878, relating 
to the levy of and exemption from customs duties, drawback of duty, 
warehousing, offences and penalties, confiscation, and procedure relating 
fA. ofhnces alIA appealashall. with, such modificatioJl$ .and alteraUolls as 
it J;Q.IB cGOSjder ~~ or desirable to ~W\pt them to t~ circ~tances, 
1te ItppUcable in regaN to like matters io. respect of the duties imposed 
by section 3. 
CHAP'I'EB.IH 
POWIiRS 4!1lQ DUTIES OF QITICERS AND. LANl)HOLDl!lRS.. 
• • • • • 
18 •. ]!:vexy owner Of, occ1ij)ier of land, and the agent of ~y such owner 
011 O(C1lpiet, in charge of the management of that land, if contraband 
excisable goods are manufactured thereon" shall in the absence of reason-
able excUSf: be bound to give notice of such manufacture to a Magistrate, 
14. of lila. 
let 18T •. 

54 of 1963. 
99 
or to an officer of the Central Excise, Customs, Police, or Land Revenue 
Department, immediately the fact comes to his knowledge. 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER IV 
TRANSPORT BY SEA 
24. When any excisable goods are carried by sea in any vessel other 
than a vessel of the burden of three hundred tons and upwards, the own-
er and master of such vessel shall each be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may 
extentl to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
25. Nothing in section 24 applies to-
(a) any excisable goods covered by a permit granted under 
rules made under this Actj 
(b) any excisable goods covered by a pass granted by Qny oft-
cer whom the Central Board of Excise and Customs constituted 
under the Central Baar'ds of Revenue Act, 1963 may appoint in this 
behalf; 
(c) such amount of excisable goods carried on board any vessel 
for consumption by her crew or by the passengers or animals (if 
any) on board as the Central Board of Excise and Customs consti-
54 of 1963. tuted under the Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963, may from time 
too time exempt from the operation of section 24. 
26. When any officer empowered by the Central Board of Excise and 
54 of 1963. Customs constituted under the Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963, to 
act under this section has reason to believe, from personal knowledge or 
from information taken down in writing, that any excisable goods are 
being carried, or have within the previous twenty-four hours been car-
ried, in any vessel so as to render the owner or master of such vessel 
liable to the penalties imposed by section 24, he may require such vessel 
to be brought-to and thereupon may-
(a) enter and search the vessel; 
(b) reqUire the master of the vessel to produce any documents 
in his possession relating to the vessel or the cargo thereof; 
(c) seize the vessel if the officer has reason to believe it liable 
to confiscation under this Act, anti caUSe it to be brought with its 
crew and cargo into any port in India; and 
(,d) where any excisable goods are found on board the vessel, 
search and arrest without a warrant any person on board the vessel 
whom he has reason to believe to be punishable under section 24. 
27. Any master of a vessel refusing or neglecting to bring-to the ves-
sel or to produce his papers when required to do so by an officer acting 
under section 26, and any person obstructing any such officer in the per-
for1ll'3nce of his duty. may be arrested by such officer without a warrant, 
and shall be punishable with Imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to six months or with fine which may extend to <me thousand rupees, or 
with both. 
1188 (B) LS-14 , 
manufac-
ture or 
conh .. _ 
band ex • 
cisable 
goods. 
Penalties 
for car-
rying ex-
cisable 
goods in 
certain 
vessels. 
Excep_ 
tions. 
Power 
of stop-
page, 
search 
and 
arrest. 
Penalties 
for resist-
jnE: 
office, 

Confisca-
tion of 
vessel and 
cargo. 
Jurisdic-
tion. 
Power to 
exempt 
from 
operation 
of this 
Chapter. 
Power of 
Centra} 
Govern-
ment to 
make 
rules. 
100 
18. (J) Every vessel (including all appurtenances) in which any ex-
cisable goods are carried so as to rentIer the owner or master of'such 
vessel liable to penalties imposed by section 24, the cargo on board such 
vessel and the excisable goods in respect of which an offence under this 
Act has been committed shall be liable to confiscation on the orders of 
the officer empowered in this behalf by the Central Government. 
(2) Whenever any Customs Officer is satisfied that any article is liable 
to confiscation under this section he may seize such article, and shall at 
once report the seizure to his superior officer for the information of the 
oiHcer empowered to order confiscation under sub-section (1) and such 
otticer may, if satisfied on such report or after making such inquiry as 
he thinks fit, that the article so seized is liable t() confiscation, either dec-
lare it to' be confiscated, or impose a fine in lieu thereof not exceeding 
the value of the article. 
29. Any offence punishable under section 24 or section 27 may be 
deemed to have been committed within the limits of the jurisdiction of 
the Magistrate of any place where the offender is found, or to which, if 
a:nested untIer section 26 or section 27, he may be brought. 
30. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazet-
te, exempt the carriage of excisable goods within any local limits or in 
any class of vessels from the operation of this Chapter, and, by like noti-
fication, again subject such carriage to the operation of this Chapter. 
.. 
CHAPTER V 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO SALT 
'" '" 
CHAPTER VII 
SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS 
'" 
37. (I) The Central Government may make rules to carry into effect 
the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may-
(i) provide for the assessment and collection of duties of excise, 
the authorities by whom functions under this Act are to be discharg-
ed, the issue of notices requiring payment, the manner in which the 
duties shall be payable, and the recovery of duty not paid; 
(ii) prohibit absolutely, or with such exceptions, or subject to 
such conditions as the Central Government thinks fit, the production 
or manufacture, or any process of the production or manufacture, of 
excisable goods, or of any component parts or ingredients or con-
tainers thereof, except on land or premises approved for the purpose; 
(iii) prohibit abSO'lutely, or with such exceptions, or subject to 
such conditions as the Central Government thinks fit, the transit of 
exci!'able goods from any part of India to any other part thereof; 
(iv) regulate the removal of excisable goods from the place 
where produced, stared or manufactured ()r subjected to any process 
of production or manufacture and their transport to or from the pre-
mises of a licensed person, or a bonded warehouse, or to a market; 
(v) regulate the production or manufacture, or any process of 
the production or manufacture, the possession, storage and SIBle of 

101 
salt, and so far as such regulation is essential for the proper levy and 
collection of the duties imposed by this Act, of any other excisable 
goods, or of any component parts or ingredients or containers there-
of; 
... ... • ... 
(viii) provide for the appointment, licensing, management and 
supervision of bonded warehouses and the procedure to be followed 
in entering goods into and clearing goods from such warehouses; 
(ix) prOVide for the distinguishing of goods which have been 
manufactured under licence, of materials which have been imported 
under licence, and of goods on which duty has been paid, <Jr which 
are exempt from duty under this Act; 
(x) impose on persons engaged in the protluction or roonufac-
ture, storage or sale (whether on their own account or as brokers (1't 
commission agents) of salt, and, so far as such imposition is essential 
for the proper levy and collection of the duties imp<1Sed by this Act, 
of any other excisable goods, the duty of furnishing information, 
keeping records and making returns, and prescribe the nature of 
such information and the form of such records and returns, the 
particulars to be contained therein, and the manner in which they 
shall be cerified; 
(xi) require that excisable goods shall not be sold or offered or 
kept for sale in India except in prescribed containers, bearing a 
banderol, stamp or label of such nature and affixed in such manner 
as may be prescribed; 
(xii) provide for the issue of licences and transport permits and 
the fees, if any, to be charged therefor: 
Provided that the fees for the licensing of the manufacture and refin-
ing of salt and saltpetre shall not exceed, in the case of each such licence, 
the following amounts, namely:-
Licence to manufacture and refine saltpetr~ and to separate anj purifv salt in the 
proces~ of such manufacture and refining 
Licence to manufacture saltpctr.:: 
Licence to manufactllre su1phate of soia (Kharinun) by solar heat in evaporating 
pans 
Licence to manufactllr~ sulphate of fioJa (KharillulI) by artificial. heat 
Licence to manufacture other saline substances 
Rs. 
so 
2 
10 
2 
2 
(xiii) provide for the detention of goods, plant, machinery or 
material, for the purpose of exacting the duty, the procedure in con-
nection with the confiscation, otherwise than under section 10 or sec-
tion 28, of goods in respect of which breaches of the Act or rules have 
been committed, and the disposal of goods so detailed or confiscated; 
(xiv) authorise and regulate the inspection of factories and pro-
vide for the taking of samples, and for the making of tests, of any 
substance produced therein, and for the inspection or search of an,. 

102 
place or conveyance used for the production, storage, sale or trans-
port of salt, and so far as such inspection or search is essential for 
the proper levy and collection of the duties imposed by this Act, of 
any other excisable goods; 
• • • • • 
(xvi) provide for the grant of a rebate of the duty paid on goods 
which are exported out of India or shipped for consumption on a 
voyage to any port outside India; 
(xvii) exempt any goods from the whole or any part of the duty 
imposed by this Act; 
• • • • • 
(3) In ffi'.lking rules under this section, the Central Gcvernment may 
provide that any person committing a breach of any rule shall, where no 
other penalty is provided by this Act, be liable to a penalty not exceeding 
two thousand rupees and that any article in respect of which any such 
breach is committed shall be confiscated. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), and 
without prejudice to the provisions of section 9, in making rules under 
this section, the Central Government may provide that if any manufac-
turer, producer or licensee of a warehouse-
(4) removes any excisable goods in contravention of the provi-
sions of any such rule, or 
(b) does not account for all such goods manufactured, produc-
ed or stored by him, or 
(e) engages in the manufacture, production or storage of such 
goods without having applied for the licence required under section 
6, or 
(d) contravenes the provisions of any such rule with intent to 
evade payment of duty, 
then-
(i) any land, building, plant, machinery, materials, conveyance 
animal or any other thing used in connection with the manufacture, 
production, storage, removal or disposal of such goods, and 
(ii) all excisable go'ods on such land or in such building or pro-
duced or manufactured with such plant, machinery, materials or 
thing, 
belonging to such manufacturer, producer or licensee shall be liable to 
confiscation and the manufacturer, producer or licensee shall be liable to 
a penalty not exceeding three times the value of the excisable goods in 
respect of which any contravention of the nature referred to in clause 
(a), (b), (c) or (d) has been committed, or five thou:and rupees, which-
ever is greater. 
• • • • • 

Item 
No. 
(I) 
103 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 3) 
Description of goods 
(2) 
Food 
------ ---------
Rate of duty 
I SUGAR, PRODUCED IN A FACfORY ORDI-
NARILY USING POWER IN THE COURSE 
OF PRODUCTION OF SUGAR-
"Sugar" means any form of sugar in which the 
tlucrose conteJ?t, if. expressed a8 a percentage 
of the ~terlal dned to constant weight at 
1050 Centigrade, would be more than ninety. 
(1) Sugar other than Khandsari or Palmyra Nineteen per cent. ad valor"". 
(2) Khandsari sugar-
that is to say, sUltar in the manufacture of Ten per cent. ad valore", 
which neither a vacuum pan nor a vacuum 
evaporator is employed. 
(3) Palmyra sugar-
that is to say, sugar manufactUred from jaggery 
obtained by boiling the juice of the 
palmyra palm. 
Nil 
IA CONFECTIONERY AND CHOCOLATES IN OR Eighty paise per kilogram. 
IN RELATION TO THE MANUFACTURE 
OF WHICH ANY PROCESS IS ORDINARILY 
CARRIED ON WITH THE AID OF POWER, 
NAMELY:-
(1) Boiled sweets, toffees, car&meis, candies, 
nuts (including almonds) and fruit kernels 
coated with sweetening agent, and chewing 
Ilums. 
(2) Chocolates in bulk or in the form of slabs, 
tablets, hars, pastilles or croquett~, whether 
or not containing nuts, fruit kernels or 
fruits. 
IB PREPARED OR PRESERVED FOODS PUT UP Ten per cent. ad valorem. 
IN UNIT CONTAINERS AND ORDINARILY 
INTENDED FOR SALE, INCLUDING PRE-
PARATIONS OF VEGETABLES, FRUIT, 
M.ILK, CERBALS, FLOUR, STARCH. BIRDS, 
EGGS, MEAT, MEAT OFFALS, ANlMf.L 
BLOOD, FISH,CRUSTACEANS OR MOLLU-
SCS, NOT ELSEWHERE SPECIFIED. 
2 COFFEE, cured-
"Coffee" means the seed of the coffee tree (.:offl4), 
whether with or without husk, whether cured or 
uncured, but does not include the seed while still 
attached to the tree. 
3 TEA-
"Tea" includes all varieties of the product known 
commercially as tca, and aho includes green tea. 
e I) Tea, all varieties except package tea falling with-
in sub-item (2) of this item. 
(2) Package tea, that is ~osay, lea packed in anY.kind 
of container contalnlni not more than 27 kilograms 
net of tea. 
Eighty-five rupees per quintal. 
Not exceeding sixty-six naye paise 
per kiloaram al the Central 
Government may, by notifica-
tiOJ'l in the Ofticial Gazette, 
fix. 
Forty-six naye paise per kilogram, 
plus the duty for the time 
being leviable under sub-item 
(I) of thiS item, if notalreacly 
paid • 
. _--------- --------_. __ ._-------

Item 
No. 
(I) 
104 
Description of goods Rate of duty 
4 TOBACCO-
"Tobacco" means any form of tobacco. whe~rcured 
or uncured and whether manuflClU~ or not, and 
includes the leaf, .talks and Items of the tobacco 
plant, but docII not include any part of a tobacco 
plant while still attached to the earth. 
I. Ultnt4l1ujactured tobacco- Per kilogram 
(I) if flue cured and used in the manufacture of Three rupees and fifty paise. 
cirarettes. 
(2) if flue cured and used for the manufacture of Twenty-seven rupees and fifty 
smoking mixtures for pipes and cigarettes. paise. 
(3) if flue cured and not otherwise specified Two rupees and fifty paise. 
(4) if other than flue cured and used for the manu- Two rupees and eighty-five paise. 
facture of-
(a) cigarettes or (b) smoking mixtures for pipes 
and cigarettes. 
(5) if other than flue cured and not actually used One rupee and se\'enty-fin paise. 
for the manufacture of (a) cigarettes or (b) 
smoking mixtures fot pipes and cigarettes or 
(c) biris- . 
(i) stems of tobacco larger than 6· 35 millimetres 
in si le, . 
(;1) dust of tobacco, 
• • • 
(if) tobacco cured in whole lcaf£orm and packed 
or tied in bundles, hanks or bunches or in 
the form of twists or coils . 
• • • 
• • 
• • 
(6) if other than due cured and not othef\\;sc Two rupees and fiftY ra;,e. 
specified. 
(7) if used for agricultural pUl'pO!les 
(8) stalks 
II. Manufactured tobGcco-
(t) Cigars and cheroots of which the value-
(I) exceeds Rs. 25 a hundred 
NiT. 
Twenty-five paise. 
Per hundred. 
Twenty-one rupees. 
(ii) exceeds Rs. tS a hundred, but docs not Twelve rupees and se\'cnty-fiye 
exceed Rs. 2S a hundred. paise. 
(iii) exceeds Rs. S a hundred, but docs not Four rupees andfi fty Paise. 
exceed Rs. 15 a hundred. 
(Iii) exceeds Rs. I' 25 a hundred, but docs not One rupee and tWenty paise. 
exceed Rs. 5 a hundred. 
(2) Cigarettes 
(3) Biris in the manufacture of which any process 
hal been conducted with the aid of machines 
operated with or without the aid of power. 
One hundred and twenty-five pel 
cent. ad fJQ/oTlm. 
Three rupees per thousand. 

105 
Item 
No. Description of goods Rate of duty 
(J) 
Crude material" escopt fuel, 5. S.4.LT-
"Sail:" includes swamp salt, spontaneous salt, and The rllte fixed annually by a salt or saline ~olutlons made or produced from Central Act. a:1Y saline substance or from salt earth. 
~l faeb, lubricants aDd related material. 
6 MOTOR SPIRlT-
MotOr 8pirit, that is to Say,-
(0 any mineral oil (~xcludin, crude mineral oil) which has its flashing pOint below seveDty-six degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer, and which, either by itself or in admixture with any other substance, is 8uitablefor usc as fuel for internal combustion engines j and 
(ij) power alcOhOl, that is to say, ethyl alcohol of any grade (including luch alcohol when de-natured or otherwise treated), which, either by itself Or in admixture with any other substanee, is suitablc! for being used as aforesaid. 
E"planat;on [.-"Mineral oil" means an oil consisting of a single'liqUid hydrocarbon Or a liauid mixtll~ of hydrocarbons (except {or associatea imPurities) (derived from pettoleum, coal, shale. peat Or any other bituminous substance, and includes any similar oil prodUced by synthesis Or Otherwi~e. 
Epxlanation II.-"Flashini point" shall be de~­mined in accordance with the tests spec:jfied in thi s behalf in the rules made under the petroleum Act, 
1934 (30 of 1934). 
7 KEIlOSBNB-
Kerosene, thatil to say, any mineral oil (excluding mineral colza oil and turpentine substitute) which has a flame hei_ht of eiJllteeD mlllimetrCl Or more and is Ordinarily used II an illuminant in oil buminglamps. 
ExPlanation I.-The exPression "mineral oil" haa the meaning assigned to it in Expltzrullillrl I to item NO. 6. 
E.v:Plantztion Il.-"Flame bei.ht".ballbedctermiDed in the aPpuatu, known aa the lmote pOint lamp in the manner pre>cribcd in this behalf by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette. 
8 REFINED DIESEL OILS AND VAPORIZING 
OIL-
that is to say, any mineral oil (cxcl\IdiD'{ mineral cOlza oil and turPentine substitute) which haa its flashing ~int at or above seventy-six degrees of Fahrenheit', thermometer, and satisfies either of the following requircmellta ~ 
(i) the oil has a ftame height often millimetres or more but ;esl than eighteen millimetre s; 
or 
(ji) the oil has a dame hcilht of less than ten millimetres but haS a viscosity of lesl than one hundred sCCQDdl by RedWOod I Vis-cometer at one hundred deareet of Fahren-heit's thermometer, and contains le88 than one quaner of one Per eent. by weight or any bituminOUS substance. 
Silt hundred and twenty rupees 
per kilolitre at ~ dearces of Centigrade thermometer. 
Two hundred and thirty-five 
rupees per kilo1itre at fifteen degrees of Centip'ade thermo. meter. 

Item 
No. 
(1) 
106 
Description of goods 
(a) Refined diesel oils 
(b~ Vaporizing oil 
BxplantltiDn.- The expre8sions "mineral Oil", "ftashina 
pOint" and "Flame bcitrht" have the meantnas 
respectively ... taae4 to them in l/Jc1lanatitiiu 
I and II to itom No. 6 and in B~la1ttJrion 
II to item NO.7. 
Rate of duty 
Four hundred and ei,htyDine 
rupees per ItUoUtre at fifteen 
deIrees of Centiarade thermo-
meter. 
Four hundred and eighty-nine 
r'IIJ)eeS per kilolitre at· fifteen 
cleJrees of Centigrade thermo-
meter. 
9 DIESEL OIL, NOT OTHERWISE SPECIFIED, One hundred and sixty-eight 
that is to say, ariy mineral oil which- tu.peesand twenty-fivcPlilepcr 
kUoUtre at fifteen d~es of 
(I) has a flame hClght of less than ten millimctres; cmtpe thermometer. 
(ii) contains one quarter of onc Per cent. or more by 
welJht of any bituminous substance ; and 
(iiI) posscss;:s a viscosity Of less than onc hundred 
seconds by Redwood I Viscometcr at one 
hundred degrees Of Fahrenheit'. thcrmometcr. 
Expltmalion.-Tbc ~relsion, "mineral oil" and 
"flame hcight" have thc meanings respectively 
8IIiJned to them iD BxpltllUltion 1 to item No. 6 
ancriD E~/anation II to item NO.7. 
10 FURNACE OIL, that is to saY. any mineral oil whil:h- SeventY-fivc rupees and forty-five 
pelac per ItilOlitre at fifteen 
(a) has a flame height of less than ten millimctres ; degrees of Cenriarade thcremo-
meter. 
(ia) contains one 'fuarter of one Per ceot. or more 
by weight Of any bituminous lIubstan(lC ; and 
(iiI) p08l1C81es a viscOlity of one hundred seconds 
or more by Redwood I VilCometer at one hund-
rcd degrees Of Fahrenhcoit's thermometer. 
Ex/:l(l1llJtion.-Tbe cxprcuiODI "mineral oU" and 
'flame hclght" have tho moaDiDp reapcctively 
assiped to them in ExPUmatUm I to Item No.6 
and in ExpllJll/ltion 11 to item No. 7' 
II ASPHALT. BITUMEN AND TAR-
uA 
(1) AsPhaltaad Bltum:n (incluJinC cut-back bitu- Thirty per cent. ad valor,m. 
men and asphalt) natural Or proctuced from 
petroleum Or shale. 
(2) Tar di.tilled from coal Or lignite, and other Thirty per cent. ad valor,m. 
mineral tars. including partially distilled tar; 
and blends of pitch with creosote oils or with 
other cOal tar distillation products. 
ALL PRODUCTS DERIVED FROM REFINING Twenty per cent. ad valor,m. 
OF CRUDE PETROLEUM OR SHALE (WHE-
THER GASEOUS. LIQUID, SEMI-SOLID OR 
SOLID IN FORM). NOT OTHBRWlSB SPECI-
FIED, INCLUDING REFINERY GASES. 
LUBRICATING OIL AND GREASES, 
WAXBS AND CuKE . 
. _-. -.- ---.---.-.----.---. -- ---.---.-- .. - -------·-0 __ -

Item 
No. 
I (I) 
10? 
------------
(a) 
V.Ptabie 00. .... rab 
---
Rate of dUty 
Ia VEGETABLB NON-BSSBNTIAL OILS, IlhOrts, ODe Inmdred and teD ruptel aM 
ill or in relation to the lDaJlufacture of wbicb any tweDtY-flve naye paC.. Pel' 
. proce .. it ordinarily carried on witb tbe aid Of metric tonne. 
power. 
13 VEGETABLB PRODUCT-
"Veaetable Product" meana allY veaetable oil or fat TeD Pel' ClOt. fill 01110" •• 
which. whether by itIClf or in admixture 
with any other .ubltaDce. hal by ·hydropDatiOD 
or by any otber proc:css beeD hardened for buman 
QOQsumption • 
Cbem!caJ. 
t.} PIGMBNTS, COLOURS, PAINTS. ENAMELS..! 
V ARNISHBS, BlACKS AND CBLLULOSH 
lACQUERS- '. 
I. (1) Pigments, coloura, paints and ename1s-
(a) Zinc oxide, red lead, white lead and titanium Nineteen rupees and ICftbty-
dioside white· five naye paiIe per quintll. 
(i.) Aluminium paste • • Seventy-five naye peise per kilo-
gram. 
(~) Dry coIOWllJ. nameJ.y~ the following: laid Seventeen rupeea aDd twenty-
cbromel and ltrunawicll: arecn. five naye paise per quintll. 
{3) Water paints-
(t) Dry distemper includini cement-bued Seventeen rupees and twenty. 
water paints. five naye paiae per quintll. 
(ii) Oil-bOund distemper • 
(iia) Water pigmentflniahcafor)eathcr 
(ftI) Plastic emulaion paint 
(4)-Oil paintl and enamels-
(,) Tinting paste (Blue)J 
(iI) StUr paints.l 
• Thirty rupees and fifty naye paise 
per qUintal. 
• Forty-two naye paise per litre. 
One rupee and flve naye paiIe 
per litre. 
• SeveDtY-ftve naycpaile per kilo-
anm· 
• Nineteen rupeea aDd fifty nayc 
paiIe per quintal. 
(iii) Ready-mixed paintl and eDIIDela l. Sisty-five naye paise per litre. 
C4N Dial)Cl'8Cd ~ pi8lDllltl orQinarily Two rupees and fifty naye pal .. 
used lor the printlDi of tcixtilea. whether in l per kilosram· 
the form of pOwder, pIIte, or in emulsion. 
(5) Pigments, colourt, pIintI and enameII, not 
otherwise speci1l.ed. 
Seventeen rupees and tWenty-
live Dllye pIiIe per quintal. if 
sold 6y wei ... 
Fifty-aiJ: naye paite per litre, it 
IOJd by volume. 
(tl Vuniahee • • • • Thirty-five naye paise per littre. 
Bighteen naye pabe per 11tre. 

Item 
No. 
(I) 
108 
Description of goods Rateo(duty 
(2) 
m.CeIbilciee lDcquers-
(I) NitrOCellulose lacquers, clear~, pi~ted One rupee and fifty naye pme 
and aitJ!Ollllll.uo.e aaciHliliet1n Wpad.,.... JIW.Utre. .. 
(it) NlUOCidluloae andJ1at~ in eem4~..u~aM ~ifJ.y n~. ~ PI9' kilosram. 
pasty (orms. 
(iii) Cellulose lacquers, not otherwise speci- One ru~ and (orty uye .,.iM 
~. wh_ 
141\ SODA ASH • l\ift J*l~t. _ ~. 
I4S CAUSTIC SODA, WHBTIIIltl IN A ~UD PI .. ,..~. IIIl f},.,.,. 
FORM OR IN LYE. 
14BS SODIUM SILICATE Twenty-the per cent. GdfHllomft. 
14C GLYCERINE 
J4D SYNTIIBTIC ORGANIC ~. (IN:-
CLUDING PIGMENT ) AND 
SYNTImTIC ORGANIC DER ATIVES 
USED IN ANY DYEING PRC>C:RSS. 
I#l1l sgrr6~s8~Yc08Y~o~o~ 
Rl!S; PRODUC'tS OF THE KIND KNOWN 
Ai OP'I'~ BLEACHING AGENTS, SUBSTANTIVJ! TO THE FIBRE. 
~ P~NT c81r.~ft«?bMB:rmo~~=, 
flWlAN HEMP" OR OTHER Nh"H 
DRUGS OR OTHER NARCOTICS OTHER 
THAN TIIOSE MEDICINES WHICH ARE 
EXCLUS1VELY AYURVEDIC, UNANI. 
SIDRA OR HOMOBOPATHIC. 
&~I(JlUJliq" 1.-uPatent Or proprietary medicines" 
meaM any drug or medicinal preparation, in 
whatever term, f()r use in the internal or external 
trc&tment of, or for the prevention of ailmenu in. 
huiiian Min.. ot Idlimab which·bearI either on 
i~ or on itt container or both, a name ~bich 
d not lpecilte4in i MOnograph in a PharmacOpOeJa. 
Formulary or otber publicatiODl notified in thil 
behalf by the Central Government in the 0fII,cial 
Gazette. or which is a brand name, that ia. • '-
or a rqiltered trade mark under the Trade and 
MIrcbaDdiM M8ta Act, 19,8 (43 of 1958), Or 
any other mad: IUch as a symbol, monosram. 
label, aipature or invented wordi or any writin, 
wbiCIA ~ ued in ndaUoa to that medicine for the 
~ oC indiGlliJI, or 80 as to indicate a c:onnec-
tion m the coune of trade between the medicine 
IDd IOIDO ponQD blvina the riJbt oitba' • JIIO-
prietor or othenviae to uae the name or mart with 
or witlbout lI\y inclication 01 the idcDtiIiJ qf tat 
perIOD. 
Ihpltmation Il.-"A1cohol", ... ~·In4iao 
HaIIP", .. ~ Drup" aIId ., .hate 
.. _It,& _.,ctivcly auiaDed to them 1n 
~ a· . ,Mjdicinll and T"oiJet Preparations 
(ExcIse Duties) Act. 19" (16 of 19"). 
Seventeen rupeea per quiDtll. 
Fifteen 1* ..u. ~ fJGIDrmI. 
Fifteen per cent. ,. .,...,... 
Ten per cent. 
III ,*,,-, 
cdsJt&BrJCS, ANQ. TOILET PREPARATIONS Twenty-five per Cleftt. fill..."."". 
NO'" CONTAINiNG ALCOHOL OR OPIUA!, 
INDIAN HEMP. OR OnmR NAROOTIl,; 
DRUGS OR NARCOTICS. NAMELY:-
(.)P~ for .the care of the UiD ia-
dudin. beautY creams, vaoiIhiDa Cl'CIIDI, cold 

11)9 
llent 
NQ. 
Description of goods Rate of duty 
( r) 
--. ----- ------- .--, .. - ~.- -... ----------------
(z) 
---------_._---_.--_._-_._- ... 
skin rOods and tOllia, .. . ,baby creams ... make-up Cl'IIImI. ~.IiI" 
pOwden, toilet powders ,and powders. 
(iJ) Hair lotion, creIIIl and poaaadc. 
Ex(lla.UItion.- "Alcohol", "ODium", "Indian 
Hemp", "Narcotic Drugs" and '(Narcotics" have 
the meaninp resoect~.. "'ianaHo'them in 
aection 2 of the Medic:iDIItDCl 'I'oiJIfPreplrationa 
(Excise Duties) Act, I9S5 (16 of 1955). 
NITRIC. HYDROCHLORIC AND SULPHURIC 
ACIDS (INCLUDING FUMING ACIDS AND 
ANHYDRIDES THEREOF), ALL SORTS. 
Ten per cent. ad fJa~. 
I04 H COMPRE~SED, LIQUIFIBDOR SOLIDIFIED 
GASES, THE FOLLOWiNG, NIlMBLY:-
(i) OXYJCn . Ten per cent. ad valornrr. 
(ii) Chlorine. Ten per cent. trd t·a!ortlrt. 
(iii) Amm'lnia Ten per cent. ad wlorl!HI. 
(ifJ) Carbonic acid (carbon dioxil!el Ote fq~ce reI' h!q I' m. 
ttl) Refrigerant gas~1 not otherwise specified, Twenty pt:r '·C'nl. ad fJO/OI'", 
such as sUlphur !u~'fidiI!'nd rreOn. 
14HH FERTILISERS. ALL SORTS, BUT EXCLUDING Ten per QIIlt. ,. t»/ __ . 
NATURAL ANIMAL OR VEGETABLE FER-
TILISERS WHEN ·NOT CHBMICALLY 
TREATED. 
IS "SOAP" mean, all varieties of the prOduct known 
QDmI8efa.Dya '-aOIP-
lSA 
I. Soap in or in relation to the ~ of. wOidI 
.~yproc:ea is qr;Unartly carried on with the aid 
Of pOwer or of~am for heatinl-
(1) '~" hOUsehOld and laundry 
(2) Odler sorts 
n. Sqap,iD. or·in r~lation to the manufacture of 
.wbiCh-sao.J*lIIOII hal been carried on with the 
aid of power or of steam for beatina· 
Sixand a halfpcr cent.adtlalor,,,,. 
Nine and a hM per cent. ad 
fJalor"". 
Six and a half per CClDt •• d 
va/or,m. 
.. ----- -_._.--_._-, .--. _.". - ---- .---.-. -" 

Item 
No. 
(I) 
15M 
110 
Deecript.ion of goode 
(iii) CellulOse acetate (fncludlllg di-or trl-
acetate), Cellul08e acetate butyrate and 
CellulOse propionate, Cellulose acetate-
propionate, Ethyl cellulOSe and Benzyl 
cellul08e, whether plasticieed or not, arid 
plasticised Celluloae nitrate. 
(~) Articles made of plaatica. all lOtti, including 
tubes, rods, sheets, foils, ltic:ka, other rectangular 
Or profile shapes, whether laminated or Dot, 
and whether rigid or Sexible, 
includinglayftat tubiDp and POlyvinyl chloride 
sheets. 
Bx,lanation.-For the purpose of sub-item (~), 
"plastics" means the vari9US ·artiflcial or 
synthetic resins or plastic material included 
in sub-item (I). 
ORGANIC SURFACB-ACI'IVE AGENTS 
(OTHER THAN SO&).J SURFACE-ACTIVE 
PREPARATIONS AND wASHINGPREPARA-
TIONS, WHETHER OR NOT CONTAINING 
SOAP. 
Rate of duty 
(3) 
Ten per cent. ad "alor.",. 
15B CBll.OPHANE, THAT IS, ANY FILM OR SHEET Twenty per cent. ad tlalorelll. 
OF RBGBNBRA TED CELLULOSE. 
MaDafactare4 looda clualfled chleay.,y material 
16 TYRBS-
"l'y:re" means a pneumatic tyre in the manufacture 
Of which rubber is used, and includes the inner 
tube and the outer COVer of such a tyre. 
(I) Tyree for motor vehicles 
(2) For cycles (other than motOr cycles)-
(a) ~tyres 
(b) tubcl 
(3) All other tyres. 
SiXty naye pai~ per lyre Or fifteen 
.per cent. iMl "a/or."" Which 
evcr is higher. 
Thirty naYe paise per tube of 
fifteen per CCIIt. ad flalor"", 
whlGbevet is hi ,her. 
Fifteen per cent. ad Wllor"". 
t6A RUBBER PRODUCTS, THE FOLLOWING.· 
NAMELY:-
r6B 
tl) Latexfoamsponre Twenty. Pel cent. ad wlorem. 
(2) Plat~J ,hem and atriPi unhardened, whether TweDt!' Per --at. ad t)olor.".. 
,.ulcanised or not, and wbeteher combiJled with 
any textDe material or otherwise. 
(3) PiPing and tubing, of unhardened vUlcanised .,pif~cnRer cent. ad fla/or."" 
rubber. ." .; ... 
(,J) T:l'un:nio1., co1.vcYOr or elevatOr belts Or Pifteen per unto ad WI/or"". 
belting, or Vulcanised rub~r. . , . 
PLYTOOD, BLOCKBOARD, LAM INBOARD, 
BATTEN BOARD, HARD OR SOFT WALL 
BOARDS OR INSULATING' BOARD AND 
VENEERED PANELS ; WHBTIIER OR NOT 
CONTAINING ANY MATBRIAL OTHER 
THANWOOD; CELLULAR WOODPANBLS; 
BUIlDING BOARDS OF WOOD PULP OR OF 
VEGETABLE FmRE, WHETHER OR .NOT 
BONDED WITH NATURAL OR ARTIPICIAL 
RESINS OR WITH SIMILAR BINDBRS; AND 
--------_ .. __ . 

Item 
No. 
(1) 
lli 
Delcripdon of ,oodt 
(a) 
ARTIFICIAL OR RECONSTITUTBD WOOD, 
BEING WOOD SHAVINGS, WOOD CHIPS, 
SAW DUST, WOOD FLOUR OR OTHER 
LIGNEOUS WASTE AGGLOMBRATBD 
WITH NATURAL OR ARTIFICIAL RBSINS 
OR OTHER ORGANIC BINDING SUB-
STANCES, IN SHEETS, BLOCKS, BOARDS 
OR THE LIKE--
---------
(I) Plywood for tea-chestl when cut to aize in Ten per cent. tI4 ......... 
panels or sboob and pacltcd in Bcts. 
(il) Allothen Fifteen per ceDe. till .. ",... 
17 PAPER] all.sorta (includinl pasteboard, millboard, 
sUawDoarQ and cardboard), in or in relation to the 
manufacture of which any proccaB is ordinarily 
carried on with the aid of power-
(I) Cigarette tissue One rupee per ld1~am. 
(2) Blotting, tOilet, target, tislueother than ci&a- Fifty naye palae per Itilowram. 
rette tissue, teleprinter, typewriting, maniford. 
bank, bond. art paper. chrome paper. tub-sized 
paper, cheque paper, stamp PaPer. c:artridae 
paper. parchment. and coated board (indudiJig 
art boUd, chrome board and board for playin, 
cards). 
(3) Printing and writing paper, packing and wrap- Thirty-five naye paise per 
ping paper, strawboard and pulp-board, inclu- ldlop'8Dl. 
ding grey bOard, corrugated board, duplex 
and triplex bOards. other sorts. 
(4) All other ldDda of paper .nd paper-board Dot Fifty Jla1e paiIe per kilqrram. 
otherwise specified. 
I 8 RAYON AND SYNTHETIC FIBRES AND YARN Forty-five rapees per kilogram. 
lSA 
Explan4tion.:-"Rayon and synthetic fibres and yam" 
shall be deemed to include man-made fibres and 
yarn made out of man-made fibres. 
COTTON TWIST, YARN AND THREAD ALL 
SORTS, sized or unaizcd, in all furms indUdiDi 
skeins, banks, cops, CODCI, bobbins, pims, spooll, 
reels, cheeses, balls or on ~ beams, in orin rela-
tion to the manufacture of which .. ,y proc:eaa is ordi-
narily carried on with the aid of power-
(I) of counts 29 or more 
(2) of counts leas than 29 
&Plananon.-(l) "Count" means the size of grey 
yarn expressed as the number of 1000 metre hanb 
per one-half kilogram. 
(2) ':Por multiple fold yarn,f'count" means the 
count of the basic single yarn. 
ISB WOOlLEN YARN, All SORTS INCLUDING 
KNITTING WOOL. in or in relation to 
, the manufacture·o£ wIUc:h. .any proc.u . is 
ordinarily carried on with tbe aido! powa'-
(I) Worsted yarn-
(a) .. of 48S coun~ and more 
(b) oflcssthan4 8S counts 
(2) Othen 
'. 
Expltmazlon.-"Count·· meanl the lire ofliDl1e yarn 
expressed •• the number of S60 yard banb per 
pound. 
Six rupees and fifty paiIe per 
kiloInm· 
One rupee per ItilQIrIID. 
TweDt)" per ceDt. 1IIl~. 
FiftCCll per ceDL lid fJ __ • 
Se'fell and a baIf per cent. fill 
~. 

112 
----------
Item 
No. 
l)escription of SOOdI 
(2) 
Rate of duty 
(3) 
19 COrrON FABRICS-
"Cotton Fabrics" means all ~es df~ mllliu-
facturcd either wholly.or :par:tly frOm cottOn 
and includes dhoties,' sarees, dladders, bed-
sheets, bed-spreads, counter-panes, table-clotha, 
ealbroideE)' in the, ~ ill ,trips or in IQOtifa 
and fabrics impregnated or c:oe.ted witb,cnauuiooa 
of cellulose derivatives or of other ardficfaI plaltic 
ma~thds bUt does not include any slIch fabnc if it 
contains-
(i) 40 per cent. or more bYwe1Pt ofwool; 
(ii) 40 per cent. or more by weight of silk; or 
Gi.) 6o.per cent. or more by weight of rayon or 
attHicia1 silk: 
Provided that in the case of embroidery in the:piecc, 
in strips or in motifs and' fabriCi ~ or 
coated with preparations ofoeUu1Ci111e cSeriwtlVllS Or 
of other artificial pla~tic ma·erials. the percentaaes 
referred to i!1 (I) ttl (.ii) ::')ove shall be in relation 
to the ba.~e r.l..)rics w~l.ich are embroicSetoci'ar bDpr.ea-
nated or coated, as the case may be-
I Cotton fabrics other than (.) embroidery in the 
plecle~ in.rips or in motifs,IdMtOO lIIbrkla 
Impregnated or coated with preparations of 
cellulose deri vati ves or of othec artificial 
plaUic materlals,-
(1) Coating, su:ting, tussora, corduroy, pbeatiDe, Twelve aDd a half per cent. ,.~ 
bed-ford, satin, denim, lappet, lace, bijtted fIGlor"". 
fabric, tapestry, furnishing fabric Including 
jacquard curtain cloth, ~t~ ~8 
fabric. teI!Y towel in(:t~ 'furk;iah tl:lwel, 
terry towelling cloth iacllJdingnutllh towel-
ling cloth, blanket, c:anvu,dudt,BlJer cloth, 
tracing cloth and bu1aam cloth. 
(2) Others-
(4) Cotton fabrial, IUperfine-
tbat ,i. to ny,.fOrics in which tho avenae Biabfy.)Ili_per IqUIIR met\'e. 
count of yarn i. 48a or more. 
(b) Cotton fabrics, fino-
tllat i. to say, fabrics h~ which ~ IVQrNC 1l~1\ty pU'-: per Iq1IIfe mellr. 
OOUDt of yam il 3S1 or ntaft but.. 
than 481. . 
'c) CottOft f'abrlCi. medium-A-
that i, to IIY, fabricI in ..w.k tbe' ...... Sixty ,...per . -.quilt motte 
COUDt of)'IIfD t, a6s or'man-"'"" 
thaD3!" 
(, ; Cotton fabrica, medium-B-
~.t ~ t~· IIY, flbric:a in wbJch the -venae Sixty pal" per equare anetrc. 
cow,tt ofyvn i. I7S or mare but islel8 than 
rtun'%&: 
(.) Oatlon fabrioa;come-
that is to IIY, fabrics in which. the average Sixty paise per square metre. 
count of yarn is lell tbtn 1710 
(J) Cotton fabriCi not otherwiae apecified l!iahty pallC per tiIiI*e meh'e. 

113 
Item 
No. 
Dacription of goode 
(I) (2) 
II Bmbroidery, in the piece, in stripe or in motifs, in 
or in relation to the I1llnufllCtUre ofwhich any pro-
cess is ordinarily carried on with the aid of power. 
HI Cotton fabrics impregnated or coated with preparations 
of cellulose derIvatives or of other artificial plastic 
materials. 
&tpltJllllltiDn [.-"Bue fabrics" means fabrics falling 
under sub-item I ofthi. Item wbicb.arc subjected 
to the proceu of embroidery or which are imprea,ua-
ted or coated with preparations of cellulose deriva-
tives or of other plutic materials. 
&,lanatwn /I._ coeount" means count of arey 
yarn. 
B1t/'lanarion [I/.-For the ,~ of dctenDinioa tl1e 
avenae count of yam, the foUowiDa rula .ball 
apply, namely:-
(Q) yam UIcd in the borden or aelvedaes aball 
be il1lored j 
(b) f~"If multiple-fold yam, the count Oftbe ba.ie 
sinRle yam .ball be taken and the number of 
eua. per 2S'4 millimetrea in the reed or 
~he,~~,* ofpi~ per 2$'. miJlimeu-. .. 
the ~.EoIJ' be, aball be multipUed 'by the 
number of plies in the yarn; 
(c) in the c:aae offabrica JDIIrwfacturedfrom cotton 
an4 other JII'llI, the other 1IfIII, shall, for the 
aforeeaid pQn)O&e, be deemed to be cotton ~; 
(4) the avCJ1llC count aball be obtained by Ipply-
inl the following fonnula, nlDlCly:-
-----------
Rateofduty 
(3) 
The duty for the time being 
leviable on tbe bue fabrics, if 
not already paid, phIS twenty 
per cent. ad f/alor",.. 
The duty for the time being Jevi-
able on the hue fabrics, if not 
already paid],/III twenty-five 
per cent. till t*t1rnn. 
"(Count ofwarp x number of endI per 2S '4 mi11imetreI in the reed) +. (Count for weft X 
number ofpicb per 2S'4 miUimetrea) 
(Number of ends per 2S'4 millimetrea in the reed)+,Number of picks per 2S'4 
millimeten), 
the rsult beina rounded oft', whqe"lI'neoeNal1'. by treatin,IIIY frlCtioll which il one-half or 
more as one, and disregarding any fraction whklda 1 ... tben one-bal!." 
2 SILK FABRICS-
"SUIt fabrics" means all varietiea of fabric. manufac-
tured either whoUy or partly from ailk and includes 
embroidery in the piece. ill '1IriPI or in modfa bat 
doea not include Iny such fl~ 
(f) if it contains 40 per cent. or:DIOI'e by weiPt of 
wool; 
(i.) if it contains cottOD or udftcWaBk or both aad 
leal than 40 per cent. by wcilbt of aiIk. 
(iU) if it containa no cottoD and no artificial .ilk and 
lee. thaD 40 per cent. by wei,ht of silk; or 
(ifI) if manufactured on I haDdloom : 
.-----------------

Item 
No. 
(I) 
114 
Detc:ription of lOods 
Provided that in the cue of embroidery in the piece, 
in Itri~ or in motifs. the peroentape referred to in 
(.) to (HI> aboft .ball be in relation to the bile 
tilbIiCl which are embroidered-
Rate of duty 
(I) SDk fabriCI, other than embroidery in the piece, Thirty-six paise per square mcttc. 
in stripe or in motif •. 
(2) Bmbroidery, in the piece, in strips or in motifs, The duty for ~ time beini 
in or in relation to the manufacture of which any leviable on the base fabrics 
proceaa is ordinarily carried on with the aid of if not already paid, pillS twenty 
power. per cent. ad fJalor,m. 
Bxpltmation.-"Baae fabrics" mcana fabrica fallin; 
under lub-item (I) of this item which are sub-
lec:ted to the procesa of embroidery. 
21 WOOLLEN FABRICS-
-'WooDen fabrics" means all varieties of fabrics manu-
factured wboUy of wool or which contain 40 per 
cent. or more by weiabt of wool and inc:1adea blan-
ltetI, lobia, 1'\111, ahawls and embroidery in the piece, 
in Itripa or in motif. : 
Provided that In the cue of embroidery in the piece, 
in stripe or in motifa. the percentqe referred to 
above ahall be in relation to the base fabIic, which 
are embro1dered-
(I) WoolleD fabriCl. other thaD embroidery in the Siz and a quarter per Cl:nL. (.G 
piece. in atrip, or in motifs. fJaltW"". 
(2) Bmbroldery In the piece, in strips or in motUs, The duty for the time bein~ 
in or in relation to the manufaca1re of which any leviable on the baac fabrics, if 
proceal il ordinarily carried on with the aid of DOt already paid. plus twenty 
power. per cent. ad valor"". 
R.qllauricm.-CCBue fabIica" means fabrics fallini 
UDder lub-ltaD (I) of thfa item which are lubjeded 
to me proccal of embroidery. 
u RAYON OR ARTIFICIAL SILK FABRICS-
"Rayon or artificial lut fabrics" means all varietiea 
of fabrica manufac:tlucd either wholly or partly from 
rayon or arti6clal lilt and include. embroidery in 
me pieee, in Itripe or in motifs and fabriCI impNl-
Dated or coated with prepamiolll of ceIlu10ae deri-
vatives or of other artiBcial plutie materials, but 
dOCl not include any such fabric-
(I) if It contaiDa 40 per cent. or more by weiaht of 
wool i 
(Ii) if it contalna 40 per cent. or more by weiJbt of 
aflk ; 
(iii) if It coDt.l1na cottoD and lea than 60 per cent. 
by weJaht of rayOft or artifidal Ifllt ; or 
(lei) illt oontafDa no cotton and leu than 40 per 
cent. by weiaht of wool and leal thaD 40 per cent. 
by weiaht of rayon or artificial sfllt : 
Provklecl that In the cue of embroiderY in the pieee, 
ill ttrlpa or in IDOti& and fabriCI imprcpared or 
0IIIteCI widl pnpuatioDa of ccUuloIc dcrivadvea 
------- ........ -

Item 
No. 
115 
Description of goods Rate of duty 
-.----------
(I) (~) 
or of other artificial p1l&Stic materials, tbe percent-
qes referred to in (i) to (iv) above shaD be in rela-
tion to the base ti:brics which are embroidered or 
impfCllllltcd or coated, as the c:uc may be-
(T) Raron or artificial silk fabrk.'5 other than (i) 
embroidery in the piece , in strips or in motifs, 
and (ia) fabrics impregnated or coatecI with pre-
parations of ~'elkalosc derivatives or of other 
artificial plastic materials. 
(z) Hmbroidery in the piece, in strips or in motifs, 
in or in relation to the manufacture of which 
any process is ordinarily carried on with the aid 
of power. 
(3) Fabrics imprelJUlted or coated with prepara-
tions of CCUuJOlie dcrivatives or of othcr artificial 
plastic materials. 
E3CfJlanation.-"Base fabricti" means fabrics falling 
under sub-item (I) of this Item which 
are subjected to the process of embroi-
dery or which are impresnaled or OCI8ted with pre-
parations of cellulose derivative. or of other plas-
tic malCrials. 
Sc:\'cn paise per square metre. 
The duty for the time being levi-
able on the hIIIt fabrics, if not 
already paid"bu twenty per 
cent. ad wlfw"". 
The duty for the time heins levi-
able on the but fabrics. if not 
alread~' J'IlIid, plus twenty-five 
per cent. ad fJCIIMwn. 
zzA JUTB MANUFACI'URES (INCLUDING MANU-
FACTURES OF BIMLtPATAM JUTE OR OF 
MESTA FIBRB), ALl. SORTS-
uB 
(i) Hessians }live hundred and fifty rupee. 
per metric 1iOIIIW. 
(ii) All other dcacriptionti of jute ~ Three hundered aDd fift\' rupee. 
not otherwise specified (including cloth, bags, per metric tonne. . 
twist, yam, rope: and twine). 
TEXTILE fABRICS IMPREGNATED OR COA-
TED WlTHPRBPARATIONS OP CELLU-
LOSE DERIVATIVES OR OF OTHEJl 
ARTIFICIAL P1.ASTIC MATBRJALS, 
• NOT ELSBWHliRli SPECIFIED. 
Twenty-fi"e per cent. ad t'a/ore". , 
23 CBMENT,III varieties Twenty-one per cent. a<l 
valor,,,,. 
GLASS AND OLASSWARE-
(I) Sheet glass and Plate glaS5 
(I) Lebotalory~ 
(3) G",s .hells, pa.. globes 
lamps and la1ltCnl.'I. 
Ten per cenl. ad valoreM, 
Five per CCftt. ad ,."lorem. 
and chimn\',)'. for Ten per cent. ad flalOMJI. 
(4) Other gla18wlre including tableware 
CHINA'WARB AND pORCELAI'NWARE, ALL 
SORTS-
(1) Tableware . 
(2) Sanitary ware 
(3) Glazed ti1e~ 
(4) Not otherwise specifiell 
Hxplanation.-"Chinaware" includes all sJaztd 
claywan: but does not include tenacona. 
Fifteen per cent. ad flalor"". 
Fifteen per cent. tJti vaiore"" 
Fifteen per cent. ad valor,,,,. 
Ten per cent. ad flalorl1fl. 
Ten per .m. ad valor,,,,. 
z3C ASBBSTOSCEMBNT PRODUCTS, ALL Teo rer CC'Ot. ad 'lJa/orem. 
SORTS. INCLUDING FLAT AND CORRU-
GATED SHEETS. PIPES AND TUBES AND 
TILES. 
-------------- ---- --_.'"-- "---_._---. - ~---- .. ------ .. --~.- --.----.-.----~-

Item 
No. 
(I) 
Description of good~ 
116 
Rate of duty 
(3) 
24 SILVER . Seven naya paise per every ten 
grams. 
25 IRON IN ANY CRUDE FORM including pig Forty-five rupees per metric tonne. 
iron, scrap iron, molten iron or iron cast in any 
other shape or size. 
26 STEEL INGOTS Including steel melting scrap. Seventy-five rupees per metric 
tonne. 
2M COPPER AND COPPER ALLOYS CONTAIN-
ING NOT LESS THAN FIFTY PER CENT. 
BY WEIGHT OF COPPER,-
(I) In any crude form including ingots, bars, blocks, One thousand and five hundred 
slabs, billets, shots and pellets. rupees per metric tonne. 
(Ia) Wire bars, wire rods and castings, not othcr- One thousand and five hundred 
wise specified. rupees per metric tonne. 
(2) Manufactures, the following, namely, plates, Two thousand rupees per metric 
sheets, circlc~, strirs and f('il~ in any form or tonne. 
size. 
(3) Pipes and tubes. 
26AA IRON OR STEEL PRODUCTS, THE FOLLOW-
ING, namely:-
(I) Semi-finished steel including blooml, billets, 
slabs, sheet bars, lin bars and hoe bars. 
(ia) Bars, rods, coils, wires, JOlatK, girders, 
angles, channels, tees, beams, zeds, through, 
piling. and all other rolled, forged or extruded 
shapes and sections, not otherwise specified. 
(i;> Plates and sheets (includiD, u.nc:oated plate; 
and sheets intended for tiDnina and forma such 
as r i dac., channels. rain water pipes, and their 
fittinp made f. om piaU. or.beetS but not in-
cluding plates and sbeets after tinninl). and 
hoops, all sOrt;, other than skelp and strips. 
(m) Flats, Bkclp and strips . 
(if) Pipet and tube. (incl\ldina b1anb therefor) all 
IOrti. whether rolled. foraed; ~ c:aat. drawn, 
annealed, welded or emuded. 
Ten per cent. ad valorem. 
Fifty rupees per metric tonne 
plu5 the excise duty for the 
time being leviable on steel 
ingots. 
Fifty rupees per metric tonne 
plus the excise duty for the 
time being leviable lin 
steel ingots. 
Three hundred rupcle!l per metric 
toDDe lira the dciIe duty fOr 
tbe time bein,leviable on ateel 
ingots. 
Three hundred rupeel per metric 
tonne p/IU the escise duty fOr 
the time beina leviable on ateel 
inaots. 
Fifteen per ceDt. ad NlDr",. PlfII 
the ezciJe duty for the time 
befOg leviable OIl Pia iron or 
steefinaom ... the lie may IK:. 
(f) All other 1tec1 Qlslinp. not otherwise specified. Five per coDt. GIl NlDr",.,ws 
the excise duty for the tlmc 
being l(viable on Itcelinaom. 
26B ZINC-
(I) U~t, 'indudiD, ingotl. caJrea. bars. FiVe hundred rupeea per metric 
blOcb. bird Or loft Ilab9. billets. piltel. c:athodea. tonne. 
anodea, Plluet., spelter, drOll, ash. and brOlreD 
zjQc. 
(z) ManufactUre., the foUowtnc, namely, pilte.. BiJht hundred rupees ocr metrie 
.heets, circles, stripe Iftd foila in any form Ot .ize. tonne. 
Ten per Cf'Ilt. ad f)tJ/",."". 

Item 
No. 
(I) 
Delc:ription of aoOOs 
(2) 
117 
Rate or duty 
27 ALUMINIUM-
(a) Inany crude form including ingots, ban, blOCks, Nine hundred and fifty rupees pcr 
slabs, billets, shots and pellets. metric to1lDc. 
(aa) Wire bars, wire rods and castings, not otherwi;e Ninc hundred and fifty rupees per 
specified. metric tonne. 
(b) ManufactUres, the followinJ, namely, platea, onetthoUiand four hundreciand 
,heetB, circlca and Itrips in any form or size, not fifty rupees per metric tonne. 
otherwise lPecified. 
(bb) Foill, that is a productofthicll;nesl (excluding TWO thoUllnd rupees per metric 
any backing) not exocedJn, o· I, miI1imetres. tonne· 
(c) Pipes and tubes, other than extruded piPeS and Twenty pcr cent. ad oalor ..... 
tubes. 
Cd) Extruded shaPes and sections includi11lextruded TWellty per cont. ad valor,m. 
piPeS and tubes. 
LEAD unwrought, including ingots, pigs, blOcks, FiVe hundred rupee' per metric 
anodes, slabs, cakes and cast sticks. tonne. 
28 TIN PLATE AND TINNED SHEETS INCLUD- Three hundred andl sevc:l1ty-ftve 
ING TIN TAGGERS, AND CUTTINGS OF rupees per metric tonne. 
SUCH PLATES, SHEETS OR TAGGSRS. 
Machinery .Dd Tr .... port BqllipmeD t 
29 INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINES, ALL 
SORTS, NAMELY-
(j) Those designed for use as a prime1l0ver Cor trans- Ten per Cellt. ad 
pOrt vehiCles and have been given Cor that pur-
pOSe some special shape, lize or quality which 
would not be elBential for their use for any other 
purpose. 
(ii) Others 
29A REFRIGERATING AND AIR - CONDITIONING 
APPLIANCES AND MACHINBRY, ALL SORTS, 
AND PARTS THBREOF-
Fiyc per CeIlt. till valor .... 
(I) Refrileraton and other refrigeratina appliances, Thirty Per cent. ad valo,,,,,. 
which are OrdinarilY sold Or offered fOr laic as 
ready aSlembled units, such as ice makers, 
bortle coolers,diaplay cabinets and .water coolers. 
(2) Air-conditioners and other air-conditiODilli Thirty per cent. till wUor,m. 
appliances, which are ordinarily ,old or otfered 
for sale as ready assembled units. induclill, 
package type air-conditioners and evaporative 
type of coolers. 
(]) Parts of rcfrilerating and air-conditioning appli· FOrty Pet cent. ad f!a/or,m. 
ances and machinerY, all IOrtS. 
30 ELECTRIC MOTORS, ALL SORTS lAND 
PARTS THEREOF, NAMELY-
(1) those dc.iJned for use in circuits of Jell than)IO Fifteen per' cent. ad val""".. 
amperes and at a pressure not elfCCCdJDg 2,0 
volts. 
(2) lhOle dcliped for use in circuits at a preIIUfC 
,~~ceedinl 400 ..,11:1, and 

118 
nem No. 
Description of ,oads Rate of duty 
(I) (,z) 
(i) with a rated capacity not exoeeclinl 10 H.P. Ten per cent. ad "Glo'''tl. 
(is) exceeding 10 H.P. Five per cent. lid f.'Qlorelll. 
(3) aU others Fifteen Per cent. ad f}{JW",II. 
(4) parts of electric motors Fifteen Per cent. ad. {la/ortlll. 
EqJ1Gnau·on.-Thii item docs not include motora 
specJa11y desi,Ded for USe in arumopboDes or record 
players and aU pam of lua metol'l. 
POWER. DRIVEN PUMPS (INCLUDING 
~~I~~~~io"SLtcWws, 
WHBTHBR OR NOT FIll WlTH MEA-
SUlUNG DEVICES. 
31 ELECTRIC BATTERIES AND PARTS THERE-
011-
(I) Dry 
(,z) Storage 
Twenty per cent. ad valort"" 
Pifteen per cent. ad Valofelll. 
Fifteen per cent. ad valorllll. 
(3) Parts of storage batteries, the following, namely Seventeen and half per cent. ad 
containers, COV4f8 aDd platos. vaI.,NIn. 
32 ELECTRIC LIGHTING BULUS AND 
FLUORESCENT LIGHTING TUBES-
(1) Vacuum and gas-filled bulbs 
. 2) Fluorescent tubes . 
" 3) Sodium and mercury vapour disc;burae lamps 
(4) AU sorts, not otherwise specified 
B ELECTRIC FANS, including air circulaton but 
fteludill!la tbeac which an: desiaDed (or use in an 
indUllriil system as parts iIlcftspenl.b1e for its 
operation and have ~.ttA for daat purpose some special shape or wblch would not be 
essential for their use for lUly other purpose-
EI:ven per cent. aJ'Valorelll • 
Twenty-two per cent. aa 
~.'a'(lrl1n. 
Six per cent. ad t'alorem. 
Sixteen I\.:r cent. ad ~'alorrm. 
(1) Table, cabin, carriagc, pedestal and air circulator Six per ccnt. ad valorem. 
fans, DOt ex~inlJ 40'6 c:eDtimctres. 
(2) All other f\lns Eitlu and a half per cellt. ad 
tId'-'-. 
3)A WIRliLESS RtiCBIVING SHTS, ALL SORTS, Twenty per cmt. ad fJalo/·elll. 
INCLUDING TRANSISTOR SETS AND 
RADIOGRAMS. WITH oa WITHOUT LOUD-
SPEAKER. 
338 
" 
PARTS OF WIRELESS RECEIVING SETS 
(INCLUDING PARTS OF TaANSISTOll SETS 
AND RADIOGRAMS) NAMELY, JU..BC1'RO-
NIC VALVES AND TUBES. TAANSIS-
TORS AND SEMICONDUCTOR DIODES. 
ELECTRIC WIlU::S AND CABLES, ALL SORTS, 
NOT OTHERWISE SPECIFllu>-
Five rupees each. 
(i) Insulated witts and cables of copper, aluminium Fifteen per cent. ad ,,'alor,m. 
or other metals anJ alloys, whether sheathed or 
unsheathed, the cond~Qr of any COle of whicb, 
not being one speciaUy dClisned as a pilot core, has 
• 

ltfm 
No. 
119 
------------------ .... -.- ... ------.--- ---
Description of goods 
(z) 
a soctio~aJ area not exceedm, I' S squaremil~­
metres U1 the case of copper, or not exceedmg 
2' S squarr millimetres in the CIIIe of aluminium 
Clr of not more than equivalent conductivity as of 
copper in the case: of other metals and alloys. 
Rate of duty 
(3) 
(;i) AU other~. Five per cent. ad t·alorun. 
ExplQnatioll.- The expression "Electric wires and 
cables, all sorts" used in this item shall not include 
square or rectangular conductors, whether insulated 
Clr not. 
33C DOMtiSTIC ELECTRICAL APPLIANCES, NOT Ten per cent. ad f'alore",. 
ELSEWHERE SPECIFIED. 
F.xp/Wlatioll I.-·'Domestic clcl.'tric..1 appliances" 
means electrical appliances normally used in the 
household and similar appliances used in hotels. 
restaurants. hosle1s, offices, educational institu-
tions, hospitals, train kitchens, aircraft or ships, 
pantries, canteens, tailoring establishments. 
laundry shops and hair dressing saloons. 
l?xpianation II .-Interchangeable parts or auxiliary 
devices accompanying an appliance to make it suit-
able for various purposes shall be assessed to duty 
along with the appliance. 
34 MOTOR VEHICI ES-
35 
"Motor vehicles" means all l1'IL'ChanicaUy propelled 
vehicles adapted for usc upon roads. and inc:lucks 
a chassis and a trailer; but doc~ not include a vehicle 
running upon fixed rails. 
( J) Auto-cycles, motor cycles, scooters, auto-ridt-
shaws and any other three-wheeled motor 
vchicles. . 
One hundred and seventy-five 
rupees each or leftn and a half 
per a:ar. tid ,laiD'''''''. whichever 
ill higher. 
(2) Motor vehicles of not more: than 16 H. P. by One thousand rupees each or ten 
RoyalAutomobil.c Club (R.A.C.) ratllll. Fr CIIIIL "" (l1Jl,m"1, whichever 
18 bIPer. 
(3) Motor cars of 11lQle tban 16 H.P. by Royal TIuec thOll1llnd rupees each or 
Automobile Oub (R.A.C.) ratiDlr. conltrUCed ifteen per' c:eat. ad 'Valor,,,,, 
or adapted to carry not more than nine whiche\"Cr is hilther. 
persons. 
(3A) Tracton, including agricultural tractors 
(4) Motor vehicles, not otherwise specified 
ExpkultJlioll.-For the purposes of this item, where a 
motor vehicle is mounted, fitted or fixed with any 
weight-tlitting. earth movina and similar specialiaed 
material handling equipment, then such equipment 
other than the chassis, Ihall not be taken into 
acoount. 
CYCLES, PARTS OF CyCLES OTHER THAN 
MOTOR CYCLES, NAMBLY-
(I) free wheds . 
(2) rims 
Ten rer CCIIt. ad {'a/ore",. 
Two thousand five hundred rupees 
each. 01" twdn aad balf per cent. 
ad valorem, whichever is higher. 
Foor rupees each. 
----- -_ ..•. _.-

Item 
No. 
(I) 
120 
Description of goods Rate of duty 
36 FOOTWEAR AND PARTS TIlEREOF in or in 
relation to the manufacture of which any proceIII 
is ordinarily carried on with the aid of power-
(J) Footwear . 
(2) Parts of footwear 
Explanation.-"Footwear" includes all varieties of 
footwear, whether known IS boots, shoes, sandals, 
chappa1s, or by any other name. 
Ten per cent. Ild valorem. 
Fifteen per cent. Ild valore",. 
37 CINEMATOGRAPH FILMS-
37A 
(I) Unexposed . Two paise per metre. 
(iz) P.xposed.-
Of a width of Below 30 mm. 
30 mm. or higher in width 
(I) News-reels and shorts not exceeding 500 metres Fifty paise per Thirty paise 
metre. per metre. 
(2) Feature films advertisement shorts, and films One rupee and One rupee 
not otherwise' specified. fifty paise per per metre. 
GRAMOPHONES, INCLUDING RECORD PLAY-
ERS RECORD PLAYING DECKS AND 
RBCbRD CHANGER DECK~. WHETHER 
MECHANICALLY OR ELECTRICALLY 
DRIVEN, wml OR W1THOur AN IN-BUILT 
SYSTEM OF SOUND REPRODUCTION OR 
AMPLIFICATION (ACOUSTIC, BLBCTRONIC 
OR TRANSISTORlSED), AND PARTS AND 
ACCESSORIES THEREOF NOT ELSEWHERE 
SPECIFIED, AND GRAMOPHONE RECORDS, 
ALL SORTS -
metre. 
<,) Gramophones, rerord players, record playing Twenty per cent. ad valor"" . 
decks or record changer decb. 
(ii) Parts and accessories of gramophones, record Thirty per cent. Ild -calor,,,,. 
players, record playing dcclta or recOrd changer 
decks, 
(iii) Gramophone records, all 90rlS, other than rna· Fifteen per cent. Ild valor."" 
tricea. 
(iv) Matrices for records, impressed. Thirty per cent. ad valorem. 
(v) Gramophone needles Or styli-
(a) wholly made of steel 
(b) others 
Twenty per cent Ild va.lor"". 
Twenty-five per cent. ad valor"", 
38 MATCHES-
.. Match" includes a firework in the form of a match; Sixty-five naye paise for every 
and, where a matchstick has more heads than one 1000 matches or fraction thereof. 
capable ofbein, ignited by striking, each euch head 
llhall be deemed to be a match. 
39 MECHANICAL LlGHTERS-
.. Mcchanical IIlhtcr" means any mechanical or cbemi- Three rupees per lighter, 
cal contrivance for causing ignition which i. portable 
------.------~---- ----

Item 
No. 
_.' _._-------... -- .... --_.,-,- .,-.-- - '-"--
Rate of duty 
(I) (2) 
and which operates by producing a spark or flame 
whether by itself or when r.roug!lt into contact with 
gas, and includes a mechanic:allightcr issued from a 
factory in an incomplete state or requiring for its 
completion the addition of a dint. 
40 STHBL FURNITURE MADE PARTLY OR Twentypercent.adClaJor,m. 
WHOLLY OF STEEL. IN OR IN RELATION 
TO THE MANUFACTURE OF WHICH ANY 
PROCESS IS ORDINARILY CARRIED ON 
WITH THE AID OF POWER. WHETHER IN 
ASSEMBLED OR UNASSEMBLED CONDI-
TION. 
41 CROWN CORKS WITH OR WITHOUT WASH- One paisa each. 
ERS OR OTHER PIITINGS OF CORK, RUB-
BER, POLYETIlYLBNE OR ANY OTHER 
MATERIAL. 
42 PILFER PROOF CAPS FOR PACKAGING, ALL One paisa each. 
SORTS, WITH OR WITHOtn' WASHERS OR 
OTHER FIITINGS OF CORK, RUBBER, 
POLYETHYLENE OR ANY OTHER 
MATERIAL. 
43 WOOL TOPS Five rupees per idiogram. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(S" Section 8) 
TOBACCO 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BIIL 
to consolidate and amend the law relating to Central duties of 
excise. 
(Shri Parkashchand B. Sethi, 
Minister of State in the 
Ministry of Finance). 