AS INTRODUCED IN Lox Sanna

, 10 401 1998

Bill No. 68 of 1998
—_——___
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998

By

Suri K.C. Konpaian, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
ws
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1998.

2. In article 514 of the Constitution, after clause
namely:—

Short title,

(0), the following clause shall be Amendment of
article 514.

"(b) to vote at elections to the House of the People, Legislative Assemblies of
States and local bodies.".



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

© ensure clear verdict of the people
clections. voting by a citizen should be made compulsory. Therefore, Article SIA m

be amended to make voting in the elections a duty of every citizen who has become
to become a voter.

Hence this Bill.

New Dew;

K.C. KOND,
May 12, 1998.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * * *

‘PART [VA
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
514. Fundamental duties— It shall be the duty of every citizen of India—

(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the National
Plag and the National Anthem;

(9) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for
freedom;

(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(व) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so;

(¢) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people
of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities; to renounce
practices derogatory to the dignity of women;

(/) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;

(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers
and wild life, and to have compassion for living creatures;

(0) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform;
(0) 10 safeguard public property and to abjure violence;

(/) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so
४ that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement }

* * * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amcnd the Constitution of India

(Shri K.C. Kondaiah, M. P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—967LS— 26.06.1998,