., 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
• 
Bill No. 88 of 1983 
THE LEPERS (DELHI, ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS, 
LAKSHADWEEP, DADRA AND NAGAR HAVEU AND 
CHANDIGJ\RH REPEAL) BILL, 1983 
J ., 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the' repeal oj the Lepers Act, 1898, as in force in the Union 
territories oj Delhi, Aa.daman and NicobaT Islands, Lakshadweep,. 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Chandigarh. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic 
of India- as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Lepers (Delhi, Andaman and Nicobar Short 
Islands, Lakshadweep, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Chandigarh Repeal) title. 
S Act, 1983. 
• 
2. The Lepers Act, 1898, as in force in the Union territories of Delhi, 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands Lakshadweep, Dadra and Nagar Haveli , . 
and Chandigarh, Q; hereby repealed . 
Repeal"! 
Act 3 of 
)898. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The enactment of the Lepers Act, 1898 (3 of 1898) was based on the 
then prevailing knowledge about leprosy, the means available for its 
treatment and control and the age-old stigma attached to the ctisease. It 
was considered that the disease was incurable, that all lepers are infectious 
and· it is essential to restrain movement of pauper lepers and prohibit 
leprosy patients from following certain trades and doing certain acts. The 
Act made provisions to prevent 'Spread of the di'Sease to others. 
2. In the light of recent scientific advancements, the concept about 
leprosy as regards its causation, spread, infectivity and treatment has 
undergone a radical change. Leprosy tis curable. Its treatment is possible 
in patients' own homes without atTecting their normal pursuits of life. 
The physical deformities, which may arise out of tms disease, 'are prevent-
able and correctible. 
It; 
'3. Most of the le~osy patients are non-infectious. The few infectious 
cases can be made non-infectious within a short period by modern treat-
ment. The problem of their infectivity is, however, to be tackled by 
taking common' precautions, as in <:ase of other infectious diseases along •. 
with this treatment. 
4. In these circumstances, it is considered necessary to repeal the 
Lepers Act, 1898. Since the said Act provides for matters in the State 
List, Parliament cannot repeal it except in respect of the Union territories. 
The object of the Bill is to repeal the said Act as in force .in the Union 
territories without Legislatures, namely,' Delhi, Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands, Lakshadweep, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Chandigarh. 
L :5. The BW seeks to give effect to the above object. 
NEW DELm; B. 8HANKARAN/lND. 
The 28th April, 1933. 
, 
2 
• 

LOK SABHA 
.\ 
BILL 
to provide for the repeal of the Lepers Act, 1898, as in force in the Union territories of Delhi, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Chandigarh. 
., 
(Shri B: Shankaranand, 
Ministe1' of Health and 
Family Wel/o7'f.) 