Bill No. as of 1182 
THE ASSAM STATE LEGISLATURE (DELEGATION OF FOWERS) 
BILL, 1982 
A 
BILL 
to confer on the President the power of the Legislature ot the State of 
Assam to make laws. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Assam State Legislature (Delegation of 
Powers) Act, 1982. 
5 2. In this Act, "Proclamation" means the Proclamation issued on the 
19th day of March, 1982 under article 356 of the Constitution, by the 
President, and published with the notification of the Government of India 
in the Ministry of Home Affairs, No. G.S.R. 256 (E) of the said date. 
3. (1) The power of the Legislature ot the State of Assam to make 
10 laws, which has been declared by the Proclamation to be exercisable by 
or under the au.thority of Parliament, is hereby' conferred on the 
President. 
(2) In the exercise of the said power, the President may, from time 
to time, whether Parliament is or is not in session, enact, as a President's 
15 Act, a Bill containing such provisions as he considers necessary: 
Provided tbat before euactIac any such Act, the PresIdent sbaIl, 
wheaever he CODd4Iers it pradicable to do 80, CODIAIlt a Committee coa,. 
stituted for the p~ con .. at;nc of thirty .",.=t .. '·01 the IIou8e of 
the People nomfnated by the Speaker and ftIteeD members of the Coun-
20 ell of States nomiDated by the ChabmaD. 
Short 
title. 
Defini-
tion, 
Confer-
ment on 
the Presi-
dent of 
the 
power 
of the 
state 
Legisla-
ture to 
make 
laws 

2 
(3) Every Act enacted by the President under 8ub-aection (2) shall, 
as soon as may be after enactment, be laid before each House of Parlia-
ment. 
(4) Either House of Parliament may, by resolution passed within 
thirty days from the date on which the Act has been laid before it under 5 
sub-section (3), which period may be comprised in one session or in two 
successive sessions, direct any modifications to be made in the Act and 
if the modifications are agreed to by the other House of Parliament dur-
ing the session in which the Act has been 'so laid before it or the session 
succeeding, such modifications shall be given effect to by the President 10 
by enacting an amending Act under sub-section (2): 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall affect the validity of 
the Act or of any action taken thereunder before it is so amended. 

STATEMENT OF· OBJE'.:!TS AND REASONS 
Under the Proclamation issued by the President on the 19th March, 
1882, the powers of the Legialature of the State of Assam are now exer-
cisable by or under the authority of Parliament. Such legislative mea-
sures as may be necessary for that State can be taken up by Parliament 
only by postponing its business; and even then, it is likely that Parlia-
ment may not have time to deal with all the legislative measures for the 
State. It is, therefore, proposed that Parliament should, in accordance 
with ~ provi&iOll5 O'fsub-clauae (a) of clause (1) of article 357 of the 
Constitutioni confer by law on the Prllident the powers·of the Lesisla-
ture of the State of Assam to make laws for the State. The present 'Bill 
is intended to give effect to this proposal, 
NEW DBLHIi 
The 28th April, 1982. N. R. LASKAR. 
I 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The proviso to'sub-clause (2) of clause 3 of the BUl provides for the 
constitution of a Committee for consultation regarding President's Acts, 
consisting of 30 members of the House o'f the People and 15 members of 
the Council of States. Expenses to be incurred in connection with "the 
meetings of the Consultative Committee would be met from the Conso.-
lidated Fund of India. This Committee will meet as and when neces-
sary. The expenditure is not expeete~ to be large and is not likely to 
exceed Rs. 4 lakhs during the period for which the Proclamation remains 
in force. The B1l1, if enacted, will not involve any non-recurring expen-
diture. 
•• 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
The power of the Legislature of the State of Assam to make laws, 
which has been declared by the Proclamation issued under article 356 of 
the Constitution in respect of that State on UH:h day of March, 1982, to be 
exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament, is sought to be 
conferred on the President under article 357 (1) (a) of the Constitution. 
Before exercising the aforesaid power, the President is required, when-
ever he considers it practicable to do so, to consult a Committee of 
Members of Parliament constituted for the purpose in accordance with 
the provisions of the proviso to sub-clause (2) of clause 3. Any Act 
enacted by the President in exercise of the :.tforesaid power is required 
to be laid before each House of Parliament and Parliament may direct 
modifications to be made in that Act [vide sub-clauses (3\ and (4) of 
clause 3]. The delegation of legislative power is in pursuance of the 
express provision in this behalf in article 357 (1) (a) of the Constitution 
and is necessary as it will not be easy for Parliament to find time to deal 
with the various legislative measures that may b~ required in respect 
of the State of Assam. Under the exceptional circum'3tances arising out 
of the is~ue of a Proclamation under article 356 of the Constitution, this 
delegation of legislative power is limited to the period during which the 
aforesaid Proclamation remains in force. To the extent that it has been 
usual fer Parliament to c~nfer on the President such le'gislative powers~ 
it can be regarded as. of .a normal character. 

LOK SABHA "". 
f - .' 
A 
BILL 
to confer on the President the power of the Legislature at the 
State of Assam to make laws. 
(Shri N. R. Laskar, Minister of State in t7ie MiniBtry of H01M Affairs) 