THE TELEVISION BROADCASTING COMPANIES
(REGULA TION) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI PRAHLAD SINGH PATEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to regulate closing down of broadcasting channels by television broadcasting
companies and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called as Television Broadcasting Companies (Regulation)
Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 68 of 2015
5
Short title
and com-
mencement.

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, "prescribed" means prescribed by
rules made under this Act.
3. No television broadcasting company shall close down the operation of its
broadcasting channel except in accordance with provisions of this Act.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, within six months of the coming into force of this
Act, constitute a Committee to be known as the Regulatory Committee.
(2) The Committee shall consist of—
(a) the Secretary to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting —
  Chairperson,  ex-officio;
(b) an Additional Secretary to the Ministry of  Finance — Member;
(c) an Additional Secretary to the Ministry of Law and Justice — Member;
(d) three persons representing the television broadcasting companies —
 Member; and
(e) three persons representing the employees of television broadcasting
channels — Members.
5.  (1) A television broadcasting company which intends to close down the operation
of its broadcasting channel shall apply to the Regulatory  Committee in such form and
manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Regulatory Committee shall, before taking a decision on  closing down of a
television broadcasting channel, give an opportunity of being heard to the employees of
that channel.
(3) The Regulatory Committee shall give its decision within three  month of the receipt
of an application made under sub-section (1).
6. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything  inconsistent
therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or in  any instrument having effect
by virtue of any law other than this Act.
7.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definition.
Guidelines for
closing down
the operation
of broadcast-
ing channels.
Constitution
of Regulatory
Committee.
Application
for closing
down the
operation of
a broad-
casting
channel.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
35
25
30

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
After the liberalization, there was a boom in the country's media industries which led to
launch of a number of channels by private limited or public limited companies. This
privatization opened up different set of problems including fall in advertising revenues and
overcrowded market resulting in layoff and closure of channels. There are ample number of
examples where private channel operators shutdown their operations within a period of one
year for various reasons. Therefore, prior permission must be obtained before stopping the
broadcasting by properly presenting the case and obtaining necessary permission from the
regulatory body without any harassment to employees and other persons working in the
broadcasting channel. This will also stop wastage of precious resources.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; PRAHLAD SINGH PATEL
February 10, 2015.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Regulatory Committee. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India for payment
of travelling allowance/dearness allowance to the members. It is estimated that an annual
recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore would be involved per annum from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and, as such, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to regulate closing down of broadcasting channels by television broadcasting companies
and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Prahlad Singh Patel, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4755LS(S3)—04-03-2015.