1
THE DISASTER MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI FEROZE VARUN GANDHI, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Disaster Management Act, 2005
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows :—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In Section 4 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in sub-section (1), for the words "as and when necessary" the words "at least
once every quarter or more often, as it deems necessary," shall be substituted.
Bill No. 214 of  2015
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 4.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Amendment of
section 46.
Amendment of
section 8.
3. In section 8 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(2A) The National Executive Committee shall meet at least once every quarter
or more often, as it deems necessary.".
4. In section 15 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the words "as and when
necessary" the words "at least once every quarter or more often, as it deems necessary,"
shall be substituted.
5. For section 27 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"27. The District Authority shall meet at least once every quarter or more often,
as it deems necessary.".
6. For section 43 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"43. (1) Subject to approval of the Central Government, the National Institute of
Disaster Management may specify the number, nature and category of officers and
employees required by it for carrying out its functions.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, alongwith the terms and conditions of
service of, officers and employees shall be such as may be specified with the approval
of the Central Government.
(3) The National Institute of Disaster Management may, if deems necessary,
appoint consultants on such terms and conditions, as it may deem fit.".
7. In section 46 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(IA). The Finance Commission shall, once in every five years, determine the
corpus of the National Disaster Response Fund.".
8. In section 47 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(3) The guidelines for identification of projects and utilisation of National
Disaster Mitigation Fund shall be prepared by the National Authority in consultation
with the National Institute for Transforming India Aayog.".
9. In section 48 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(IA) The Finance Commission shall, once in every five years, determine
the corpus of the State Disaster Response Fund constituted under clause ( a) of
sub-section (1).
(IB) The guidelines for identification of projects and utilisation of State Disaster
Mitigation Fund, constituted under clause (c) of sub-section (1), shall be prepared by
the State Authority in consultation with the National Institute for Transforming India
Aayog and be subject to review and monitoring once every five years.".
10. In the principal Act, in Chapter XI, under the heading 'Miscellaneous', before
section 61, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
"60A. A community group, youth organisation or a voluntary agency
may—
(a) assist the State Authority in all disaster management activities;
Amendment of
section 15.
Substitution of
new section for
section 27.
Substitution of
new section for
section 43.
Meetings.
Officers and
other
employees of
the National
Institute.
Amendment of
section 47.
Amendment of
section 48.
Insertion of
new sections
60A and 60B.
Duties of
community
groups, youth
organisations
and voluntary
agencies.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(b) participate in capacity-building vulnerability reduction programmes
and training activities;
(c) assist in relief operations under the supervision of the State Authority;
(d) assist in conducting damage assessment and in carrying out
reconstruction and rehabilitation activities in accordance with the guidelines
framed by the State Authority; and
(e) provide such assistance to the State Authority and take such other
steps as may be necessary for disaster management.
60B. It shall be the duty of every citizen to assist the State Authority or a person
entrusted with or engaged in disaster management, whenever his assistance is
demanded for the purpose of disaster management particularly, but not limited to, for
the purposes of prevention, response, warning, emergency operation, evacuation and
recovery.".
Duties of
Citizens.
5
10

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Disasters and Disaster Management generally get discussed in their aftermath followed
by renewed interest in mitigation planning and disaster response in a responsible and effective
manner. India is a disaster prone country plagued by various kinds of natural disasters, such
as floods, drought, earthquakes, cyclones and landslides every year. Millions of people are
affected every year and the economic losses caused by natural disasters amount to a major
share of the Gross National Product (GNP). Every year, huge amount of resources are mobilized
for rescue, relief and rehabilitation works following occurrence of natural disaster.
India has put in place a Disaster Management Act, 2005 in order to mitigate occurrence
and impact of disaster alongside providing disaster response in a timely and effective manner.
From an organization perspective, the Act envisages governing bodies at national, state and
district levels and provides for such bodies to convene on "as needed" basis. This has
resulted in the National Executive Council, a body consisting of Secretaries of various
Ministries of the Government of India and responsible for formulating the National Plan, not
meeting even once from May, 2008 to December, 2012, although the country had faced many
natural disasters during the period. This was also mentioned in the Comptroller and Auditor
General (CAG) report on Disaster Preparedness. The present Bill seeks to correct this anomaly
by calling for a minimum number of meetings every quarter to ensure that action plans are
formulated and implemented effectively.
The CAG report also comments adversely on the project management capability of the
National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), as no major project undertaken by NDMA
has seen the light of the day due to deficient planning and lack of coordination with nodal
ministries. It is, therefore, proposed in the Bill that the projects be taken up in consultation
with NITI Aayog with the corpus of funds being determined by the Finance Commission and
reviewed on a periodic basis. This step will ensure better planning and focus, reduce
duplication of work being undertaken by nodal ministries and improve financial management.
The Bill also seeks to define the roles and responsibilities of various community
groups, voluntary agencies, youth organizations and more so, citizens of the country, which
is similar to existing provisions being followed in Gujarat, as these bodies/individuals play a
major role in disaster response in the current context. Lastly, the Bill also provides for
strengthening the National Institute of Disaster Management, a premier institute for training,
capacity building and management of natural disasters, on pan-India basis.
The proposed amendments would make a positive contribution to the way we view,
mitigate and respond to disasters, especially at a time when the country is reeling under the
impact of frequent and unforeseen disasters.
N
EW DELHI; FEROZE V ARUN GANDHI
July 2, 2015.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides that subject to approval of the Central Government, the
National Institute of Disaster Management may specify the number, nature and category of
officers and employees required by it for carrying out its functions. It further provides that
the National Institute of Disaster Management may, if deems necessary, appoint consultants
on such terms and conditions, as it may deem fit.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore would be
incurred per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be incurred.
5

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE DISASTER MANAGEMENT ACT, 2005.
(ACT 53 OF 2005)
* * * * * * *
4. (1) The National Authority shall meet as and when necessary and at such time and
place as the Chairperson of the National Authority may think fit.
8. (2) The National Executive Committee shall consist of the following members,
namely:—
(a) the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry or
Department of the Central Government having administrative control of the disaster
management, who shall be Chairperson, ex officio;
(b) The Secretaries to the Government of India in the Ministries or Departments
having administrative control of the agriculture, atomic energy, defence, drinking water
supply, environment and forests, finance (expenditure health, power, rural development,
science and technology space, telecommunication, urban development, water resources
and the Chief of the Integrated Defence Staff of the Chiefs of Staff Committee,
ex officio.
27. The District Authority shall meet as and when necessary and at such time and
place as the Chairperson may think fit.
43. The Central Government shall provide the National Institute of Disaster
Management with such officers, consultants and other employees, as it considers necessary,
for carrying out its functions.
46. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a fund to be called the National Disaster Response Fund for meeting any threatening disaster
situation or disaster and there shall be credited thereto —
(a) an amount which the Central Government may, after due appropriation made
by Parliament by law in this behalf provide;
(b) any grants that may be made by any person or institution for the purpose of
disaster management.
47. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be called the National Disaster Mitigation Fund for projects exclusively for the
purpose of mitigation and there shall be credited thereto such amount which the Central
Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, provide.
48. (1) The State Government shall, immediately after notification issued for constituting
the State Authority and the District Authorities, establish for the purposes of this Act the
following funds, namely:—
(a) the fund to be called the State Disaster Response Fund;
(b) the fund to be called the District Disaster Response Fund;
(c) the fund to be called the State Disaster Mitigation Fund;
(d) the fund to be called the District Disaster Mitigation Fund.
* * * * * * *
Meetings of
National
Authority.
Constitution of
National
Executive
Committee.
Meetings.
Officers and
other
Employees of
National
Institute.
National
Disaster
Response Fund.
National
Disaster
Mitigation
Fund.
Establishment
of Fund by
State
Government.
6

GMGIPMRND—1504LS(S-3)—23.07.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Disaster Management Act, 2005
————
(Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi, M.P.)