5
Short title and 
commencement.
                 As ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
 Bill No.  68 of 2025
THE RESERV ATION FOR THE OTHER BACKWARD CLASSES, 
THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND THE SCHEDULED TRIBES IN 
ADMISSION IN PRIV ATE EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
 (AIDED AND UN-AIDED) BILL, 2025 
By
Sඁඋං Dඁൺඋආൾඇൽඋൺ Yൺൽൺ ඏ, M P
A
BILL
to provide for reservation in favour of persons belonging to the Other Backward 
Classes, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in admissions in 
private educational institutions (aided and un-aided) 
and for matters connected therewith.
 B ൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-Sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows :—
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Reservation for the Other Backward Classes, 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in Admission in Private Educational 
Institutions (aided and un-aided) Act, 2025  

2
  ( 2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
  2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
   ( a) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act and published 
in Gazette; and
  ( b) “private educational institution” means any school, college, institution 
or university imparting primary, elementary, secondary, higher secondary or 
higher education including medical and technical education as recognized by the 
appropriate Government, whether aided or unaided, whether owned partly or wholly 
by a private person or trust, society, or company but does not include a minority 
educational institutions.
3. (1) The Central Government shall provide appropriate incentives to private 
educational institutions for making provisions for reservation in favour of persons 
belonging to the Other Backward Classes, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes in admission in such private educational institutions.
  ( 2) The incentives as provided in sub-section (1) may include—
   ( i) special concessions under various existing Central schemes; 
 ( ii) allotment of land on lease for educational institutions at lower prices; 
and
 ( iii) loans from nationalized banks at reduced rate of interest.
  4. The Central Government shall cause to be laid an annual report before both  
the Houses of Parliament about the action taken under this Act.
  5. The provision of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of 
any provision of any other law for the time being in force.
  6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
  ( 2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of the Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following 
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both the Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
rule.
5
10
15
20
25
30
Definitions.
Government to 
give incentive to 
Private Sector 
to provide 
reservation. 
Annual Report.
Power to make 
rules.
Savings.
35

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Presently, reservation is given to Other Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes students in admission in Government owned educational 
institutions, except in the minority institutions of the Central Government, but there 
is no provision of reservation in favour of Other Backward Classes, the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes students for admissions in private educational 
institutions.
 The Constitution (One Hundred and Third Amendment) Act, 2019 allows 
reservation upto 10 percent for economically weaker sections of society for admission 
to government and private educational institutions (aided and unaided), excluding 
minority institutions. The Constitution (One Hundred and Third Amendment) Act, 
2019 inserted new Articles 15(6) and 16(6) in the Constitution of India. These 
articles enable States to provide reservation upto 10 percent for economically 
weaker sections in Government jobs and Government educational institutions. 
Based on this, the government implemented the scheme of 10 percent reservation 
for EWS in January 2019. Several writ petitions were filed in the Supreme Court 
challenging the validity of the 103rd Amendment Act of the Constitution, 2019. The 
Constitution Bench by a majority judgment dated 07.11.2022 upheld the validity of 
The Constitution (One Hundred and Third Amendment) Act, 2019 and dismissed all 
the writs.
 There are many schemes and special provisions for the welfare of the persons 
belonging to the Other Backward Classes, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes in the country. However, despite all these measures, no major change is 
visible in their educational status. In this situation, in order to ensure their overall 
and holistic development, reservation in admission of Other Backward Classes, 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes students in private educational 
institutions of the country (Aided or Un-aided) is of utmost importance.
 At present, there is no provision for reservation in admission of students 
belonging to the Other Backward Classes, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes in private educational institutions (aided or unaided) in the country. However, 
the government cannot impress upon the private educational institutions to provide 
reservation for them. In such a situation, these institutions can be encouraged to 
provide reservation in admission to students belonging to Other Backward Classes, 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes by providing concessions and 
special schemes to private educational institutions.
 Hence this Bill.
   Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                              DHARMENDRA YADA V  
March 3, 2025

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
  Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill.  As the rules will relate to matters of detail 
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
4

 
 LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for reservation in favour of persons belonging to the Other Backward 
Classes, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in admissions in
 private educational institutions (aided and un-aided)
 and for matters connected therewith.
 
(Shri Dharmendra Yadav, M P) 