1
Short title and
commencement.
THE BIO-DEGRADABLE PACKAGING MATERIALS
(COMPULSORY USE IN PACKING
COMMODITIES) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI PARVESH SAHIB SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory use of bio-degradable packaging material in the supply and
distribution of certain commodities with the aim to curb the usage of plastic and
such other non-degradable material in packaging, and in the interests of the
environment.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Bio-degradable Packaging Materials (Compulsory
Use in Packing Commodities) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 68 of  2019
5
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "bio-degradable material" means any organic material that can be degraded
by micro-organisms into simpler stable compounds and includes material made of
paper or paperboard, bagasse, starch or cellulose or such other material or of such
composition as may be notified by the Government from time to time in the Official
Gazette, based on the recommendation of the Expert Committee as per the criteria laid
down in section 3;
(b) "commodity" means—
(i) any essential commodity;
(ii) any article manufactured or produced by any scheduled industry;
(c) "essential commodity" shall have the same meaning as in the Essential
Commodities Act, 1955;
(d) "Expert Committee" means the Expert Committee constituted under section 4;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) "scheduled industry" shall have the same meaning as in the Industries
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Central Government may, if it is satisfied, after considering the recommendations made to
it by the Expert Committee, that it is necessary so to do, by order published in the Official
Gazette direct, from time to time, and from such date, as may be specified in the order that—
(i) certain packaging material shall be qualified as bio-degradable and suitable
for packaging; and
(ii) such commodity or class of commodities or such percentage thereof, shall,
be packed for the purposes of its supply or distribution in such bio-degradable
packaging material:
Provided that until such time as the Expert Committee is constituted under sub-
section (1) section 4, the Central Government shall, before making any order under this
sub-section, consider the matters specified in sub-section ( 2) of section 4, and any
order so made shall cease to operate at the expiration of three months from the date on
which the Expert Committee makes its recommendations.
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the order or both Houses agree
that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
order.
4. (1) The Central Government may, with a view to determine the scope of bio-
degradable packaging material in addition and determining the commodity or class of
commodities or percentages thereof in respect of which bio-degradable packaging material
shall be used in their packing, constitute an Expert Committee consisting of such persons
as have, in the opinion of that Government, the necessary expertise to give advice in the matter.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may take into
consideration the experience of the experts in the academia, industry, commercial or social
sector working particularly in the field of manufacturing of bio-degradable packaging
material.
Definitions.
Power to
specify bio-
degradable
packaging
material.
Constitution
of Expert
Committee.
10 of 1955.
65 of 1951.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

3
(3) The Expert Committee shall, after considering the following matters, indicate its
recommendations to the Central Government with regard to the scope of bio-degradable
packaging material, namely:—
(a) the nature of the material, its durability and its ability to decompose
effectively;
(b) the cost of production of such material;
(c) the probable reduction in the cost of solid waste management;
(d) the impact of packaging costs;
(e) the cost-benefit analysis of industrial vis-a-vis environmental costs;
(f) the quantity of commodities which, in its opinion, is likely to be required for
packing in bio-degradable material;
(g) the nature of the commodity;
(h) the consumption pattern of the commodity; and
(i) such other matters as the Expert Committee may think fit.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the experts of the Expert Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. Where an order has been made under section 3 requiring any commodity, class of
commodities or any percentage thereof to be packed in bio-degradable packaging material
for their supply or distribution, such commodity, class of commodities or percentage thereof
shall not, on and from the date specified in such order, be supplied or distributed unless the
same is packed in accordance with that order:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the supply or distribution of any
commodity, class of commodities or percentage thereof for a period of three months from the
aforesaid date if immediately before that date such commodity, class of commodities or
percentage thereof, were being packed in any material other than bio-degradable packing
material.
6. The Central Government may, by order, require any person, who is required to use
bio-degradable material for packing under section 3, to furnish, for the purposes of this
Act,—
(a) such information in his possession, with respect to any commodity or class
of commodities or percentage thereof which requires such packing, to any officer
specified by it, in such form and within such period as may be specified by that
Government in the order; and
(b) such samples of bio-degradable packaging material for inspection by such
officer at such places and within such period as may be specified by it in the order.
7. Any officer authorised by the Central Government (hereinafter referred to as the
authorised officer) may enter, at all reasonable times, any place, premises or vehicle where
any commodity packed in bio-degradable packaging material is stored or kept for supply or
distribution, and may require its production for inspection and ask for any information
relating thereto.
8. (1) The authorised officer may, if he has reason to believe that any commodity has
been packed in contravention of section 5 and is secreted in any place, premises or vehicle,
enter into and search such place, premises or vehicle for such commodity.
(2) Where, as a result of any search made under sub-section ( 1), any commodity
packed in contravention of section 5 has been found, the authorised officer may seize such
Prohibition or
packing in
any material
other than
the bio-
degradable
packaging
material.
Power to
call for
information
and samples.
Power to
enter and
inspect.
Power to
search and
seize.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

4
commodity and any other thing which, in his opinion, will be useful for, or relevant to, any
proceeding under this Act:
Provided that where it is not practicable to seize any such commodity or thing, the
authorised officer may serve on the person an order that he shall not remove, part with, or
otherwise deal with, the commodity or thing except with the previous permission of the
authorised officer.
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, relating to searches and
seizures shall, so far as may be, apply to every search or seizure made under this section.
9. (1) Whoever packs any commodity, class of commodities or any percentage thereof
in any material in contravention of section 5 shall be punishable with fine which may extend
to an amount equal to three times the cost of the bio-degradable packaging material which
should have been used in accordance with the order made under section 3.
(2) Whoever, who has been previously penalised under this section, contravenes
section 5 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to an amount equal to six times the
cost of the bio-degradable packaging material which should have been used in accordance
with the order made under section 3.
10. If any person, when required by any order made under section 5 to furnish any
information or sample, fails to furnish such information or sample, or makes any statement or
furnishes any information which is false in any material particular and which he knows, or
has reasonable cause to believe, to be false or does not believe it to be true, he shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees.
11. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge, of, and was responsible
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company,
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent
the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this sub-section ( 1), where an offence
under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the words "company" and "director"
will have the same meaning as under the Companies Act, 2013.
12. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
every offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.
13. The Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, direct that
the powers exercisable by it under any provision of this Act, other than the power to make
orders under section 3 or under section 16 or to make rules under section 17, shall, in relation
to such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, be
exercisable also by—
(a) such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government; or
(b) such State Government or such officer or authority subordinate to a State
Government, as may be specified in the order.
Penalty for
contravention
of section 5.
Penalty for
false
statement,
etc.
Offences by
companies.
Offences to
be cognizable.
Power to
delegate.
2 of 1974.
18 of 2013.
2 of 1974.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

5
14. The Central Government may give such directions as it may consider necessary to
a State Government as to the carrying into execution of the provisions of this Act.
15. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government, State Government or any officer or employee of the Central Government or of
any State Government or any authorised officer for anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done under this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.
16. (1) If the Central Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient so
to do in the public interest, it may, by order published in the Official Gazette, exempt any
person or class of persons, supplying or distributing any commodity or class of commodities,
from the operation of an order made under section 3.
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the order or both Houses agree
that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
order.
17. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power to
exempt.
Power to
make rules.
Central
Government
to give
directions.
20
25
30
5
15
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India generates about sixteen thousand tonnes of plastic waste per day in the country,
out of which, about nine thousand tonnes is recycled, while six thousand one hundred thirty
seven tonnes remains uncollected and littered. Of the total waste, nearly forty three per cent.
arises from packaging material, which is way over the world average of thirty five per cent.
Growing economy with rise in per capita income has led to an increase in consumption of
plastic for packaging of commodities in last few years. Consumption pattern and consumer
behaviour has witnessed manifold increase in use of plastic bottles and plastic wrapping of
products. The lack of awareness and absence of effective tools to collect the discarded
plastic products including wrapping material has led to indiscriminate littering by plastic
waste. However, with the promulgation of the Plastic Waste Management Rules 2016, there
is now a formal and structured system in place in combating the issues of irregular management
of plastics.
In a matter before the National Green Tribunal, the concern over usage of plastic in
food and pharmaceutical packaging remains a bone of contention and wherein many a report
by concerned stakeholders lay claims that such usage contributes to further harm, especially
to consumers. Thus, to further the cause of a healthy environment, secure safety to consumers
and to improve the system in combating plastic waste, it would be ideal that certain products
be packaged using bio-degradable material. The need is to achieve that by creating a statutory
mechanism by way of which the Government can mandate the compulsory usage of
biodegradable material in packaging. It will push for a greater commitment towards making
wise, environment-friendly choices in the manufacturing industry. Invariably, such a resolute
show of interest by the Government will encourage and open up avenues for those who
develop and manufacture bio-degradable packaging material.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; PARVESH SAHIB SINGH
June 6, 2019.
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to provide for the constitution of an Expert Committee by the
Central Government. It also provides for appointment for experts to the Committee. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that sum of rupees two hundred crore may involve as recurring expenditure per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
7

MEMORANDUM OF DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matter of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
8

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory use of bio-degradable packaging material in the supply and
distribution of certain commodities with the aim to curb the usage of plastic and such
other non-degradable material in packaging, and in the interests
of the environment.
————
(Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—424LS(S3)—18-06-2019.