AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 68 of 2022
THE RURAL MEDICAL EDUCATION BILL, 2022
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide quality medical education and equitable
distribution of healthcare personnel to all
rural areas in the country and for
matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called  Rural Medical Education Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

   5
10
15
20
25
2
Definitions. 2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires;—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State,
the Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central
Government;
(b) “rural area” means areas other than designated urban areas;
(c) “rural candidate” means an individual who resides in a
rural area;
(d) “medical student” means a student of medicine pursuing
recognised MBBS degree in a medical institution recognised by the
National Medical Commission constituted under section 3 of the
National Medical Commission Act, 2019;
(e) “medical degree” means the recognised MBBS degree from
any Medical institution recognised by the National Medical
Commission constituted under section 3 of the National Medical
Commission Act, 2019;
(f) “medical institution” shall have the same meaning as assigned
to it in clause (h) of section 2 of the National Medical Commission
Act, 2019;
(g) “prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
          (2) Words and expressions used in this Act but not defined shall have
the same meaning as assigned to them in this National Medical Council
Act, 2019.
  3.  (1) The appropriate Government shall, within one and a half
year from coming into force of this Act, conduct a survey to assess the
shortage of healthcare professionals in rural areas of the country.
(2) The survey conducted under sub-section (1) shall be made available
to public in such manner as may be prescribed.
4.  (1) The appropriate Government shall, on the basis of survey conducted
under sub-section (1) of section 3, calculate the number of medical seats
required for rural areas and designate it as rural quota.
        (2) The appropriate Government shall bear the entire expenditure
to be incurred on providing medical degree to every rural candidate under
the rural quota including:—
(a) tuition fee for MBBS degree along with any other post-
graduate or super-speciality in any disciplines of medical sciences;
(b) the cost of lodging or boarding during the time period of
degree as mentioned under clause (a);
AppropriateGovernment toconduct surveyto assessshortageof healthcareprofessionals inrural areas.
30 of 2019.
Appropriate
Government to
calculate and
fill medical
seats required
in rural areas. 30
35

(c)  such amount as monthly allowance for basic necessities as
may be prescribed; and
(d) travel allowance as may be prescribed.
(3) The appropriate Government shall, on the basis of number of
medical seats required for rural areas under sub-section (1), take measures to
fill such seats as early as possible in such a manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The appropriate Government shall ensure that the selection of
medical seats under sub-section (3) take on a yearly basis.
5. No rural candidate shall be eligible to be selected for the rural quota
medical seats calculated under sub-section (1) of section 4 unless—
   (a) he has obtained qualified marks as per National Eligibility-cum-
Entrance Tests administered by the appropriate Government; and
 (b) declared successful in the selection interview by the Board.
  6. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the appropriate Government
shall provide reservation in Medical institutions to rural candidates belonging
to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes in
such manner as may be prescribed.
   7. Every candidate selected under rural quota under section 4 shall
comply with  such set of rules and conditions, as may be prescribed,
including,—
  (a) the completion of the medical degree with satisfactory results;
     (b) signing of an employment contract or bond for obligatory service
with the appropriate Government in rural areas.
8. Every candidate selected under rural quota shall sign an employment
contract or bond with the appropriate Government on the terms that:—
      (a) on completion of his medical degree he shall serve in the district
to which he belongs for a minimum period of six years;
       (b) if he fails to comply with the term as mentioned under clause (a)
or the rules framed under section 7, he shall be liable for cancellation of
licence to practice and also shall be liable to fine equivalent to the entire
expenditure incurred on his medical education.
     9. (1) The Central Government, shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute a Board to be known as the National Board for Rural
Medical Education for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
  (2) The National Board shall consist of:—
Reservation toCandidates.
Rules forselectedCandidates.
EmploymentContract, bondfor medicalstudents forObligatoryrural service.
Constitutionof NationalBoard forRuralMedicalEducation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
3
Method of
selection
of rural
candidates.

(a) a representative each from the Union Ministry of Finance; Health
and Family Welfare and Rural Development;
(b) one member representing Scheduled Castes;
(c) one member representing Scheduled Tribes;
(d) one member representing Other Backward Classes;
(e) three eminent female members from the medical field; and
(f) a transgender member from the medical field,
 to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may
be prescribed.
10. The Board shall oversee the implementation of the provisions of this
Act, including:—
(a) selection of candidates under rural quota;
(b) setting rules for candidates for selection under rural quota;
(c) setting the limit on the amount of miscellaneous expenditure on
candidates;
(d) the compliance of rules by candidates under the rural quota;
(e) taking appropriate action against defaulting candidates selected
under rural quota; and
(f) any other functions as it deem necessary for carrying out the
performance of this Act.
11. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
12. The provisions of this Act and of any rules and orders made thereunder
shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained
in any other law for the time being in force.
13. (1)The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2)Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, Parliament agrees in making any modification in the rule or
Parliament agrees that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have
Functions ofthe Board.
Act to have
o v e r r i d i n g
effect.
Power tomake rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
4
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
35

effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modifications or annulment shall be without prejudice to
the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
 (3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
5
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Countries all around the world struggle with shortages in Human
Resources for healthcare in rural areas. India too is one of them. The sixty five
per cent. of our population living in rural areas had to flounder for adequate
healthcare. To put it into perspective, the World Health Organization recommends
a 1:1000 doctor-patient ratio in order to provide both preventive and curative
care. In many rural areas our doctor-patient ratio is as low as 1:25000.
This is not owing to shortage of healthcare professionals, as India is well
on par to meet the World Health Organisation’s recommended healthcare
personnel requirements as a country. The issue lies in the distribution of
healthcare personnel, with a bulk of doctors preferring to practice in major
metropolitan cities, consequently leading to two things: an over-saturation of
doctors in cities, and an insidiously low number of doctors in rural areas.
Owing to the high prevalence of privately owned healthcare institutions,
and a lack of healthcare personnel in Community Healthcare Centres (CHC)
Primary Health Centres and Government Hospitals, preventive care and awareness
is almost certainly out of the question for many people in rural areas. In fact, there
is an approximate shortfall of 78.9 per cent of surgeons, 69.7 per cent of
obstetricians and gynaecologists, 78.2 per cent of physicians and 78.2 per cent of
pediatricians in our rural CHCs according to the 2021 Rural Health Statistics
report released by the Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. This in turn
leads to catastrophic out of pocket expenditure on health at the tertiary stages of
many diseases. The National Health Policy, 2017 stresses on the need for preventive
care, but this is simply inaccessible for most given the current doctor-population
ratio in rural areas.
While certain States have implemented progressive laws requiring
 a certain time period of mandatory rural service to be completed by MBBS
graduates from Government institutions, there is a need for a more sustainable,
long term and community oriented solution.
Hence, the need is to provide medical seats free of cost to needy candidates
from rural districts in India, on the condition that they will practice and provide
care to people in their home district for a minimum duration of time failing which
there will be strict penalties imposed. This is owing to the extremely high tuition
fees of medical courses, which often dissuade many needy rural candidates from
pursuing medicine.
The present Bill not only seeks to solve the shortage of healthcare personnel
in medical areas, but also extends to facilitate the inclusion of needy, marginalised
communities  into our health workforce. With this comes the added  benefit of
receiving healthcare from doctors from ones own community and area, who are
more likely to understand its intricacies and context.
            Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;
 17 January, 2022.                      SUPRIYA SULE
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the appropriate Government to
conduct surveys to assess the shortage of healthcare professionals in rural
areas of the country. Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the appropriate
Government to bear the entire expenditure to be incurred on providing
medical degree to the eligible candidates.  Clause 9 provides for Constitution
of National Board for Rural Medical Education. Clause 11  provides that
the Central Government shall provide requisite funds for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill. At this stage, it is not possible to estimate the amount
to be incurred. However, the Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an
annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore would be
involved.
       A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifteen hundred crore is likely
to be involved.
7

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to
matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power, therefore, is of
a normal character.
8

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide quality medical education and equitable distribution of
healthcare personnel to all rural areas in the country
 and for matters connected therewith.
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P .)