1
Short title and
commencement.
THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2020
By
SHRI ANTO ANTONY,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Amendment)
Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 18 of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—
"18A.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgement, decree or order
of any court or any of the provisions of the National Medical Commission Act, 2019 or
any other law or regulation for the time being in force, any person with any form of
disability, who clears a selection test for admission to any under graduate, post graduate
or diploma course in medical science as recognized by the Medical Council of India,
shall not be denied admission in such course on ground of such disability.
Bill  No. 68 of  2020
Insertion of
new section
18A.
No student
with disability
who has
cleared
selection test
to be denied
admission to
and
completion
of medical
education.
5
10
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(2) No student who has been admitted to any medical course as recognized by
National Medical Commission and who by reason of disability either prior to the
admission or subsequent to the clearing of selection test or during the course of the
medical course shall be incapacitated from completing such medical course on ground
of such disability.
(3) If where a student, who suffers from any form of disability either prior to or
after admission into a medical course, finds it difficult to perform in practical classes
involving dissection or surgery, he shall be given facility of attending additional theory
classes so as to compensate the practical knowledge which he might have otherwise
gained but for the physical disability.".
5
10

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The preamble to the universal declaration of the Human Rights, which came into force
on December 1948 reads as "whereas recognition of inherent dignity and the equal and
inalienable rights of all members of human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and
peace in the world".
Over a period of time, the conceptual understanding of the rights of persons with
disabilities has become more clear and there has been worldwide change in approach to
handle the issue concerning persons with disabilities. The United Nations adopted its
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities laying down the principles to be
followed by the State parties for empowerment of persons with disabilities. India signed the
said Convention and subsequently ratified the same on the 1st day of October, 2007. The
Convention came into effect on the 3rd day of May, 2008. Being a signatory to the Convention,
India has an international obligation to comply with the provisions of the said Convention
which required an entirely new legislation. Accordingly, the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Act, 2016 was enacted.
Any able bodied can become disabled in a fraction of second by any unforeseen
reason. Every individual has the right to cherish his or her ambition. It is the will and not
always the physical strength which capacitates one to lead a useful life by contributing to
the society. Unfortunately there are people who even today share the false belief that people
with disabilities are unable to pursue such courses as medical, engineering etc. They fail to
learn the fact that Stephen Hawking, one of the most accomplished Physicist had been
suffering from amyotropic lateral selerosis or A.Ls. Had Hawking been deprived of pursuing
Science, humanity would have lost a brilliant genius. One can see a galaxy of disabled
scientists such as John Forbes Nash Jr. who was awarded Noble Prize in 1994 for inventing
the Nosha Equilibrium Theory. It is sin and shame that people write opinions and make
judgements etc. with the aid of electric light without bothering to learn the fact that the father
of electric light Thomas Edison was himself a disabled man. Temple Grandian, the famous
animal behaviourist, who was diagnosed with autism, yet the education system of the US
paved way for that genius to pursue education up to Ph.D. Albert Einstein himself was
disabled as he had severe dyslexia.
Sad, indeed, disregarding all these facts, brilliant students who even clear the medical
entrance tests are being denied admission to Medical Colleges citing reasons of physical
disability. In this context, it is pertinent to remember the words of M.A. Johnson, the totally
disabled Scientist, who is a pioneer in manufacturing LED lights "My mind is not imprisoned
by my body.".
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016
with a view to ensure that any person with any form of disability shall not be denied admission
into any medical course nor be deprived of completing medical education on ground of such
disability.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ANTO  ANTONY
January  28, 2020.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016
————
(Shri Anto Antony,  M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5344LS(S3)—02-03-2020.