AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

17 DEC 200

Bill No. 68 of 2004

THE SPECIAL FINANCIALASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF
UTTARANCHAL BILL, 2004

By
‘Suni K.C. Svc Baba, MP.
n

BILL

to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Uttaranchal for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward
Sections of People and for the development, exploitation and proper utilization of its

resources.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (J) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of Uttaranchal
Act, 2004,

(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
5 notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of Uttaranchal to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be
undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of

0 promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Sections

Short title
and
commencement.

Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Uttaranchal,


2

of people or for the development, proper utilization and exploitation of the resources the:
State.

Act not in 3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
eroussie of law to be made by Parliament or for the time being in force.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Having been part of the erstwhile State of Uttar Pradesh, the region known as
Uttaranchal remained socially and economically backward mainly because it was found
impracticable to administer this region from the far away capital at Lucknow. The low pace of
development in the region resulted in the agitation by the people of the region for a separate
State, Ultimately, the Government of India respected the wishes of the people of the region
and a new State of Uttaranchal was created. The State was also subsequently granted the
special category status.

‘The State of Uttaranchal is socially and economically backward. Problems of poverty,
unemployment, illiteracy as well as measures for proper utilization of resources, welfare of
weaker sections in the region and for initiating new development schemes are required to be
addressed urgently and in a time bound manner. It is, therefore, necessary that the Central
Government should provide some special financial assistance to the State of Uttaranchal for
its all-round development including the welfare of weaker sections and for the development
and exploitation of its vast resources. Such a step of providing financial assistance to this
new born State would go a long way in building this nation more and more strong.

Hence this Bill.

New Detut; K.C.SINGHBABA
August 12,2004.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Uttaranchal for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward
Sections of People and for the development, exploitation and proper utilization of its
resources

(Shri K.C. Singh Baba, M.P,)
MGIPMRND—2341LS—17.09.2004.