Bill No. 68 of  2014
THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO COWS BILL, 2014
By
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for effective measures for the prevention of cruelty to cows
and for matters connected therewith
WHEREAS cow is subjected to inhuman cruelty and atrocities resulting in law and order
problems and breach of peace, alarming depletion in its population, decline in its growth rate
and sharp reduction in cow-human ratio and consequent malnutrition, disease, disabledness,
poverty, unemployment and pollution of agricultural products and environment, it is expedient
in the interest of the nation to take effective steps to prevent cruelty to and killing of cows
and its progeny by an effective legislation to give effect to the provisions of the Directive
Principles of State Policy contained in articles 47, 48 and 48A of the Constitution.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Cruelty to Cows Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "beef" means flesh of cow or its progeny in any form;
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "beef products" include extraction from beef;
(c) "cow" includes its progeny including bulls and bullocks;
(d) "export" means taking to a place outside India;
(e) "injury" means—
(i) torturing any cow so as to subject it to unnecessary pain or suffering or
causing or permitting any cow to be so treated;
(ii) abandoning any cow in such circumstances which render it likely that
it will suffer pain;
(iii) wilfully permitting any cow, by its owner to go at large in any street,
while the cow is affected with any contagious or infectious disease or without
reasonable excuse permit any diseased cow to die and includes killing of cow; and
(iv) practicing phooka or doom dev or injecting any substance in the body
of the cow for improving lactation.
(f) ‘‘killing’’ means killing by any method whatsoever and includes inflicting
physical injury which in ordinary course causes death; and
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. It shall be the duty of every person having the care or charge of any cow to take all
reasonable measures to ensure that the contravention of the provisions of this Act does not
take place.
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
or any usage or custom to the contrary, no person shall cause any injury or kill or attempt to
cause injury or kill for any purpose, whatsoever, any cow in any place to which this Act
extends.
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to,—
(a) the dehorning of cows; or
(b) the extermination and destruction of cows under the authority of any law for
the time being in force and in the manner prescribed thereunder.
5. No person shall export a cow for the purpose of killing it either directly or through
his agent or servant or by any other person acting on his behalf.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
person shall possess or offer for sale or sell or transport beef or beef products in any form.
7. (1) Whoever kills or attempts to kill or abets the killing of cow shall be deemed to be
guilty of committing an offence punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may
extend to seven years but which shall not be less than two years and with fine which may
extend to fifty thousand rupees on each cow.
(2) Whoever causes or attempts to cause or abets in causing injury to, other than
killing of, cow shall be deemed to be guilty of committing an offence punishable with fine
which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
(3) Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the
provisions of section 5 or section 6 shall be deemed to be guilty of committing an offence
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with fine which
may extend to fifty thousand rupees.
8. The Central Government shall establish a Research and Development Institute for
cow and its progeny.
Duty of
persons
having
charges of
cows.
Killing or
causing injury
or cruelty to
cow
prohibited.
Restriction on
export of
cows.
Prohibition on
sale of beef.
Penalty.
Establishment
of Research
and
Development
Institute.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
9. The provisions of this Act shall override the provisions of the Prevention of Cruetly
to Animals Act, 1960 or any other law for the time being in force to the extent of inconsistency.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
5
10
59 of 1960.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Cow is subjected to inhuman cruelty resulting in decline in its growth rate and sharp
reduction in cow-human ratio. It is in the interest of the nation to take effective steps to
prevent cruelty to cows including killing of cows, which is the most extreme form of cruelty
and to punish the guilty. With the growing adoption of non-conventional energy sources
like bio-gas plants, even waste material have come to assume considerable value. After the
cattle cease to breed or are too old to do work, they still continue to give dung for fuel,
manure and bio-gas, and therefore, they cannot be termed as useless. It is well established
that the cow is the backbone of Indian agriculture.
Under article 48 of the Constitution, a duty has been cast upon the Government to
prohibit slaughter of cows and calves. Acting under this Directive Principle, the Union
Parliament has got the legislative competence to enact a law on the subject.
It is, therefore, proposed to enact a uniform central law, namely, the Prevention of
Cruelty to Cows Act, 2014 under entry 17 of the Concurrent List in the Seventh Schedule to
the Constitution.
The salient features of the Bill are—
(i) making it a duty of every person having the care or charge of any cow to
prevent any cruelty to it;
(ii) prohibition on killing or causing injuries to cows;
(iii) restriction on export of cows;
(iv) prohibition on sale or transport of beef or beef products; and
(v) penalties for contravention of the aforesaid provisions.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUNIL KUMAR  SINGH
July 1, 2014.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 8 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a Research and Development
Institute for Cow and its Progeny. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure  to the tune
of rupees two hundred crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for effective measures for the prevention of cruelty to cows
and for  matters connected therewith
————
(Shri Sunil Kumar Singh,  M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1314LS(S3)—23.07.2014.