1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL,  2010
By
SHRI OM PRAKASH YADAV, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first  Year of the Republic of  India  as follows:—
1. This  Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2010.
2. After article 45 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,  namely:—
“45A. The State shall take steps to ensure that no child is subjected to corporal
punishment in any form by any person.
Explanation: For the purpose of this article, "child" means any person below
the age of eighteen years.".
Short title.
Protection of
children from
corporal
punishment.
Bill No.  68 of  2010
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Insertion of
new article
45A.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
"We reaffirm our obligation to take action to promote and protect the right of each
child—every human living below the age of 18 years, including the adolescents. We are
determined to respect the dignity and to secure the well-being of all children." These are the
words from the Declaration adopted by the Special Session on children of the United Nations
General Assembly, which met in New York in May, 2002 and attended by representatives of
190 countries from all over the world.
The United Nations General Assembly urged upon Governments to take all possible
steps as part of achieving Millennium Development  Goals, to provide children affection,
love and care so that the future generation would grow in a friendly and healthy atmosphere
where they will develop their personality in an atmosphere of dignity.
In this context, it is very important that children are protected from all forms of corporal
punishments by anyone, including the parents and teachers.
By amending the Constitution, India ensures that the dignity of children will be given
utmost respect and contributes greatly in achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; OM  PRAKASH YADA V
May 10, 2010
2

LOK  SABHA
————————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Om Prakash Yadav, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2701LS(S4)—05-07-2010.