| 4 #8 AUG 203 (19
‘As merzonucep m Lox SABHA sO |
का (४०, 68 of 2003

THE STATE OF DELHI BILL, 2003

| 7
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES

PARTY
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1, Shorttitle.
2. Definitions.
PARTIL

ESTABLISHMENT OF THE STATE OF DELHI
3, Establishment of the State of Delhi.
4, Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constitution.
5. Saving powers of the Government.

PARTI
‘REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES
The Council of States
6. Allocation of seats in the Council of States to the state of Delhi.
7. Allocation of sitting members and term of their office.
_ The House of the People

8. Allocation of seats in the existing House of the People.
9. Provision as to sitting member.
The Legislative Assembly

10. Provisions as to the Legislative Assembly.
11. Speaker and Deputy Speaker.
12, Rules of Procedure. हु

PARTIV
Hicu Court,
13. High Court for the State of Delhi.
14. Provisions as to Advocates.

15, Practice and procedure in the High Court of Delhi;

16, Custody of seal of the High Court of Delhi.

17. Form of writs and other processes.

18. Powers of Judges.

19. Principal seat and other places of sitting of the High Court of Delhi.

20. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court.

21. Transfer of proceedings to the High Court of Delhi.

22. Interpretation, ete.
है -@



CLAUSES

24.
25.
26.

é

44.

45,
46,

47,
48,
49.

50.
51.

53,

@)

PARTV

AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES

| Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by the Legislature.

Reports relating to the accounts of the existing Union territory.
Allowances and privileges of Governor of the State of Delhi.
Distribution of revenues.

PARTVI

ASSETS AND LIABILITIES

. Definition.

. Land and goods.

. Cash Balances.

. Arrears of taxes.

. Right to recover loans and advances.

. Assets and liabilities of State undertakings.
५. Refund of taxes collected in excess.

. Certain deposits.

. Provident fund.

. Pensions granted by the Administrator, ete.

Contracts.
Liability in respect of actionable wrong.
Liability as guarantor of co-operative societies.

Ttems in suspense.

. Residuary provision.
2. Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement.
3, Power of Central Government to ordey allocation or adjustment in certain.cases.

PART VIL

PROVISIONS AS TO ARRANGEMENTS, CORPORATIONS AND wrex-STATE AGREEMENTS | ~

Continuance of arrangement in regard to generation and supply of electric:
power and supply of water and disposal of sewage.

Provisions as to Co-operative banks.
Temporary provisions as to continaance of certain existing road transport
penmits.
Special provisions relating to retrenchment compensation in certain cases.
Special provision as to income-tax. है
Continuance of existing facilities in certain institutions or universities, étc.

PART VOT

‘PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES

Provisions relating to All India Services.

Provisions relating to other services.

. Provisions as to continuance of officers in the same post.

Powers of Central Government to give directions.



CLAUSES

ii)

PARTIX

LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

. Amendment of section 15 of Act 37 of 1956,

. Territorial extent of laws.

. Power to adapt laws.

. Power to construe laws.

. Provisions as to continuance of courts, ete.

. Effect of provisions of Act inconsistent with other laws.
. Amendment of Scheduled Castes Orders,

Power to remove difficulties.

. Power to make rules,
. Repeal of Act 1 of 1992.

THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.

225



fo

43 of 1950,

As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

Bill No. 68 of 2003
eeepc

THE STATE OF DELHI BILL, 2003
A
BILL

to provide for the establishment of the State of Dethi and for matters connected
therewith,

Be itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year ofthe Republic of india as follows:-—

PARTI
PRELIMINARY
1. This Act may be called the State of Delhi Act, 2003.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “Administrator” means the administrator appointed by the President under
article 239;

(6).“appointed day” means the day which the Central Government may, by
notification, appoint; .

(०) “article” means an article of the Constitution;

(व) “assembly constituency” and “parliamentary constituency” have the
meanings assigned to them in the Representation of the People Act, 1950;

{e) “Election Commission” means the Election Commission referred to in article

324;

Short title.

Definitions.



2

(0 “existing Union territory” means the Union territory of Dethi called as the
National Capital Territory of Delhi as ex! isting immediately before the appointed day;

(g) “law” includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, bye-law, rule, |
scheme, notification or other instrument, having immediately before the appointed |
day, the force of law in the whole or any part of the existing Union territory; 5 |

(४) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;

Legislative Assembly of the existing Union territory, means a person who, immediately
before the appointed day, is a member of that House or that Assembly, as the case may

be; io

3. (7) “treasury” includes a sub-treasury.

(i) “sitting member’, in relation to the either House of Parliament or of the

PARTI

ESTABLISHMENT OF THE STATE oF जिया .
Establishment 3, On and from the appointed day, there shall be established a new State to be known
of the State i isi itori isti j if
of Delhi. as the State of Delhi comprising the territories of the existing Union territory. प्रा
Amendment 4. On and from the appointed day, in the First Schedule to the Constitution —
of the First
Schedule to (a) under the heading “I. THE STATES”, after entry 28, the following entry shall
the be inserted, namely:—

Constitution. हि कि if
“29, Delhi ‘The territories specified in section 3 of the State of Delhi Act, 2003.”;

(8) under the heading “{), THE UNION TERRITORIES”, entry | relatingto Delhi 20
shall be omitted and entries 2 to 7 shall consecutively be re-numbered as entries | to 6.
Saving powers 5. Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall be deemed to affect the power
of Govern of the Government of the State of Delhi to alter, after the appointed day, area or boundaries
ment. of any district or other territorial division in the State.

PART UL as

REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES
The Council of States

6. On and from the appointed day, there shall be allotted three seats in the Council of

States to the State of Delhi and in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, the entry 29
hall be deemed to be the entry relating to the State of go

Allocation of
seats in the
Council of relating to the existing Union territory ४
States to the 6,
State of Delhi, 2

‘Allocation of य. (7) On and from the appointed day the three sitting members of the Council of
sitting States, representing the existing Union territory, shall be deemed to have been duly elected i
members and under clause (4) of article 80 to fill the seats allotted to the State ‘of Delhi.

term of their रे है है
office. (2) The term of office of the sitting members shall remain unaltered. 3y

The House of the People
Allocation of 8, (7) On and from the appointed day, the allocation of seats to the State of Delhi in the
seats in the House of the People shall be seven and the number of seat to be reserved for the Scheduled :
existing Castes shali be one out of those seats and the First Schedule to the Representation of the i

House of the People Act, 1950 shall be deemed to be amended, accordingly. Yas of 19:

People.
(2) On and from the appointed day, the parliamentary constituencies of the existing |
Union territory shall be deemed to be the parliamentary constituencies of the State of Delhi H
and the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1976, shall be i

construed accordingly.



43 of 1950
10

45

ge

| of 1992.

cc

3e

3s

yo

५5

25 of 1961.

5o

3

9. The sitting members of the House of the People representing the constituencies
which, on the appointed day, by virtue of the provisions of section 8 become the
constituencies of the State of Delhi shall be deemed to have been elected under sub-clause
(4) of clause (1) of article 81 to the House of the People by those constituencies,

The Legislative Assembly
10. On and from the appointed day,—

(#) the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Delhi to
be filled by person chosen by direct election from assembly constituencies shall be
seventy and the Second Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950 shall
be deemed to be amended, accordingly;

(70 the assembly constituencies of the existing Union territory shall be deemed
to be the assembly constituencies of the State of Delhi and the Delimitation of
Assembly Constituencies Order, 1976, shall be construed accordingly; है

(iii) the sitting members of the Legislative Assembly representing the
constituencies which, on the appointed day, by virtue of the provisions of clause (ii)
become the constituencies of the State of Delhi, shall be deemed to have been elected
under clause (1) of article 170 to the Legislative Assembly of the State of Delhi;

(00 the period of five years referred to in clause (1) of article 172 shall, in case of
Legislative Assembly deemed to be the Legislative Assembly of the State of Delhi
under clause (if), be deemed to have commenced on the date on which the duration of
the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union territory commenced under section 5 of
the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991.

11. The persons who immediately before the appointed day are the Speaker, and the
Deputy Speaker, of the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union territory shall be the
Speaker and the Deputy Speaker respectively, of the Legislative Assembly deemed to be the
Legislative Assembly of the State of Delhi under clause (i/) of section 10.

12, The rules of procedure and conduct of business of the Legislative Assembly of the
existing Union territory, as in force immediately before the appointed day, shall, until rules are
made under clause (1) of article 208, be the rules of procedure and conduct of business of the
Legislative Assembly deemed to be the Legislative Assembly of the State of Delhi under

clause (ii) of section 10 subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made
therein by the Speaker thereof.

PARTIV
Hic Court
13. On and from the appointed day,—

(a) the High Court for the existing Union territory (hereinafter referred to as the
existing High Court) shall be deemed to be the High Court for the State of Delhi under
article 214, to be called the High Court of Delhi (hereinafter referred to as the High
Court of Delhi);

(5) the Judges of the existing High Court holding office immediately before that
day shall unless they have elected otherwise, become, on that day, the Judges of the
High Court of Delhi;

(©) the High Court of Delhi shall have, in respect of the territories comprised in

the State of Delhi, all such jurisdiction, powers and authority as, under the law in force

- immediately before that day, are exercisable in respect of those territories by the existing
High Court.

14, (7) On and from the appointed day, in the Advocates Act, 1961, in section 3,—

Gi) in sub-section (7), for clause (0, the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(f) for the State of Delhi to be known as the Bar Council of Delhi;”;

Provision as
to sitting
member.

Provisions as
to the
Legislative
Assembly.

Speaker and
Deputy
Speaker.

Rules of
procedure.

High Court
for the State
of Delhi.

Provision as
to advocates.


4

(ii) in sub-section (2), the words “in the case of the State Bar Council of Delhi,
the Additional Solicitor-General of India, ex officio:” shall be omitted.

(2) Any person who, immediately before the appointed day, is an advocate entitled to
practise in the existing High Court shall be entitled to practise as an advocate in the High
Court of Delhi. |
|

(3) All persons who immediately before the appointed day, are advocates on the roll of
the existing Bar Council of Delhi shall, on and from the appointed day, become advocates on
the roll of the Bar Council of Delhi.

(4) The right of audience in the High Court of Delhi shall be regulated in accordance
with the like principles as, immediately before the appointed day, are in force with respect to 10
the right of audience in the existing High Court.

Practice and 15. Subject to the provisions of this Part, the law in force immediately before the :

procedure in appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in the existing High Court shall, with ;

ihe High the necessary modifications, applies in relation to the High Court of Delhi. |
‘ourt: of !

Delhi.

Custody of 16. The law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to the custody 15

seal of the of the seal of the existing High Court shall, with the necessary modifications, apply with
High Court of respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court of Delhi.

Delhi.

Form of 17. The law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to the form of

writs and writs and other processes used, issued or awarded by the existing High Court shalt, with

other necessary modifications, apply with respect to the form of writs and other processes used, 20

Processes. issued or awarded by the High Court of Delhi.

Powers of 18. The law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to the powers

Judges. of the Chief Justice, single Judges and division courts of the existing High Court and with
respect to all matters ancillary to the exercise of thdése powers shall, with the necessary
modification, apply in relation to the High Court of Delhi. 5

Principal seat 19. (1) The principal seat of the High Court of Delhi shall be at the same place at which

and other the principal seat of the existing High Court is located immediately before the appointed day.

places of कि
sitting of the (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (7), the Judges and division

High Court of courts of the High Court of Delhi may also sit at such other place or places within the -

Dethi. territories to which the jurisdiction of that High Court extends as the Chief Justice of that 3o
High Court may, with the approval of the Governor of the State, appoint.

Procedure as 20. The law in force immediately before the appointed day relating to appeals to the

to appeals to. Supreme Court from the existing High Court and the Judges and division courts thereof shall,

Supreme with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of Delhi.

Court. बी
है 21. (7) All proceedings pending in the existing High Court immediately before the 35°
Transfer of appointed day shall, from such day, stand transferred to the High Court of Delhi.

proceedings

to ihe High (2) Bvery proceeding transferred under sub-section (J) shall be disposed of by the
Delhi. High Court of Delhi as if such proceeding was entertained by that High Court.

Interpreta- 22. (7) For the purposes of'section 21,—

tion, ete. .

(वो proceedings shall be deeied to be pending in a court unti! that court has ५०
disposed of all issues between the parties, including any issue with respect to the
taxation of the costs of the proceedings and shall include appeals, application for
leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review petitions for revision and
petitions for writs; and .

(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as including references toa ५57
Judge or division court thereof and references to an order made by a court or a Judge



ZT

1 of 1992.20

a5

ye

35

4o

44 of 199445

5

shall be construed as including references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or
made by that court or Judge.

(2) Any person who, immediately before the appointed day, is an advocate entitled to
practise in the existing High Court and was authorised to appear or to act in any proceedings
transferred from that High Court to the High Court of Delhi under section 21 shall have the
right to appear or to act, as the case may be, in the High Court of Delhi in relation to those
proceedings.

PARTY
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DisTRIBUTION OF REVENUES

23. (/) The President may, at any time before the appointed day, authorise by order
such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Delhi as he deems necessary for
a period of not more than six months beginning with the appointed day, pending the sanction
of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Delhi:

Provided that the Governor of Delhi may, after the appointed day, authorise by order
such further expenditure as he deems necessary from the Consolidated Fund of the State of
Delhi for any period not extending beyond the said period of six months.

(2) The President or, as the case may be, the Governor of Delhi shall make separate
orders under sub-section (/) in respect of periods falling in different financial years.

24, The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India referred to in section
48 of the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991, relating to the accounts
of the existing Union territory in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be
submitted to the Governor of the State of Delhi who shall cause them to be laid before the
Legislative Assembly of that State.

25. The allowances and privileges of the Governor of the State of Delhi shall, until
provision in that behalf is made by Parliament by law under clause (3) of article 158, be the
same as are provided to the Adm’ inistrator of the existing Union territory immediately before
the appointed day.

26. The President shall, by order, determine the grants-in-aid of the revenues of the
State of Delhi and share of that State in the Union duties and taxes in such manner as he
thinks fit till 31st day of March, 2004.

PARTVI
ASSETS AND LiABILITIES

277. In this Part “Union purposes” means the purposes of Government relatable to any
of the matters mentioned in List 1 of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and entries 1
and 2 of List IL of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and entries 64, 65 and 66 of that
List in so far as they relate to the said entries | and 2.

28. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Part, all land and all stores, articles and other
goods held immediately before the appointed day, by the Union for the purposes of the
governance of the existing Union territory, shall, on and from that day pass to the State of
Delhi, unless any such land, stores, articles, or goods are owned or held for Union purposes:

Provided that the ownership of land which is within the boundary of New Dethi shail
vest in the Union.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression “New Dethi” has

the meaning assigned to it in clause (27) of section 2 of the New Delhi Municipal Council Act,
1994. पु

(2) The stores held for specific purposes, such as use or utilisation in particular
institutions, workshops or undertakings or on particular works under construction, shall be

Authorisation
of expendi-
ture pending
its sanction,
by the
Legislature

Reports
relating to
the accounts.
of the
existing
Union
territory.

Allowances
and privileges
of Governor
of the State
of Delhi

Distribution
of revenues.

Definition.

Land and
goods.



Cash
balances.

Arrears of
taxes.

Right to
recover loans
and advances

Assets and
liabilities of
State
undertakings.

Refund of
taxes
collected in
excess.

Certain
deposits.

Provident
fund.

6

retained by the Union if such institution, workshop, undertaking or work is carried on for
Union purposes.

(3) In this section, the expression “{and” includes immovable property of every kind
and any rights in or over such property.

29. The total of the cash balances in all treasuries, the Reserve Bank of India, the State 57
Bank of India and any nationalised bank, of the existing Union territory immediately before
the appointed day shall be the cash balances of the State of Delhi.

Explanation, —In this section, “balance” includes a debit balance.

30. (7) The right to recover arrears of any tax or duty (including arrears of land
revenue) on any property situated in the territory of the State of Delhi shall belong to the 19
State of Delhi.

(2) The right to recover arrears of any tax or duty, other than a tax or duty specified in
sub-section (7), shall belong to the State of Delhi if the place of assessment of that tax or
duty is included in the territory of the State of Delhi:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall empower the State of Delhi 15°
to recover any tax or duty which that State is not competent to impose.

31. (7) The liability of the Union or the Government of the existing Union territory
whether attributable to the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of the
existing Union territory, in respect of any Joan taken by the Union or the Government of the
existing Union territory for the purposes of the existing Union territory shall be the liability of 20
the State of Delhi on and from the appointed day subject to such contribution from the Union

_ asmay be determined by the Central Government.

(2) The right to recover any loans or advances made by the Union or the Goverment
of the existing Union territory before the appointed day to any local body, society, agriculturist
or other person in the territory of the State of Delhi shall belong to the State of Delhi: 25

Provided that the right to recover loans or advances of pay and travelling allowances
to a Government servant made before the appointed day by the Administrator shall pass to
the State of Dethi if such Government servant is allotted to that State.

32. The assets and liabilities relating to any commercial undertaking of the existing
Union territory shall pass to the State of Delhi. Bo

Explanation.--For the purposes of this section the expression “any commercial
undertaking of the existing Union territory” shall not include any undertaking to which the
provisions of Part VII are applicable.

33, The liability of the Union to refund—

(a) any tax or duty on property, including land revenue collected in excess, shall 35°
go to the State of Delhi if the property is situated in the territories of that State;

(6) any other tax or duty collected in excess shall go to the State of Delhi if the
place of assessment of that tax or duty is included in the territory of the State of Delhi.

34, The liability of the Union in respect of any civil deposit or local fund shall, on and
from the appointed day, be the liability of the State of Dethi, if the deposit has been made in Yo
the territory of the State of Delhi.

35. (1) The liability of the Union in respect of the provident fund account of a
Government servant employed in connection with the administration of the existing Union
territory and in service on the appointed day shall, on and from that day, be the liability of the
State of Delhi if that Government servant is permanently allotted to that State. ur

(2) The liability of the Union in respect of the provident fund account of a Government

servant employed in connection with the administration of the existing Union térritory who
has retired from service before the appointed day shall be the liability of the State of Delhi.



ip

a5

35

yo

ue

7

36. (7) Subject to the adjustments mentioned in sub-section (4), the State of Delhi
shall, in respect of pensions granted before the appointed day by the Administrator of the
existing Union territory, pay the pensions drawn in the treasuries in Delhi of the existing
Union territory.

(2) Subject to the adjustments mentioned in sub-section (4), the liability in respect of
pensions of Government servants employed in connection with the affairs of the existing
Union territory who retire or proceed on leave preparatory to retirement before the appointed
day but whose claims for pensions are outstanding immediately before that day, shall be the
liability of the State of Delhi.

(3) The liability of the Union in respect of pensions granted before the appointed day
by the Administrator and drawn in any treasury outside the existing Union territory shall be
the liability of the State of Dethi.

(4) In respect of the period commencing on the appointed day and ending on the
31st day of March, 2004, and in respect of each subsequent financial year, the total payments
made by the State of Delhi in respect of pensions referred to in sub-section (/ ') and sub-
section (2) shall be apportioned between the State of Delhi and the Union in such manner 38
may be agreed between them before the expiration of one year from the appointed day, or in
default of such agreement in such manner as the Central Government may, by order, direct.

(5) The liability in respect of the pension of any Government servant employed
immediately before the appointed day in connection with the affairs of the existing Union
territory and retiring on or after that day, shall be that of the State of ‘Delhi or the Union, as the
case may be, but the portion of the pension in respect of the period of service of any such
Government servant before the appointed day shall be apportioned between the State of
Delhi and the Union in such manner as may be agreed between them before the expiration of
one year from the appointed day, or in default of such agreement in such manner as the
Central Government may, by order, direct.

(6) Any reference in this section to a pension shal be construed as including a reference
to the commuted value of the pension.

37, (7) Where before the appointed day, the Union has made any contract in the
exercise of its executive power for any purposes of the existing Union territory that contract
shall be deemed to have been made in the exercise of the executive power of the State of
Delhi, if the purposes of the contract are, on and from that day, exclusively purposes of that
State, and all rights and liabilities which have accrued, or may accrue, under any such
contract shall, to the extent to which they would have beemrights or liabilities of the Union,
be rights or liabilities of the State of Delhi.

(2) For the purposes of this section, there shall be deemed to be included in the
liabilities which have accrued or may accrue under any contract—

(a) any liability to satisfy an order or award made by any court or other tribunal
in proceedings relating to the contract, and

(4) any liability in respect of expenses incurred in, or in connection with, any
such proceedings.

(3) This section shall have effect subject to the other provisions of this Part relating to
the apportionment of liabilities in respect of loans, guarantees and other financial obligations.

38. Where, immediately before the appointed day, the Union, in connection with the
governance of the existing Union territory, is subject to any liability in respect ofan actionable
wrong, other than breach of contract, that liability shall,—

(a) if the cause of action arose wholly within the territories of the existing Union
territory, be-a liability of the State of Delhi; and है

(0) in any other case, be initially a liability of the State of Delhi but subject to
such financial adjustments as may be agreed upon between the State of ‘Delhi‘and the

Pensions
granted by

the Adminis-

trator, etc.

Contracts.

Liability in
respect of
actionable.
wrong.



8

Union, or in default of such agreement, as the Centtal Government may, by order,

direct,
if Liability as : 39. Where, immediately before the appointed day, the Union, in connection with the
7 निम्न ग governance of the existing Union territory, is liable as guarantor in respect of any liability of
| societies. a registered co-operative society or other person, that liability of the Union shall bea liability 5°

: ~ of the State of Delhi if the area of the operations of such society or person is limited to the
territories of the existing Union territory.

40, If any item in suspense is ultimately found to affect an asset or liability of the

Items in

suspense. nature referred to in any of the foregoing provisions of this Part, it shall be dealt with in
accordance with that provision. 10

Residuary 41. The benefit or burden of any assets or liabilities of the Union in connection with

provision. the governance of the existing Union territory not dealt with in the foregoing provisions of
this Part shall be retained by the Union.

Apportion- 42. Where the State of Dethi and the Union agree that the benefit or burden of any
ment of particular asset or liability should be apportioned between them in a manner other than that 15
assels oF provided for in the foregoing provisions of this Part, then, notwithstanding anything
liabilities by ined . ae है .
agreement. contained therein, the benefit or burden of that asset or liability shall be apportioned in the
manner agreed upon. .

Power of 43, Where, by virtue of any of the provisions of this Part, the Union becomes entitled
Central to any property or obtains any benefits or the State of Delhi becomes subject to any liability, go

Government and the Central Government is of opinion on areference made within a period of three years
0 oe or from the appointed day by the State of Delhi that it is just and equitable that property or
adjustment in those benefits should be transferred to, or shared with, the State of Delhi or that acontribution
certain cases. towards that liability should be made by the Union, the said property or benefits shall be”
allocated in such manner, or the Union shall make to the State of. Delhi such contribution in 25°
respect thereof, as the Central Government may, after consultation with the Government of

the State of Delhi, by order, determine.

PARTVII
PROVISIONS AS TO ARRANGEMENTS, CORPORATIONS AND INTER-STATE AGREEMENTS,
Continuance 44, If it appears to the Central Governmeit that the arrangements in regard to the 30
of arrange generation or supply of electric power or the supply of water or the disposal of sewage for
regard to any area or in regard to the execution of any project for such generation, supply or disposal

1 generation has been or is likely to be modified to the disadvantage of that area by reason of the fact that
and supply of it has been transferred by the provisions of Part li from the existing Union territory to the
cleeure pom Slate of Delhi in which the power station and other installation for the generation and supply 35°
water my of such power or disposal of the sewage or the catchment area, reservoir and other work for
disposal of the supply of water, or disposal of sewage, as the case may be, are located, the Central
sewage. Government may give directions as it deems fit, to the State Government or other authority

concemed for the maintenance of previous arrangement.

Provision as 45, Notwithstanding anything contained in section 22 of the Banking Regulation Act, ५०
to co 1949, where by virtue of the provisions of Part Il, a co-operative bank is newly formed on the — 10 of 1!
peerative appointed day or within three months thereof in the State of Delhi, it may commence and

conduct banking business without obtaining a licence under that section from the Reserve

Bank of India, until it is granted such a licence or until it is informed by the Reserve Bank of

India that such a licence cannot be granted to it: » US
Provided that such bank applies to the Reserve Bank of India for such a licence within

a period of three months from the date of formation of the bank.



$9 of 1988.

हा

ar

35

414-08, 1947,

43.0f 1961 ५57

1]

9

46, (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 81 of the Motor Vehicles Act,
1988, a permit granted in the existing Union territory shall, if such permit was immediately
before the appointed day, valid and effective in any area therein, be deemed to continue to be
valid and effective in that area up to the 3] st day of March, 2004, subject to the provisions of
that Act as for the time being in force in that area and it shall not be necessary for any such
permit to be countersigned by any State or Regional Transport Authority for the purpose of
validating it for use in such area;

Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the Goverment of
the State of Delhi, add to, amend or vary the conditions attached to the permit by the
authority by which the permit was granted.

(2) No toll, entrance fees or other charges ofa like nature shall be levied for a period up
to and inclusive of the 3 {st day of March, 2004, in respect of any transport vehicle for its
operations in the State of Delhi under any such permit, if such vehicle was immediately
before that day exempt from the payment of any such toll, entrance fees or other charges for
its operations within the existing Union territory:

Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the State Government
of Delhi authorise the levy of any such toll, entrance fees or other charges, as the case. may
be.

47. Where, by virtue of the provisions of Part 1, any body corporate constituted under
a Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act, any co-operative society registered under any law
relating to co-operative societies or any commercial or industrial undertaking is reconstituted
or reorganised in any manner whatsoever or is amalgamated with any other body corporate,
co-operative society or undertaking, or is dissolved, and in consequence of such
reconstitution, reorganisation, amalgamation or dissolution, any workman employed by such
body corporate or any such co-operative society or undertaking, is transferred to, or re-
employed by any other body corporate, or in any other co-operative society or undertaking,
then, notwithstanding anything contained in section 25F or section 25FF or section 25FFF,
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, such transfer or re-employment shal! not entitle him to
any compensation under that section:

Provided that

(a) the terms and conditions of service applicable to the workman after such
transfer or re-employment are not less favourable to the workman than those applicable
to him immediately before the transfer or re-employment; and

(4) the employer in relation to the body corporate, the co-operative society or
the undertaking where the workman is transferred to or re-employed, is by agreement
or otherwise, legally liable to pay to the workman, in the event of his retrenchment,
compensation under section 25F or section.25FF or section 25FFF of the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947, on the basis that his service has been continuous and has not
been interrupted by the transfer or re-employment.

48. Where the assets, rights and liabilities.of any body corporate carrying on business
are, under the provisions of this Part, transferred to any other bodies corporate which after
the transfer carry on the same business, the losses of profits or gains sustained by the body
corporate first mentioned which, but for such transfer, would have been allowed to be carried
forward and set-off in accordance with the provisions.of Chapter VI of the Income-tax Act,
1961 shall be apportioned amongst the transferee bodies corporate in accordance with the
rules to be made by the Central Government in this behalf and, upon such apportionment, the
share of loss allotted to each transferee body corporate shall be dealt with in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter VI of the said Act as if the transferee body corporate had itself
sustained such loss in a business carried on by it in the years in which these losses were

sustained.

‘Temporary
provisions as
to continu-
ance of
certain
existing road
transport
permits.

Speciat
provisions
relating (0
retrenchment
compensation
in certain
cases,

Special
provision as
fo income-
tax,



10

Continuance 49. On and from the appointed day, the Government of the State of Delhi shall, in
panies respect of the educational or technical institutions or universities or any other State institutions

Jocated or which may be established in the Sate of Delhi continue to provide facilities to the

certain
institutions or persons resident in the territories comprising the State of Delhi which shall not in any respect
universities, be less favourable than those which were being provided to them immediately before that 5 i
ote. day upon such terms and conditions (including those relating to any contribution or payment
to be made for the provisions of such facilities) as may be agreed upon between the State of i
Delhi and the Union before the Ist day of April, 2004, or if no such agreement is reached by
the said date, as may be fixed by the order of the Central Government.
PART VIL 10
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES
Provisions 50, (7) In this section, the expression “State Cadre”,——
relating to

‘All-india (a) inrelation to the Indian Administrative Service, has the meaning assigned to
Services. it in the Indian Administrative Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954;

(6) in relation to the Indian Police Service, has the meaning assigned to it inthe 15
Indian Police Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954; and .

(c) in relation to the Indian Forest Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the
Indian Forest Service (Cadre) Rules, 1966.

(2) The strength and composition of the State Cadre of the State of Delhi shall, on and
from the appointed day, continue as such as it is existing immediately before such day in 20
respect of the existing Union territory, till the Central Government, by notification, provides
a separate Cadre for the State of Dethi.

(3) Nothing in this section shail be deemed to affect the operation, on or after the
appointed day, of the All-India Services Act, 195 1, or the rules made thereunder, inrelation 61 of 1
to the State Cadres of the said services and in relation to the members of those services 25°
borne on the said Cadres.

Provisions 51. (/) Every person employed in connection with the affairs of the State of Delhi and
renting 10 serving, immediately before the appointed day, in the existing Union territory shall, on and

services. from that day,—

(a) continue to serve in connection with the affairs of the State of Delhi; and 39

(b) be deemed to be provisionally allotted to serve in connection with the affairs
.of the said State:

Provided that nothing in clause (4) shall apply to a person to whom the provisions of
section 50 apply orto a person of deputation from any State. .

(2) As soon as-may be after the appointed day, the Central Government shall by 35°
general or special order, determine whether every person referred to in clause () of sub-
section (7) shall be finally allotted for service in the State of Delhi or under the Union in
connection with the affairs of the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands and the
date with effect from which such allotment shall take effect or be deemed to have taken effect.

(3) As soon as may be after the Central Government passes orders finally allotting an Yo
employee in terms of sub-section (2), the State of Delhi or the Union shall take steps to
integrate him into the services under its control in accordance with such’special or general
orders or instructions as may be issued by the Central Government from time to time in this i
behalf. ;
(4) The Central Government may, by order, establish one or more Advisory Committees YS |
for the purpose of assisting it in regard to— i

(a) the division of the services between the State of Delhi and the Union; and i

(6) the ensuring of fair and equitable treatment to all persons affected by the



1s

fo

25

Be

Br

yo

us’

YW

provisions of this section and the proper consideration of any representations made
by such persons:

Provided that notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law or role
for the time being in force, no representation shall lie against any order passed by the
competent authority on matters arising out of the division and integration ofservices under
this Act, on the expiry of three months from the date of publication or service, whichever is
earlier, ofsuch order:

Provided further that, notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding proviso.
the Central Government may sto motu or otherwise and for reasons to be recorded, reopen
any matter and pass such orders thereon, as may appear to it to be appropriate if it is
satisfied that it is necessary so to do, in order to prevent any miscarriage of justice to any
affected employee.

(5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect, on or after the appointed day, the
operation of the provisions of Chapter I of Part XIV of the Constitution in relation to the
determination of the conditions of service of persons serving in connection with the affairs
of the State of Delhi or the Union:

Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed
day to the case of any person referred to in sub-section (/) or sub-section (2) shall not be
varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central Government.

(6) All services prior to the appointed day rendered by a person allotted under sub-
section (2) in connection with the affairs of the existing Union territory shall for purpose of
the rules regarding his conditions of service, be deemed to have been rendered in connection
with the affairs of the Sate or the Union to which he is finally allotted.

(7) The provisions of this section other than clause (5) of sub-section (7) shall not
apply in relation to any person to whom the provisions of section 50 apply.

52. Every person who immediately before the appointed day is holding or discharging
the duties of any post or office in connection with the affairs of the existing Union territory
shall continue to hold the same post or office and shall be deemed, on and from that day, to
have been duly appointed on the same terms and conditions of appointment and on the same
tenure to that post or office by the Government of, or the other appropriate authority, in the
State of Delhi or of the Union, as the case may be:

Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a competent authority,
on or after the appointed day, from passing in relation to such person any order affecting his
continuance in such post or office.

53. The Central Government may give such directions to the Government of the State
of Delhi as may appear to it to be necessary for the purpose of giving effect to the foregoing,
provisions of this Part arid the said State Government shall comply with such directions,

PARTIX

LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

54, On and from the appointed day, in section 15 of the States Reorganisation Act,
1956, in clause (6), forthe words “and Jammu and Kashmir and the Union territories of Delhi,
and Chandigrah”, the words “, Jammu and Kashmir, Delhi and the Union territory of
Chandigarh” shall be substituted.

55. The provisions of Part वी shall not be deemed to have effected any change in the
territories to which any law in force immediately before the appointed day extends or applies,
and the territorial references in any such law to the existing Union territory shall, until
otherwise provided by a competent Legislature or other competent authority, be construed
as meaning the territories within the existing Union territory before the appointed day.

Provisions as
to continu-
ance of
officers in the
same posts.

Powers of
Central
Government
to give
directions.

Amendment
of section 15
of Act 37 of
1956.

Territorial
extent of
laws.



Power to
adapt laws

Power to
construe laws,

Provisions as
to continu-
ance of
courts, etc,

Effect of
provisions of
Act inconsis~
tent with other
laws.

Amendment

of Scheduled
Castes Orders.

Power to
remove
difficulties.

Power to
make niles.

Repeat of Act
1 of 1992.

12
56. For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the State of Delhi ofany
Jaw made before.the appointed day, the appropriate Government may, within two years from
that day, by order, make such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of
repeal or amendment, as may be necessaty or expedient, and thereupon every such law shall
have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made until altered, repealed or 5”
amended by a competent Legislature or other competent authority.

Explanation.—-In this section, the expression “appropriate Government”, subject to
the provisions of article 371J, means, as respects any Jaw relating to a matter enumerated in
the Union List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the Central Government; and as
respects any other law, the Government of the State of Delhi.

57. Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been made under
section 56 for the adaption of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or
authority required or empowered to enforce such taw may, for the purpose of facilitating its
application in relation to the State of Delhi, construe the law in such manner not affecting the
substance as may be necessary or proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or
authority, as the case may be. .

a

58. All courts and tribunals and all authorities discharging lawful functions throughout
the existing Union territory or any part thereof immediately before the appointed day shail
unless their continuance is inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or until other provision
is made by a competent Legislature or other comipetent authority, continue to exercise their go
respective functions. पु

59, The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in-any other law.

60. (/) On and from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order,

1950, shall stand amended as directed in the First Schedule. ae

(2) On and from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Union
Territories) Order, 1951, shall stand amended as directed in the Second Schedule.

61. (/) Ifany difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the President
may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which appears to him to be
necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty:

Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of three years from the
appointed day.

(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament.

62. (/) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the 5
3

provisions of this Act.

(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that therule Ye
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule,

63. The Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 shall be repealed
with effect from the appointed day.

jo.



THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See section 60(1)]

AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER, 1950
In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950,—

(4) in paragraph 2, for the figures "XXIV", the figures "KXV" shall be substituted;
(2) in the Schedule, after Part XXIV, the following Part shall be inserted, namely:-
"PART XXV.—Delhi

Throughout the State of Delhi:—.

डे ० #० 3 9 ७ के (०1० :-

|. Adi-Diarmi
. Agria

Aheria
Balai

. Banjara

Bawaria
Bazigar
Bhangi

Bhil

, Chamar, Chanwar, Chamar, Jatva or Jatay Chamar, Mochi, Ramdasia, Ravidasi,

Raidasi, Rehgarh or Raigar

. Chohra (Sweeper)
. Chuhra (Balmiki)
.. Dhanak or Dhanuk
. Dhobi

. Dom

. Gharrami

. Julaha (Weaver)

. Kabirpanthi

. _Kachhandha

). Kanjar or Giarah

Khatik
Koli

. Lalbegi
, Madari
. Mallah
. Mazhabi

Meghwal
Naribut

, Nat (Rana)

. Pasi

. Perna

. Sansi or Bhedkut

. Sapera

| Sikligar

. Singiwala or Kalbelia
» Sirkiband.",

13



THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See section 60(2)]
AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) (UNION
TERRITORIES) ORDER, 1951

In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951,—

(/) in paragraph 2, for the words and figures “Part { to III", the words and figures
"Parts I to HI" shall be substituted;

(2) in paragraph 4,—

(i) the words and figures “Any reference in this Order to a Union territory
in Part I of the Schedule shall be construed as a reference to the territory
constituted as a Union territory as from the first day of November, 1956," shall be
omitted;

(ii) for the word and figures “Part II", the word and figure "Part 1" shall be
substituted;

(ii) for the word and figures "Part III", the word and figures "Part II" shall
be substituted;

(3) in the Schedule, PART I.-Delhi shall be omitted and Part I] and Part IIT shall
respectively be renumbered as Part | and Part Il.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

With a view to satisfying the aspirations of the people of Delhi, the Government have
decided to undertake legislative measures to grant full statehood to the National Capital
Territory of Delhi. This Bill is intended to give effect to this decision and will come into force
‘on a date to be notified by the Central Government. It seeks to form a new State of Delhi
comprising the entire area of National Capital Territory of Delhi as at present. It also.seeks to
make the necessary supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions.

NEw Det; L.K.ADVANI
The 13. August, 2003 .

PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 3, 117 AND274 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.

{Copy of letter No. 12012/14/98-SR(Part-I]), dated the 13th August, 2003 from Shri LAK.
Advani, Deputy Prime Minister to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]

The President is having been informed of the subject matter of the proposed Bill to

.gtant full statehood to Delhi and for matters connected therewith, recommends the introduction

of the Bill in the Lok Sabha under article 3, 117(1) and 274(1) of the Constitution and the
consideration of the Bill in the Lok Sabha under article 117(3) of the Constitution.



Notes ON CLAUSES

Clause 2.—This clause seeks to define various expressions used in the proposed
legislation.
Clause 3—This clause provides for the establishment of the new State of Delhi.

Clause 4.—This clause seeks to amend the First Schedule to the Constitution.

Clause 5.—This clause empowers the Government of the State of Delhi to alter, after
the appointed day, the area or boundaries of any district or other territorial division within.
the new State.

Clauses 6 and 7.—This clause provides for the allocation of three seats in the Council
of States to the State of Delhi. Clause 7 deals with the representation of new State of Delhi'in
the Council of States. At present there are three seats in the said council for the existing
Union territory. It is proposed to continue this representation for the new State also. The
sitting Member from the State of Delhi in the Council of States will be deemed to be duly.
elected-and will represent in new State for the unexpired term.

Clause 8.—This clause deals with the representation of State of ‘Delhi in the House of
the People. At present there are seven seats in the House of the People for the existing Union
territory. It is proposed to continue their representation for the new State also. The sitting
Members from State of Delhi in the House of the People will be deemed to represent the new
State. पु

Clause 9.—This clause provides that the sitting members of the House of the People
representing the constituencies on the appointed day shall be deemed to be elected and will
represent the new State. ”

Clause 10.—This clause provides for a Legislative Assembly for the State of Delhi
consisting of a total number of 70 persons to be chosen by direct election and the consequent
amendment to the Second Schedule to the Representation to the People Act, 1950. Asseinbly
Constituencies of the existing Union territory shall be deemed to be the Assembly:
Constituencies of the New State of Delhi. The period of five years shall be deemed to‘have
commenced on the date on which the duration of the Legislative Assembly of the existing.
‘Union territory commenced.under the National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991.

Clause 11 —This clause provides that the existing Speaker and the Deputy Speakerof
the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union territory shali be deemed to be the Speaker
and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Delhi.

Clause 12-—This clause provides for the continuance of the existing rules of procedure
of the Legislature.

Clauses 13 to22.—These clauses provide that the existing High Court of Judicature.at
Delhi will be High Court of the new State of Delhi. The detailed provision contained in other
clauses fotlow broadly the relevant provisions of the previous Reorganisation Acts and deal
inter alia with the powers, function and the procedure to be followed by the new High-Court_

Clause 23.—This clause provides for the authorization of expenditure by the President
before the appointed day, and by the Governor after the appointed day, from the Consolidated.
Fund of the State of Delhi. :

Clausé 24.—This clause provides that the report of the Comptroller and Auditor Gerieral
of India for a period prior to the appointed day should be submitted to the Governor ofthe
State of Delhi.

16



17

Clause 25.—This clause provides that until Parliament makes law under article 158 (3)
of the Constitution to provide for allowances and privileges to the Governor of State of
Delhi, he shal! have the same allowances and privileges as that of the Administrator of the

Union Territory of Delhi.

Clause 26.—The clause empowers the President to determine, by order, the grants-in-
aid to the State of Delhi and its share in the Union duties and taxes.

Clauses 27 to 43.——These clauses relate to the apportionment of assets and liabilities
between the existing Union territory and the State of Delhi including cash balances, arrears
of taxes, right to recover loans and advances, investments in the loans, etc. assets and
liabilities of State Undertakings, refund of taxes collected in excess, certain deposits, liabilities
as guarantor of co-operative societies, provident fund and pension accounts, government
contracts actionable wrong, iterns in suspense, special provision for apportionment of benefit
or burder of any particular asset or liability and finally the power of the Central Government
to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases of assets or liability.

Clause 44:—This clause makes provisions for continuance of arrangements in regard
to generation and supply of electricity and water and also the disposal of sewage on the
pattern of section 107 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.

Clause 45.—This clause provides that a co-operative bank which is newly formed on
the appointed day or within three 11070 thereof in the State of Dethi, it may commence and
conduct banking business without obtaining license from the Reserve Bank of India provided
that the bank makes an application for the license within thrée months of its formation. Such
a bank will continue to function without license until it is granted a license by the Reserve
Bank or the license refused.

Clause 46.—This clause contains a general provision to enable continuance of existing
road transport permits and follows the corresponding provisions of the States Reorganisation

Act, 1956.

Clauses 47 and 48.—These elauses include for special provisions relating to
retrenchment-compensation in certain cases with regard to registered co-operative societies,
commercial or industrial undertakings and special provisions as to income tax. These
provisions follow similar provisions of the State Reorganisation Act, 1956.

Clause 49.—This clausé deals with, and contains provisions for, the continuance of
existing facilities in certain institutions or universities to residents in the territories comprising
the new State of Delhi.

‘Clauses 50 to 53. —These clauses deal with the provisions relating to services and
generally follow the similar provisions 48 are provided under corresponding sections of the
State Reorganisation Act, 1956. पर

Clauses 54 to 59.-—These clauses make consequential amendments in the State
Reorganisation Act, 1956 and also make usual provisions regarding continuance of existing
laws of the existing Union territory of Dethi in the new State of Delhi subject to adaptations
of the laws and their interpretations by the Courts and Tribunals, continuance of authorities
exercising statutory functions, legal proceedings, etc. These provisions follow similar
provisions of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956,

Clause 60.—This clause seeks to make the necessary consequential amendments in.
the Constitution (Schedule Castes) Order, 1950 and the Constitution (Schedule Castes)
(Union Territory) Order, 1951.

Clause 61,—-This clause provides that within three years from the appointed day, the
President may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with the provisions which appears to
him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removal of any difficulty arises in giving
effect to the provisions of the Bill.



18
Clause 62.—This clause empowers the Central Government to make rules by carrying
out the provisions of the Bill.

Clause 63.—This clause provides for the repeal of the Government of National Capital
Territory of Delhi Act, 1991.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

At present, the National Capital Territory of Delhi is given anon-plan grant of Rs, 325
crore in Hieu of share of Union taxes and duties. Asa State, Delhi will be entitled to a share in
the income tax and additional excise duties of the Central Government. The net share of the
Delhi State in the exise duty of the Central Government shall be determined by the Finance
Commission. Consequently, the State's revenue would be augmented and the non-plan
revenue deficit reduced correspondingly. In the past, Finance Commission has taken note of
such deficits and recommended suitable grants-in-aid under article 275 (1) of the Constitution
to the National Capital Territory of Dethi. It is, therefore, until the provision is made by the
Parliament in this regard, it is proposed under clause 26 to empower the President to determine,
by order, the grants-in-aid of the revenues of the State of Delhi and its share in the Union
duties and taxes in such manner as he thinks fit till 3 Ist day of March, 2004.

2, Clause 51(4) of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to establish one or
more Advisory Committees for the purpose of assisting it in regard to the discharge of its
functions in relation to division of the services between the State of Delhi and the Union and
for ensuring fair and equitable treatment in all the affected employees, Some éxpenditure may
have to be incurred out of the Consolidated Fund of. India for discharging the duties and
responsibilities by the Committee.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 26 of the Bill empowers the President to determine by order the grant-in-aid of
the revenues of the new State of Delhi and its share of the Union duties and taxes.

2. Clause 56 provides for the adaptation of existing laws to facilitate their application
to the proposed State of Delhi. The power to adapt is being conferred on the Centra!
Government in the case of laws relating to matters enumerated in the Union List in the
Seventh Scheduled to the Constitution and on the Government of the proposed State of
Delhi in the case of all other laws. This power shall be subject to the provision contained in
the proposed article 3711 to be inserted by the Constitution (One hundred and second
Amendment) Bill, 2003.

3. Clause 62 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to give effect
to the provisions of the Bill when enacted. The rules, if any, will be confined to matters of
procedure and other matters of minor detail relating to the enforcement of the various
provisions included in the Bill.

4. The various provisions aforementioned are modelled on identical or analogous
provisions in the State Reorganisation Acts passed by the Parliament carlier. Besides, they
are mainly of a consequential nature or pertain to matters of detail and procedure. As such,
the proposed delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

20



Name

*

1. Dethi

ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUION OF ENDIA

* + + कं
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
{Articles | and 4]
1. The STATES
* * * *

Tl. THEUNION TERRITORIES
TABLE
Extent

* * * *

The territory which immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution was
comprised in the Chief Commissioner's
Province of Delhi,

* * * *
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 4(1) and 80(2)]

Allocation of seats in the Council of States

* * * *

EXTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1950

(43 oF 1950)

* * + ok

THE FIRST SCHEDULE.

(See section 3)

ALLOCATION OF SEATS IN THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE

*

1. STATES:

*

* * * x

* + * *

TL UNION TERRITORIES:

*

5, Delhi

21



- 22

* + * * *

EXTRACTS FROM THE STATES. REORGANISATION Act, 1957

(37 oF 1956)

Establishment ¥ + * * *
of Zonal

Council. 15. As from the appointed day, there shall be a Zonal Council for each of the following

five zones, namely:—

(a) the Northern Zone, comprising the State of Haryana, Punjab, Himachal
Pradesh, Rajasthan and Jammu and Kashmir and the Union Territories of Delhi and
Chandigarh;

* * * * *

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER, 1950
(.0.19

* * * * *

2. Subject to the provisions of this Order, the castes, races or tribes or parts of, or
groups within/castes or tribes specified in Parts Ito XXIV of the Schedule to this Order shall,
jn relation to the States to which those Parts respectively relate, be deemed to be Scheduled
Castes so far as regards members thereof resident in the localities specified in relation to
them in those Parts of that Schedule.

* * * * *

EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED Castes) (Union TERRITORIES) ORDER, 1951
C.0.32

* * * * *

2. Subject to the provisions of this Order, the castes, races OF tribes or parts of or,
groups within, castes or tribes, specified in Part] to III of the Schedule to this Order shall, in
relation to the Union territories to which those Parts respectively relate, be deemed to be
Scheduled Castes so far as regards members thereof resident in the jocalities specified in
relation to them respectively in those Parts of that Schedule.

* * * * *

4, Any reference in this Order to a Union territory in Part I of the Schedule shall be
construed as a reference to the territory constituted as a Union territory as from the first day
of November, 1956, any reference to a Union territory in Part II of the Schedule shall be
construed as a reference to the territory constituted as 8 Union territory as from the first day
of November, 1966 and any reference to a Union territory in Part ILI of the Schedule shall be
construed as a reference to the territory constituted as 8 Union territory as from the day
appointed under clanse (b) of section 2 of the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987

(18 of 1987).
‘THE SCHEDULE
PART 1L—Delhi
Throughout the Union territory:—— है
1. Adi-Dbarmi
2, Agria
3, Aheria
4. Balai

5. Banjara



23
7. Bazigar
8 Bhangi
9. Bhil

10. Chamar, Chanwar, Chamar, Jatva or Jatav Chamar, Mochi, Ramdasia, Ravidasi,
Raidasi, Rehgarh or Raigar

11, Chohra (Sweeper)
12. Chubra(Balmiki)
13, Dhanak or Dhanuk
M4, Dhobi

15. Dom

16, Gharrami

17. Julaha (Weaver)
18. Kabirpanthi

19, Kanchhandha
20. Kanjar or Giarah
21, Khatik

22. Koli

24, Madari

25, Mallah

26. Mazhabi

27. Meghwal

28. Naribut

29. Nat (Rana) है ‘
30, Pasi

31, Perna

"32, Sansi or Bhedkut
33. Sapera

34, Sikligar

35, Singiwala or Kalbelia
36. Sirkiband.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the establishment of the State of Delhi and for matters connected * ५
therewith. :

(Shri LK, Advani, Deputy Prime Minister)

MGIPMRND—2547LS—13-8-2003,