1
Short title.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI BHAIRON PRASAD MISHRA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) After article 16 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
Bill No. 68 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
"16A. Every citizen, who has attained the age of twenty-one years, shall have
the right to employment:
Provided that any such citizen, who is not provided with employment, shall be
entitled to unemployment allowance at such rate as Parliament may, by law, determine.".
Insertion of
new article
16A.
Right to
employment.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Even after sixty-seven years of independence, twenty-seven per cent of India's
population is living below poverty line and a large section of people die of starvation every
year. Although poverty has been checked to a large extent, yet a large section of our society
is unemployed and they have no source of income. In the absence of adequate employment
opportunities, youth take to other courses to sustain themselves by joining extremist, terrorist
and criminal activities and also indulge in other anti-social activities such as kidnapping,
robbery, hijacking, etc., which is not good for unity and integrity of the nation. Therefore,
time has come to amend the Constitution to make right to employment a fundamental right,
so that the young generation do not indulge in anti-national activities. Besides, making right
to employment a fundamental right of the citizens, the Bill also provides for payment of
unemployment allowance to all unemployed citizens till they are provided with employment.
This will help young generation financially, discourage them from indulging in anti-national
activities and engage them in nation building activities.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHAIRON PRASAD MISHRA
March 6,  2017.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for making right to employment a fundamental right of the
citizens who have attained the age of twenty-one years. It further provides that every such
citizen who is not provided with employment shall be entitled to get unemployment allowance
at such date as Parliament may, by law, determine. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore is likely to be involved initially.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5289LS(S3)—27-03-2017.