L , As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABRA ON 
, .r ~.., I,\~: >~7 " 
" MI No. • of 1181 
"--11111111"'~\1""-"'--
THE DALMIA DADRI CEMENT LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND 
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 1981 
" 
CL'USES 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
.. -,' 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY 
3. Transfer to, and vesting in. the Central Government of the 
undertakings of the Company. 
4. General effect of vesting. 
5. Central Government or Cement Corporation not to be Uable 
for prior liablUties. 
6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the under-
takings of the Company in Cement Corporation. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
7. Payment of amount. 
8. Payment of further amount. 
CHAPl'ER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE CoMPANY 
", if 
9. Manageme'1t, etc., of the undertakings of the Company. 
10. Duty to d!'liver possession of the undertakings of the Company 
and documents relating thereto. 
11. Duty to furnish particulars. .. ~ -: i' 
CHAPTER V 
12. Employment of certain employeee t9 epntinue, 
13. Provident fund and other ~n4s\j ~.,:,--;-
~, 

ii 
CHAPTER VI 
I 
j 
COMMISSJONb OF PAndNTS 
Cr.AUSES 
. I 
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments. 
'.' I }f,; ~~'lt.RY the Central Government to the Commilsloner. 
,.. 18. CerWri. powent of the Central Government or Cement Corpora-
i. I~ 
17. Clah~. to be . made to the Commissioner. 
18. Priority of claims. 
19. Examination of claims. 
20. Admission or rejection of claims. 
21. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants . 
• <0> 'r 
22. Disbursement of amO'Unts to the Company. 
23. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the gene-
ral revenue account. , , 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
24. Act to have overriding effect . . . 
25. Contracts to cease to have ,.e~~t: .~RJe,s.~'*~d, .j~Y Central 
Government or Cement CorporatIon. 
26. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
27. Delegation of powers. 
28. Penalties. ,! ... (1 j ~ '1 . ..f i ) ", 
2P-. Offences by co~panies. 
30. Power to make rules. 
31. Power to remove :dU'lc,l,U,t~es. 
THE SCHEDULE 

to 
TI-lE ;:,.c.Lln [j,,;)RI (;E! .. C:T LI: .. ITCJ (,;e ~:J!SITIlI"l ANn 
TRANSFER GF UNDERTAKI~G~) DILL, 1q81 
L~ he!8~_.int~~s:_ed in Lok_S.dbh.:l 7 
1. Page 3, line 20,-
$2£ II Govrl'lTle nt 1\ re ad "Gove rl'lTle nt tI 
2. Page 6, line 32,-
afte.1: .. teI'r"in~ted or" 
insert "until his remuneration and other 
• - conditions of s€rvice are duly altered" 
3 • Page 8 ,Ii n e 5,-
for "ensure" rend "entJJTe" -
NEVv DE u-I I , 
• 

~oI1951. 
.~.J ' l ~ \ • • 
.BWNo ..... l.81 
1"HE'DALMtA'D~rcEMENT LIMrrm> '(A~d1t AND 
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 198f': . 
A 
to .~ tor .. the acquisition' and. tra1r8fer of the ",~kin.,,: ""'til' the 
Dalmia Dadri Cemnt Limi'ted toith a 'View ·t9',eiCtlrit'ijint.' ~ 
~~~~S qJ,.'uc~. ~n~T;~~~ng •.. ~ ",_,~, B1'Nerue .• fIA~erut of 
. t'J.~ dmb~~J~Y. ~~r!1&Jl t~. ~~~. ma,.ufalfJu'H, ~­
tiOfraAa"distrilmtion of c~t.!4'4W4,v .. eB.entictto.t4e ~ 01 
the economy of the country and for m4tter, connected therewith. or 
incidental thereto. 
Yt-!,.~..,~rn'",,~; ... ! ...... '.- ':'.Jt.:, .. ~ '!:'!'-"U" :., ~ " , 
WHE1l2AS Messrs Dalmia Dadri Cement Limited had been ~and. in 
the; manufaetqre. 'and' 'pioduetJoD' of ~rtl8hd c~t.f"an Jttc{e~~~­
tl9d 1 in'S. FirBt Schedule to the IDt!tiItrles '(DeVer.,pHleHt' an:di~!" 
latlon) ,Act, 1951; , 
5 AND WHERIlAS an order has been made for the winding UP. at the Com-
pany and proceedings for its liquidation are pending in the High Court 
of Punjab and Haryanaj 
AND WHDI:AS the undertakings of the Company have not been fUD;C-
tiohirig'jinde rM..eb, l88O; " i 

Short title 
and com-
menee-
ment. 
Defini-
tion •. 
Tranlfer 
to, and 
vestin, in, 
the Cen-
tral Gov-
ernment 
althe 
under-
taJdn,. 
of the 
Company. 
General 
effect 
of veltinl. 
lact.ure, production and distribution of portland cement which is esaen-
tial to the needs of the economy of the country. 
BJ. it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-second Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINABY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Dalmia Dadri Cement Limited 
(A<"quisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1981. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
5 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 10 
z. In this Act, unless the context otHerwi'se requi.res,-
(a) "appoih.ted day'" means the date of commencement of this 
Act; 
(b) "Cement Corporation" means the Cement Corporation of 
India, a company incorporated and registered und~ the Companies IS 
Act, 1956; 1 of 1956. 
(c) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Payments 
appointed under section 14; 
(d) "Company" means the Dalmia Dadri Cement Limited, being 
a company within the meaning of the Companies Act, 1956, and 20 1 of 1956. 
havingtts registered offi<:e at Charkhi, Dadri (Haryana); 
(e) "notification" means a notification I;nJbliahed in ,the otftcial 
Gazette~, .' . 
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 25 
(g) "specified date", in relation to any provision of this Act, 
means such date as the Central Government may, by notification, 
specif)r for the purposes of that provision, and different dates may 
be sptclfted for diilerent provisions of this Act; . 
(h) 'words and expressions used herein and not deftned but 30 
. deft.ned in the Companies Act, 19ss, shall have the meantnis, res- 1 of 1956. 
p8eti.,ely, assigned to them in that Act. ' 
CHAPrER II 
AcQUISITION AND TIlANSl"BR OF THE UNDDTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY 
. ~<QJ;l the apfOinted day, the .undertakings of .the Company, and the 35 
ri~~,?i~le and jn~ere.t of the Company in relation to its wadertaldDp;· 
shall, by virtue of this Ad, stand transferred to and vest in the 
Central Government. " 
I ~: 
, f·: . :,,... . . . '." . '. '! . : 
.~. "(1) The undertakings of the Company shall be deemed ,to 'in~ll1de 
all assets, rights, lease-holds, powers, authorities and privileges, and all 40 
property#, movable and . immovable, including lands, buildin .. , w.ork-
shop!'. sto~ instrllments, machinery azul equipment, cash baIaa ... · 
" ~. 

cash on hand, reserve funds, investments, book debts and all othel' 
filMs and interests in', or arising out of, such property as were imIne-
dieltely before the appointed day in the ownership, possession, power or 
con\tOlOf the Company, whether within or outside India, and all books 
S Of 8CeOunt, registers and all other d~uments of whatever nature relating 
thereto. 
(2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central 
Govemment under section 3 shall, by force of such vesting, be:freed 
and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and 
J c. all other incumbranCt's affecting them, and any attachment, injunction, 
cieueeor order of any court restricting the use of such properties in any, 
manner shall be deemed to have been withdrawn. 
(3) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this 
Act in the Central Government and every person holding any charge, 
J ~ lien lOr other inte~st in, or in relation to, any such property, shall give, 
• within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation 
to the Commissioner of such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest. 
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mort-
gagee of any property refened to in sub-section (3) or any other person 
holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such 
20 property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and 
intel'ests, payment of the mortgage money or other dues, in whole or 
in part, 01,lt of the amount specified in section 7 and also out·'of the 
amount determined under section 8, but no such mortgage, charge, 
25 lien or other interest shall be enforceable against any property which 
haa vested in the Central Govrnment. , 
(5) A:I1y licence or other instrument granted to the Company in 
relation to any undertaking which has vested in the Central Govern-
mellt under section 3, at any time before the appointed day and in 
force immediately before that day, shall continue to be in force on and 
30 after such day in accordance with its tenor in relation to, and for the 
purposes of, such undertaking and on and from the day of vesting of 
such undertaking under section 6 in the Cement Corporation, that Cor-
.poratton.shall be deemed to be substituted in such licence or other instru-
ment as if such licence or other instrument had been granted to the 
3S Cement Corporation and that Corporation shall hold it for the remainder 
of the period for which that company would have held it under the 
terms thereof. . 
, " I 
(6) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of 
whatever nature in relation to any property which has vested in the 
40 Central Government, under section 3, instituted or preferred by or 
against the Company is pending, the same shall not abate, be disconti-
nued or be, in any way, prejudicially affected by reason ot the tranafer 
of the undertakings of the Company or of anything contained in this 
Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prose-
4S cuted or enforced by or against the Central Government, or, where the 
undertakings of the Company are directed under section 6 to vest in the 
Cement Corporation, by or against that Corporation. 

Central 
Govern-
ment or 
Cement 
Corpora-
tion 
not to 
be liable 
for prior 
IiabUi-
tl_. 
Power of 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
direct 
vesting of 
the under-
takings of 
the Com-
panyin 
Cement 
Corpora-
tion. 
Payment 
of 
amount, 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that,-
(ci)"save as otherwiSe. expressly provichKi in thiS ~~n'CJl"m 
any -other: proylSion of thi$. Act, no llabi4t.Y o~ the CQ.m~y . in 
r~~- 'of 'any -'pe'ciod Frior to'the appointed day, shall be ~~ 
abfeagalnst' the' Ceh'irai Government, or, where the und~takia .. 10 
of' ttle' COinpany 'are directeq. unlier section 6 ~ vest in the CeIIleJlt 
Corporation, against 'that "Corporation; 
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal oc other 
authority in relation to the' undertakfugs' of . theCo~pin.y,"" ~. 
after the appointec'l day; in respect of any ~atter" claim or ~~~, 15 
which arOse before that day, shall be enforceable a~\ ,#le 
Ce~ttalGO"Vemment, or, where the Undertakings' of '.the C~j', ~~ 
dltected under section 6 to vest in the Cement Corporation,"'against 
that Corporation; 
(c) no liability incurred by the Compltny befor~ 'the ap~'thied ~o 
day, for the contravention of a proviLII:on of' any l'aw fot'tne -t:ifxle 
be~ in force, ~hall be enforceable against the Central' ,~EWii'.:.' 
ment, or, where the undertakings of the Company are dfrected'Uhtre'i-
st:Ction 6 to vest in the Cement Corporation, against that Corpo1:a::" 
tion. .. , ., .• __ 4 ....... 2 5 
6 .. (1) 'Notwith5tand~ a~ything contairu!d in sections 3 and 4, the 
Cen\ral 'Gov~rrilnent may, subject t~.s~ch terms and conditioos as it ma, 
think fit to impose, direct, by notification, that the undertakings of the 
CompbllY,. anq the right, title and interest of the Company in relation 
to its 'undertakings, which have vested in the Central Government 30 
un~erSection 3, shall, ins~eadof continuing to vest in the Centnl 
dovernment, vest in the Cement Corporation either on the date of the 
nolihcationor on such earlier or later date (not being.a date eamier than 
the' appointed· day) as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the Company, in relatloa'Bs 
to its' undertakings, vest in the Cement Corporation under su1Hlectlon 
; 1 '.' • 
(1), the Cemerit Corporation sball, on and from the date of such vestiftg, 
be' dt:emed to have become the owner in relation to such undertakings,' 
aiid' all the rights and liabilities of the Central Government ill relation 
to such undertakings shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be 40 
c1.~~~~d to have become the rights and liabilities of the Cement COrl'Ora-
tion. ~, 
, CHAPTER III 
PA~ENr 01 AMOt:Tm's 
7. Pot the'transfer to, and vt'!stlng'in, the Centr.1Goveril~Qt,i ~}45': ' 
sectlbn sot the undertaldnp 'of the Compahy and' the rl&'ht, "tl~ iilia' 
iateMt ~f' the' Com"Wny In relattOn "to its' tiiicJertaldhl*,: there I iiBdt'1eu I 
paid by the Central Gb~ernD1ent' to 'the 'Company, in' cu1i; "aria' tb"th:e' I 
manner specifted in Chapter VI, an amount of rupees ei,hty-four Iakh& 

8. (1) The MDount lpecUled in section 7 shall carry limple, in~est 
"'ithe irate 01. lour per' eeat. per annum for the period cOInmenctDg on 
tile, appointed day anti eIUIlnr on the date on which" paym~t '~f meh 
amount II made by the eeatral Gowpnment to the cOminfiiioner.'" 
5 (J) The amount determined bt aecortlance with the provillODl of 
IU~-.. etion <a) shall be paid by the Central Gevernment to the Com~ 
pany in addition to the amount specified in sedion 't. ' ' 
, (3), For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabilities 
ol t~ Company in relation to its' undertakings whi~h' have vested-in 
10 the Ct>lltral Government under section 3, shall be' discluu~ged fro~ the 
a~t referred to in sectiOn 7, and also from the amount determfned 
under sub-section (1) in aCcordance with the r'ights and interests O1'~tbe 
creditors of the Company. ' 
CHAPl1ER IV 
15 MANAGF.MENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THB CoMPANY 
9. The general superintende1lce. dir~on, control and management 
of the affairs an~ business of t,he ~O'dert~kings of the 90~~y, the 
right, title' and intere'st in relation to which have vested in the Central 
~~~~J?~ent,1,l,.n?er" ~eC~iol} 3, shall, where a direction hasheen Pil~de ;by 
20 tfi'e ,~~~t;8:IJtQvern~~nt"under sub-section (1) ,of section 6, v;~st in the 
Cement Corporation, and thereupon the Cement Corporation shall be 
entitl~d to exercise, to the exclusion of all other persons, all such powers 
and do all such things as the Company was authorised to exercise' and 
do in relation to its undertakings. 
Payment 
01. fur-
ther 
amount. 
Manage-
ment, etc., 
of the 
undertak-
inga9.l~ 
Com~. 
25 ]0. (1) Notwithstanding any: judgment, ~ecree or order of, any ~~>urt, Duty to 
tribunal or other tluthorit:v or anything contained in any law for the deliver 
time being in foree, the Official LiqUidator of the Company or any other possession 
person, in whose possession or C'UstOcly or under wnOse control' the of the undertak-undertakings of the Company or any part thereof may' be, shall fo:t h- ings of the 
30 with daliver possession of the undertakings of the Company or any part ' Company 
~hereOf to the Central Government, or where the undertakings of the and docu-
Company are vested' under section 6 in the Cement Corporation to that menta relating 
Corporatiob. ' r thereto. 
(2) On the vesting of the management of the undertakings of the 
35 Company ill ~h.e. Ce~ent CorpO'I',atlon, tp,e Offi::-ial IJqp.idator .of .. t,p.e 
::fi~~y~or"any' other persQn W?O q~1 on tne appoin~ ,day, jn ,his 
po~~~~~~n or cqs\ody pr under ~lS co~trol any books, d<>?~eptsor 
other p~~rs r,el,atil}g to, the under:t~l$:ings of the COIJlpaJlYlmmedJ.a.~ 
before' su~h vesting c,r apP?intment, shall be bound to deliver tile ~d 
40 b(lfft~,' aocym~nis·.or. othe~ p'W~r~ to ~he Cement C~~ratiop ,or ~o, sW~h 
J!e!¥~~ as: tp~' ,Cr~ii.tral· Govern,ment or the, Cement Corporation, as. ~he 
ease may be, may specify in this behalf. 
(3) The Central Government may take or cause to be taken all 
nec;s~wy,:.~~ tPl' .. sec\Uing possession of the 'Ulldertakings which have 
45 ve~~.jA. it.,~4.w Cloctioll .3. 

Duty to 
furn1ah 
part.i-
culars. 
Employ-
mentot 
certain 
employees 
to eonti-
nue. 
.. 
(4) The Central Government may issue such direction. as it IDa, 
deem desi'l'8ble in the circumstances of the case to the Cement ·Corpora.. 
tion and that Corporation, may also, if it is considered necessary '10 to 
do, apply to the Central Government at any time for instru::tions as to 
the manner in which the management of the undertakings of the Com- S 
pany shall be conducted or in relation to any other matter ariBing in the 
course of such management. 
11. (1) The Company shall, within such period as the Central Gov-
ernment may allow in this behalf, furnish to that Government or to 
the Cement Corporation a complete inventory of all the properties and 10 
assets of the Company as on the appointed day pertaining to the under-
takings which have vested in the Central Government or the Cement 
CorpO'l"ation, as the case may be. 
(2) &> much of the obligation of the Company under sub-section (1) 
as relates to the properties and assets of the Company in the possession, J 5 
custody or control of the Official t,iquidator of the Company shall be 
discharged by him. 
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIONS REl.ATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY 
n. (1) Everv person who has been. immediately before the appointed 20 
day. employed in any of the undertakings of the Company shall become,-
(4) on and from the appointed day, an employee of the Central 
Government; and 
(b) where the undertakings of the Company are directed under 
sub-se'1:ion (1) of section 6, to vest in the Cement Corporation, an !:l5 
employee of that Corporation on and from the date of such vesting, 
and shall hold office or service under the Central Government or the 
Cement Corporation, as the case mav be, with tl,e same rl~bts and 
privilel!e!; as to 1)en~on. Ill"atuitv and other' matters a'J would have been 
adm'issible to hi'm if therE" had been no su~'h ve9tine' and shllll continue 30 
to do so unless and '1.1 '1 til his emplovrnent under the Central Government 
or the Cement Corporation. as the caRe may be. is dulv terminated or 
by the Central Government or the Cement Corporation. as the case may be. . , .., ~-,.-. -- 4,. 
(~) Notwithstanrlinrl anvth;na cnntl\ined in the Industrial Disootes 
Ar.t. 1947. or in anv othf"T' law for th .. time being in force the transfer 35 14 of 
of the servicec; of nnv offit!er or other oerson p.moloved in anv under-
takin~ of the Comnanv to thp Central Govemmpnt or the Cement CorPO-
ratfon shalt not entitle such officer or nther pmnloVf'e to anv C'omDenslltion 
under tl,is Act or under an" other law for the time beinq in for--e and 
no !luch claim shall be entertained by Rny COU'l't, tribunal 01' other 40 
authority. 
(~) Where. 'UndP.r t'hp tf>Y'mCl of anv ~1l"b-ACt rtf Rervfee or otherwise. 
anv pprson. whose !'lervices her.nme transfe~ to the Central Govern-
ment or the Cement Cgrporatton by r~ason of the prnyt.l0 nl of thtll 

., 
"ActIt Is entitled to any arrears of salary or wages·· or any payments· for 
any lep.ve not availed ot or any other payment, not being payment by· 
way of gratuity or pension, such person may enforce his claim ·again8t. 
the Company, but not against the Central Government or the Cement 
5 Corporation. 
13. (1) Where the Company has established a provident fund, 
Bu!X'rannuation fund, welfare fund or any other fund for the benefit of 
the persons eml>loyed in any of the undertakings of the Company, the 
monies relatable to the officers or other employees. whose services have 
10 become transfen-ed, by or under this Act, to the Central Govemment or 
the Cement Corporation, shall, out of the monies standing, on the 
anpointed day. to the credit of such provident fund, superamrlolation 
fund, welfare fund Or other fund, stand transferred to, and vest in. the 
Central Government or the Cement Corporation, as the case may be. 
15 (2) The monies which stand transferred under sub-'3ection (1) to the 
20 
C~ntral Government Or the Cement Corporation, as the case may be, 
shall be dealt with by that Government or that Corporation in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
14. (1) The <;entral Government shall. for thp. purpose of disbursing' 
the amounts payable to the Company under section 7 and section 8, by 
notjfjcation, appoint a Commissioner of Payme~ts. 
f;)) The Central Government may apooint suoo other 1)e1SODS as it 
25 may think fit to allsist the Commissione,. and thereupon the Commi"l!lioner 
""3;\' authorise one 01" more of such llerSODS also to p.xf!rcise aU or any of 
the powers exercisable bv him under this Act and different persons may 
be Rlltborised to exc"cise different powers. 
(.1) Anv person authorisP.d bv the Commi~sioner to exercise any 
30 of the powp.rs excrcisable by the Commissioner may. exercise those 
llowers in the same manner and with the !lame effect as if thttv have 
been conferred on that person directly by this Act and, not by way. of 
authorisation. 
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissionet' and other 
35 persons appointed under thjs section shall be defrayed out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 
15. (1) The Central Government shall, within thirty days, from the 
specified date, pay, in cash, to the Commissioner, for the payment. to the 
Comp~ny,-
I 
(a) an amount equal to the amount specified in section 7, and 
(b) an amount equal to the amount payable to the Company 
under section 8. . I 
~;:w (2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in 
m favour of the Commissioner in the Public Account of India, and every 
45 amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be deposited: by 
... ~ him to the credit (·f the said deposit account and the said deposit 
lQCount shall be operated by the Commissioner, 
Provident 
tundand 
other 
'fun.cU. 
Appofnt-
mentot 
Commis-
aionerof 
Payment .. 
Payment 
by the 
Central 
Govern-
ment 
to the 
CoJDJDJ.-
sloner. 

Certain 
powers 
of the 
Central 
Govem-
mentor 
Cement 
Corpora-
tion. 
Claims to 
be made 
to the 
Commis_ 
sioner. 
Priority 
ofcJaims. 
8 
(3) Records shall be maintained by the Commissioner In respect of 
the undertakings of the Company in relation to which payment has been 
made to him under this Act. 
(4) The interest accruing on the amount standing to the credit of 
the deposit account referred to in sub-section (2) shall ensure to the 5 
benefit of the Company. 
16. (1) The Central Government or th.e Cement Corporation, as the 
case may be, shall be entitled to receive 'Up to the specified date, to the 
exclusion of all other persons, any money due to the Company, in 
rebtion to its undertakings which have vested in the Central Govem- 10 
ment or the Cement Corporation, and realised after the appointed 
day, notwithstanding that the realisation pertains to a period prior to the 
app(li~ted day. 
(2) The Central Government or the Cement Corporation, as the 
case may be, may make A claim ~') the Commissioner with regard to 15 
every paym~t mRde by it after the appointed day for dis('harging anv 
liability of th(' Company in relatio1 to any period prior to the appointed 
day; and every such claim shall have priority in accordance with the 
priorities attaching, under this Act. to the matter in re1ation to which 
such liability has been discharged by the Central Government or the 20 
Cement Corporation. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of the 
Company in respect of any transa"tion prior to the appointed day, 
which have not b~n di!';c"harged on or before the !';pecifieo date, shall 
bE' thr liabilities of thf!' Company. 25 
17. Evf!'ry person having a claim against the Company sltnll prefer 
such claim before t"he CommiS'3ioner within th'irty days from the specified 
date: I 
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant wac; 
prp.vented by ~ufficient cause from preff.'mng- the rl:J.im within the said 30 
period (If thirty days, he m~y entertain the claim within Il. further period 
of thirty days and not thereafter. 
18. The 
shall have 
namely:-
claims arising out of the matters specified in the &hedule 
priorities in accordance with the following principles, 
(a) Category! !';hal1 have precedence over all other categories 
and Category U !'lhall have precedence over Category m, and SO on; 
35 
(0) the clnims specified in each of the categories shall rank 
equally and be paid in full, but, if the amount is insufficient to meet 
such claims in full, they shall abate in equal prO?ortions ann be 40 
paid accordingly; and . 
(c) the question of discharging any liability with regard to a 
matter specified in a lower cate~ory shall arise only if a surplus is 
left after meeting all the liabilities ~fiect in the immediately 
higher category. I., 

5 of 1908. 
45 of 1800. 
2 of 197" 
9 
.19.(1) On receipt of the claims made under section 17, the CommiJ- Examina-
.noner shall arrange the claims in the order of p,rioritiea specified in the tion of 
~he<1ule and examine the same in accordance with such order of clal'ms. 
priorities. 
a ~2) If, on examination of the claims, the Commissioner is of opinion 
that tne amount paId to him under thlS Act is not sUfficient to meet the 
liabilities specified in any lower cateiory, he shall not be reqwred to 
exam.llle the claims in respect of such lower category. 
20. (1) After examining the claims with reference to the priorities set 
r 0 out in the Schedule, the ConurusslOner shall b.x a certain date on or 
belore wruch every claunant shall HIe tile proof of his claun. 
l~) Not less than lourtct:n days' notice of the date so fixed shall be 
givt!n lJy advertisement in one issue of any daily newspaper in the 
.l£nghsh langu.age llClvmg ClrcUla1.lOn in the major part of the country 
anti one issue or any dallY newspaper in such regional language as the 
15 CommISSIoner may consider suitable, and every such notice shall clll 
upon the claImant. to tile Lhe Pl'OOl of hls claim with the Commissioner 
WIthin Llle pellod sl'ecilied m the advertisement. 
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the 
tinu;; specllled by tnc COlrumsslOner shall be excluded from the dislTolI'se-20 ments made by the Comnllssloner. 
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his 
opilllon, be necessaTY and alter giving the Company an opportunity ot 
re1uting the claim and after gIvmg the claimant a reasonable oppor-
tunity uf being heard, by oraer in writing, admit or reject the claim 
2:> in whole or in part. 
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own 
procedure in all matters ariSing out of the discharge of his functions, 
mcludmg the place ur places at which he may hold his sittings and shall, 
lor the purpose of making an investigation under this Act, have the 
30 same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Pro-
cedure, 1901:1, while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, 
namely:-
35 
40 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any wUnesa 
and examining him on oath; 
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other 
material object producible as evidence; 
(c) the rereption of evidence on affidavits; 
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of 
witnesses. 
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be 
a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the 
Indian Penal Code and the Commissioner shall be deemed. to be a Civil 
cow·t ror the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of 
45 Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
Admli-
sion or 
rejecifbn 
. of cIal1ns. 

l>JPurae-
ment of 
-moiieyby 
the Com-
inissioner 
to clai-
mants. 
Disburse-
ment of 
amounts 
to the 
Com-
pany. 
Undis-
bursed 
or un-
claimed 
amount 
to be 
deposited 
to the 
general 
revenue 
account. 
Act to 
have 
over-
riding 
eftect. 
. 10 
17)' A t:lItin8nt, who is dissatisfied with the decision o(tKe ·Commii .. 
... , smner, 'may prefer an. appeal against the decision to the I?rincipal civil 
cbUrt"of'ongma,l jUrisd.ction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction 
the registered office of the Company is situated: 
. -Ptbvli:ied"that where a person who is a Jud·ge of a High Court is 5 
. appointed 'to be the Commissioner.' the appeal shall1ie to tht!High Court 
'or '.Punjab -and 'Haryana and such appeal shall be heard and ctisposed· of 
by DoL less than two Judges of that High Court. 
21. After admitting a claim Wlder this Act, the amount due in respect 
at such Claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or persons ) 0 
to whom such amount is due, and, on such payment, the liability of the 
Company in respect of any claim relating to the undertakings of the 
Company shall stand discharged. 
''2% •. (1) If, out Of the monies paid to him in relation to the undertakings 
of 'the Company, there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities as ) 5 
~ec11ied in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse such balance 
to the Company. 
(2) Where the possession of any machinery, equipment or other pro-
perty, has vested in the Central Government or the Cement Corporation 
under this Act, but such machinery, equipment or ot.her propeny does 20 
not belong to the COm;?any, it shall be lawful for the Central Govern-
ment or the Cement Corporation to continue to possess such machinery 
or equipment or other property on the same terms and conditions under 
which it was possessed by the Company immediately before the 
appointed day. 25 
23. Any money paid to the Commissioner which rema~n\) undisbursed 
or unclaimed on the date immediately preceding the date on which the 
oJ:lice of the Commissioner is finally wound up, shall be tran.sferred by 
the COmmissioner, before his office is finally wound uP. to the general 
revenue account of the Central Government; but a claim to any money 30 
so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the per-
son entiUed to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such transfer 
had not been made, and the order, if any, for payment of the claim, being 
treated as an order for the refund of revenue. 
CHAPrER VII 35 
MlscELLANEOUS 
'·24. The provisiOns of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any-
thing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force or in any Instrument having effect by v;rtue of any law, 
other thaD-this Act, or in any decree or order of any court,· tribunal or 40 
other authority. 

,- ' 
11 
25. Evel'Y contract entered into by the Company in r.tion to ita contracts 
~uaertaKIDgli, W lllcil has vested In the llentral (Jovemment una.er section to cease 
... , for any tJervlce, sale 01' SLl.PP.1y anQ ID torce immediately before the to have 
~puJn1.eu QiIlY, snall, on anQ Irom tne explry ot one h1lllcUed -.and eighty effect un-
aa ~~ 5 ys U'om I.ue appoIDLed aay, cease to h~ve elfect wUea r 8tlCh.,contract fled by 
lS, lJeJ.oct: tne expU'y 01 tnaL penod, ratlfied, in writing, by the Central Central 
-liOvefhmeht or ~ue L.ement Lorporatlon,wlieresuch Untcettaltings have Govern. 
lJi:!en -VeSted in that Cotp01"'cition under thlS Act, and hi rat1f11ttg 1uch con- ment or 
ttact,'ttie CehtralGovernment or'the Cement t:orporation Dlaymake such Cement 
alteratIon or mbcUtlcauon therem as it Iilay think fit: tc:orpora-10 IOn. 
20 
25 
30 
.Provic1.ed that the Central Government or the Cement Cor;Joration 
sna.u not omlt to raLlty a contract and snall not make any alteration or 
nlOCU1lCalion in a contract-
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is undUly onerous or 
has been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental to the interests 
ot the Cemra! Government or the Cement Corp0ration , and 
(b) excepl after giving to the partie; to the contract a reasonable 
O'?pu.rtumty of bemg neard. and except after recording in writing its 
reasons for refusal to ratlfy the contract or for making any altera-
tion or modification therein. 
u. '(1) No suit, p.rcJsecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against Protection 
the Central Government or any othl:er or other employee of that Gov- of action 
tlfnn&ent Or the Cement Corporation or other person authorised by that taken in 
liovernment or CorporatIOn tor anythmg whicn is in good faith done or good faith. 
mtt:llded to be done under thls Act. 
(2) No suit or ottler legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
Government or any ollicer or otn~r employee of that Government or the 
Cement Corporatlon or other person authorised by that Government or 
CorporatIon lor allY d.amage caused or llkely to be caused by anything 
WhIch is in good tallh done or intended to be done. 
27. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct 'that all or 
any 01 tile ~owers exercisable by 'it under this Act, other than the powers t~eleofga· 
'. als b cised Ion conferred by this section, section 30 and sectlOn :n, may 0 e exer powers. 
uy Buen pe£son or persons as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub-section (1), 
35 the person to whom such power has been c\elegated shall act under the 
direction, control and supervision of the Central Government. 
28. Any person who,- ''''- . 'Mat-
.... .1 ... 1 ' t tieS. :(~)··having in his possession, custllUY or 'con~ro any proper y 
. 'lutlning part of any undertakings of the Company, wrongfully with-
40 holds such property from the Central Government or the 'Cement 
CorpOration; or 
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, ~ . property 
forming part of, the undertakings of the Company; or' 

Offences 
bycom_ 
panies. 
POWer 
temake 
rules. 
12 
(c) wilfully withholds or fails to Iurnish to the Central Govern-
ment or the Cement Corporation or to any perSOIl or body of 
persons speclfied by tnat uovernment or Ule lA!ment Corppration, 
Mil the case may be, any document or inventory relatmg to the under-
talungs of tne Company, willcn may be in his possesslon, custody or 5 
control; or 
(d) fails to deliver to the Cemral Government or the Cement 
Corporatlon or to any person or body 01 persons specified by that 
Government. or the Cement Corporation, any assets, books of account, 
reglSterli or other documents in his possesslOn, custOdy or control, re- 10 
1 .. ~ln~ ~o tne ullClertaltmgs of the (;ompanYi or 
\e) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part 
01 the undertakings of the Company; or 
(f) prefers any claim under this Act which he knows or has 
reasonau.le cause to belIeve to be 1alse or grossly inaccurate, 
l:Iha.iJ. be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with 1ine whlch may extend to ten thousanCl. rupees, OL' 
WHn bOth. 
~~. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
cOlupany, every person wno, at the wme the oitence was committed, was '0 
In cnarge of, and was responsible to, the company, for the conduct of the 
bUsiness of the company, as weH as the company, shaH be deemed to be 
~umy of the otience and shaU be lIable to be proceeded agairu;t and 
.;IuUlsned accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 25 
such person hable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was 
commILted without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due dili-
gence to prevent the commisliion of such offence. 
(~) .Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
any oHence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 30 
proved that the offence has been committecl with the consent or conni-
vance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, mana-
ger, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 35 
1:xpLanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "'company" means any body corporate and includes a firm 
or other association of individualsi 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in tbe firm. 
30. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 40 
carrying out the provisions of tbis Act. . 
(2) In particular, and without prejucUce to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an intima-
tion shall be given to the Commissioner under SUb-section (3) of 45 
&eetion 4i 

11 
(b) the manner in which the monies in any provident fund or 
other fund uncler section 13 shall be dealt with; 
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, pres-
cribed. 
5 (3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall 
be laid" as BOon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlla. 
ment, while it is in session, for a total geriod of thirty days whieh may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and 
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or 
10 the succe9Sive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modi-
fication in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect,as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifi-
cation or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any-
15 thing previously done under that rule. 
31, If any 'difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act p to .. ower the Central Government may, by order, not inconsIstent WIth the provi- remc,ve 
sions of this Act, remove the difficulty: difticul-
tiel. 
20 Provined that nO such order shall be made after the expiry of a pd'iod 
of two years from the appointed day. 

THE SCHEDULE 
ORQllR -or .PBIOKlTXE8· FOR 'l'HB DlS,CHARGE or LIUu.rnES or THECOMPANT·, 
Cat,gary 1-
(a) Wage51 sa1.D.ries and oth~r dues payable to the emplQyees of 
the CQmp~y. 5 
(b) DeductiOI".8 made from the salaries and wages of the employees 
for provident fund, ESI contribution, premium relafng to 
LIC Or for any other purp0t3es. 
(c) Arrears in relation to contributions to be made by the Company 
to the Provident Fund and under ESI Act 1948 and also under 10 
any other law for the time being in for~ providing for .such 
contributions. 
Cntpgory 11-
Principal amount of loans advanced by-
(i) Central Government; 
(ii) State Government; 
(iH) Banks and financial institutions; 
(iv) Any other sources. 
(;ategory III-
(a) Any credits availed of by the company for the purpose of 20 
carrying on any trading or manufacturing operations. 
(b) Any dues of State Electricity Boards or other Government 
or semi-Government institutions against supply of goods or 
services. 
(e) Arrears of interest on loans and advances. 
Category IV-
(a) Revenue, Taxes, ceases, rates or other dues to Central Gov-
ernment, State Government and local authorfties. 
(b) Any other dues. 
14 
25 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The unsatisfactory state of functioning of Messrs. Dalmia Dadri Cement 
Limited, one of the cement factories in the country, located at Charkhi 
Dadri (Haryana) with a licensed capacity of 2.39 lakh tonnes Of cement 
per annum has been engaging the attention of the Central Government. 
Due to financial difficulties result'ng from mis-management, the company 
had closed down pJ"c.ducti9n in 1975. As a result of the efforts made to-
wards the rehabilitation of the company by the State Government, 
Central Government and financial institutions, the company restarted its 
production in December, 1975. The performance of the company had, how-
ever, not been satisfactory and an investigation under the provisions of 
the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act was carried out. The 
Investigation Committee had commented adversely on the function'ng of 
this cement factory. Due to acute financial crisis, the management of 
this company had closed down the factory on 18th March, 1980 and the 
factory has been lying closed since then. 
2. The factory has been located in a deficit area and its closure has 
aggravated the shortage of cement in this area. The factory had employ-
ed a total of about 1600 persons at the time of its closure in March, 1980 
and the Management had terminated the services Of these employees 
without giv:ng them any retrenchment benefits. The State Government of 
Haryana has been continuously urging the Government of India to take 
over this factory in view of the fact that a large number of employees 
will be thrown out of employment, if the fadory is permanently closed 
down. The State Government Of Haryana ha'3 indicated that owing to 
financial constraints and lack of technical expertise, the State Govern· 
ment is not in a positron to take over this cement factory for restarting 
and running it. 
3. The viability of the factory on its restart has been assessed and in 
the interest of restarting production of cement and also to provide em-
ployment to the workers, the Central Government had decided that it 
would be in the public interest to acqUire the cement factory of this 
company and to transfer it to the Cement CorporatioJ;l of India which is 
a public sector undertaking engaged in the manufacture and sale of 
cement. 
4. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above object. 
NEW DELHI; CHARANJIT CHANANA. 
TlJ'? ?3rd April, 1981. 
PRESIDENT'S HECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 9-23/'BI-Cem, dated the 24th April, 1981 from 
Shri Charanjit Chanana, Minister of State in the Ministry of Industry to 
the- Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter. of th~ 
Hill to provide for acquisition & transfer of undertakings of Dalmla Dadrl 
Cement Limited with a view to securing the proper management of such 
undertakings so as to subserve the interest of the public by ensuring 
continued manufacture, production and distribution of cement which is 
an essential item to the economy of the country and for matters connect-
ed therewith or incidental thereto, recommends. under clause~ (1~ am! (3) 
of article 117 of the Constitution, the introduction of the saId BIll in and 
itR consideration by Lok Sabha. 
15 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
'Clause 7 of the Bill provides for the payment in cash and ill the 
manner Specified in Chapter VI of the Bill an amount of as. 84.87 lakbs 
for v~ttng in the Central Government the right, title .and interest of 
Dalmta Daati Cement Company Ltd. in relation to its cement unit. 
Clause 8 of the Bill provides for the payment of simple interest ~. 
per cent. per annum for the period beginnin'g from the day on which 
the Act comes into force and ending on the day on which payment 
of such amount is made by the Central Government to the Commissioner 
of Payments. It is estimated that the interest payment in term6 of the 
provisions of clause 8 is likely to be Of the order of about twenty-eight 
thousand rupees per month. 
Clause 14 of the Bill provides for appointment of Commissioner of 
Payments by the Government with adequate staff to assist him for the 
purpose of disbursement of the amount payable by the Government. 
The salary and allowances of the Commi6sioner of Payments and its staff 
and expenditure on office and establishment will be defrayed from out 
of the Consolidated Fund of India. The estimated expenditure on this 
account is likely to be of the order of fifteen thousand rupees per month. 
A~ :> number of workers in the cement factory have crossed the age 
of superannuation and such workers may have to be retired after pay-
ment of terminal benefits. A proviSion of rupees forty lakhs will have 
to be made outside the provisions of this Bill for making these payments. 
The cement factory, on its vesting with the Central Government, 
would require immediate repairs and renovation. This is likely to take 
about e· ght to nine months. During that period, the estimated expendi-
ture in respect of the salaries and wages of the employees is likely to be 
of the order of rupees forty-five lakhs. 
On an application filed by the Cement Controller for winding up of 
this company, the High Court of Punjab and Haryana, Chandigarh had 
appointed a provisional Liquidator and a sum of rupees five lakhs has 
been given to him for defraying the cost of maintenance of the skeleton 
staff and for other incidental expenses. This amount paid as a loan to 
the provisional Liqu'dator will have to be paid to the Cement Regulation 
A~count. 
In order to commission the cement factory after rehabfiitatiOh and 
for carrying out repairs, an amount of rupees two hundred and ftfty 
laldzs has been estimated by the Cement Corporation of India. The 
working capital required ia of rupee& one hundred and tbfrty ntne llkhs 
as ettimsted by the Cement Corporation of 1n&8. 
18 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 30 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the provisions of the Bill and those relate to-
(a) the time withir. which and the manner in which an intima-
tion shall be given to the Commissioner of Payments under clause 17; 
(b) the manner in which the monies in any Provident Fund 
and other fund referred to in section 13 shall be dealt with; or 
(c) any other matter which is required to be or may be pres-
cribed. 
The matters in respect of which such rules may be made are matters 
of detail and procedure anrl the delegation of legislative power is, there-
fore, of B normal character. 
2. Clause 31 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
an order not inconsistent with the provisions of the Bill to remove any 
'difficulty in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill and no !luch order 
shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the appointed 
day. As all the problems which may arise cannot be envisaged at this 
stage, this provision has been made by way of abundant caution. The 
dE:legation of legislAhve power under the aforesaid provision relates to 
matters of detail and as such the delegation is of a normal character. 
17 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of the 
Dalmia Dadri Cement Limited with a view to securing the proper 
m:magement of such undertakings so as to subserve the interest of 
the general public by ensuring the continued manufacture, production 
and distribution of cement which is essential to the needs of the 
economy of the country ann for matters connected therewith or in-
cidental thereto. 
.,. -, 
(Shri Charan;it Ch4ft4n4, 
Minister ~ State in the Ministry 
of Industry.) 