As yNTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

=3 APR 1992

_ Bill No 90 ० 69 of 1992

‘THE FOREIGN TRADE (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) -
BIL

1992

A
BILL

ent and regulation of foreign wade by facilix

0 provide for the developm
h India and for

tating imports into, ‘and augmenting esports from,
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto,

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic

of India as follows:—
CHAPTER 1

PRELIMINARY

5 4. (1) This Act may be called the Foreign Trade (Development and
Regulation) Act, 1992.

(2) Tt shall come into force on such date 88
"may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

the Central Government

this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—

” means the authority specified in,

2. In
(a) “Adjudicating Authority’
or under, section 13;

(b) “Appellate Authority” means the authority specified in, or

under, sub-section (1) of section 15;

Short title
and com-
mence-
ment.

tions.



Powers to
make pro-
vision
relating
to im-
ports

and ex-
Ports,

Continu-
ance of

Orders,

Export
and
Import
Policy.

Appoint
ment of
Director
General 4
and +
his funce

+. se 2. 2

(c) “conveyance” means any vehicle, vessel, aircraft or
other means of transport imeluding any animal;

(d) “Director General” means the Director General of Foreign
Trade appointed under setion 6; i

(6) “import” and “export” means respectively bringing into, or $
talking out of, India any goods by land, sea or air;

f (f) “Importer-Exporter Code Number” meang the Code Number
granted under section 7;

(9) “licence” means a licence to import or export and includes a
customs clearance permit and any other permission issued or 10
granted under this Act; ; |

(h) “Order” means any Order made by the Central Govern:
ment tmder section 3; and

i (i) “preseribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
CHAPTER IL 5

Power oF CenTRAL GOVERNMENT TO MAKE ORDERS AND ANNOUNCE Export

| Uport Policy

3. (4) The Central Government may, by Order published in the Offi-
cial Gazette, make provision for the development and regulation of
foreign trade by facilitating imports ang increasing exports,

(2) The Central Government may also, by Order published in the
Official Gazette, make provision for prohibiting, restricting or otherwise
regulating, in all cases or in specified classes of cases and subject to
such exceptions, if any, as may be made by or under the Order, the
import or export of goods, 2

(3) All goods to which any Order under sub-section (2) applies shall
be deemed to be goods the import or export of which has been, prohibited
under section 11 of the Customs Act, 1962 and all the provisions of that
Act shall have effect accordingly.

4. All Orders made under the Imports and Exports (Control) Act,
947, and in force immediately before the commencement of this Act
shall, so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of thig Act,

continue to be in force and shall be deemed to have been made under
this Act, :

1 Li

5. The Central Government may, from time to time, formulate and
announce, by notification in the Official Gazette, the export and import
policy and may also, in like manner, amend that policy,

6. (1) The Central Government may appoint any person to be the
Director General of Foreign Trade for the purposes of this Act.

(2) The Director Genera
the formulation of the export
for carrying out that Policy.

1 shall advise the Central Government in
and import policy and shall be responsible


(8) The Central Government may, by Order published in the Official
| direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act (other than
the powers under sections 3, 5, 15, 16 and 19) may also be exercised, in
such cases and subject to such conditions, by: the Director General or
such other officer subordinate to the Director General, as may be specified
in the Order. 4

CHAPTER पा
Inporter-Exrortir Cope Numper anp Licence

7. No person shall make any import or export except under an Im-
10 porter-Exporter Code Number granted by the Director General or the
officer authorised by the Director General in this behalf, in accordance
with the procedure specified in this pehalf by the Director General.

8. (1) Where—
(a) any person has contravened any law relating to Central
15 Excise or Customs or foreign exchange or has committed any other
economic offence under any othe rlaw for the time being in force as
may be specified by the Central Government by notification in the
Official Gazette, or | |

(b) the Director General has reason to pelieve that any person
20 has made an expott or import in a manner gravely prejudicial to the
trade relations of India with any foreign country or to the interests
€ of other persons engaged in imports or ‘exports or has brought disre-
pute to the credit or the goods of the country, —

the Director General may call for the record or any other information
25 from that person and may, after giving to that person a notice in writing
informing him of the grounds on which it ig proposed to suspend or
cancel the Importer-Exporter Code ‘Number and giving him a reasonable
opportunity of making a representation in writing within such reason-
able time as may be specified in the notice and, if that person so desires,
30 of being heard, suspend for a period, as may be specified in the order, or
aancel the Importer-Exporter Code Number granted to that person.

(2) Where any ‘Importer-Exporter Code Number granted to a person
thas been suspended or cancelled under sub-section (1), that person shall
not be entitled to import or export any goods except under a special
Yicence granted, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be

prescribed, by the Director General to that person.
9. (1) The Central Government may levy fees, subject to such

exceptions, in respect of such person or class of persons making an
application for a licence or in zespect of any licence granted or renewed
jn such maner as may be prescribed.

(2) The Director General or an officer authorised by him may, on an
application and after making such enquiry as he may think fit, grant or
refuse to grant a licence to import or export such class or classes of goods
as may be prescribed, after yecording in writing his reasons for such

refusal, I
(3) A licence granted under this section shall—

(a) be in sychform as may be prescribed;

Importer-
Exporter
Code
‘Number.

Suspen-
sion and
cancella-
tion of
‘Importer-
Exporter
Code

‘Number.

Issue, sus~
pension
and can
cellation of
Ticence.


Power
relating
tosearch

seizure.

Contra-
vention
of provi-
sions of
this

Act,
rules,
orders
and ex-
port and
import
Policy,

a
(b) be valid for such period as may be spceified therein; and

(c) be subject to such terms, conditions and restrictions as |
be prescribed or as specified in the licence with reference to the
terms, conditions and restrictions so prescribed.

(4) The Director General or the officer authorised under sub-section
@) may, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, for good and
sufficient reasons, to be recorded in writing, suspend or cancel any licence
granted under this Act:

Provided that no such suspension or cancellation shall be made

expect after giving the holder of the licence a reasonable opportunity or 10
being heard. {

(5) An appeal against an order refusing to grant, or suspending or
cancelling, a licence shall lie in like manner as an appeal against an
order would lie under section 15,

CHAPTER IV
SEARCH, SerzuRE, Penaury anp Conriscation

10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, authorise any person for the purposes of exercising such powers
with respect to entering such premises and searching, inspecting and
seizing of such goods, documents, things and conveyances, subject to such 20
requirements and conditions, as may be prescribed,

(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 relating

to searches and seizures shall, so far ag may be, apply to every search
and seizure made under this section.

या. (7) No export or import shall be made by any person except in 25
accordance with the provisions of this Act, the rules and the orders made
thereunder and the export and import policy for the time being in force,

(2) Where any person makes or abets or attempts to make any export
or import in contravention of eny provision of this Act of any rules or
orders made thereunder or the export and import policy, he shall be 30
liable to a penalty not exceeding one thousand rupees or five times the
value of the goods in respect of which any contravention is made or
attempted to be made, whichever is more.

(3) Where any person, on a notice to him by the Adjudicating Autho-
rity, admits any contravention, the Adjudicating Authority may, in such 35
class or classes of cases and in such manner as may be prescribed,
determine, by way of settlement, an amount to be paid by that person,

(4) A penalty imposed under this Act may, if it is not paid, be re-
covered as an arrear of land revenue and the Importer-Exporter Code
Number of the person concerned, may, on failure to pay the penalty by 40.
him, ‘be suspended by the Adjudicating Authority till the penalty is paid.


ail 5

| Where any contravention of any provision of this Act or any
rules or orders made thereunder or the export and import policy has
been, is being, or is attempted to be, made, the goods together with any
package, covering or receptacle and any conveyances shall, subject to
such requirements and conditions as may pe presreibed, be liable to con-
fiscation by the Adjudicating Authority.

(6) The goods or the conveyance confiscated under sub-section (5)
may be released by the Adjudicating Authority, in such manner and
subject to stich conditions as may be prescribed, on payment by the per-
son concerned of the redemption charges equivalent to the market value
of the goods or conveyance, as the case may be.

42. No penalty imposed of confiscation made under this Act shall
prevent the impesition of any other punishment to which the person
Affected thereby is liable under any other law for the time being in force.

13, Any penalty may be imposed or any confiscation may be adjudged
under this Act by the Director General ०५ subject to such limits as
may be specified, by such other officer as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, authorise in this behalf.

14. No order imposing a penalty or of adjudication of confiscation
shall be made unless the owner of the goods or conveyance, or other
person concerned, shall be given a notice in writing—

(a) informing him of the grounds on which it is proposed to
impose a penalty or to confiscate such goods or conveyance; and

(0) to make a representation in writing within such reasonable
time as may be specified in the notice against the imposition of
penalty or confiscation mentioned therein, and, if he so desires, of
being heard in the matter. J

CHAPTER V
APPEAL AND REVISION

15, (1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order made by the
" adjudicating Authority under this Act may prefer an appeal—
(a) where the decision or order has been made by the Director
General, to the Central Government;
(b) where the decision or order has been made by an officer
subordinate to the Director General, to the Director General or to
_ any officer superior to the Adjudicating Authority authorised by the
_ Director General to hear the appeal —
“within a period of forty-five days from the date on which the decision
or order is served on such person:
Provided that the Appellate Authority may, if it is satisfied that the
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal
within the aforesaid period, allow such appeal to be preferred within
a further period of thirty days:

Fenalty
or confis-
cation not
to inter-
fere with
other
punish-
ments,

Adjudi-
cating

Autho-
rity.

Giving
of oppor-
tunity

to the
‘owner
of the
goods,
ete.

Appeal.


Revision.

Powers of
Adjudi-
cating and
other
Authori-
ties.

os A iit और

Provided further that in the case of an appeal against a decision or
order imposing a penalty or redemption charges, no such appeal shall
be entertained unless the amount of the penalty or redemption charges
has been deposited by the appellant: i

Provided also that, where the Appellate Authority is of opinion that
the deposit to be made will cause undue hardship to the appellant, it
may, at its discretion, dispense with such deposit either unconditionally
or subject to such conditions as it may impose.

(2) Tho Appellate Authority may, after giving to the appellant 8
reasonable opportunity of being heard, if he so desires, and after making 10
such further enquiries, if any, as it may consider necessary, make such
orders as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or reversing the decision
or order appealed against, or may send back the case with such directions,
as it may think fit, for a fresh adjudication or decision, as the case may
be, alter taking additional evidence, if necessary: 15.

Provided that an order enhancing or imposing a penalty or redemp-
tion charges or confiscating goods of a greater value shall not be
made under this section unless the appellant has been given an oppor-
tunity of making a representation, and, if he so desires, of being heard
in his defence. 20,

(3) The order made in appeal by the Appellate Authority shall be
final. २0 ( \

16. The Central Government, in the case of any decision or
order, not being a decision or order made in an appeal, made by
the Director General, or the Director General in the case of any decision 95
or order made by any officer subordinate to him, may on its or his own
motion or otherwise, ca‘l for and examine the records of any proceeding
in which a decision or an order imposing a penalty or redemption charges
or adjudicating confiscation has been made and against which no appeal
has been preferred, for the purpose of satisfying itself or himself, as the 30
case may be, as to the correctness, legality or propriety of such decision
or order and make such orders thereon as may be deemed fit;

Provided that no decision or order shall be varied under this section
50 a3 to prejudicially affect any person unless such person—

(a) has, within a period of two years from the date of such 35.
decision or order, received a notice to show cause why such decision
or order shall not be varied, and

(b) has been given a reasonable opportunity of making repre-
sentation and, if he so desires, cf being heard in his defence.

17. (1) Every authority making any adjudication or hearing any gy
appeal or exercising any powers of revision under this Act shall have
all the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:—

(0) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses;

(0) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 4:


| Fie अञ 1

(० requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any
court or office; : |

1 (d) receiving evidence on affidavits; and

(९) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or
5 documents. | |

(2) Every authority making any adjudication or hearing any appeal
or exercising any powers of revision! under this Act shall be deemed to
be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure, 1973. | ॥

10.8) Every authority making any adjudication or hearing any appeal
or exercising any powers of revision under this Act shall have the power
to make such orders of an interim nature as it may think fit and may
also, for sufficient cause, order the stay of operation of any decision or
order. | |

5. (4) Clerical or arithmatical mistakes in any decision or order or
errors arising therein from any accidental slip or omission may at any
time be corrected by the authority by which the decision or order was
made, either of its own motion or on the application of any of the parties:

Provided that where any correction proposed to be made under this
sub-section will have the effect of prejudicially affecting any person, no
such correction shall be made except after giving to that person a reason-
able opportunity of making a representation in the matter and no such
correction shall be made after the expiry of two years from the date on

which such decision or order was made. ‘ t

CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS

18. No order made or deemed to have been made under this Act
shall be called in question in any court, and no suit, prosecution or other
legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything in good faith
done or intended to be done under this Act or any order made or deemed

to have been made thereunder. 1 {

19. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following
- matters, namely: —

(०) The manner in which and the conditions subject to which
a special licence may be issued under sub-section (2) of section 8;

(b) the exceptions subject to which and the person or class of
persons in respect of whom fees may be levied and the manner in
which a licence may be granted or renewed under sub-section (1) of

section 9; \
(०) the class or class of goods for whicli a licence may pe granted
_ under sub-section (2) of section 9;

Protec:
tion, if
action
taken in
good,
faith,

Power
to make
rules,


Repeal
and
savings.

8

(d) the form in which and the terms, conditions and :

subject to which licence may be granted under sub-section (3) of
section 9; i

(e) the conditions subject to which a licence may be suspended —
or cancelled under sub-section (4) of section 9;

(f) the premises, goods, documents, things and conveyances in
Tespect of which and the requirements and conditions subject to
which power of entry search, inspection and seizure may be exer-
cised under sub-section 1 of section section 10;

(g) the class or classes of cases for which and the manner in 10°

which an amount, by way of settlement, may be determined under
sub-section (3) of section 11;

(0) the requirements and conditions subject to which goods and

conveyance shall be liable to confiscation under sub-section (5) of
section 11; | 15

(® the manner in which and the conditions subject to which

goods and conveyances may be released on payment of redemption.
charges under section tt

(G) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or
in respect of which provision is to be, or may be, made by rules. 20

(3) Every rule and every order made by the Central Government
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before:
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 25
following the session or the succesive sessions aforesaid, both Houses
agree in making any modification in the rule or the order or both
Houses agree that the rule or the order should not be made, the rule
or the order, as the case may be, shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 30°
that any such modification or annulment shall be ‘without prejudice to the
vadidity of anything previously done under that rule or the order,

20. (1) The Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947 is hereby
repealed, F

(2) The repeal shall, however, not affect,— 35

(a) the previous operation of the Act so repealed or anything
duly done or suffered thereunder; or

(0) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued
or incurred under the Act so repealed; or

६०) any penalty, confiscation or punishment incurred in respect gy
of any contravention under the Act so repealed; or

(7) any proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right,
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, confiscation or punishment
as aforesaid,

and any such proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or
enforced, and any such penalty, confiscation or punishment may be
imposed or made as if that Act had not been repealed.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

i is now generally acknowledged that foreign trade is a driving
ce of economic activity. Technology, investment and production are
oming increasingly interdependent upon each other and foreign trade
ngs these elements together and spurs economic growth,

The Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947 was made in different
umstances. Although it has been amended from
does not provide an adequate legal framework for the development
promotion of India’s foreign trade. Besides, in July, 1991 and
ist, 1991, major changes in trade policy were made by the Govern-

€ impetus to exports,
itate imports and render export activity more profitable.

If is, therefore. considered necessary ¢

io enact a new law repealing
e existing law. The Bill intends to achi

eve these objectives,

‘New Deum;

९ 26th March, 1992. #. CHIDAMBARAM.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
tules regarding — ‘

(a) The manner in which and the conditions subject to which
@ special licence may be issued under sub-section (2)° of section 8;

(0) the exceptions subject to which and the person or class of
Persons in respect of whom fees may be levied ‘and the manner in
which a licence may be granted or renewed under sub-section (४)
of section 9;

(c) the class or classes of goods for which नव licence may be
granted under sub-section (2) of section 9; =

(8) the form in which and the terms, condition and restric-
tions subject to which licence may be granted under sub-section (3)
of section 9;

(8) the conditions subject to which a licence may be suspended
or cancelled under sub-section (4) of section 9:

() the premises, goods, documents, things and conveyances in
fespect of which and the requirements and conditions subject to
which power of entry search, inspection and seizure may be exer-
cised under sub-section 1 of section 10;

(9) the class or classes of cases for which and the manner in
which an amount, by way of settlement, may be determined under
sub-section (3) of section 11;

(0) ‘the requirements and conditions subject to which goods and
ceuyevances shall be liable to confiscation under sub-section (3) of
section 11;

(0 the manner in which and the conditions subject to which
goods and conveyances may be released on payment of redemption.
charges under section 11:

६) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or
in respect of which provision is to be, or may be, made by rules.

2. The matters with respect to which rules may be made under the
aforesaid provisions are matters of procedure and detail. The delegation
of legislative power contained in such provisions is, therefore, of a
Hormal character.



LOK SABHA ee

A
BILL

to provide for the development and

facilitating imports into, and augmenting exports from, India and for

matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

regulation of foreign trade by

(Shri P, Chidambaram, Minister of State in the
Ministry of Commerce)