AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
¥

16 JUL issu

Bill No. 69 of 1998

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998
By
Surimati Jayanti PAtNAIK, M.P.
A

BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1998. Shorttitle.
2. After Chapter V, the following Chapter and articles shall be inserted, namely:— * Insertionof

new Chapter
CHAPTER V-A — PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU Vek
“151A. (1) There shalll be established a Press Information Bureau, Press

Information
(2) The Press Information Bureau shall consist of a Chairman and four — Bureau

r members who shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his
and seal and shall only be removed from the office in like manner and on
grounds as a judge of a Supreme Court.


Establishinent
of offices and
branches,

Meetings.

Recommnenda:
tions to Central
and State
Governments,

Cancellation of
registration

2

(3) Every person appointed to be the Chairman and a member of the Pres
Information Bureau shall, before he enters upon his office, make and subscril
before the President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, oath
affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule,

(4) The salary and other conditions of service of the Chairman and o

Provided that neither the salary of the Chairman and other members of the
Bureau nor their rights in respect of leave of absence, pension or age of retirement
shall be varied to their disadvantage after their appoiniment."

“1S1B, (1) The Press Information Bureau may establish its offices or
branches in such places as it may determine.

(2) On and from the date of commencement of the Constitution
(Amendment) Act, 1998, every newspaper or magazine or periodical shall register
themselves with the Press Information Bureau within a period of one month,

(3) The Press Information Bureau may at its discretion either register a
newspaper or magazine or periodical or refuse to register such newspaper or
periodical or magazine and in that case give its reasons in writing."

“ISLC. (1) The Press Information Bureau may hold meetings periodically bu
no such meeting shall be held later than two months from the date of its previous.
meeting.

(2) All the meetings shall be presided over by the Chairman of the Pre
Information Bureau and in his absence a member to be elected by the members
themselves.

1510, (1) The Press Information Bureau may recommend to the Central
Government or a State Government as the case may be, for provision of sucl
facilities as it may deem fit to every newspaper or periodical or magazine.

‘ety newspaper or periodical or magazine shall have access to information
ces under the control of the Union or a Statesor a local authority of
Corporations or companies or establishments owned or controlled by the Union or
State Government or a Union territory Administration or a local authority, as the
case may be. in such manner as may be determined by the Press Information Bureau,

(3) The Press Information Bureau while determining the nature of information
to be thrown open to the Press may take into account the interest of the security,
unity and integrity of the State, possible hatred among different religions an
communities and possible tension among general public, the information, if disclosed
will create.”

ISIE. (1) The Press Information Bureau may, if itis satisfied that any newspaper
Or periodical or magazine takes undue advantage of the facilities given to it by whic
the security, unity and integrity of the State is affected or communal hatred is
advocated or promoted or gencral tension among the public is generated, send

show-cause notice as 10 why the registration of such newspaper or periodical or
magazine should not be cancelled.

(2) The Press Information Bureau may on receiving the reply and supporting
documents, if any, from the newspaper or periodical or magazine, consider the relevant
facts and circumstances of the case and arrive at a decision within a month from
date of receipt of the reply from the newspaper or periodical or magazine.


3

(3) The decision of the Press Information Bureau shall be final and if the
registration of such a newspaper or periodical or magazine is cancelled, all facilities
afforded to it shall stand withdrawn from that date.”.

3. In the Third Schedule to the Constitution, —

(i) for the words “Articles 75(4), 99, 124(6), 148(2),” the words “Articles
75(4), 99, 124(6), 148(2), 151A,” shall be substituted;

(ii) for heading (IV), the following heading shall be substituted, namely:—
Iv

Form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Supreme Court, the Comptroller and
| of India and the Members of the Press Information Bureau:—

"I, A.B., having been appointed Chief Justice (or a Judge) of the Supreme
Court of India (or Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or Chairman/member
of Press Information Bureau) do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I
will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established,
that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will duly and faithfully
and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of my
office without fear or favour, affection or illwill and that I will uphold the Constitution
and the laws.",

Amendment of
the Third
Schedule.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Eversince our country attained Independence our Press has been very active.
Press served the country usefully by disclosing several scandals and bringing to book |
culprits involved in henious crimes. Today our Press is one of the largest in the world,
second only to developed countries.

In the recent past our country has witnessed several instances of violence among.
different religions, different communities and different sections of the society. There has
been communal tension present since long. Although our Press while publishing news
takes into account the interests of the country, yet knowingly or unknowingly certain
newspapers and magazines publish news which create problems and promotes hatred
among several sections of the society. Due to this the communal tension flares up and
increases the tension as a result. These newspiapers and magazines should be taken to task.

Our newspapers and magazines, larger and smaller in size, numbering more than
one thousand, face certain problems in getting assistance from the Government like
newsprint, concession in import duty relating to press and printing materials, etc. Atpresent
they do not have unrestricted access to various public offices in the country thereby limiting
Sources of their information. Press is the largest media in the country which reaches all
sections of the society and which creates awareness among the public at large. Therefore,
they should have certain facilities like ‘ss to information in public offices though with
certain restrictions like information which may involve security, unity and integrity of the
country or creation of hatred among the various sections of the society.

At present, there is a Press Information Bureau functioning under the control of the
Central Government. The Bill seeks to give the Press Information Bureau a constitutional
status and also to free it from the clutches of the Government by giving them suitable
Powers to regulate the functioning of newspapers and magazines, This measure will goa
long way in efficient democratic functioning of the country.

New Detai; JAYANTI PATNAIK
May 26, 1998.

|
|
|

|
|
|


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for establishment of a Press Information Bureau
consisting of a Chairman and four other members. Already a Press Information Bureau is
functioning. However, some expenditure will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of
India in respect of the salaries and allowances of the Chairman and four other members. It
also provides that the Central Government shall assist newspapers and magazines in such
manner as suggested by the Press Information Bureau. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 1015, likely to involve an annual
“recurring expenditure of about Rs. 10 crore from the Consolidated Fund of India. A non-
“fecurring expenditure of about Rs. 2 crore is also likely to be involved.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—977LS—29-6-1998.