8W No. 6, of 1,6a 
THE LAND ACQUISITION (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCBD IN LoI{ SABRA 
ON 8m AUGUST, 1962) 
-, ~RLlAMENl L..l~i\ARl 
Mo .......•.•.•.•••• ..... ___ 
tJate .• -?:L~.lL_~~_ 

.", 
a; . .., 
"(" 
,1< 
The ta.nd Acquisi tion (Amend~:1ent) Bill, i962~ 
~, . 
.... 
• • • • • • • • • • 
II. 
stateme.nt required by Sub-rule (1) of Rule 71 of the 
Rules of Procedure ar.d. Conduct of business in t6k 
Sabha. Reasons for the promulgation of Ordinance. 
• • • • • • • • • • 
Under the taIXl Acquisition Act, 1894, tand .• ai 'be . . 
acquired for a public purpose as also for companies, ~ pUrposes 
for which acquisition of land for companles may be made; al'e, 
' .... 
however, restricted and they have been specified in section 40 (1) 
of the Act. Such acquisition may be ·tlMe for ,!)btaininr{·land (ar 
for the construction of dwelling houses for "Jl0rkillen or.~r tbe 
provision of amenities directly connected therewith; or:, (b) for 
• the construction of some work which 1s likely to prove useful 
to the pub1.ic. 
Section 40(1) (b) and section 41 of the land; Acquisition 
Act cane up for consideration before the Supreme Court in the 
case of R~L Aurora Y,§.. thEL.atAte of n,}>, ,D...i§2) j. •• ~k..t .. C;~~ 
• 
The Supreme COUl't held that lam can be acquired for a com~ 
under sec tion 40 (1) (b) re;'-d with sec t10n 41 of the .\c t · only 'Then 
.. ' .~ 
the vtork to be constructed would be directly useful to the ~b11c 
and the public would be entitled to use the work as of right . . 
for its own benefit in accordance Hi th theterrns of the agreement, ;f; 
Uc;l.J.l..l.I:!lS en-In the various States, land has been acquired for c 
gag~d r~-i;;:riitii.;";:~Wh·i~': .. " ",'", ':.~-"II"-""'-""'''''''''---. 
ment of the country or which are essential to the life of the 
community. ... 
sition. Some state Governments reI're.ented'that 
Doubts have arisen as to the validity of st~~h. acqui .. , 
tao sp~!'e lile: ' 
reach1tjG conseq-Court's decision in AurorA'Ls_ pa..s!3 would have far 
"j 
uences in respect of acqulsi tion of land for compames ~ that 
it would not be possible to proceed v!ith some acquis1tir :9:;""0-
d It was feared that the above decision 'iould .·bnder cee ings e( 
planned development of iniustries extremely difficult. 1 

·1· 
.' 
-2-. ' 
Apart from this possible set ... bac:k to industrial deveU,pment there 
.# 
was aiso the''''danger that the acquisitions made in the past :~~.ight 
be questioned in Cour'ts of la\1T and claims may be made by p:L'e,\{ious 
1 
owners whose lands uere acquired in contravention of the pro.sions 
., 
of sec tions 40 and 41 as 1nterpre ted by the Supreme Court for 
restor.~tio" of lanis or for payment of damages. It was, therefore, 
necessary 'ror the Central Government immediately to undertake 
-appropriate legislation with retrospective effect to m~et the 
situation arisen in view of the Supreme Court's decision in the 
above case. Questions ~ aforesaid arise not only in the case of 
companies in the private sector but also in the case of cO:~lpanies :. 
in the~public sector. The Fe~tilizer Corporation of lniia Limited, 
a Uniod GoverThnent undertaking, has already received legal notices 
questiqning the proceedings taken for ac~uiring land for its 
factorYI in Bombay under PaIt VII of the Act. 
The matter was examined by Government in all its aspects 
; 
and it ~las decided that the Act should be amended 1mmediately 
so as tr avoid the difficul ties expe~ienced in view of the Supreme 
Cov.rt's~decision in Aurora's Case. A:s the parliament \TaS not 
f 
in .jess+on, it was Ye"lt that an Ordinance should be promulgated. 
1. 
AcoOrdi~IY an Ordinance wa.s p~omulgated by the PrGs'ident on 20th 
July, 1~2~ 
.. . 
I 
t 
.- ~ ~ 
New Deli. . 
31s t Jut 1962. 
.' • ~ . CSd~ S~K~ Pat!l) //,' I 
Minis,ter o~ Food & Agr!cul ture. 

BUI No. " of 11)112 
THE LAND ACQUISITION (AMENDMENT) Bn..L, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, and to validate 
certain acquisitions under that Act. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Repub-
lic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Soon tide. 
Act, 1962. 
"" 
S 2. "In sub-section (1) of section 40 of the Land Acquisition Act,:r=::,. 
1894 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause (a), 
the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(aa) that such acquisition is needed for the construction of 
some building or work for a Company engaged or to be engaged 
10 in an industry which is essential to the life of the community or 
is :\likely to promote the economic development of the country; 
or". 
IS 
20 
3. In section 41 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words "the purpose of the proposed acquisition 
is to obtain land for the erection of dwelling houses for workmen 
employed by the Company or for the provision of amenities 
directly connected therewith, or that the proposed acquisition it: 
needed for the construction of a work, and that such work is 
likely to prove useful to the public", the words, brackets, letters 
and figures "the proposed acquisition is for any of the purposes 
referred to in clause (a) or clause (aa) or clause (b) of sub-
se<:tion (1) of section 40" shall be substitutedj 
Amendment 
l'faectioD "I. 

Validation of 
certain IC-
quiaitlOllL 
~ 
(b) in clause (4), the word "and" occurring at the end shall 
be omitted, and after that clause, the following clause shan be 
inserted, namely:-
"(4A) where the acquisition is for the construction. of 
any building or work for a Company engaged or to be en gag- S 
ed in an industry which is essential to the life of the com-
munity or is likely to promote the economic development of 
the country, the time within which, and the conditions on 
which, the building or work shall be constructed or executed; 
and". 10 
'" ',Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, 
everyi acq1i¥dU6t1.·of land for a Company made or purporting to have 
been made under Part" VIi' of the .principal Aet before the 20th .day 
of July, 1962, shall, in'so far as such 'acquisition is not for any of the 
purposes mentioned in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) IS 
of section 40 of the principal Act, be deemed to have been made for 
the plJtTPOSe mentioned in clause (aa) of the said SUb-section. and 
accdl'dfftgly every' such; acquisition and any proceeding, order, agree-
ment or action in cormection with such acquisition shall be, and shall 
be, deemed always to have been, as valid as if the proviSions of sec- 20 
tions 40' and 41 of the principal Act, as amended by this 
Act, were in force at all material times when such acquisition was 
made J()r prooeeding was held or order was made or agreement was 
entered into or action was taken. 
*.111111" 5. (1) 'The- Land Acquisition (Amendment) Ordinance, 1962, is 2S 3 of -1962. 
hereby repealed. 
(2)· Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
taken under the said -Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done 
or, taken under this· Act, as if this Act had commenced on the 20th 
day- of July, 1962. 30 

stATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASoNS 
Under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, land may be acquired for 
a public purpose as also for companies; The' purpOl'el:: for"whleh 
acquisition' of land for companies may be made are, however, 
restricted and they have been specified in section 40 (1) of the Act. 
Such acquisition may be made for obtaining land (a) for the cont-t 
truction of dwelling houses for workmen or for the provision ,of 
amenities directly connected therewith; or (b) for the construction) 
of some work which is likely to prove useful to the public'. ' 
2. Section 40 (1) (b) and section 41 of the Land Acquisition Act 
came up for consideration before the Supreme Court in tlie case of 
R. L. Aurora vs. the State of V.P. (1962) A.I.R. S.C. p. 764,' The 
Supreme Court held that land can be acquired for a company under 
section 40(1) (b) read with section 41 of the Act only when the work 
to be constructed would be directly useful to the 'pUblie and the 
public· would be entitled to use the work as 'of 'right for 'its ~Wn 
benefit in accordance with the terms of the agreement. In' the 
various States, land has been acquired for companies engaged in 
industries' which are likelY to promote economic development of the! 
country or which are essential to the life of the community, Doubts 
have arisen as to the wlidity of such acquisition. 
3. Some State Governments have represented that the aforesaid 
decision of the Supreme' Court may have far-reaching co~uences 
in respect of acquisition of land for companies. It is" feared 
that the decision may render planned development 'of inc!uStirie. 
extremely difficult and also that there will be thedenget' 'that'the ' 
acquisition of land made for companies in the'past'mighti>e questlob" 
ed in courts of law and claims may be made by previO\lS :owurll . 
whose lands have been acquired fer restoration of land: or payment 'of" 
damages. In order to overcome these difficulties, the 'Land ,AcquiBi"' 
tion (Amendment) Ordinance, 1962 (3 of 1962) was promulgated 'on .: 
the 20th July, 1962, suitably amendU?g sections 40 and 41' olr the Act 
and also validating all past acquisition of land made· for 'compartiei ' 
4. The Bill merely seeks to replGce'theOrdfnanee by an ACt of, 
Parliament. 
S.'K. 'PATIL. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 1st August, 1962. 
3 

ANNEXURE 
ExTaAcrs nOM THE LAND ACQUIsmoN ACT, 1894 (1 01' 1894) 
'. • • • 
40. (1) Such consent shall not be given unless the appropriate 
Government be satisfied, either on the report of the Collector under 
section SA, 'sub-section (2), or by an enquiry held as hereinafter 
provided,--
(4) that the purpose of the acquisition is to obtai.n land for 
the erection of dwelling houses for workmen employed by the 
Company or for the provision of amenities directly connected 
therewith, or 
,(b) that such acquisition is needed for the construction of 
some work, and that such work is likely to prove useful to the 
public. 
(?) Such enquiry shall be held by such officer and at such time 
and place as the appropriate Government shall appoint. 
(3) Such officer may summon and enforce the attendance of 
witnesses and compel the production of documents by the same 
means and, as far as possible, in the same manner as is provided by 
the Code of Civil' Procedure in the case of a Civil Court. S of 1901. 
~lDeDt ~L If the appropriate Government is satisfied after considering 
pdate~: the report, if any, of the Collector under section 5A, sub-section (2), c:mmenL or on the report of the officer making an inquiry under section 40 
that the purpose of the proposed acquisition is to obtain land for 
the erection of dwelling houses for workmen employed by the 
Company or for the provision of amenities directly connected there-
with, or that the proposed acquisition is needed for the construction 
of a work, and that such work is likely to prove useful to the public, 
it shan require the Company to enter into an agreement with the 
appropriate Government, prOviding to the satisfaction of the appro-
priate Government for the following matters, namely:-
(1) the payment to the appropriate Government of the cost 
of the acquisition; 
(2) the transfer, on such payment, of the laO(~ to tilt 
Company; 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to oUllend the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, and to 
validate certain acquisitions under that Act. 
(Shr; S. K. Pari!, 
, Minister of Food and 
Agr iculture). 