To BE INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA 
BID No. 69 of 1983 
THE ELECTRICITY (SUPPLY) AMENDMENT BILL, 1983 
A 
BILL 
further to am.end the Electricity (Su.pply) Act, 1948. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic 
of India as fo11ow5:- ' 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Electricity 
Act, 1983. 
(Supply) Amendment Short 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as ~he Central Government 
5 may, by notification in the Official Gazette. appoint. 
10 
2. In section 59 of the Electrici!y (Supply) Act, 1948 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act) ,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "leave such surplus, as ,the 
State Government may, from time to time, specify.", the ,following 
shall be substituted, namely:-
leave such surplus as is not l'.:!ss than ~hree per cent., or such 
higher percentage. as the State Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf. of ~he value of the 
fi,xed assets of the Board in service at·the beginning of such year. 
Explanat'ion.-For the purposes of this sub-section. "value of . . the fixed asse~s of the Board in service at the beginning of the 
year" means th~ original cost of 'Such fixed assets as reduced by 
the aggregate of the cumulative depreciation in respect of such 
assets calculated in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and consumers' contributions for service lines.'; 
(b) in sub-section (2), in the opening portion. for .the word~ '''the 
surplus", ~ wOrds "any percentage" shall be substituted. 
title 
and com-
mence-
ment. 
Amend_ 
mfmtof , 
st'ction 59. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 07. 
Priority 
of liabili-
ties of 
the Board. 
Inser-
tion of 
new!'lec-
tion 6'1A. 
Interest 
on loans 
advanced 
by State 
Govern-
ment 
to be 
paid only 
after 
ilther 
expenses. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
as. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
69. 
.... , ." .... , " 
3. For section 67 of the principal Act. the following section shall be 
substituted. namely:-
"67. The Board shall distribute the surplus referred to in sub-
section (1). of section 59 to" the extent available in a particular year 
in th~ following order, namely:- 5 
(i) repayment of principal of any loan raised (including 
redemption of debentures or bonds issued) under section 65 
which becomes due for pay~ent in the year or which became 
due for payment in any previous year and has remained unpaid; 
(ii) repayment of principal of any loan advanced to the 10 
Board by the State Government under section 64 which becomes 
due for payment in the year or which became due for payment 
in any previous year and has remained unpaid; 
(iii) payment for purposes specified in sub-section (2) of 
... section 59 in such manner as the Board: may decide.". 15 
4:. After section 67 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"67 A. Any interest which is payablC? on loans advanced under 
section 64 or deemed to have been advanced under section 60 to the 
Board by the State Government and which is charged to revenues 20 
in any year may be paid only out of the balance of the revenues, if 
any, of that· year which is left after m~ting all the other expenses 
referred to in sub-section (1); of section 59 and so much of such 
interest as is not paid in any year by reason of the provisions of th;s 
section shall be deemed to be deferred liability and shall be dis- 25 
charged in 'accordance with the provisions of this section in the sub-
sequent year or years, as the case may b.e.". 
5. In section 68 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-seciton (1), the Words "Subject' to the provisions of 
section 67," shall be omitted; 30 
(b) sub-section (2) shall be omitted. 
6. In section 69 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section ~1), for the words "as may be prescribed hv 
the State Government 10 consultation with the Compt 11 :d A d·t G al f I di" h ro er an ·u 1 Of- ener 0 n a, t e words "as the Centr I G - 35 b titi t' . a overnment ~a~iu y ~~ If c~ Ion In the Official Gazette, prescribe by rules mad .. 
'GIn 51 aI d.m consultation with the Comptroller 'and Auditor:' 
enera of n laand. the State Governments" shall -be substitut~'d; 
(b) after sub-section (5), the following su b- t' h 11 b t ~~ I sec 1011 s a e in-ser I:U, name y:- , 
. "(6) Th . . 4() .. e ~ prOVISIOns of sub-s~tion (3)· of section 4B shall 
apply 10 relabon to any rules made by th C t 1 G 
:,3' 'b" t· . \ '(1 e en ta . overnml"nt unuer su -see Ion . ) ,as they apply in reIat' t 1 .. 
that, GOvf;I'llment.-und~i:'. ChaP'J;tl-,n,'", . Ion Q. r'~ ~s m~d~ l?y 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 provides the statutory basis for 
the functioning of State Electricity Boards and lays down the basic 
framework for the constitution, functions, financial performance and 
accounts of State Electricity Boards. The financial provisions contained 
in the Act with respect to the Boards were last amended in 1978 with a 
view to ensuring that· Electricity Boards are able to function on sound 
commercial principles. Experience since then has shown the need fr)r 
further changes for' achieving this object. 
2. Though section 59 of the Act, as amended in 1978, casts an obliga-
tion on the State Governments to specify the surplus to be earned by the 
State Electricity Boards, ,no State Government has so far specified the 
quantum of such surp1'Us. At present there is no uniformity in the manner 
of classification and presentation of accounts of the Boards and this 
renders inter-Board comparison of financial performance d.fficult. It is 
als(~ considered necessary to re-arrange the priorities with regard to dis-
tribution of revenues of the Boards. It is, therefore, proposed to amend 
the Act-
(a) to provide that each Board shall have a surplus which shall 
not be less than three per cent., or such higher percentage as the State 
Government may specify, of the value of the fixed assets of the Board 
in service at the beginning of the year; 
(b) to re-arrange the priorities for distribution of revenues of 
the Boards; 
(c) to bring the financial repor~ing system of the Boards in line. 
with commercial accounting practice; and 
(d) to empower, with a view to securing uniformity in the man-
ner of classification and presentation of accounts, the Central Gov-
ernment to prescribe the forms in which the accounts of the Boards 
and other records in relation thereto may be maintained. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW D,ELHI; CHANDRA 5HEKHAR SINGH. 
T~ 2nd May, 1983 . 
. " 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATEUtEGISLATION 
At present under sub-section (1) vI' s~ction 69 of the E~ectricity 
(Supply) Act, 1948, the power to preser,be by ntl'!s, the form in which 
the Boards shall maintain accounts ~nd other records in relation thereto 
is vested in the State Governments. With a view to st.'Curing uniformity, 
sub-clause (a) of clause 60i the Bill seeks to amend this section so as 
to vest the power to m~e the rules in this behalf in the Central Gov-
ernment. The' amendmen< also makes it clear that the Central Govern-
ment has to exercise this power in consultation with the Comptroller ana 
Auditor-General of India ani the State Governments. The matters in 
respect of which the ruleR may be made by the Central Government by 
virtue of the amendmen~ are matters of detail and form. Provision has 
also been made for the laying gf the rules before' Parliament [vide sub-
clause (b) of clause 6]. The delegation of legislative power ;s of a nor. 
mal chnracter. 
/' 
, 
',. 0"-· 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE ELECTRICITY (SUPPLY) ACT, 1948 
(54 tOr 1948) 
• • • • • 
;;9. (1) The Board shall, after taking credit for any subvention irom 
the State Government under section 63, carryon i'.s operations lmder 
this Act and adjust its tariffs so as to ensure that the total revenues In 
any year of account shall, after meeting all expenses properly charg'!able 
to revenues, including operating, main~enance and management expenses, 
ta,;es (if any) on income and profits, depreciation and interes~ payable on 
all debentures, bonds and Joans, leave such surplus, as the State Govern-
ment may, from time to time, specify. 
(2) In s~ifying the surplus under sub-section (1), the State Gov-
ernment shall have due regard to the availability of all\oun~s acc!·ued by 
way of depreciation and the liability for loan amortization and leav~ 
(a) a reasonable sum to contril1ute towards the cost of capital 
work.; and 
• • • 
" . • 
67. (1) If in any year, the revenue receipts are not adequate to enable 
complianCe with the requirements of section 59, the Board shall, after 
Meeting its operating, maintenance and management expenses and after 
provision has been made for the payment of taxes (if any) on income 
and profits, distribute the revenue receipts, as far as they are available, 
in the following order, namely:-I .. 
/ 
(i) payment of interest on loans not guaranteed under section 66; 
(ii) repayment of principal of any loan raised (including re-
demption of debentures or bonds issued) under section 65 which 
becomes due for payment in the year; 
(iii) payment of interest on loans guaranteed under section 66; 
(iv) payment of interest on sUms paid by the State Government 
in pursuance of guarantees under section 66; 
(t» payment of interest on loans advanced to the Board by the 
State Government under section 64 or deemed to be advanced under 
sub-section (2) of section 60; 
(vi) repayment of prinCipal of any loan guaranteed by the State 
Government under section 66 which,becomes due for payment in the 
year or which became due for payment in any previous year and has 
remained unpaid;. 
(Vii) rej>ayment of ptr~ipa1 of any' loan advanced to the 
. Board un~ section 64 which become due for payment in the year 
or which became due for payment in any previous year and has re-
mained unpaid, 
~~,~"~ _. - . 
'i I 
General 
principles 
for 
Board's 
finance. 
Priority 
of liabili-
ties of 
3oard. 

Charg. 
ingof 
deprecia· 
tion by 
Board. 
Accounts 
and 
audit. 
6 
and if any balance amount is left thereafter, the same shall be utilised 
for the other purposes specified in section 59 in such manner as the Doard 
may decide. 
(2) If for any reason beyond the control of the Board, the revenue re-
ceipts in any year are not adequate to meet its operating, maintenance 
and management eXpenses, taxes ("f any) on incomes and profits and 
the 1i~b;1ities referred to in clauses (i) and (i.i) of sub-section (1), the 
short fall shall, 'with the previous sanction of the State Government, be 
pa;d out of its capital receipts. 
68. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 67, the Board shall provide 
each year for depreciation such sum calculated in accordance with such 
principles as the Central Government may, after consultation with the 
Authority, by notification in the Official Gazet~e, lay down ·from time to 
time. 
(2) Where in any particular year depreciation cannot be . adjusted 
against revenues, the same may be carried over to subsequent years . 
• • • • 
69. (1) The Board shall cause proper accounts and other records in 
relation thereto be kept, including a proper system of in~ernal check 
. and prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the profit and 
loss account and the balance-sheet in such tlorm as may be prescribed 
by the State Government in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India . 
• • • • • 

, I 
, , LOK SABHA 
A 
BlLL< 
further to amend the Electricity (Supply) Act, 194&. 
(Shri Chand..,.a Shekhar Singh, 
. Minister of State in the Ministry 
oj En.erg1l,) 