THE DOCK WORKERS (REGULATION 
OF EMPLOYMENT) AMENDMENT 
BILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoIc SABRA 
ON ~ DECEMBER, 1961) 
dJ,J 

8111 No. 6', of 1"1 
THE DOCK WORKERS (REGULATION OF EMPLOY-
MENT) AMENDMENT BILL, I¢I 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOE SABRA, 
.A 
BILL 
further to amend the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) 
Act, 1948. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Dock Workers (Regulation of Short tita 
Employment) Amendment Act, 1961. ~~-
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In section 2 of the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Amendment 
,of I948. Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), clause (a) of ICCtJoD 2-
shall be re-Iettered as clause (aa) thereof, and before the clause as 
10 80 re-Iettered, the following clause shall be inserted, name1y:-
C (a) ccBoard" means a Dock Labour Board established under 
section 5A;'. 
3. In section 3 of the principal Act,- & ___ .. _ 
nIU5I ...... ent 
(a) in sub-section (1), after the words CCthe registration of ofleCtiOD S-
IS dock workers", the words CCand employers" shall be inserted; 
(b) in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) in clause (c), for the words ccand their registra-
tion", the words ccand the registration of dock workers and 
employers" shall be substituted; 
(it) in clause (j), the words ccwhether as a body cor-
porate or otherwise" shall be omitted. 

Amendmont 
of IeCtion s. 
2 
4. In section 5 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:- ' 
"(2) The members of the Advisory Committee shall be 
appointed by the Government and shall be of such number S 
and chosen in such manner as may be prescribed by rules 
made under this Act: 
Provided that the Advisory Committee shall include 
an equal number of members representing-
(i) the Government, 
(ii) the dock workers, and 
(iii) the employers of dock workers, and shipping 
companies."; 
(b) sub-section (5) shall be omitted. 
10 
IDIel1ion. of 5. After section 5 of the pcincipal Act. the following sections IS 
!rt~ ':tic: shall be inserted, namely:-
S· 
Dock Laboul ' 
Boards. 
Panc:tionl of 
• Board. 
"5A. (1) The Government, may, by notification in the om-
cial Gazette, establish a Dock Labour. Board for a port or 
group of ports to be known by such name as may be specified 
in the notification. ' 
(2) Every such Board shall be a body corporate with thp. 
name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common leal 
with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to 
contract and may, by that name. sue and be sued. 
20 
(3) Every such Board shall consist of a Chairman and such 2S 
number of other members as may be appointed by the Govern-
ment: 
Provided that every such Board shall include an equal 
number of members representing-
(i) the Government, 
(ii) the dock workers, and 
(iii) the employers of dock workers, and shipping 
companies. 
30 
(4) The Chairman of a Board shall be one of the members 
appointe4 to represent the Government, and nominated in this 35 
Behalf by the Government. 
lB. (1) A Board shall be responsible for administering the 
scheme for the port or group of ports for which it has been 
established lnd shall exercise such powers' and perform such 
functions as may be conferred on it by the scheIDel· 40 

5 
[0 
IS 
20 
3 
(2) Itt the exerCIse of its powers and the discharge of its 
functions, a Board shall be bound by such directions as the 
Government may, for reasons t~ be stated in writing, give to it 
from time to time. 
5C. (1) Every Board shall maintain proper accounts and ~UDca aDd 
other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of audit. 
accounts, including a balance-sheet in such form as may be 
prescribed by rules made under this Act. 
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited annually by 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India or by such othel' 
auditors qualified to act as auditors of companies under the 
law for the time being in force relating to companies, as the 
Government may appoint. . 
(3) The auditors shall, at all reasonable times, have access 
to the books of accounts and other documents of the Board 
and may, for the purposes of the audit, call for such explana-
tion and information as they may require or examine any 
member or of1\cer of the Board. 
(4) The auditors shall forward to the Government a copy 
of their report together with an audited copy of the accounts 
of the Board. 
(5) The cost of the audit as determined by the Govern-
ment shall be paid out of the funds of the Board.". 
6. After section 6 of the prinCipal Act, the following 
25 shall be inserted, namely:-
sections Inaertioa ot 
new aecdonl 
after lCCtion 
6. 
35 
"6A. (1) The Government may, at any time, appoint any Power 
person to' investigate or inquire into the working of a Board ?rde~ 
and submit a report to the Government. mqwJ")'. 
(2) The Board shall give to the person so appofuted all 
facilities for. the proper conduct of the investigation or inquiry 
and furnish to him such documents, accounts or information 
in the possession of the Board as he may require. 
to 
68. (1) If, on consideration of the report undet section 6A Power to 
or otherwise, the Government is of opinion- =~e a 
(0) that, on account of a grave emergency, a Board is 
unable to perform its functions, or 

Acts or pr0-
ceeding of 
Board and 
AdvilOry 
Committee 
DOt to be in-
nlidated. 
.. 
(b) that a Board has persistently made default in the 
disclaarge of its functions or has exceeded or abused its 
powers, 
the Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette. 
supersede the Board for such period as may be specified in the 5 
notification: 
Provided that. before issuing a notification under this sub-
section on any of the grounds mentioned in clause (b), the 
Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Board 
to show cause why it should not be superseded and shall con- 10 
sider the explanations and objections, if any, of the Board. 
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section 
(1).-
(4) all the members of the Board shall. as from the 
date of such publication, vacate their offices as such mem- 15 
bers; , 
(b) all the powers and functions which may be exer-
cised or performed by the Board shall, during the period of 
supersession, be exercised or performed by such person as 
may be specified in the notification; 20 
(c) all funds and other property vested in the Board 
shall, during the period of supersession, vest in the Govern-
ment. 
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified 
in the notification issued under sub-section (1). the Govern- 25 
ment may-
(4) extend the period of supersession for such further 
period as it may consider necessary; or 
(b) re-establish the Board in the manner 'provided in 
section 5-A 30 
6C. No act or proceeding 'of a Board or the AdvisOry Com-
mittee shall be invalid merely by reason of-
(4) any vacancy in, or. any defect in the constitution of. 
the Board or the Advisory Committee. or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting 3' 
as a member of the Board or the Advisory Committee. or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board or 
the Advisory Committee not affecting the merits of the 
caae.", 

s 
10 
IS 
,. After section ., of the principal Act, the following sections Inaerdon 0( 
ahall be inserted, namely:- Pew ICCtion. attu tection 
7· 
"8. (1) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, P~r I to 
k ul . ff ma .... ru c •.• ma e r es to glve e ect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality 
of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for-
(a) the composition of the Advisory Committee and 
Boards and the manner in which members of the Advisory 
Committee and the Boards shall be chosen; 
(b) the term of office of, and the manner of filling 
casual vacancies among, the members of a Board or the Ad· 
visory Committee: 
(c) the meetings of a Board and the Advisory Com· 
mittee, the quorum for such meetings and the conduct of 
business thereat; 
(d) the conditions subject to which, and the mode in 
which. contracts may be entered into by or on behalf of a 
Board; 
(e) the allowances, if any, payable to the members of 
20 a Board or the Advisory Committee; 
30 
3' 
(1) the disqualifications for membership of a Board: 
(g) the form in which a Board shall prepare its annual 
statement of accounts and the balance.sheet. 
(3) Every rule made under this section by the Central 
Government shall. be laid as soon as may be after it is made 
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a 
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry 
of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately 
following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be: so however that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
9. Every Dock Labour Board established for a port or a group of Smlll. 
ports before the commencement of the Dock Workers (Regulation of 

Ac:b or pro-
ceediD, of 
Board and 
~ 
DOt to be in-
ftlJdatcd. 
Employment) Amendment Act, 1961 under. a . scheme made under 
section 4, and functioning as such immediately before such commen-
cement shall be deemed to be a Board established under section 5A 
and, accordingly. all the provisions of this Act shall apply to every 
such Board.". , 

, 
1 ! ; 
.!~, 
. J 
:',} 
.f:: 
'7"; 
j 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Section 3 of the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) 
Act, 1948 provides fer framing a scheme for the registration of dock 
workers with a view to ensuring greater regularity of employment 
and for regulating the employment of dock workers. Clause H) 
of sub-section (2) of that section provides that a scheme itself may 
constitute an authority which may be a body corporate for the 
administration of the scheme. It is proposed that the Act itself 
should contain provisions for the setting up of autonomous Dock 
Labour Boards for the administration of schemes framed under the 
Act for a port or a group of ports. The Bill makes such a provision. 
The Bill further provides for the audit of accounts of Dock Labour 
Boards. for the issue of directions by Government to the Boards. 
for inquiry into the working of the Boards and for ~heir supersession 
in certain contingencies. 
2. Section 3(2) (c) of the· Act provides for the registration of 
dock workers and fer the imposition of a registration fee. It is 
proposed to provide for the registration of employers as well and 
for the imposition of a registration fee in respect of them. 
3. Section 5 (2) of the Act provides for an Advisory Committee 
consisting of not more than 15 members. It is considered necessary 
that all the Dock Labour Boards should have representation on the 
Advisory Committ~e and that Shipping Companies should also have 
representation on the- Advisory Committee. The number of mem-
bers of the Advisory Committee has to be determined by taking 
into account all the relevant factors and it is proposed that the 
statutcry restriction with regard to the number of members should 
be removed. It is accordingly proposed to amend section 5 of the 
Act to provide for all these matters. 
4. Opportunity has been taken to make certain other fonnal and 
consequential amel'ldments in ,the Act. 
NEW DELHI; G. L. NANDA . 
The 27th November, 1961. 
7 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 7 of the Bill inserts a new section 8 in the Act which 
empowers the Govemment to make rules. The rule making power 
is restricted to such matters as the composition of the Advisory 
Committee and the Dock Labour Boards, the term of office of 
members of a Dock Labour Board and the Advisory Committee, the 
meetings of a Board and the Advisory Committee, the allowances 
payable to members of a Board or the Advisory Committee, etc. The 
delegation of power is of a normal character. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE DOCK WORKERS (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMBNT) 
ACT, 1948 (9 OF 1948) 
" " " • • 
3. (1) Provision may be made by a scheme for the registration Sche. for 
of dock workers with a view to ensuring greater regularity of ~:~iDl re-
k k , ..... ea-employment and for regulating the employment of doc wor ers, ploJsDeAt .f 
whether registered or not, in a port. workers. 
(2) In particular, a scheme may provide-
" " • • • 
(c) for regulating the recruitment and entry into the 
scheme of dock workers, and their registration, including the 
maintenance of registers, the removal, either temporarily or 
permanently, of names from the registers and the impoeition fif 
fees for registration; 
" • " • " 
(i) for constituting, whether as a body corporate or other-
wise, the authority to be responsible for the administration of 
the scheme; 
" • • • • 
5. (1) 
• " " • " 
(2) The members of the Advisory Committee shall lie appointed 
by the Government, and shall be of such number (not exceeding 
fifteen) and chosen in such manner as may be prescribed by rules 
made under sub-section (5): 
Provided that the Advisory Committee shall include an equal 
number of members representing-
(i) the Government, 
(ii) the dock workers, 
(iii) the employers of dock workers. 
" " " " • 
9 
1441(B) LS-a 

10 
(5) The Government may, by notification in the OfBcial Oazette, 
make rules to provide for-
(a) the composition of the Advisory Committee; 
(b) the manner in which its members shall -be chosen; 
(c) the term of office of its members; 
(d) the allowances, if any, payable to the members of the 
,Committee; , 
(e) the manner in which the Committee shall conduct its 
business, including the number of members to be present at a 
meeting thereof in order to constitute a quorum . 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Dock Workers (Regulation of 
Employment) Act, 1948. 
(Shri Gulzarilal NaruM, 
Minister of Labour 
and Employment.) 