As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
IW N .. " of 1911 
THE SALARffiS AND ALLOWANCES OF OFFICERS OF 
PARI. lAMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, J Cf!l 
·a' 
BILL 
further to amend the Salaries and Allowances of Olficns of Pa"lw1Mftt 
Act, 1953. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-second Year of the Re-
public of India as foIlows:-
1. This Act may be called the Salaries and Allowances of Offtcera of 
Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1971. 
S; 2. For section 3 of the Salaries and Allowances of Officers of ParJia-
:20 of 1953· ment Act, 1953 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act). the fol1ow-
ing section shall be substituted, namely:-
"3. There shall be paid to each .,81cer' of Parliament a salary 01 
two thoa.ad, two bandred and 8Ity rupees pel'mea ..... ". 
'10 3. In section 5 of the principal Act, the words "and to the Deputy 
CIaImum &ad the Deputy Speaker a IRIIIlPtuary allowaaee of two 
hundred and Ifty rupees per mensem" .hall be added at the end. 
Short title. 
'SubsUtu-
Hon ot 
new 
section foe' 
sectiona. 
Salaries of. 
o8bn of 
Parlla-
_to 
Amead-
mentot 
qct,IOQ 5. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under Section 3 of the Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parlia-
ment Act, 1953, the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States and the 
Deputy Speaker of the House of the People are entitled to a salary of 
two thousand rupees per mensem. In 1962, the Deputy Chairman of the 
Council of States and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People 
were given the status of a Minister of State for purposes of warrant of 
precedence and travelling and daily allowances, but their salary was not 
made at par with that of a Minister of State then. It is now proposed 
to equate them in the matter of salary also with a Minister of State by 
raising their salary to two thousand two hundred and fifty rupees per 
mensem. It is also proposed to provide for them a sumptuary allowance 
of Rs. 250 per mensem in order to enable them to meet their official 
obligations. 
RAJ BAHADUR. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 11th Ma.y, 1971. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 193 (L) 170, dated the 20th May, 1971 from Shri Raj 
Bahadur, Minister of Parliamentary Affairs, and Shipping and Transport 
(Sansadiya Karya tatba Nauwahan aur Pariwahan Mantri) to the 
Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Bill further to amend the Salaries and Allowances of Offtcers of 
Parliament Act. 1953, recommends the introduction of the Bill under 
article 117(1) and its consideration by Lok Sabha under article 117(3) .. 
of the Constitution. 

I'INANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Under Section 3 of the Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parlia-
ment Act, 1953, the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States and the 
Deputy Speaker of the House of the People are entitled to receive a 
salary of two thousand rupees per mensem. The proposed provision in 
clause 2 of the Bill is to increase this salary to two thousand two 
hundred and fifty rupees per mensem. 
Under Section 5 of the Act referred to above, only the Chairman of 
the Council of States and the Speaker of the House of the People are 
entitled to receive a sumptuary allowance of five hundred rUp'es pel' 
mensem. Clause 3 of the Bill makes provision for the Deputy Cbail'man 
of the Council of States and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the 
People also to receive a sumptuary allowance of two hundred and fifty 
rupees per mensem. Thus, if the provisions proposed in clauses 2 anrl 
3 of the Bill are carried, the additional recurring financial expenditure 
involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India will be of the order of 
Ra. 12,000 per azmum. 
. . 3 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE SALARIES AND AJ.uJw ANCBS or OrnCIIIS OF 
PABLIAMJan ACT, 1958 
(20 OF 1953) 
... ... ... • .. 
3. There shall be paid to the Chairman and the Speaker a salary of SaI8l'ies 
two thousand two hundred and fifty rupees per mensem, and to the : ::~~ 
Deputy Chairman and the Deputy Speaker a salary of two thouaand ment. 
rupees per mensem. 
.. .. .. ... .. 
5. There shall be paid to the Chairman and the Speaker a sumptuary 
allowance of five hundred rupees per mensem. 
... ... ... ... ... 
4 
Swnp-
t.uU)" 
allowance 
to the 
Chairman. 
and 
the 
Speaker • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parliament Act, 1953. 
[Shri Raj Bahadur, 
Minis7.sr of Parliamentary Affairs, 
and Shipping and TranSport 
(Sanradiya Karya tatka Nauwahan 
aul' Pariwahan Mantrt)] 