10K SABHA -- --
- .' .. ~ 
l', ',' . .. CPRP.IGElJT"IA , ' . A'~"",:. '" )' 
. ,~~'.. ' " '-,' '! ' 
~ . __ .... 
THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATlmi" AND ABOT~ITION) ·Bn.L~' " 
. , .~ ,1 9 6. ,6 .. 
Of. '0 
(To be/As introduced i9 Lok,~abha) ,. 
1.:PageC1l,head1ng under Ch.~pter· III, 
for 
-
"ESTA1LISm--:.1'iT" rElad u:s5TABLISHMENTS" 
•• 1 ... 
2. Page 3, line 8,-
3 I ,e 
I 4 .. ' " J 
5. 
-atter "establishment" 'for It." !!.!:!!. ";" 
. : : ...... ;f .. ·0. '. .. •• 
ge 4, line 8, - . ' '., -.~.- .. , ", ' ;,'': 
:', :"~:.~'::'r.~.; ~''', ~.·I.,~· '~'.;"' ~"',,' ! ." j. .... • " 
fT)r "asigned" r''''ad'' U ass1gned U 
, -
,age 4" line l8,~"" .,~':' . "l·.!· " ! 
tor "ottice ot" read "oftice" . - -!"". " '0. '.' '0,' 
,age 5, line 4,- . ,t._'. '. .. . ........ -...... 
tor ninannes" read "mahriertt 
-
Page 5, lin~' i~,-
" " .. 
..', .... 
, . 
after "~rEtscr1 bed" for tI,·~" read' ",tt , .' 
7. 
8. 
. 9. 
"r, • !,\'.~ . 
fage 5, line 23,- ~, 
',~~ , .. ~ atter, "'andll ~, ". " 
, iif:!)~ n"'F '.~" 'to " 
" age:'6, 'i1ne :'1~~':':' . ,':"'~:;' .. '. .' ,,' ! 
, atter "Governmpnt" insert 
Page 6, line 23,-
- • "'; r •• 
'., ...... -
after trAct" insert 
~ 
,', • r 
'.: .. If " ., 
r"r "benet1t ll read IIbehefits" 
- -
" 
, r 
• t· .. • - • .::... •. 
IPage 7 line ;'3S: - .. ,~~ ~--- .':,. ',/' . .. ;" '.: 
, , , 
I . before .' I.~~O~¥U t10ns tr 1rili9Tt ""'aueh" 
..... ! .~' ... -:.~: .. i.,.; .... ~·,1 
(Page 9, line 7, - '_._, --'-. .. 
.. "f. 
ftJr It anI! read ,- -
","". 
I' '.' 
. ,.. 
. " ., ;. 
.' ,'. 
P.T.o. 

, - 2 .. 
13. Page 1Q, l1ne 22,-
m "Obstructions" ~ "obstructs" 
14. Page 11, 11ne 17,-
for "proceded" read "proceeded" 
-... f S• 
for "sActions ll read Usection" . \ :: 
16 .• Page' 12",. 1·1ne· 2! ,-
• ••• - •• - -- • 4 •• _ 
fo!' 'f ndrlersses" read II addr~BSeS" 
17. Page 13f:. :line .~,o~. 
. '-... ' '. . ~:~ . 
..... ~. ..;' ... 
!.2! 'upreeQce ft read' II pr od'uc a" . .. ..... .~ 
. I '~L • 
" 
18. Page 14, 1n' the marginal hea'-dlng :to cl~use 32,-
.. .. '" '-ror II A.ct" read' "this Act1',: 
19. Page 14, line 19,-
after "Act" .. in~ ert 
20. Page 14, line 22,-
!.- .f _ 
II' II , 
.. ~ ~', ," 
........ 
0'· 
for tt expendiimt't read' ftexpet\~ntll ---- -.. ~:.":,,:,,.' 
21. Page 14, line 3S,-. , 
,. 
for "bu 1nes.s'!,_read ,tbUsiness" 
. 22. Page 15, line 19,-
.' 
" for u
O
fac·f11tes ft 'read "fac1..1itles u 
. --- - ..... 
23. Page 16, line 11,-
for ncase" read. "cases" 
24.. Page 16, line 12,-
for ucomi tion" read" cond1tlons" 
'25.. Page 16, I1ne 25,-
for IId~raul:!.t · . .ielid udefau1ts" 
--
2Q. . ' 
;. - ,.' 
"for" _.insert 
" 
Uthe!1-after ... ~ ... ..;.:-
. NEW DELHI 
octobe'l"" -26 1~66 . 
Kart lka 4, 1888- (Saka) 
" 
........ -.-.. 
" 
0' 
.' 
.' 
" 
. , 
4 .... 
... . " 

~, 
I: 
As IN'l'ROD'OCD Dr LoK SABRA OM 
1 f t SI 
BUI No. " of 196' 
THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND 
ABOLITION) BILL, 1966 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
[. Short title, extent, commencement and application. 
2. Definition'). 
CHAPTER II 
THE ADVISORY BOARDS 
3. Central Advisory Board. 
4. State Advisory Board. 
5. Power to constitute committees. 
CHAPTER III 
REGISTRATION OF ESTABLISBMBNT EMPLOYING 
CONTRACT LABOUR 
6. Appointment of registering officers. 
7. Registration of certain establishments. 
8. Revocation of regi~tration in certain cases. 
9. Effect of non-registration. 
10. Prohibition of employment of contract labour. 
II. 
12. 
13· 
14· 
IS· 
CHAPTER IV 
LICBNSING OF CONTRACTORS 
Appointment of licensing officers. 
Licensing of contractors. 
Grant of licences. 
Revocation, suspension and amendment of lic:eocce. 
Appeal. 

(ll) 
CHAPTER V 
WBLFARP. AND HBALllI OF CONTRACT LABOUR 
CLAUSES 
r6. Canteen<;. 
17; Rest-rooms. 
IS. Other facilities. 
19. First-aid facilities. 
20. Liability of principal employer in certain cases. 
2 J • Responsibility for payment of wages. 
CHAPTER VI 
PsN,u. TIES AND PROCBDURE 
22. Obstructions. 
23. Contravention of provisions regarding employment of contract 
labour. 
24· Other offences. 
25. Offences by companies. 
26. Cognizance of offences. 
27. Limitation of prosecutions. 
2S. Inspecting staff. 
CHAPTER VII 
M.ISCP~LANBOUS 
29. Reglsters and other recorrls to be maintained. 
30. Effect of la.s and aarcements inconsistent with this ACt. 
3 I. Power to exempt in special cases. 
32. Protection of action taken under this A/=r. 
33. Power to give directions. 
34. Power to remove difficulties. 
35. Power to make rule~. 

8B1 No. " of I'" 
THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND 
ABOLITION) BILL, 1966 
A 
BILL 
to regulate the employment of Contract labour in certain establishments and 
to provide for its abolition in certain circumstances and for matters (;Oll-
neeted therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows :-
CHAPTER I 
PRBLlMINARY 
5 I , (1) This Act may be ~al1ed the COntract LaboW" (Regulation 
Abolition) Act, 1966. 
and Short title, 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except 
Kashmir. 
the State of Jammu and 
(J) It shall come into force on such. date as the Central Government 
10 may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates 
may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. 
(4) It applies-
(a) to every establishment in which twenty or more workmen are 
employed or were ,employed on any.day ofthe.p'~ng twelve months 
IS as contract labOur j 
(b) to every contractor who employs or who employed on any day 
of the preceding twelve months twenty or more workmen : 
Provided that the appropriate Government may, after giving not less 
than two months' n"tice of its intention so to do, by notification in the 
20 Official Gazette, apply the provisions of this ACt to any e'ltablishment or 
contractor employing such number of workmen less than twenty as may he 
specified in the notification. 
(5) (a) It shall not apply to establishments in which WOrk only of an 
intermittent or casual nature is performed. 
5 (b) If a question arise~ whether work performed in an e!ltablishment 
~ is of an intermittent or ca5ual nature, the decision of the appropriate 
Government thereon shall he final. 
exte»l, c:om-
mencemt'Dt 
and applica-
tion. 

2 
D!ftnitions. z. In this AI;t, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appropriate Government" means-
(1) in relation to-
(,) any establishment pertaining to any industry carried 
on by or under the authority of the Central Government, or 5 
pertaining to any such controlled indu~try as may be speci-
fied in this behalf by the Central Government, or 
(ia) any establishment of any railway, Cantonment Board, 
major port, mine or oil-field, or 
( .... ,) any establishment of a banking Or insurance com- 10 
pany, 
the Central Government, 
(3) in relation to any other establishment, the Government 
of the State in which that other establishment is situated; 
(b) a workman shall be deemed to be employed a8 "contract IS 
labour" in or in connection with the work of an establlshmeat 
when he is hired in or in connection with such work by or through 
a contractor, with or without the knowledge of the principal 
employer; 
(c) "contractor", in relation to an establishment, means a person 20 
who undertakes to produce a given result for the establishment, other 
than a mere supply of goods Or articles of manufacture to such esta-
blishment, through contract labour or who supplies contract labour for 
any work of the establishment and includes a sub-contractor; 
(d) "controlled industry" means any industry the control of which 2S 
by the Union has been declared by any Central Act to be expedient in 
the public interest; 
(B) "establishment" meam-
(i) any office or department 
authority, or 
of the Government or a local 
(ia) any place where any indmtry, trade, business, manufacture 
or occupation is carried on; 
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made unuer the Act; 
(g) "principal employer" means-
30 
(.) in relation to any office Or department of the Government 3S 
or a local authority, the head of that office or department or such 
other officer as the Government or the local authority, as the cac;e 
may be, may specify in this behalf, 

3 
(il) in a factory, the owner or occupier of the factory and 
where a person has been named a'3 the manager of the factory 
under the Factories Act, 1948, the person so named, 
(ii.) in a mine, the owner or agent of the mine and where 
5 a person has been named as the manager of the mine, the person 
so named, 
(iv) in any other establishment, any perscn responsible for the 
supervision and control of the establishment. 
Exp/anation.-For the purpose of sub-clause (iii) of this clause, 
10 the expressions "mine", "owner" and "agent" shall have the mean-
ings r~lXctiveiy assignelt to them in clause (j), clause (1) ar.d clame 
(c) of sub-section (I) of section 2 of the Mines Act, 1952 j 
15 
20 
(h) "wages" shall have the mefnirg assjgned to it in claute (vi) of 
slct~on 2 of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 ; 
(i) "workman" means any person employed in or in connection 
with the work of any establishment to do any skilled, semi-skilled 
or un-ski lled manual, supervisory, technical or clerical work for hire or 
reward, whether the terms of employment be express or implied, but 
does not include any such person-
(A) who is empJoyed mainly in a managerial or administra-
tive capacity; or 
(B) who, being employed in a superv~ory capacity draws wages 
exceeding five hundred rupees per mensem or exercises, either 
by the nature of the duties attached to the office or by reason of 
25 the powers vested in him, functions mainly of a managerial nature ; 
or 
(G) who is an out-worker, that is to ~ay, a penon to wl:om any 
articles or materials are given out by or on behalf of the principal 
employer to be made up, cleaned, washed, altered, ornamented, 
fini!1hed, repaired, adapted or otherWise p.ocessed for sale for the 
purposes ofehe trade or business of the principal employer and the 
process is to be carried out either in the home of the out-worker or 
in some other premi4les, not being plUllises under the control and 
management of the principal employer. 

Central 
Advisory 
Board. 
4 
ClfAPTER It 
THE ADVISORY BOARDS 
3· (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, consti-
tute a board to be called the Central Advisory Contract Labour 
Board (hereinafter referred to as the Central Board) to advise the 5 
Central Government on such matters arising out of the administra-
tion of this Act as may be referred to it and to carry out other func-
tions asigned to it under this Act. 
(2) The Central Board shall comist of-
(a) a Chairman to be appointed hy the Central Government; 10 
(b) the Chief Labour Commissioner (Central), ex-officio; 
(c) such .number of members, not exceeding ~eventeen, as the 
Central Government may nominate to represent that Government, the 
Railways, the coal industry, the mining industry, the contractors, the 
workmen and any other interests which, in the opinion of the Central 15 
Government, ought to be represented on the Central Board. 
(j) The number of person" to be appointed as memhers from each 
uf the categories specified in sub-section (.1), the term of office of and other 
conditions of service of, the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their 
functions by, and the manner of fi lling vacancies among, the members of 20 
the Central Board shall be such as may be pre.~cribed. 
State Advi- 4· (1) The State Governmt!nt may constitute a board to be called 
sory Board. the State Advisory Contract Labour Board (hereinafter referred to as the 
Stat(Board) to advise the State Government on such matters arising out of 
the administration of thi5 Act as may be referred to it and to carry out 2~ 
other functions assigned to it under this Act. 
(2) The State Board shall consist of-
Ca) a Chairman to be appointed by the State Government; 
(b) the Labour Commissioner, ex -offiCiO, or in his absence 
any other officer nominated by the State Government in that behalf; 30 
(c) such number of members, not exceeding eleven, as the 
State -Government may nominate to represent that Government, the 
industry, the contractors, the workmen and any other interests which, 
in the opinion of the State Government, Qught tQ he represented. on the 
State Board· 

{ 
s 
. (J) The number of persons to be appointed as members from each of 
the categories specified in sub-section (2), the term of office and other 
conditions of service of, the procedure to he followed in the discharge of 
their functions by, and the mannes offil1ing vacancies among, the members 
S of the State Board shall be such as may be prescribed. 
5· (1) The Central Board or the State Board, as the case may power .to 
b • h . . constitute e, may constitute sue committees and for sach purpOse or purposes committees. 
as it may think fit 
(2) The committee constituted und'~r sub-section (1) shall meet at 
10 such times and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to 
the transaction of husiness at its meetings as may be prescribed. 
CJ) The members ofa committee shaD be paid lach fees and 
allowances for attending its meetings as ma, be prescribed. 
Provided that no fees shall be paya!.,le to a member who is an officer of 
15 Government or of any corporation established by any Jaw for the time 
heing in force. 
CHAPTER III 
REGISTRATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS EMPLOYING CONTRACT LABOUR' 
6. The appropriate Government may, hy an order notified in the AppOint-
meJJ.LQi"rcai-
20 Official Gazette - sterials. ' 
officers. 
(a) appoint such persons, being Gazetted Ofticcrs of Govern-
ment, as it thinks fit to tie registering oflicers for the· purpose of 
this Chapter; and. 
(b) define the limits within which a registering officer shall ex-
ercise the powers conferred on him by or under this Act. 
7. (1) Every principal employer of an e .. tabli~hment to ,yhich this Reaistratioo 
Act applies shall. within such period as the appropriate Government rna", orb~rhtalnenetS-. , • ta liS m s. 
hy notification in the Official Gazette, fix in this behalf with respect to 
establishments generally or with respect to any class of them, make an 
30 application to the registering officer in the prescribed manner for registra-
tion of the establishment: 
Provided that the regio;tering officer may entertain any such application 
',: for registration after expiry of the period fixed in this behalf, if the r egister-
>;. ing officer is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause 
')3S from making the application in time. 

6 
(.z) If the application for regi~tra:ion is complete in all respects, the 
registering officer ,hall regi&ter the establishment and issue to the principal 
employer of the e5tablishmcnt a certificate of registration containing such 
particulars as may be prescribed. 
Revocation 8. !fthe registering officer is satisfied, either on a refexence made to S of registra- . 
tioa in h1Dl in this behalf or otherwise, that the registration of any e-stablishment 
certain cases. has been obtained by misrepresentation or suppression of any material 
Effect of non-
registration. 
fact, or that for any other reason the registration has become useless 
or ineffective and, therefore, requires to be revoked, the registering officer 
may, after giving an opportunity to the principal employer of the establish- 10 
ment to be heard and with the previous approval of the appropriate 
Government revoke the registration. 
,. No principal employer of an establishment, to which this Act 
applies, shall~ 
(a). in the case of an' establishment required to be registered IS 
under section 7, but which has not been registered within the time 
fixed for the purpos'! under that section; 
(b) in the case of an establishment the registration in respect 
of which has been revoked under section 8, 
employ contract labour in the establishment after the expiry of the period 20 
referred to in clause (a) or after the revocation of registration, referred to 
in clause (6), as the case may he. 
Prohibition 10. (1) Not with standing anything contained in this Act the appro-
:cnt ~plOY- priate Government may, after con'lultation with the Central board or, as 
contract the caao may. be, a State board, prohibit, by notification in the Official2S labOur .... . 
. Gazette, employment of contract labour in any process, operation Or 
other work in any establishment. 
(.z) Before issuing any notification under SUb-section (1) in relation 
to an establishment, the appropriate Government. shall have regard to 
the conditions of work and benefit provided for the contract labour in that 30 
establishment and other relevant factors, such as :-
(a) whether the process, operation Or o(her work is incidental 
to, or neccs9&l'Y for the industry, trade, business, manufacture or 
occupation that is carried On in !he establishment; 
(b) whether it is of perennial nature, that is to say, it is of 35 
sufficient duration having regard to the nature of industry, trade, 
business, manufacture Or occupation carried on in that e9tablishment ; 
(c) whether it is done Ordinarily through regular workmen In 
that establishment or an establishment similar theretO ; 

7 
(d) whether it is sufficient to employ cflnc;ioerahle number of 
whole-time workmen. 
Explanation.-If a question ari~es whether any process or operation 
Or other work is of perennial nature, the decision of the appropriate GOv=. 
5 ernment thereon shall be final. 
10 
CHAPTER IV 
LICENSING OF CONTRACTORS 
II. The appropriate Government may, by an order notified in the Appointment 
Official Gazette. _ of licensing officers. 
(a) appoint such persons, beiDg Gazetted Officers of Govera-
ment, as it thints fit to be licensing officers for the purposes 
of this Chapter; and 
(b) define the limits, within which a licensing officer shall exercise 
the powers conferred on licensing officers by Or under this Act. 
(;5 12. (I) With effect from such date as the appropriate Government Licensing 0( 
may, by n,tification in the Official Gazette, appoint, no contractor to whom COIltrlCtOrB. 
this Act applies, shall undertake or execute any work through contract la-
bour except under and in accordance with a licence issued in that behalf by 
the licensing officer. 
20 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a licence under sub-section (1) 
may contain such conditions including, in particular, conditions as to hours 
of work, fixation of minimum wages and other e:;sential amenities in respect 
of contract labour as the appropriate Government may deem fit to impose in 
accordance with the rules, if any, made under section 35 and shall be issued 
on payment of such fees and on the deposit of such sum, if any, as security 
25 for the due perfonnance of the conditions as may be prescribed. -
13. (1) Every application for the grant of a licence under sub-section Gnnt of 
. '1) of section 12 shall be made in the prescribed form and shall contain the lic:eDces. 
;' particulars regard!ng the location of the establishment, the nature of 
o process, operation or work for which contract labour is to be employed and 
such other particulars as may be prescribed. 
(2) The licensing officer may make such investigation i.l respect of the 
appliCdtion received under sub-section (1) and in making any such investi-
gation the licensing officer shall follow such procedure as may be pres-
cribed. 
(1) A licence granted under this Chapter shall be valid for the period 
specified therein and may be renewed from time to time lor such period 
and on payment of such fees and on; : ~ conditions as may be presaibc4. 

Rev0 cation, 
suspension 
and amend-
ment of 
licences. 
Appeal. 
8 
14· (1) If the licensing officer is satisfied, either on a reference made 
to him in this behalf or otherwise, that-
(tI) a licence granted under section 12 ha" been obtained by mifre-
presentation or ~uppression of any m~terial fact, or • 
(b) the holder of a licence has, witho~Jt reasonable cause, failed to S 
comply with the conditions subject to which the licence has beeJl 
granted or has contravened any of the rroYisions of this Act or the 
rules.made thereunder, 
then, without prejudice to any other penalty to which the holder of the 
licence may be liable under this Act, the licensing officer may, after giving 10 
the holder of the licence an opportunity of showing cause, revoke or 
suo;:pend the licence or forfeit the sum, if any, or any portion thereof 
deposited a') security for the due performance of the cor.ditions SUbject 
to which the licence h':ls been granted. 
(2) Subject to any rule') that may be m1de in this behalf, the licensing 15 
officer may vary or amend a licence granted under section 12. 
15. (1) Any person aggrieved hy an order made under se~tion 7' 
section 8, section 12 or section 14 may within thirty days from the date 
on which the order is communicated to him, prefer an appeal to an 
appellate officer who ~hall be a person nominated in this behalf by the 20 
appropriate Government : 
prCJvided that the appellate officer may enterta~n the appeal after the 
expiry of [he said period of thirty days, if he is satisfied that the appellant 
was prevented by ~.-ufficient cause from filing the appeal in time. 
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1), the appellate 25 
officer ~ hall, after giving the appellant an opportunity of being heard 
dispose of the appeal as expeditiou~ly a,s pos~ible. 
CHAPTER V 
WELFARE AND REALm OF CONTRACT LABO~R 
Cantl!c:n!l. 16. (1) The appropriate Government may make rules requiring that 30 
in every establishrnent-
(a) to which this Act applies, 
(b) wherein work requiring employment of contraCt labour is 
likely to continue for such period as may be prescribed, and 
(c) wherein contract labour numbering one hundred or mOre is 35 
ordinarily employed by a contractor, 
one or more canteens shall be prOvided and maintained by the contractor 
for the use of such contraCt labour. 

5 
9 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for-
(a) the date by which the canteens shall be provided; 
(b) the number of clnteens that shall he pro\'ided and the 
standards in respect of conc;truction, accommC'dation, furniture and 
other equipment of the canteens; and 
(c) the foodstuffs which may he served therein an the charges 
which may be made therefor. 
17· (1) In every place wherein contract labour is required to halt Rest rooms 
10 at night in connection with the work of an estahlishment-
(a) to which this Act applies, and 
(b) in which work requiring employment of contract labour is 
likely to continue for such period as may be prescribed, 
there shall be provided and maintained by the contractor for the use of 
15 the contract labour such Dumber of res:-I'OOms Or such other suitable 
alterna1ive accommodation within such time as may be pre~cribed. 
(2) The rest-rooms or the alternative acc6mmodation to be provided 
under sub-section (1) shall be sufficiently lighted and vcntilated and shall be 
maintained in a clean and comfortable condition. 
20 18. It shall be the duty of every contractor employing contract Other 
I b · " h h k f bl' h' h W·· facililiea. a our In connectIon WIt t e wor 0 an esta lshmcnt to W Ie t s 
Act applies, to pre vide and maintain-
(a) a ~ufficient supply of wholesome drinking water for the contract 
labour at convenient places ; 
25 (b) a sufficient number of latrines and urinals of the prescribed 
types so situated as to he convenient and accessihle to the contract labour 
in the establishment ; and 
(c) washing facilities. 
19. There shall be provided and maintained by the contractor so as First aid 
30 to be readily accessible during all working hours a first-aid box equip- facilities. 
ped with the prescribed contents at every place where contract labour 
is employ(d by him. 
20. (1) If any amenity required to be pro\,ided under section 16, Liability of 
. . 8 . &: h h fi f h principal sectIon 17, secuon I or sectIOn 19 lOr t e ene tOt e contract lahour emplnyer in 
35 employed in an establishment is not provided hy the contractor within the certain cases 
time prescribed therefilr, such amenity shall be provided hy the principal 
employer w:thin :such time as may he prescribed. 
(2) All expemes ir:curred by the principal employer in providing 
the amenity may be recovered hy the principal employer from the 
I' :! 
~ .. 

Responsibili-
ty for pay-
ment of 
wages. < 
ObstNC!ions. 
Contraven-
tion of 
provisions 
reprding 
employment 
ofcontfBCt 
labour. 
10 
Contractor either by deduction from any amount payable to 
under any contract or as a debt payable by the contractor. 
the contractor, 
21. (1) A contractor shall be re~ponsib}e for payment of wages to 
each worker employed by him as contract labour and such wages shall be 
paia before the expiry of such period as may be prescribed. 
(2) Every principal employer Ehall nominate a representative duly 
authoriEed by him to be present at the time of disbursement of wages by the 
contractor ar.d it shall be the duty of ~uch representative to certify the 
amounts paid as wages in ~uch manner 88 may be prescribed. 
5 
V) It shall be the duty of the contractor to en~ure the 10 
disbursement of wages in the preser:ce of the authorised representative 
of the principal emplcyer. 
(4) In case the contractor fails to make payment of wages within 
the prescribed period or makes short payment, then the prit\cipal 
employer shall be liable to make payment of wages in full or the unpaid IS 
balance due, as the case may be, to the contract labour employed by 
the contr~ctor and recover the amount w paid from the contractOr either 
by deduction from any amount payable to the contractor under any 
contract or a5 a debt payable by the co:1tCactor. 
CHAPTER VI 
PENAL TIES AND PROCEDURE 
22. (1) Whoever Obstructions an insrector in the discharge of his 
duties under this Act or refuses or wilfully neglects to afford the inspector 
any reasonable facility for making any inspection, examination, inqUIry 
20 
or investigation authorised by or under this Act in relation to an 25 
establishment to which, or a contractor to whom, this Act applies, shall 
be puniShable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupee~, 
or with both. 
(2) Whoever wilfully refuses to produce On the demar.d of an inspec- 30 
tor any register or other document kept in pun: uance of this Act Or 
prevents Or attempts to prevent or does any thing which he has reason to 
believe is likely to preven~ itny person from appearing before or being 
examined by an inllpector acting in pur.~uance of his duties under this Act, 
shall bCi"punishable with imprisonment for a term which may exter.d to 35 
three month." or with fine which may extend to five hurdred rupees, Or 
with both. 
a3. Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rules 
made thereunder prohibiting, restricting Or regulning the employment 

II 
of contract labour, or contravenes any condition of a licence granted under 
this Act, shall be punilihable with imprisor.ment for a term which may 
exterd to three months, or with fine wh:ch IT ay cxterd to one thou~ and 
rupee~, or with both, and in the case of a continuing contravention with 
5 an additional fine wh:ch rray extcrd to or.e hudHd lupces for every day 
during which !1uch contravention continues after ccnv:ction for the first 
such contravention. 
24· If any permn contravenes any of the provisions of trus Act or Other ofTen-
of ar.y n.les mrde thereur.der for wh:ch no olher per:a}ty is elsewhere ccs. 
10 prov:dcd, he ~pall t-e plnid:al-le w~th :ITpr;~(rn:(nt for a telm wh:ch may 
extud fo thlee rronth<; or with fir:e wh:ch may exttrd 10 one thou~ar.d 
rupees, or with t:oth. 
2S· (1) If the person committing an cffer.ce under thIs Act is a com- Offi b • encea y 
pany, the company as well as every perron in charge of, and r~-ponMble to, companies. 
15 tht company for the conduct of its business at the time of the commission of 
the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be Hable to 
be proceded against and. punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this mb-~ection shaIl render any 
such person Hable to any punishment if he pro'·cs that (he offence was 
20 committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to 
prevent the commission of such offence. 
Col) Notwithstandirg ar.ything contained in sub-~ec[ion (1), where an 
offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved 
that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or 
25 that the commission of the offence is attributable to any neglect on the part 
of any director, manager, managing agent or any other officer of the com-
pany, such director, manager, managing agent or such other officer ~hal1 also 
be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and puni~;hed accordingly. 
30 Explanat,01l:--For the purpose of this sections-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or 
other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
26. No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Ac( f'X- ;t~;r!~~~ 
,.35 cept on a complaint made by, or with the previous sanction in writing of, the 
inspector and no court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Ma-
gistrate of the fir~t class shall try any oftence puni!"hahle under t!-is Act. 

12 
Limitation of 27· No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under 
prosecutions. this Act unless the cornp!aint three f is rnrde wiThin three rr.onths from 
the d:lte on which the alleged commis~ion of the (\tfence c~me to the know-
ledge of an inspector: 
Provided that where the otfcr.cc consists of diwl-eying a written order 5 
made by an inspect.or, complaint thereof may he mrde within six months 
of the date on which the offence is alleged to have been committed . • 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Inspecting 
staff. 28. (I) The appropriate Government may, by notification in 10 
the Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be 
inspectors for the purposes of this Act, and define the local1-imits 
within which they shall exercise their powers under the Act. 
(2) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, an inspector may, 
within the local limits for which he is appointed- J 5 
(a) ellter, at all reasonable hours, with such assistants (it any), 
being persons in the serv:ce of the Gonrrrrcnt cr Hy local or other 
public authority as he thinks fit, any pnmises or place where contraCt 
labour is employed, for the rurro~e of exrmining [ny register or record 
or notices required to be kept or exhibited ~y or under this Act or ru!es 20 
mede thereunder, an,i require the prcduction thereof for inspection; 
(b) examine any person whom he finds in any such premises or 
place and who, he has reasonable cau~e to believe, is a workman 
employed therein ; 
(c) require any person gl\"mg out work and any workman, to give 25 
any information, which is in his power to give, with resrect to tt-.c 
names and adders~:es of the persons to, (or and from whom 'he work is 
given out or r(clived, ard Wilh Ie' r(ct !o It-e rayrr.ents to be mrde for 
the work; 
Cd) seize or tuke copies of such register, record of wages or notices 
or portions thereof as he may consider relevant in respect of an offence 30 
under this Act which he has reason to I~e!ieye has heen committed by 
the principal employer ; and 

t3 
(e) exerci;e such other powers as m~y be prescribed. 
(3) A'lY person required to proeuce any document or thing Or to give 
any information required. by an inspector u~der sub-section (ol) shall be 
deemed to be legally bound to dJ so within the meanipg of section J75 ard 
5 section 176 of the Ir.dian Penal Code. 
(4) Tne provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 shaU, so 
far as IDly be, apply to any search Or seizure u!lder sub-section (ol) as they 
apply to any search or seizure made under the authority of a warrant issued 
under section 98 of the sa;d Code. 
• 
10 29. (1) Every principal employer and every co,tractOr shall maintain Registers and 
such regbters and record; giving such particulars of contract labour em- ~~ht~ ~~i: 
ployed, the nature of work performed by the contract labour, the rates of ntainl':d. 
wages plid to the c:>ntract labour and such other particulars in such form 
a'l may be prescribed. 
15 (ol) Every principal employer and every contractor shall keep 
exhibited in such manner a!'= may be prescribed within the premises of the 
establishment where the cOltract lahour is employed, notices in the pre,-
cribed form containing particulars about the hours of work, nature of duty 
and such other information as may be prescribed. 
20 30 • (1) Tile provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithl!tanding Effect of 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or in the terms ~;:e::nts 
of any agreement or contract of service. or in any standing orders applic- i~nsi~tent 
• Co With thIs able to the estabhshment whether made be re Or afte .. the commencement Act. 
of this Act: 
25 Provided that where under any such agreement, contract of service 
or standing orders the cOntract labour emplcyed in the establishment are 
entitled to henefits in respect of any matter which are more favourable to 
them than th03e to which they would be entitled ur:der this Act, the con-
tract labour shall contir.ue to be entitled to the more favourable benefits in 
30 respect of that matter, notwithstanding that they receive benefits in respect 
of other matterc; under this Act. 
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as precluding 
any such contract labour from entering into an agreement with the princi-
pal employer or the con·.ractor, as the case may he, for granting them rights 
S or privileges in respect of any matter which are more favourable to them 
than those to which they would be entitled under this Act. 

..I. 
d 
~ l. ') 
Power to 
ext.'mpt in 
specia I 
cases. 
Prote cti.)n 
of action 
taken under 
Act. 
Power to 
give direc-
tions. 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
Power to 
makerules. 
31. Tile appropriate Governme~t. may. if in it.; opInion It IS necessary 
Or expedient sO to do. direct, ry n\.ltifil..'3tion in the Official Gazette, that 
suhject to such conditions ard re~tri ... tions, if any, ard for such period Or 
period., Be; may be sp::-cified in the ~)tification, all or any of the provisions 
of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall not apply to any e$tablish- ) 
ment or cia,s of e,tablishmc.1ts or any class of contractors. 
32. (1) No suit, pr03ecutio.:1 or other legal proceeding .~halllic against 
any r~gistecing offi':::!r, licen;ing offi.:er or a]y other Government servant or 
again~t alY m~mber of the Central board or the State board, as the case 
may he, for anything which is in gDl."\\i faith done or intended to be done in to 
pur~uance of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeuing shall lie against the Govem-
ment for any damlge caused or likd)- to be caused by anything which is in 
good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule 
or order made there under. 
33. The Central Governmen(may give directions to the Government 
of any State as to the carrying into execution in the State of the provisions 
contained in this Act. 
15 
34. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act 
the Central Government may, hy order published in the Official Gazette, 20 
make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as 
appears to it to be necessary or expendient for removing the difficulty. 
35. (1) The appropriate Government may, subject:o the condition 
or previou5 publication, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(ol) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 25 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely :-
(a) the number of persons to be appointed as members rep res en" 
ting various interests on the Central bOlrd and the State bolfd, the 
term of their office and other conditions of service, the procedure to be 30 
followed in the discharge of their fUl'lctions and the manner of filling 
vacancies; 
(b) the times and places of the meetings of any committee coJUti-
tuted under this Act, the procedure to be followed at such meetill8s 
including the quorum necessary for the transaction of bujl1ess, and the 3S 
fees and allowances that may be paid to the members of a committee ; 

10 
15 
30 
3S 
15 
(c) the manner in which establishment, may be rt·gistercd under 
section 7, the levy of a fee the.·efor and the fo:m of certificate of 
registration ; 
Cd) the fO;'m of applicat:on for the gram 0 .. renewal of a licence 
under section 13 and the patticulars it may contain ; 
(e) the mlnnel" in which an inve;tigation is to be made in respect 
nf an application for the g.-ant of a licence and the matters to be taken 
into account in granting or refusing a licence ; 
(j) the form of a licence which may be granted or renewed under 
~ection 12 and the conditions subject to which t'. e licence may be 
granted or renewed, the fees to be levied for the grant or renewal of 
a licence and the deposit of any ~um as security for the performance 
of such conditions ; 
(g) the circumstances under which licences may be \"aricd or 
amended under section 14; 
(h) the form and manner in which appeals may be filed under 
~cction 15 and the procedure to be followed by appellate officers in 
disposing of the appeals ; 
(i) the time within which facilites required by t&:s Act to be pro-
\"ided and maintained may be sO provided by the contractor and in 
ca,e of default on the part of the contractor, by the principal employer; 
(j) the number and types of canteenc;, test-rooms, latrines and 
urinals that should be provided and maintained ; 
(k) the type of equipment that should be provided in the first-aid 
boxes ; 
(I) the period within which wages payable to contract labour 
should be paid by the contractor under sub-section (1) of section 21 ; 
(m) the form of registers and records to be maintained by prin-
cipal employers and contractors; 
en) the subm=S!ion of returns, fonns in which~ and the authoritiec; 
to which, such returns may be submitted ; 
(0) the collection of any infonnatlon or statistiC!f in relation to 
contract labour ; and 
(P) any other matter whkh has to be, Or may be, prescribed under 
this Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS A~D REA~ONS 
Tne system of employment of contract labour lend; itself to variou,\ 
abu')es. Tile question of its abolition has heen under the con .. ideration of 
Government for a long time. In the Se~ond-Fh'e-Year-Plan, the Plar.ning 
Commission made certain recommendation'), namely, undertaking of studies 
to ascertain the extent of the prohlem of ~ontrac( labour, progressive aboli-
tion of the system and improyement or !tervice conditions of Contract labour 
where the abolition was not po.isihle. Tile matter wa l discu.;sed at variou. 
meetings of Tripartite Committees at which the State Governments were 
also repre:-ented and the general oo,sensu'i of opinion was that the system 
should be a bolished wherever pos :ible and practicable and that in case 
where this syscem could nor he abolished altogether, the working condition 
of the COntract labour should be regulared SJ a; to ensure payment of wages 
and provision of e3sential amenities. . 
2. The propos!d Bill a:mc; at the a~)olition of contra;;l labour inre .. -
pect of such categoric; a; maY be notified by the appropriate Government 
in th~ light of certain Criteria th!lt ha\'e been laid down, and at regulating 
the service conditions of C(;ntract lab:lUr wh~re abolition is not possible. The 
Bill provides for the setting up of Advisory baa:ds of a trips ·tite cha:-acter, 
repr.!"en~i.lg varinus interests, to add;e the Central 3"lJ Stat~ G;,vernm'!nts 
in administering the legislation and registration of establh-hments and con-
tractors. Under the scheme of the Bill, the provision and maintenance of 
certain basic welfare amenities for ~contract labour, like drinking water and 
firstaid facHitie." and in certain caie, reit-room~ and canteens, have 'been 
made obligatory. Provisions ~ve also been made to guard against defaul 
in the matter of wage payment. 
NEW DELHI; JAGJIVAN RAM. 
The 27th August, 1966. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMfu"\DATION LTNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 14 (S)j66-LWI, dated the 5th September, 1966 
from Shri Jagjiwan Ram, Minister of Lahour, Employment and Reh1hi-
litation to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, h'l\'ing been informed of the subject rn!ltter of the 
Contract Labour (Regulation and Aholition) Bill, 1966 hlJS reciJmmended 
it, under articles 117 (I) and 117 (3) of rhe Constitution, fOr introducdon 
and consideration of the Lok Sahha. 

FINA1'\CIAL M.EMOR.A~Dt:.1\1 
The following clauses of the ContniCt L:lhour (Regulation and 
Aholition) Bill involve expenditure to the Central Government :-
(I) Clause 3-Constitution of a Cemral Advisory Board. 
(2) Clause 5-Appointmem of Committees by the CentrJI Advisory 
Board. 
(3) Clause 6-Registration of establishments (Appoimment of 
registering officers for Central sphere). 
(4) Clause I I-Appointment of licensing officers and issue of licenses 
for the Central sphere. 
(5) Clause 28-Appointmcnt of inspecting staff hy the Central 
Government. 
2. It is proposed to entrust the enforcement of the provisions of the 
Bill in all establishments in re ,pe~t of which the Central Government is 
'appropriate' Government, i. e., work relating to registrJtion of estab-
lishments employing contract labour (clause 6), licensing of contractors 
(clause II), inspections (clause 28), etc., to the Central Industrial Relations 
Machinery. It may be necessary to appoint one Assistant LabQur 
Com~issioner at each. regionall'teadqU8rte.rs namel)" Bombay, Cal~tt~ 
Madras, }abalpur, KanpUt, Dhanbad and Hyderabad, and two Labour 
Enforce~ent Officers in each region. Taking i~to account the ad~ 
trative w~k that may devo~ve on the office of the Chief Labour Commi-
ssioner and the Department of Vtbour and Employment, the follo\\;ng 
staff is likely to be required :-
I. Deparlmmt of Labour and Employmenl 
I. Section Officer 
2. V.D. C. 
3. L. D. C. 
I I. Office of the Chief Labour COI1l7llissiNIt'T 
I. Regional Labour Commissioner 
2. Section Officer 
3. Stenographer 
I Rs. 350 (400)-<)00 
I 
I 
Rs. 900-1250 

-to .\s.,i~tants 
5· F D.Cs. 
o. L. D. Cs. 
7· D"lftry 
S. Peons 
I II. Regional Headquarters 
I. Assistant Labour Commissioners 
2. U. D.Cs. 
3· L. D. Cs. 
4· Peons 
IV. For field work 
I. Labour Enforcement Officers 
2. L. D. Cs. 
3. Peons 
7 
7 
Rs. 6oC-950 
Rs. 350-25-575 
The total non-recurring expenditure likely to be incurred will 
amount to Rs. 37,000/- and recurring expenditure to about Rs. 4,52,000/-
per annum. 
3. In addition to the expenditure mentioned above expenditure 
on T. A. and D. A. of the non-official members of the Central AdVisory 
Board, to be constituted under clause 3 and Committees to be constituted 
under c1au~e 5 of the Bill will also be met by the Department of Labour 
and Employment. For holding two meetings in a year the expenditure 
is likely to be Rs. 10,000/- per annum, thus increasing the annual 
recurring expenditure to Rs. 4,62,000/-

\iE.\1:)RA ~DU.\1 REGAI{DING DELEGATED LEGISLATIO~ 
Clause 16 of the Bill empower.; the appropriate Government to make 
rule' :'egarding ca:~teen to be p:ovided by cont llCtor; in e\'ery establish-
ment wherein CO!1t 'act labour numbering 0:- e hu'" dred or more is o~'djnarily 
employed and wherein work requi 'jng cmp'r·yn:er t c,f Cfor tract labour is 
likely to Conti!'_u~ f)r the prescr:bed period. T_le matter; in re pect of which 
rules may be made relate to the date by which the canteens should be pro-
vided, the number of C1nteens, the standard .. in respect of con~truction, ac-
commodation and furniture to be provided and the foodstuffs which may be 
served and the charges which may be made therefor. 
2. Clause 28(2) of the Bill provides for the making of rules subject to 
which the Inspecting staff may exercise the powers of entry, inspection, 
search and seizure conferred under that clause. 
3· Clause 35 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The various matters in 
re~pect. of whi~ rule~ may be made are specified in sub-claUse (3) of that 
clause. They relate inter-alia to the constitution of the Central and the ~tate 
Advisory boards, the procedure ~o be followed by the Central board and 
the State boards and by the Committees thereof, manner and procedure for 
registration of establishments, the form of application for the grant or rene-
wal of licences for contractors, etc., the form and manner in which appeals 
may be filed and the procedure to be followed by appellate officers, the 
manner and time within which facilities like canteens, rest-rooms, supply of 
wholesome drinking water, latrinec;, urinals and first-aid facilities sball be 
provided and maintained by the contraCtor, and in certain Contingencies, by 
the prinCipal employer, the period within which the wages have to be paid 
by the Cllntractor and the manner in which the representative of the princi-
pal employer should certify the payment of wages, the forms of repsters to 
be maintained and the returns to be submitted. 
4, These are ~ matters. of administrative:procedUre and detail. The 
delegation of legislative power IS tho." of a 1\ormal character. 
19 

LOR S.-\BHA 
A 
BILL 
to regulate the employment of contract labour in certain 
establishments and to provide for its abolition in certain 
circumstances and for matters connected therewith. 
(Shri JagjifJan Ram, 
Minister of Labour, 
Employmmt and Rehllbilitation.) 