20'1.1924. 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
Bill No. .. of 1982 
THE CANTONMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1982 
A 
BILL 
jurtheT to a.nHmd the Cantonments Act, 1924. 
Bs it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-third Year of the RepubUc 
of India as follows:-
. 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Cantonments (Amendment) Act, Short 
1982. Ut~ 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, appoint. 
2. In section 2 of the Cantonments Act, 1924 (heremafter referred to 
as the principal Act) ,-
(a) in clause (iia) , for the words "eight feet in height", the 
10 words "two and a half metres in height" shall be substituted; 
(b) clause (iii) shall be omitted; 
(e) in clause (vii), after the word "Board", the words ", and 
includes a vacancy in such o1!ice, arising under Bub-sectioD (lA) of 
section 17" shall be inserted; 
15 (d) after clause (vii), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:-' 
'('&1iia) "civil area" means an area declared to be a civil area 
by the Central Government under section 4SA; 
and com-
mence-
ment. 
Amend-
ment ot 
section 2. 

(viib) "civil area committee" means a conunittee appoint-
ed under section 43A;'; 
(e) clause (xia) shall be renumbered as clause (ric) and before 
cla'Use (ric) as so renumbered, the following clauses shall be insert-
ed, namely:- 5 
'(xia) "Defence Estates Officer" means the officer appointed 
by the Central Government to perform the duties of the Defence 
Estates Officer tor the purposes of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder; 
(rib) "Director" means the officer appointed by the Central 10 
Government to perform the· duties of the Director, Defence 
Lands and Cantonments, the Command, . for the purposes of 
this Act and the rules made thereunder and includes the Joint 
Director;'; 
(f) in clause (xii), for the words "the Public Works officer of 15 
that grade, or the Officer 'Of the Military Engineer Services of the 
corresponding grade", the words "the Officer of the Military Engi-
neer Services of that grade" shall be substituted; 
(g) after clause (xiii), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:- 20 
'(xiiia) "factory" means a factory as defined in clause (m) 
of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948; 
(xiiib) "Forces" means the Army, Navy and Air Force or 
any part of anyone or more of them;'; 
(h) after clause (xiv), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:- 25 
'(xV) "hospital" includes family welfare centre, child wel-
fare centre, maternity centre and health centre;'; 
(i) after clause (xix), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely.-
'(xixa) "lower grade employee" means daftry, peOn, 
bhisti, mali, lamp-lighter, chowkidar, mazdOor or safaiwala or 
any other employee declared by the Central Government to be 
a lower grade emplcyee for the purposes of this Act;'; 
go 
63 of 1948. 
(;) for clause (xx), the following clause shaH be substituted, 
namely:- 35 
• (xx) "market" includes any place where persons assemble 
for the sale of, or for the purpose of exposing for sale, meat, 
fish, fruits, vegetables, animals intended for human food or any 
uther articles of human· food whatsoever, with or without the 40 

L0K SABHA 
CuRRlGEND-A 
to 
THE CAf\lTvN'J:ENT... (./JME~fJ'IENT) BILL, 1'J82 
£)0 be/As int roducecLj.n Luk_~ abh a 7 
1. Page 'J, line 41,-
12..£ "for the use" Le~2. "Or the use" 
2. Page 14, line 1,-
i.~ " for sub-sectiun" read "'fo r sub-sect ions" 
3. Page 1(,., line 11,-
i.E£ "princip al" rea£ lip r inc ip1 e" 
4. Page 2), line 10,-
lli. " se st ivn ll rea.d "sect iUll" 
5. Page 2) ,-
for line 31, r~ad -
!(pb) preparing and implementing town 
planning schemes;".' 
6. Page 21, line 14,-
M "sch all e" £&. ad "sch em es" 
7. Page 22, line 2,-
" all" 11 sh all" 
.. 8. Page 23, in the marginal heading tu section 1::lM.-
ill I "Tubbish" re .~ 
--~. "rubbish" 
9. Page 28, in the margin.,)l heading t'J clause 10",-
fOr IIIn sectiun" Le_af. "lnser':ion" 
10. Page 44, line 6,-
i£.I "0 f the" read "arIel the" 
11. PClge 45, line 10,-
for "provisoins" reac! "provisions" 
P. T. O. 

2 
12. Page 47 J line 1,-
~ IIwords" read "w~rds" 
13. Page 4'7 J line 3 from bottom,-
~ftc:'r "~2'" insert "of" .... I _"_' __ "_ 
14. PagE' 50, line 4,-
.2!llli " the" 
15. Page 51, line 30,-
i2.I t\ re sf raint" £i! i2. "dist raint" 
1(". Page 51, line 2 from butt-om~-
~ "oni y" rc ad nan y" ... 
17. Page 55, line 11 frum bottviTI,-
i.2£ " 10 .1 " oF e ad " 1 'J 1 " 
18. Page 56, line 7,-
l~. Page 58, line 13 fr<xTl bottqn,-
fux: "to" ~ "of" 
2~. Page 5'1, line 15 rrcmJ bottom,- \ 
£0 r "recommend CI.tion of t he Centre" 
21. P i:lge 69, in 1the ; arginal headin<o. tv section 32,-
.i£r 'WI ember's" re ad ''I'.t1 ember" 
22. Page 70 J in the marginal heading tu section 44,-
.f.52£ "Puewer" ,read "power" 
23. Page 81, line 12 from bottom,-
i.££. "SuPRESSILJN" react "SWPRESSIUN" 
24. P a'.:e 84, liLe 13,-
after II rLfe rred" in sert "to" 

3 
2:). Page '12, in tho r:, argine 1 heading to section 210,-
fur - .. certains" " certain" 
20, Page ';;'2, -
against line 25, in the marginal citation,-

'46 of 1950, 
62 of 1957. 
45 of 1950. 
46 of 1950, 
62 of 1957. 
45 of 1950. 
3 
eonsent of the owner of such place notwithstanding that there 
may be no common regulation for the concourse of buyers and 
.sellers and whether or not any control is exercised over the 
business of, or the persons frequenting, the market by the owner 
5 of the place or by any other person, but shall not include a 
single shop or group of shops not being more than six in num-
ber and shops within unit lines;'; 
(k) clause (xxa) shall be omitted; 
(l) for clauses (xxi) and (xxii), the following clauses shall be 
IO mbstituted, namely:-
20 
25 
35 
40 
'(xxi) "military officer" means a person who, being an 
officer within the meaning of the Army Act, 1950, the Navy Act, 
1957 or the Air Force Act, 1950, is commissioned, gazetted or 
in pay as an officer doing army, naval or air force duty with the 
army, navy or air force, or is an officer doing such duty in any 
arm, branch or part of any of those forces; 
(xxii) "nuisance" includes any act, omission, place, animal 
or thing which ca'Uses or is likely to cause injury, danger, 
annoyance or offence to the sense of sight, smell or hearing or 
disturbance to rest or sleep, or which is or may be dangerous to 
life or injurious to health or property;'; 
(m) for clause (xxiv), the following clause shall be substituted, 
n~ely:-
'(xxiv) "Officer Commanding the Area" means the Oftlcer 
Commanding anyone of the areas into which India is for mili-
tary purposes for the time being divided, or any sub-arca which 
does not form part of any such area, or any a~e3 ·which the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare to be an area for all or any of ,the purposes of this 
Act;'; 
(n) in clause (xxiva), for the word "District", in both the 
places where it occurs, the word "Area" shall be substituted; 
(0) for clause (xxxv), the follOWing clause shall be rubstituted, 
namely:-
'(xxxv) "soldier" means any person who is a soldier or 
a sailor or an air man '.:iubject to the Army Act, 1950, the Navy 
Act, 1957 or the Air Force Act, 1950, as the case may be, and who 
is not a military officer;'; 
(p) after clause (xxxvii), the following clause shall be illJel"t-
ed, namely:-
.5 
'(xxxviia) "sub-area" means one of the sub-areas int. 
which India is for military purposes fer the time being divided, 
and includes, for all or any of the purposes of this Act, any 
territory which the Central Go .... ernment may, by notificaboll fa 
the Official Gazette, declare to be a sub-area for such pur-
poses;', 

Amend-
mentof 
aection3. 
Amend-
mentof 
aectlon 10. 
Omission . 
of sec-
tion 12. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 13. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 14. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 15. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 16. 
Amend-
ment of 
tection 17. 
4 
3, In lection 3 of the principal Act, in aub-lection (J), for the 
wOrds "the Ifidian Army or th4[! Indian Air Force", the words "the Forces" 
shall be subltltuted. 
" In section 10 of the principal Act, the words "and an Executive 
Officer" shall be omitted. 5 
S. Section 12 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
6. In section 13 of the prmcipal ~ct, in clause (6) of sub-section (3) 
and clause (b) of sub-section (4), for the words "a Magistrate of the first 
class", the words "an Executive Magistrate" shall be substituted.. 
'1. In section 14 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for clause 10 
(c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
II (c) one member, not being a person in the service of the 
Government, nominated by the Central Government in consultation 
with the Officer Commanding-In-Chief, the Command.". 
8. In section 15 of the principal Act,-
(4) in sub-section (1),-
(i) for the words "three years", the words "five years" shall 
be substituted; 
(it) after the proviso, the following proviso shaU be inserted, 
namely:- 20 
"Provided further that a member whose term of office 
has been so extended, shall cease to hold office on the date 
of the notification of the election of his successor under sub-
section (7) of section 13."; 
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words "date of election", the 25 
words "date of the notification of his election" shall be substituted. 
9. In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in the 
proviso, for the words "three months", the worcla "six months" shall be 
IUbstituted. 
10. In section 17 of the principal Act,- 30 
(a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section .hall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(lA) If a person is elected to more than one seat in a 
Board, then, unless he resigns all but one of the seats within 
fourteen days from the date on which he is declared eleeted., or 35 
where the dates on which he is declared elected are different in 
respect of different seats, from the last of such dates, all the seats 
shall become vacant."; 

- (b) in 8ub-section (3), for the words "where there has been a 
division of the cantonment into wards or of the inhabitants thereof 
into classes, be deemed to have been elected by such ward or class. 
as the case may be,", the words "where there has been a division of 
5 the cantonment into wards, be deemed to have been elected by such 
ward" shall be substituted. 
10 
IS 
11. For section 18 of the prinCipal Act, the following section shall be 
rubstituted, namely:-
'18. (1) Every person who is by virtue of his office, or who is 
nominated Or elected to be, a member of the Board shall, before 
taking his seat, make and subscribe at a meeting of the Board an 
oath or affinnation of his allegiance to the Constitution of India in 
the 'following form, namely:-
become 
"I, A.B., having been elected a member of this Board; do 
been nominated 
swear ~ ~he name of ~~ that I will bear true faith and allegi-
solemnly affirm 
ance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I 
20 will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to 
enter."'. 
(2) If any such person fails to make and subscribe the oath or 
affirmation at one of the first two meetings held after the date of 
commencement of his term of office, the Central Government shall 
25 by notification in the Official Gazette, declare his seat to be vacant: 
35 
Provided that a meeting where the member is absent with the 
leave of the Board shall not be taken into accO'Wlt.'. 
12. In section 19 of the principal Act,- .. 
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"(1) (a) Any elected member of a Board who wishes to 
resign his offiee may' give his resignation in writing to the 
President of the Board who shall forward it for orders to the 
Central Government under intimation to the OJBcer Com-
mavding-in-Chief, the Command. 
(b) Any nominated member of a Board who wishes to 
resign his office may forward his resianation in writing through 
the President of the Board to the Officer Commanding-in-Chief, 
the Command for qrders."; 
4° (b) in sub-section (2), for the words "Central Government", the 
words "Central Government or the Offtcer Comtn8nding-in-Chlef,. the 
Command, as the case may be," &hall be substituted; 
Substitu_ 
tionof 
new sec-
ti<ln for 
section 18. 
Oath or 
affirma-
tion. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 19. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 20. 
Amend-
ment of 
lection 21. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 22. 
Substi~­
tion ot 
Qew sec-
tiona for 
aection 24. 
Appoint_ 
ment of 
Executive 
Officer. 
6 
(c) after sub-section (2), the following sUb-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), 
the resignation of any person ~lected to more than one seat in a 
Board from all but one of the seats in pursuance of sub-section 5 
(lA) of section 17 shall take effect when such resignation is 
received by the President of the Board..". 
13. In st"Ction 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in the 
proviso, for the words "temporary absence from the station on duty or 
on station Jeave, or during the transfer of his headquarters to a hill 10 
station", the words "temporary absence from the station for a period not 
exceeding thirty consecutive days" shall be SUbstituted. 
14. In section 21 of thE principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section .(1), for the words "three years", the words 
"two years and six months" shall be substituted; 15 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(3) A Vice-President may be removed from his office, at 
a special meeting convened for the purpose on a requisition 
for the same by not less than one-half of the elected members 20 
of the Board holding office, by a resolution passed by a majority 
of not less than two-thirds of the total number of elected mem-
bers then holding office and attending and no member, other 
than an elected member, shall have the right to vote on the 
resolution.". 25 
15. In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (b), 
for the words "exercise supervision and ~ontrolover", the words "control, 
direct and supervise" shall be substituted.. 
16. For section 24 of the principal Act, the following sections shall 
be substituted, namely:- go 
'24. (1) For every cantonment there shall be an Executive 
Officer appointed by the Central Government or by such person as 
the Central Government may authorise in this behalf: 
Provided that the Board may empower any of its members or 
officers to exercise or perform in the absence of the Executive 35 
Officer from the cantonment all or any of such powers or duties of 
an Executive Officer under this Act as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Offic.ial Gazette, specify. in this behalf. 
. ExpZanation.-In thit; proviso, the word "officers" she,ll mean any 
of the sllpervisory staff of the Board as may be specified by the Board 40 
(2) Not less than on~half of the cost of the salary of the Execu-
. tive Oftker shall be paid by the Central Government and the balance 
from the cantonment fund. 
(3) The Executive Officer shall be the Secretary of the Board 
ftnd of every Committee of the Board and may participate in every 45 
meeting of the Board and of every Committee of the Board, but, 
shall not be a member of the Board or of any such Committee. 

5 
10 
7 
24A. Subject to the provisions of clause (b) and clause (d) of 
sub-section (1) of section 22, the Executive Officer shall-
(a) exercise all the powers and perform all the duties con-
ferred or imposed upon hi.m by or under this Act or any other law 
for the time being in force; 
(b) prescribe the duties of, and exercise supervision and 
control over the acts and proceedings of, officers and other 
employees of the Board, other than medical officer in charge of 
the cantonment general hospital or dispensary; 
(c) be responsible for the custody of all records at the 
Board; 
(d) arrange for "the performance of such duties relative to 
the proceedings of the Board or of any Committee of the Board 
or of any Committee of Arbitration constituted under this Act, 
15 8S thOse bodies may respect:vely impose on him; 
20 
. 25 
35 
45 
(e) comply with every requisition of the B('ard on any 
matter pertaining to the administration of the cantonment.'. 
17. In section 28 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "in receipt of pay in the 
military or civil service of Government", the words "holding any 
office of profit under the Government" shall be substituted; 
(b) in SUb-section (2) ,-
(i) in the opening portion, for the words "election or nomi-
nation as", the words and brackets "being chosen (whether by 
election or nomination) as, and for being" shall be S'Ubstituted; 
(ii) clauses (dd), (ddd) and (e) shall be re-Iettered as 
clauses (e), (f) and (i) respectively, and,-
(A) in clause (e) as so re-Iettered, after the word 
"Board", the words "or of any other local authority" shall 
be inserted; 
(B) after clause (f) as so re-Iettered, the following 
clauses shall be "inserted, namely:-
"(g) haf:, by the authority referred to in clause (f) 
of section 31, been found to have been guilty of any of 
the corrupt practices specified in sub-section (2) of section 
29 unless a period of five years has elapsed since the 
date of the finding or the disqualification has been 
removed either retrospectively or prospectively by an 
order of the Central Government; or 
(h) fails to pay any arrears of any kind due by him 
otherwise than as an agent, receiver, trustee or an 
executor, to the Board within thirty days after the notice 
in this behalf has been served upon him; or"; 
(iii) in the proviso, in clause (ii), in sub-clause (d), for the 
fiyures "1,500", the figures "3,000" shall be substituted. 
Duties of 
Executive 
Officer. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 28. 

Substitu-
t.ion of 
Dew sec-
tion 'tor 
section 29. 
Interpre-
tation. 
8 
18. For section 29 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
'29. (1) For the purposes of sections 26, 27 and 28, uperson" means 
an individual human being. 
(2) The following shall be deemed to be corrupt practices within 5 
the meaning of clause (g) of sub-section (2) of section 28:-
(1) "Bribery", that is to 88y,-
(A) any gift, ofter or promise by a candidate or his 
agent or by any other person with the consent of a candidate 
or his agent of any gratification, to any person whomsoever, 10 
with the object, directly or indirectly of inducin~ 
(4) a person to stand or not to stand as, or to with-
draw or not to withdraw from being, a candidate at an 
election, or 
(b) an electQr to vote or refrain from voting at an 15 
election, or as a reward to-
(i) a person 'for having so stood or not stood, or 
for having withdrawn or not having withdrawn his 
candidature; or 
(ii) an elector for having voted or refrained 20 
from voting; 
(B) the recei}1t of, or agreement to receive, any grati~ 
fication, whether as a motive or a reward-
(a) by a person for standing or not standing as, or 
for withdrawing or not withdrawing from being, a 25 
candidate; or . 
(b) by any person who.msoever for himself or any 
other person for voting or refraining from voting, or 
inducing or attempting to indu<:e any elector to vote or 
r~~ain from voting, or any candidate to withdraw or not 30 
to withdraw his candidature. 
Explanatio"l..-For the purposes of this clause, the term 
"gratification" is not restricted to pecuniary gratifications or 
gratifications estimable in money and it includes all forms 
of entertainment and all forms of employment for reward 35 
but it does not incl;ude the payment of any expenses bona 
fide incurred at, or for the purpose of any election. 
(2) Undue inftuence that is to say, any direct or indirect 
interference or attempt to interfere on the part of the candidate 
or his agent, or of any other person with the consent of the 40 
candidate or his agent, with the free exercise of any electoral 
right: 
Provided that-
(a) without prejudice to the generality of the provisions 
of this clause any such person as Is referred to therein who- 45 
(i) threatens any candidate or any elector, or any 
person in whom a candidate or an elector is interested,· 

5 
10 
1.1 
35 
45 
9 
with injury of any kind including social ostracism and 
ex-communication or expulsion from any caste or com-
munity; or 
(ii) induces Or attempts to induce a candidate or an 
elector to believe that he, or any person in whom he is 
interested, will become or will be rendered an object of 
divine displeasure or spiritual censure, 
shall be deemed to interfere with the free exercise of the 
electoral right of such candidate or elector within the mean-
ing of this clause; 
(0) a declaration of public policy, or a promise of public 
action, or the mere exercise of a legal right without intent to 
interfere with an electoral right, shaH not be deemed to 
interfere within the meaning of this clause. 
(3) The appeal by a candidate or his agent or by any other 
person with the consent of a candidate Or his agent to vote or 
refrain from voting for any person on the ground of his religion, 
race, caste, communitv or language or the use of, Ot appeal to 
religious symbols or the use of, or appeal to, national symbols, 
such 'as the national flag or the national emblem, for the further-
ance of the prospects of the election of that candidate Or for pre-
judicially affecting the election of any candidate. 
(4) The promotion of. or attempt to promote, feelings of 
enmity or hatred between different classes of the citizens of 
India on grounds of religion, race, caste, community or language, 
by a candidate or his agent or any other person with the consent 
of a candidate or his agent for the furtherance of the prospects 
of the election of that candidate or for prejudicially affecting 
the election of any candidate. 
(5) The pUblication by a candidate or his agent or by any 
other person. with the consent of a candidate or h:s al{ent. of any 
statement of fact which is false, and which he either believes to 
be false or does not believe to be true, in relation t'a the personal 
character or conduct of any candidate. or in relation to the 
candidature, or withdrawal Of anv candidate. bein~ a stqtement 
reasonably calculated to prejudice the prospects of· that candi-
date's election. 
(6) The hiring or procuring, whether on p'avment or other-
wise. of anv vehicle or vessel bv a canriid,.te or h;s age"lt or by 
any other person with the consent of a randidate Or his agent 
~or the use of such vehicle or vessel for the free conveyance of 
any elector (other than the candidate himself, the members of 
his family or his agent) to or from any polling station or place 
fixed for the poll: 
Provided that the hiring of a vehicle or vessel by an elector 
or by several electors at their joint costs for the purpose of con-
veying him or them to and from any such polling station or place 
fixed for the poll shall not be deemed to be a corrupt practice 
under this clause if the vehicle or vessel so hired is a vehicle 
"I' vessel not propelled by mechanical power: 

Amend-
ment of 
section 31. 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 32. 
JO 
Provided further that the use of any public transport vehicle 
or vessel or any tramcar or railway carriage by any eleetor at 
his own cost for the purpose of going to or coming from any such 
polling station or place fixed for the poll shall not be deemed to 
be a corrupt practice under this clause. 5 
Explanation.-In this clause, the expression "vehicle" means 
any vehicle used or capable of being used for the purpose of road 
transport, whether propelled by mechanical power or otherwise 
and whether used for drawing other vehicles or otherwise. 
(7) The obtaining or procuring or abetting or attempting to 10 
obtain or procure by a candidate or his agent or, by any other 
person with the consent of a candidate or his agent,· any assistance 
(other than the giving of vote) for the furtherance of the pros-
pects of that candidate's election, from any person in the service 
of the Government or the Board: 15 
Provided that where any person, in the service of the Gov-
ernment or the Hoard in the discharge or purported discharge of 
his official duty, makes any arrangements or provides any faci-
lities or does any other act or thing, for, to, or, in relation to, any 
candidate or his agent or any other person acting with the con- 20 
sent of the candidate or his agent (whether by reason of the oflice 
held by the candidate or for any other reason), such arrange-
ments, facilities or act or thing shall not be deemed to be assist-
ance for the furtherance of the prospects of that candidate's 
election. 25 
Explanation.-In this section, the expression "agent" includes 
any person who is held to hav~ acted as an agent in connection with 
the election with the consent of the candidate.'. 
19. In section 31 of the principal Act, after clause (f), the following 
clause shall be inserted, namely:- 30 
II (ftl) the fee to be paid for admission and consideration of any 
application relating to election or election disputes;". 
20. Section· 32 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section 
(1) thereof, and-
(a) in S'Ub-section (1) as so renumbered, after the words "his 35 
own co.nduct or", the words "vote or take part in any discussion" 
shall be inserted; 
(b) after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-
section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Where any member of the Board present at the meeting 40 
of the Board or any committee of the Board believes that the 
person presiding over such meeting has pecuniary or other 
interest in any matter under ~iscussion and moves a nlotion to. 
that effect, the person so prt$iding-
(a) shall not be entitled. to vote on such motion, and 45 
(b) shall, if such motion is carried, absent himself from 
the meeting during such discussion.". 
Amend- 21. In section 33 Of the principal Act, for the words "belonging to the 
ment of Board", the words "belonging to, vested in, or entrusted to the mana,... 
section 33. ment of, the Board" ~hall be substituted. 50 

M ot 1860. 
5 
10 
12. In section 34 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2A) ,-
(a) for the words "Central Government", the words "Officer 
Commanding-in-Chief, the Command" shall be substituted; 
(b) the words "through the Off'.cer Commanding-in-Chief, the 
Command," shall be omitted. 
%3. After section 35 of the principal Act and before the heading 
"Servants", the following section shall be inserted, namely:-
'35A. Every member of the Board shall be deemed to be a public 
servant within the meaning of tpe Indian Penal Code, and in the 
definition of "legal remuneration" in section 161 of that Code, the 
word "Government'· shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed 
to include a Board.'. 
M. In section 36 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the words 
''menial servant", the words "lower grade employee" shall be subatituted. 
15 25. In section 39 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the word 
20 
"President", the words ", or in the absence of the President, the Vice-
President, or in the absence of both the President and the Vice-President, 
the Secretary" shall be inserted. 
26. In section 41 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "the President", the words 
"the person presiding over the meeting" shall be substituted; 
~5 
(b) in sub-section (2), 'for the words. "the Officer Commanding 
the District, the Officer Commanding the brigade area, the District 
Magistrate and the Military Estates Officer", the words "the Officer 
Commanding the Area, the Officer Commanding the sub-area, the 
District Magistrate and the Defence Estates Officer and in canton-
ments where Navy or Air Force stations are located, copies of the 
minutes shall be forwarded' for information to the Command Head-
quarters of the Navy or. as the case may be, the Air Force" shall 
be substituted.' 
27. In section 42 and in sub-section (2) of section 43, 'for the word 
"President", the words "person presiding over the meeting" shall be 
substituted. 
28. In section 43A of the prinCipal Act, after sub-sect.ion (2) , the 
35 following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(3) The powers, duties and functions of the Board under 
section 126,section 127, sub-section (1) of section 134, section 137, 
section 139, section 142, section 144, section 189 and section 195 shall 
be exercised or discharged in respect of a civil area by the civil area 
40 committee: 
r-'" ,-;ded that if the Health Officer dissents from any decision 
arrived at by the committee under sUb-section (1) of section 134, 
section 137, section 139, section 142, section 144: on health grounds, 
tile matter may be referred to the Board by the President for 
45 decision.". 
Amend-
ment of 
Jection34. 
1'l1sertion 
of new 
section 
35A. 
Member 
of the 
Board to 
be deem-
ed a pub-
lic ser-
vant. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 36. 
Amend-
mentot 
section 39. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 41. 
Amend-
mebt of 
sections 
42 and 43. 
Amend-
ment of 
IeCtion 
43A. 

Amend:" 
ment of 
section 44. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 45. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 46. 
• 
12 
29. In section 44 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the follow-
ing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
., (4) Every regulation made under this section shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while 
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be com- 5 
prised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessioris afoff-said. both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regula. 
tion should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect 10 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulm.ent shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
regulation.". 
30. In section 45 of the principal Act.- . 15 
(a) ill sub-section (1), in clause (b), for the words "aggregate 
area co:nprlsing the areas subject to the control of the Board and 
such othel local authority",: the words "area subject to the control 
of the Board and such other local authority (hereafter in this section 
referred to as the. aggregate area)" shall be substituted; 20 
(b) in sub-section (3) ,-
(i) for clauses (a) and (b), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(a) where the agreement relates to octroi or terminal 
tax or toll, the party to the agreement (the Board or as the 25 
case may be such other local authority) which is specified in 
this behalf' in the agreement-
(i) shall ha~e the same powers to establish octroi 
limits and octroi stations a~d places for the collection 
of octroi, terminal tax and toll within the aggregate 30 
area as it has within the area ordinarily subject to its 
control; 
(ii) shall have the same powers of collecting such 
oC'eroi, tax or toll in the aggregate area and the provisions 
of any IO!nactment in foree relating to the levy of such 35 
octroi. tax Or toll by it shall apply in the same manner as 
if the aggregate area were comprised within the area 
ordinarily subject to its control;"; 
(ii) clause (c) !=lhall be re-Iettered as clause (b) and for 
clause (b) as so re-Iettered, the following clause shall be sub- 40 
stituted, namely:-
" (b) the total of the collection of such octroi, tax or toll 
made in the aggregate area and the costs thereby incurred 
shall be divided between the cantonment fund and the fund 
subject to the control of such other local authority, in such 45 
proportion, as may have been determined by the agreement.". 
31. In section 46 of the principal Act, after the words "Central Govern-
ment". the words "or such officer or authority as may be autli0rised by 
the Central Government 1n this behalf" shall be inserted. 

5 
)0 
13 
32. In section 47 of the principal Act, after the words "Central Gov-
ernment or the Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command", the words 
"or the Director or such other officer or authority as may be authorised 
by the Central Government in this behalf" shall be inserted. 
33. In section 48 of the principal Ac( after the words "Officer Com-
manding-in-Chief, the Command", the words "or the Director" shall be 
inserted. . 
34. In section 51 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),-
(i) for the words "the health, welfare or discipline of the troops", 
the words "the health, welfare, discipline or seclK'ity of the Forces" 
shall be substit1:lted; 
(ii) for the word "District", in both the places where it occurs, 
the word "Area" shall be substituted. 
35. After section 51 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
15 ilUlerted, namely:-
20 
i of 1898. 40 
2 of ]974. 
"SIA. The Central Government may, at any time, review any 
deeision or order of the Board or the Officer Commanding-in-Chief, 
the Command, and P3SS such orders thereon as it may deem fit: 
Provided that where it is proposed to modify a decision or 
order of the Board, reasonable opportunity shall be given to the 
Board to show cause why the decision or order in question should 
not be modified.". 
36. In section 56 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words "military or air force law", in both the places 
where they occur, the words "Army, Navy or Air Force law" shall 
be substituted; 
(b) for the words "one hundred rupees", the words "five hundred 
rupees" shall be substituted. 
37. In section 57 of the principal Act,-
(a) in clause (a), for the words "military or ail' force law", 
the words "Army, Navy or Air Force law" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words "fifty rupee.>", the words "two hundred and 
fifty rupees" shall be substituted; 
(c) for the words "one hundred rupees", the words "five hund-
red rupees" shall be substituted. 
38. In section 58 of 1 he principal Act,-
(a) in SUb-sections (1) and (2), for the word "Magistrate", the 
words "JudiCial Magistrate" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (4), for the words and figures "Chapter XLIII 
of the Code of Cri:11inal Procedure, 1898", the words and figures 
"Chapter XXXIV of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973" shall be 
substituted. 
39. In section 60 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the 
words "Official Gazette", the words "or where any later date is specified 
45 in this behalf in the notification, from such later date" shall be inserted. 
(·D. In section 62 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "any objection", the words 
"such objection" shall be substituted' , 
Amend-
ment of 
sectIon 
17. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
48. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
S1. 
Insertion 
of new 
sectiO'il 
SIA. 
Power 
of ·Cen-
tral Gov-
ernment to 
review. 
Amend-
ment of 
sect: on 
56. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
57. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
58. 
Amend-
ment ot 
section 
60. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 62. 

Insertion 
of new 
eection 
63A. 
Power of 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
issue 
directiona 
to the 
Board. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
65. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 66. 
14 
(b) ":01" sub-section (2) and (3), the following sUb-section shall 
be substituted, namely:-
.. (2) Unless the Board decides to abandon its proposals 
contained in the notioe published under section 61, it shall sub-
mit to the Central Gilvemment through th,e Officer Commanding- 5 
in-Chief, the Command, all such proposals along with the objec-
tions, if any, received i'n connection therewith together with its 
opinion thereon and any modifications proposed in accordance 
with such opinfon and the notice published under the said 
section.". , 
41. After section 63 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"63A. (1) Where the Central Government is of opmlon that 
for securing adequate financial provision for the efficient discharge 
10 
of the duties and functions of a Board it is necessary so to do, it may 15 
issue directions to the Board requiring it to impose within the can-
tonment area any tax specified in the direction which it is empowered 
under this Act to impose and whicp. is not already imposed within 
the said area or to enhance any existing tax in such manner or to 
such extent as the Central Government considers fit and the Board 20 
shall, in accordance with the direction, forthwith impose or enhance 
such tax in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter: 
Provided that-
(a) no such directions shall be issued without giving the 
Board and the inhabitants of the· cantonment area, an opportu- 25 
nity of showing cause why such dire~tions should not be issued; 
(b) the· Central Gilvernment shall take into consideration 
any objection which the Board or any inhabitant of the canton-
me'llt area may make against the imposition or enhancement of 
such tax; 30 
(c) it shall not be lawful for the Board to modify or 
abolish such tax when imposed or enhanced without the sanc-
tion of the Central Government. 
(2) The Central Gilvernment may, at any time, cancel or modify 
any direction issued by it under sub-section (1) with effect from 35 
such date as may be specified in the direction and on and from the 
date so specified the imposition or enhancement of such tax, shall 
cease or be modified accordingly.". 
42. In section 65 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the follow-
ing sub-section sball be inserted, namely: - 40 
"(2A) The liability of the several owners of any building which 
is, or purports to be, severally owned in parts or flats or ro?ms or 
separate tenements for the payment of such tax or any instal-
me'llt thereof payable during t~ period of such ownership shall be 
joint and several.". 45 
a. In section 66 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the word "Board", the words "Executive Officer" shall 
be substituted; 

5 
(b) for the words "in such form", the words "in such form and 
in such manner" shall be substituted. 
44. In section 67 of the principal Act, for the word "Board", the words 
"Executive Officer" shall be substituted. 
45. In ·section 68 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-secti'on (1) ,-
(i) for the word "Board", the words "Executive Officer" 
shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "when it will proceed", the words "when 
IO the Board will proceed" shall be S'Ubstituted; 
(iii) for the words "it shall also give", the words "the Exe.-
cutive Officer shall also give" shall 'be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the word "Board", in both' the places 
where it occurs, the words "Executive Officer" shall be sUbstitued. 
15 46. In section 72 of the principal Act, for the word "Board", the words 
"Executive Officer" shall be substituted. 
''7. In section 74 of the principal Act. in sub-section (2), for the words 
"fifty rupees", the words "two hundred and fifty rupees" shall be subs-
tituted. 
20 ft. In section 75 of the principal Act, after the words "as it thinks 
fit'" the follo,,:ing ~rds shall be inserted, namely:-
"but no remission or refund shall take effect in respect of any 
period commencing more than two months before the delivery of such 
'application" . 
25 49. In sections 76 and 77 of the principal Act, for the words "such 
portion of any tax", wherever they occur, the words "one-half of sueR 
portion of any tax" shall be substituted. 
50. In section 77A of the principal Act, for the word "Board", the 
words "Executive Officer" shall be substituted. 
30 51. In section 79 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2). for the words 
35 
"fifty rupees", the words "two hundred and fi'fty rupees" shall be substi-
tuted. 
52. In section 82 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "fifty rupees", the words 
"two hundred and fifty rupees" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (3), for the word ''Board'', the words "Execu-
tive Officer" shall be substituted; 
(e) in SUb-section (5), for the words ''to the Board", the words 
"to the Executive Officer" shall be substituted. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
67. 
Amend-
ment of 
sectioa 
68. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
72. 
Ame'nd-
ment of 
section 
74. 
Amend-
ment of 
eectian -75. 
Amend-
ment of 
sections 
76 and 77. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
77A. 
A.mend-
ment of 
sectioD 
79. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
82. 

Amend-
ment of 
section • 
83. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
84. 
Amend-
rnent of 
section 
85 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
86. 
Amend· 
ment of 
sectiotl 
87. 
53. In section 83 of the principal Act, in the proviso, for the word 
"Board", the words "Executive Officer" shall be substituted. 
501. In section 84 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-sections (1) and (2), the following sub-sections shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"(1) An appeal against the assessment or levy of, or 
against the refusal to refund, any tax under this Act shall lie 
to the District Court. 
5 
(2) If the District Court, on the hearing of an appeal under 
this se::-tion, el).tertains reasonable doubt on any question as to 10 
the liability to, or the,principal of assessment of, a tax, the Court 
may, either on its own motion or on the application of the appel-
lant, draw up a statement of the facts of the case and the point 
on which doubt is entertained, and refer the statement with its 
opinion on the point for the decision of the High Court."; 15 
(b) after sub-section (3), the fonowing Explanation shall be 
inserted, namely:-
'Explanation.-I"or the purposes of this section and <;ection 
85, section 86, section 87, section 88 and section 92A, "District 
Court", in relation to a cantonment, means the principal Civil 20 
Court of original jurisdiction having jurisdiction over the area 
in which that cantonment is situated, and includes such other 
Civil Court having jurisdiction over that area, as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the OfB.cial Gazette, specify 
in this behalf, in consultation with the High Court having juris- 25 
diction over that area.'. 
55. In section 85 of the principal Act, for the words '''discretion of the 
C1fficer", the words "discretion of the District Court" shall be substituted. 
56. Section 86 of the principal Act. shall be renumbered as sub-sf;'ction 
(1) thereof and- 30 
(i) in sub-se~tion (1) <:s so renumbered, for the words lithe 
officer", the words "the District Court" shall be substituted: 
(ii) after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-
section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Where the appellant fails to pay, any costs awarded to 35 
the BOard 'within ten days after the date of the order for payment 
thereof, the same shall be recoverable by the Board in the same 
manner as moneys recoverable by the Board under section 259.". 
51. In section 87 of the principal Act, in the proviso to clause (a), for 
the word "court", the words "District Court" shall be subEtituted. 

"7' 
,;. ~8. In section 88 of the principal Act, for the words "appellate autho-
rity", wherever they occur, the words "District Court" shall be substi-
tuted. . I 
59. In section 91 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the wnrds 
5 "one rupee", the words "two l"Upees" shall be substituted. 
10 
. 
60. In section 92 of the principal Act, in sub~ection (1) ,-
(a) after the words "by distress and sale of the movable pro-
,perly", th:e words co. or attachment and sale of the immovable 
property" shall be inserted;. 
(b) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted. 
namely:-
"Provided further that the sale of any immovable property 
attached under this SUb-section shall not be made, save under 
the orders of the Board." . 
Amend-
mel1t 01 
seetlon 
88. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
91. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
92. 
. 15 61. After section 92 of the principal Act, the following section shall be . Insertion 
tnserted, namely:- of new 
20 
35 
"92A. (1) If a person on whom a notice of demand has been 
served under section 91, does not, within thirty days from the service 
of. such notice, pay the sum demanded in the notice, he shall be 
liable to pay by way of interest, in addition to the sum and other 
charges due,- . 
(a) one-half. per cent. of the sum due for each complete 
month for tqc;! ,first six months, from the date of the expiry of 
the period ot thirty days aforesaid; and 
(b) one per cent. of the sum due for each complete. month 
thereafter, during the time he continues to make default in the 
payment of the sum due: 
(2) The amount of interest shall be recoverable in the same 
manner 8S moneys recoverable by the Board under section 259: 
Provided that-
(a) where no appeal has been prefelTed, the Executive om· 
cer with the previous sanction of the Board, and 
(b) in any other case, the Dfatrict Court hearing the appeal 
under section 84, . 
may remit ,the whole or any part of the interest payable in respect 
of any period.... . [ .. ' J.. i 
'.: fiZ. lp section 94 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (3) ,-
(i) for the words "from whose possession the property was 
40 taken", the words "whose property has been sold or his legal 
representative" shall be ,substituted; 
45 
(ii) after the words "such person", the words "or represen-
tative" shall be inserted; 
(~) .in .sub-section (4), ,f9r the words "one . rupee", the words 
"two r,q,pees',' $hall be slJ.pstituted. . 
I section 
inA. 
Interest 
payable 
on taxes 
.Aue. 
Amend· 
ment 01 
section 
94. 

18 
Insertion 
dtnew 
section 
MA. 
b.1. lUter section 94 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
Attach-
ment and 
88le of 
immovable ' 
propen,. 
Amend-
mentof 
.eetion 
95, 
"94A. (1) When a warrant is issued for the attachment and sal. 
o'f immovable property, the attachment shall be made by an order 
prohibiting the defaulter from transferring or charging the property 5 
in any way, and all persons from taking any benefit from such transfer 
or charge, and declaring that such property would be sold unless the 
amount of tax due with all costs of recovery is paid in the office of 
the Board within fifteen days from the date of attachment. 
(2) An order under S'Ub-section (1) shall be proclaimed at some 10 
place on or adjacent to such property by beat of drum or other cus-
tomary mode and a copy of the order shall be fixed on a conspicuous 
part of the property and upon a conspicuous part of the office of the 
Board and also, when the property is land paying revenue to the 
Government, in the office of the Collector. . 15 
(3) Any transfer of or charge on the property attached. or any 
interest thereon made without the written permission of the Execu-
tive Officer shall be void as against all claims of the Board enforce-
able under the attachment. 
(4) Where the sum due to the Board together with the cost in- RO 
curred by the Board in the sale of the property, and R sum equal to 
five per cent. of the purchase money for payment to the purchaser 
is paid by the defaulter, before the confirmation of the sale under 
sub-section (5), the attachment, if any, of "the immovable property 
shall be deemed to have been removed. R5 
(5) After the sale of the property by auction as aforesaid, it 
shall be confirmed in writing by the Executive Officer who shall 
put the person declared to be the purchaser in possession of the 
same and shall grant him a certificate to the eff.ect that he has pur-
chased the property to which the certificate refers. 30 
(6) The Central Government may make rules for-
(a) regulating the manner of execution of warrants for the 
attachment and sale of immovable property; 
(b) charging of fees. for the attachment and sale of im-
movable property, to be included in the cost of recovery of the 35 
tax due; I 
(c) summary determination of any claim made by any per-
son other than the person liable 'for the payment of any tax, in 
respect of any property attached in execution of warrant under 
this section.". ' 40 
64. In section 95 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) for the words "remove from the cantonment", the words 
"move from the cantonment" shall be substituted; 

•• fl ..... 
40 of IDBO. 
5 
10 
19 
(ii) for the words "a bi11~', the words "a notice of demand" 
.hall .be substituted; 
(b) for sub-section (2), tt- following sub-section shall be sl1b~­
tituted, namely:-
"(2) If, on the service of such notice, such person does not 
forthwith pay Rle sum so due or about to be<:ome due, the amount 
shall bG leviable by distress and sale of movable property· or 
attachment and sale of immovable property in the manner here-
inbefore provided in this Chapter, and the warrant of such dis-
tress and sale or attachment and sale may be issued and executed 
without any delay.". 
85. In section ~6 of the I?rincipal Act, fOr the words "distress and sale", 
the words "distress and sale of movable property or attachment and sale 
of immovable property" shall be S'Ubstituted. ' 
15 86. In section 99 of the prin('ipal Act, in sub-section (2), for cJause 
(I>, the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
-n (f) any buildings or lar.ds, or portion of such burdings or lands 
which are the property of the Government.". 
67. In section 102 of the principal Act, in the proviso, for the words 
~o "fifty rupees", the words "two hundred and fifty rupees" shall .be sul-s-
go 
. 35 
tituted. ~ 
68. In section 103 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), in clause (a), for the words "to pay any 
tax", the words "to pay, or has correctly r.:>ain., any tax" shall be suhs-
~~; , 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "one hundred rupees", the 
words "five hundred rupees" 'shall be substituted. 
69. In section 105 of the pri.ncipal Act,-
(a) for the words "distress levied", the words "distress levied 
or attachment made" shall be substituted; 
. (b) for the words "warrant of distress", the words "warrant of 
distress or attachment and sale" shall be substituted. 
70. In section 107 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-sections (1) and (2), the fol1owiRg sub-section shall 
be mbstitll~ed, namely:-
• (1) Where !n or near a cantonment there is a Government 
treasury or sub-treasury or a branch of the State' Bank of India 
or a subsidiary bank or a nationalised bank, the cantonment fund 
shall De kept in such treasury, sub-treasury or bank as the Board 
may deem fit. 
Explanation.-In this section-, 
(i) "nationalised bank" means a corresponding new bank 
specified in the First Schedule to the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 or the . 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertak· 
lngs) Act, 1960; -
Amend· 
ment of 
lIection 
96. 
Amend-
ment of 
leCtion 
99. 
Amend.-
ment of 
section 
102. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
1"03. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
105. 
Amend-
ment of 
HCtioA 
10'1 • 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
109. 
Amend-
ment of. 
section 
113. 
Amend-
ment of 
secticm 
114. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
116. 
Amend-
ment 01 
lection 
117. 
20 
(ii) 'State Bank .of India" me8.Ili the State Bank of 
India constituted under the State Bank of India Act, 1955; 23 of 1155. 
(iii) "subsidiary bank" means a subsidiary bank as de-
fined in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 
1959.'; 5 38 at 1959. 
(b) sub-.Sections (3) and (4) shall be renumbered respectively 
as sub-sections. (2) and (3), and in sub-section (3) as so renUmber-
ed, for the word, brackets and figure "sub-section (3) It, the word, 
brackets and figure "sub-section (2) II shall be substituted. 
71. In sestion 109 of the principal Act, in the second proviso, clause 10 
(d) shall be omitted. 
72. In section 113 of the prindpal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause 
(b), for the words "two hundred rupees", the words "one thousand 
rupees" shall be substituted. 
73. In section 114 of the principal Act, in.sub-section (1),- 15 
(a) for the words "one hundred I'\ipees", the words "five hundred' . 
rupees;' shall be substituted;· 
(b) in the proviso, for the words "five hundred rupees", the 
words "two thousand and five hundred rupees" shall besub.tituted;· 
'74. In section 116 of the principal Act,-
(a) in clause (h), after the words "sewerage works", the worda 
"and regulating their use" shall be inseTted' . . ' 
(b) in clause (1), for the word "vaccination", the words "vacci-
nation and inoculation" shall be substituted' . , 
(e) clauses (m) and (n) shall be omitted; 25 
. . (d) in clause (p), the word "and" occurring at the end shall be 
omitted; . i 
(e) after clause (p), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(pa) establi~hing and maintaining civil defence services; 
"(pa) establishing and maintaining civil· defence 'Services; 
75. In section 117 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),-
(a) !1r clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
,. (d) furthering educational objects;"; 3S 
(b) in clause (g), for the words "local epidemics" the words 
"local epidemics, floods, famines or other natural calamities" shall be 
substituted; 
(c) in clause (j), the word "or" occul'l'il'lg· at the end.:1hall be 
omitted; . 
.L...''>.' -' . --__ .• 40 

~ . 
~ \ \J , 
(d) clause (k) shall be rclettereq. as clause (t) and before clause 
(t) as so relettered the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:-
"(k) establishing and maintaining cattle poJUlds; . 
(l) arrangiJ)g lor civic recepti"n with ~rior approval of the 
5 Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the CommaDd; 
10 
(m) providing housing accommodation for any class of 
inhabitants; 
(n) establishing and maintaining or supporting pl\blic hospi-
tals and dispensaries, and providing pUblic mediE.al relief; 
(0) celebrationg IndependencePay~nd Republic Day and 
incurring expenditure thereon; 
(p) developing land resources under the ~~gement of the 
BOard; 
(q) preparing and implementing group housing $cheme; 
(r) establishing remunerative projects; 
(8) developing small-scale and cottage industries;" 
76 [n section 118 of the principal Act,-
• 
(a) in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) in clause (a) ,-
(a.) in sub-clause (vU.i.), for the word "cam", the. word\ 
"vehicles." shall be subStitllted; 
(b) insub-clause(xv) ,-
(1) for .the word "Board", in both the places where it 
occurs, the words "Executive Officer" shall be substituted; 
(2) for the word "cart", in both the places where it 
occurs, the word "vehicle" shall be substituted; • 
(iO in clauses (b) and (g), for the word "Board", the WGdI 
·Executive Officer" shlUl be subs.tituted; 
(iii) in clause (h), after the word "shouting", the words "or' 
30 by using ~egaphone or .loud-speaker" shaD be inserted~ 
(iv) in clause (k), for the words "Board and in such manner 
as it may authorise", the words. "Executive Officer and in suck 
manner as he may authorise" shall be substituted; 
(v) in clause (l), the word "or" shall be inserted at the .end; 
35 (vi) after clause (l), the following clause shall be inserted. 
namely:-
.. (m) uses or permits to be used without previous pertnis-
sion of the Executive Oftl.Cer·.a.ny premises for any trade in-
volving offensive smell or smoke· .. · , . 
40 (v.ii) for the words "fifty rupees" occurring at the end, the 
words "tWO· hundred and fifty rupees" shall· be . ~ubttitatad; 
Amend 
ment of 
~ 
118. 

~enJ.­
ment of 
.action 
119. 
Amend-
ment til 
~ 
12L 
Amend-
ment. of 
section 
123. 
Amend-
ment. of 
lection 
124. 
Amend-
ment. of 
section 
125, 
22 
(0) in S'Ub-section (3), fOT the words "twenty rupees", the 
words "one hundred r'lpees" la11 be substituted. 
·77. In section 119. of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (2), in clause (a), for the word "unit", at both 
the places where it occurs, the words "unit or establishment or 5 
detarhment" shall be substituted; ... 
(b) in sub-section (3) ,-
(i) in the opening portion, for the words "A Board", the 
words '''The Executive Officer" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in olause (a.), for the word "it", 'the word "he" shall 10 
be substituted. 
78. In section 121 of the principal Act, i.n sub-section· (2), in the pro-
vfso, for the words "that Authority"; the word "it" shall be substituted. 
79. In section 123 of the principal Act, in the proviso, the words 
" subject to the permission in writing of the Board," shall be omitted. 15 
• 80. In section 124 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1),-
• 
(i) for the words and figures ", the Cinematograp!1 Act, J916", 
the words "any other law relating to sanctioning of cinemato-
gr~ph films for exhibition" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "or pantomime,", the words", panto-
mime, circus, carnival, exhibition, dance or other '3imiJal' show {or 
public recreation or amusement," shall be substituterl,' 
(b) in sub-section (2),-
2() 
(i) for the words "or pantomime,", the words ", pan to- 25 
mime, circus, carnival, exhibition, dance or other similar show 
for public recreation or amUt!lement," shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "two hundred rupees", the words "five 
hundred rupees" shall be substituted; 
(iii) for the words "fifty rupees", the words "two hundred 30 
rupees" shall be substituted; 
(c) in sub-section (3), for the words "or pantomime", in both 
the places where they occur, tlie words ", pantomime, circus, carni-
val, exhibition, dance or other similar show for public recreation or 
amusement," shall be substituted, 35 
81. In section 125 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words "or engages In any game in such manner as 
to cause", the words "or detonates or engages in any game or carries 
on works such as quarries, blasts, timber eutting or Duilding opera-
tion in such mann~.r {lS ~o caus~" sllall ~ ~Hbtttituted; 40 
2 of 1918. 

5 
10 
25 
t,' 
(b) for the words "fifty rupees", the Nords "two hundred and 
fifty rupees" shall be substituted. 
8%. In section 128 of the principal Act, for clauses (a), (b) and (c), the 
following cla'Uses shall be substituted, namely:-
"(a) the Officer Commanding the army in the cantorunent-all 
buildings and lands which are occupied or used for army purposes; 
(b) the Officer Commanding the navy in the cantonment-all 
buildings and lands which are occupied or used for naval purposes; 
(c) the Officer Commanding the air force in the cantonment-all 
buildings and lands which are occupied or used for air-force pur-
poses; 
(d) the Officer Commanding the station in the Command-all 
buildings and lands occupied or used for any defence purpose, other 
than those referred to in clauses (a), (b) and (c); 
(e) the head of any civil department or railway administration 
occupying as such any part of the cantonment-all buildings and 
lands in his charge as head of that Department or adlTllnistration.". 
83. After section 130 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:- . 
'130A. (1) It shall be the duty of an occupier of a buildi,ng or 
land- I. 
(a) to make adequate arrangements for the house scaveng-
ing of the building or land; 
(b) to provide receptacles df the type and in the manner 
preseribed by the Executive Officer for the collection therein 
of all filth, rubbish and other offensive matter from such 
building or land and to keep such receptacle in good conditio~ 
and repair; 
(c) to cause all filth, rubbish and other offensive matter 
collected in receptacles and to be removed and deposited in the 
public receptacles, depots or places provided or "appointed under 
sub-section (1) of section 132. 
(2) For the purposes of this section and section 131, "hoUie 
Icavenging" means the removal of filth, rubbish or other offensive 
matter from a privy, latrine, urinal, drain, cesspool or other 
35 common receptacle for such matter.'. 
45 
84. In section 131 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) for the words "the Board", the words "the Executive 
Oftlcer" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "a Board", the words "the Executive 
Oftlcer" shall be substituted; 
(iii) for the words "for such period as it thinks fit on S'Ileh 
terms as it may prescribe", the words "for such period as he 
thinks fit on such terms as "he may specify" shall be 
lubstituted; 
Amend-
ment 
of sec-
tion 128. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
130A. 
Duty of 
occupier 
to colled 
and 
deposit 
Tubbish, 
etc. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
131. 

AmeDd-
ment of 
aection 
132. 
Amend-
ment of 
aection 
133. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
134. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
135. 
Amend-
merit of 
~tion 
111. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
139. 
Substitu-
tion ot 
new 
section 
for sec-
tion 141. 
Power 
to re-
quite 
land or 
bu11diDI 
te be 
cleMlSed. 
.<. '~. 
(b) in 8ub.sectiOlt (2) ,-
(i) for the words "the Board", :1he words "the Executive 
Officer" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "that Board", the words "the Board" 
shall be substituted; 5 
(c) sub-section: (3) shall be omitted. 
85. In section 132 of the I;.lrincipal Act, in sub-section (2), for the 
'word "Board", the words "Executive Oftlcer" shall be' substituted. 
. 86. In section 133 of the principal Act, in clause (4) I in suh-clause 
(iv) , the words "situate at not more than one hundred. feet from the 10 
'nearest boundary of the premises," shall be omitted. 
87. In section 134 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the 
wilrds "the Command" I the words "or the DiHctor '.'! shall Be inserted. 
88. In section 135 of the principal Act,-
(4) for the words "A Board", the wards .!1TM :lDaecYtive 15 
Officer" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the worda '~in its opinion" I the words "in his opinion" 
shall be substituted. 
89. In section 136 of the principal Act,-
(4) for the word "Board", -in .both theplacelwhere it occurs, !20 
the words "Executive Officel''' shan be .ubstttv.ted; 
(b) tn the proviso, for the words and figures "Indian Factories 
Act, 1911'-, ,the' words. and figures "Factories Act, l948" shall be 12 of 1911. 
substituted. 8S of 1948. 
It. In aection 139 of the principal Aet, in sub-section (2) ,- !25 
«(11) for the W9rds "fifty rupees", the words "two hundred and 
fifty rupees" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words ·'five rupees", tbe·w.orWi "tw,eA~y-tWe.;:I'Upees'" 
shall be substituted. 
91. For section 141 of the principal Act, the following secticm.shall ~,e 30 
Bubstituted, namely: - I 
"141. (1) If any building or· Janci, whether .tenantable or other-
wise, is- I 
(i) in an insanitary, filthy or unwholesome""tafle; or 
(ii) il'l the Gpinkm Of the ExecutiYe Oftlcer,' t nuisance Jo .85 
persons residing in the neighbourhood; or 

25 
(iii) overgrown with prickly-pear or rank and noisome 
vegetation, 
the Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner, 
lessee or occupier of such building or land to clean, lime-wash 
5 internally or externally, clear, or otherwise put such building or 
land in a proper state within such period as may be specified in the 
notice. 
(2) Any person who fails to comply with the notice issued 
under sub-section (1) shall be punishable with fine which may 
10 extend to five hundred rupees, and, in the case of a continuing 
offence, with an additional fine which may extend to twenty-five 
rupees for each day after the first during which the offence conti-
nues.". 
15 
9Z. In section 143 of the principal Act,-
(4) (or the words IIA Board", the words "The Executive Officer" 
shall b. substituted; 
(b) for the words "to it", the words "to him" shall be substi-
tuted. 
93. In section 145 of the principal Act, for the words "A Board", the 
20 words "The Ji:xecutive Officer" shall be substituted. 
35 
. , 
M. For section 150 of the principal Act. the following section ::;ha11 be 
substituted, namely:-
,. 
"150. (1) Any pel'.mn being in charge of, or in attendance, 
whether as a medical practitioner or otherwise,. upon any person in 
a cantonment whom he knows or has reason to believe to be suffering 
from a contagious or in'fe':'tious disease, or being the owner, lessee 
or occupier of any building in a cantonment in which he knows that 
any person is so suffering, shall, forthwith give information to the 
Board respecting the existence of such disease. 
(2) No person shall-
(a) knowing that he is suffering from a contagious or an 
infectious disease, expose other persons to the risk of infection 
by his presence or conduct in any public street or public place; 
(b) having the care of a person whom he knows to be 
suffering from a contagious or an infectious disease cause or 
permit that person to expose other persons to the risk of infection 
by his presence or conduct in any such street or place as afore-
said; 
(c) place or cause to be placed in a dustbin or other receptacle 
for the deposit ~f rubbish any matter which he knows or has 
reason to believe to have been exposed to infection from a 
contagious or an infectiO'Us disease and which has nOt been dis-
infected properly; 
Amend-
ment ef 
section 
143. 
Amend-
ment ot 
section 
145. 
Substitu-
tion of 
new 
section 
for 
section 
1'50. 
Obligation 
concern-
ing infec-
tious or 
contagioUs 
diseueL 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
159. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
164. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
167. 
Amend-
ment 01 
section 
173. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
178. 
Substitu-
tion of 
new sec-
tion for 
section 
178A. 
Sanction 
for build-
ing. 
26 
(d) throw or cause to be thrown into any latrine or urinal 
any matter which he knows or has reason to believe to have 
been exposed to infection from a contagious or an infectious 
disease and which has not been disinfected properly. 
(3) Nothing cG::ltaincd in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall 5 
apply in the case of venereal disease where the person suffering 
therefrom is under specific and adequate medical treatment and is 
by reason of his habits and conditions of life and residence unlikely 
to spread the disease. 
(4) Whoever-
(a) fails to give information or gives false information to 
the Board respecting the existence of such disease as is referred 
to in sub-section (1), or 
(b) contravenes the provisions of sub-section (2), 
IO 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred 15 
rupees: 
Provided that no person shall be punishable for faihtre to give 
information if he had reasonable cause to believe that the information 
had aiready been duly given.". 
95. In section 159 of the principal Act, for the words "one hundred,20 
rupees", the words "five hundred rupees" shall be substituted. 
96. In section 164 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1). for the 
word "Board", the words "Executive Officer" shall be SUbstituted. 
97. In section 167 of the principal Act, for the words "one hundred 
rupees", the words "five hundred rupees" shall be substituted. 25 
98. In section 173 of the principal Act, the proviso shall be omitted. 
99. In section 178 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the word "sweeper", the word 
"safaiwala" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words "'sweeper" includes any 30 
menial servant', the words • "safaiwala" includes any.lower grade 
employee' shall be substituted. 
100. For section 178A of, the principal Act, the following section shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"178A. No person shall erect or re-erect a building on any land 35 
in a cantonment-
(a) in an area, other than th~ civil area, except with the 
previous sanction of the Board; 

5 
10 
15 
(b) in a civil area, except with the previous sanction of 
the Exe<:utive Officer, 
nor otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this Chap-
ter and of the rules and bye-laws made under this Act relating to 
the ·erection andre-erection of buildings.". 
101. In section 179 of the principal Act,-
(a) 'for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
" (1) Whoever intends to erect or re-ere<:t any building in 
a cantonment shall apply for sanction by giving notice in writ-
ing of his intention,-
(a) where such erection or re-erection is in an area, 
other than the civil area, to the Board; 
(b) where such erection or re-erection is in a civil area, 
to the Executive Officer."; 
(b) in sub-section (2), after clause (e), the following clause shall 
be inserted, namely:-
• "(ee) converts into a dispensary, stall, shop, warehouse, 
godown, factery or garage any building originally constructed 
20 for human habitation, or" . 
. 1 OZ. In section 180 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the 
wor.d '~Board", the words "Boar.d or the Executive Officer, as the case 
may be," shall be substituted. 
103. After section 180 of the principal Act, the follOwing section 
25 shall be inserted, namely:-
"l80A. The powers, duties and functions of the Board under 
section 181, stib~ion (1) of section 182, section 183, section 183A 
and section 185 [excluding the provisos to sub-section (1) and 
.the prO-viso to sub-section (2) of the said section 185] shall be 
,-exercised or discharged in a civil area by the Executive Officer.". 
104. In section 181 of the principal Act,-
(a.) for sub-section (2), the following SUb-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(2) The Board may refuse to sanction the erection or 
35 re-erection of any building on any grounds sufficient in the 
opinion of tb.e Board affecting the particular building: 
Provided that the Board shall refuse to accord sanction the 
erection or re-erection of any building if such erection or re-
erection is not in conformity with any general scheme sanction-
40 ed under section 181A."; 
(b) in su&section (3), for the words "Military Estates Officer", 
wherever they occur, the words "Defence Estates Officer" shall be 
substituted; 
Amend-
ment 'Of 
section 
179. 
Amend-
ment o'f 
section 
180. 
Inserti@ 
of new 
aectian 
18M. 
Powers 
DfBoard 
under 
certain 
sections 
·exercis-
able by 
Execu- . 
tive 
Officer. 
Amend-
ment 01 
aection 
181. 

Insertion 
otnew 
section 
181A. 
Power to 
sanction 
genera} 
scheme 
for pre-
vention 
of O\"er_ 
crowdini, 
etc:. 
In section 
Of new 
Section 
l83D. 
Comp1e. 
tlonnotice 
Amend-
ment ot 
IleCtion 
184. 
Amend-
mental 
leCtion 
186. 
28 
(c;) in ,sub-section (4), after clause (a), the folIo-wing clause 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"(aa) when the land on which it is proposed to erect or re-
erect the l1uilding is entrusted to the management of the Board 
by the Government if the erection or re-erectian constitutes a 5 
breach of the terms of the entrustment of management or 
contravenes any of the instructions issued by the Government 
regarding the management of the land by the Board, or". 
les. After section ]81 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely: - 10 
"18lA. The Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command may 
sanction a general scheme of erection or re-,erection of buildings 
witliin such limits as may be specified in the sanction for the pre-
vention of oV,er-crowding or for purpose of sanitation, or in the 
interest of persons residing within those limits or for any other 15 
purpose, and may, in pursuance of such scheme, impose restrictions on 
the erection or reo erection of buildings within those limits: 
Provided that no such scheme shall be sanctioned by the Officer 
Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, unless an opportunity' has been 
given by a public notice to be published locally by the Executive 20 
Officer requiring persons affected or likely to be affected by the pro-
posed scheme, to file their objections or suggestions in the manner 
specified in the notice, Within a period of fifteen days of the publi-
cation of such notice, and after considering such obj,ections and sug-
gestions, if any, received by the Executive Officer within the said 25 
period.". 
106. After section H.:~A of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"l83B. Every person to whom sanction for the erection or re-
erection of any building in any area in a cantonment has been given 30 
or deemed to have been given under section 181 by the Board or the 
Executive Officer, as the case may be, shall, within thirty days after 
completion of the erection or re-erection of the building give a notice 
of completion in writing to the Board or the Executive Oftleer, as 
the ca- -..sy be, and the Board or the Executive Officer shall on 35 
recei~ of such notice cause the building to be inspected in order to 
ensure that the building has been completed in accordanc,e with the 
sanction given by the Board or the Executive Officer, as the case may 
.~.". 
107. In section 184 of the prinCipal Act, for the words "five hundred 40 
rupees", the words "five thousand rupees" shall be substituted. 
108. In section 186 of the principal Act,-
(a) in clause (a), for the word "Board", the words "Board .. 
the Executive Officer, as the case may be," shall be substituted; 

5 
IO 
15 
r 
(b) after clause (a). as so amended, the 'following clause shaD 
be inserted, namely:-· 
"(aa) the manner in which and the form in whtch a notice 
of completion of erection or re~rection of any building in the 
cantonment shall be given to the Board or the Executive Officer, 
as the case may be, and the information and plans to be 
furnished with the notice;"; 
(c) in clause (1),-
(i) in sub-clause (iv), for the word "fire-places", the words 
"stair-cases, fire-places" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-clause (vi), for the words "and the stability of 
the structure", the words ", the sta.bility of the structure and the 
protection of l1uilding from dampness arising from sub-soil" 
shall be substituted; 
(iii) in sub-clause (x), for the words "fifty maunds", the 
words "eighteen quintals" shall be substituted. 
109. In section 190 of the principal Act, for the words "A Board", the 
words "The Executive Officer" shall be substituted. 
110. Section 191 of the principal Act, shall be renumbered as sub-
20 section (1) thereof, and-
!Z5 
35 
45 
(a) in sub-section (1), as so renumbered,-
(i) for the words "A Board", the words "The Executive 
Officer" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "as it may prescribe", the words "as the 
Board may prescribe" shall be substituted; 
(b) a'fter sub-section (1), as so renumbered, the following 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Where any article or thing is placed on any street or 
land under the management of the Board or the Defence Estates 
Officer so as to form an obstruction thereto or any encroach-
ment thereon, the Executive Officer or, as the case may be, the 
Defence Estates Officer, may cause such article or thing to be 
removed and recover from the person who placed such article 
or thing the expenses incurred in that behalf in the same 
manner as moneys recoverable by the Board under se~tion 259 
and may also, if such person fails to offer satisfactory explana-
tion, order the confiscation of such article or thing.". 
111. In section 192 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-sectiol1 (1), after the words "Officer Commanding-in-
Chief, the Command", the words "or the Director" shall be inserted; 
(0) in S'Llb-section (2), for the words "A Board", the words "The 
Executive Officer" shall be substituted. 
112. In section 193 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be sub-
stituted, namely:-
"(1) A Board may determine the name or number by which 
any area, street or public place in the cantonment ahall be 
Amend-
ment 0'1. 
section 
190. 
Amend-
ment 0'1. 
section 
191. 
Amend-
ment 0'1 
section 
192. 
Amend,.. 
ment dI. 
sectiOn 
193. 

Aaend-
ment of 
section 
1M. 
Amend-
ment of 
aect.i.on 
196. 
Amend-
ment of 
aect.ion 
200. 
30 
known, may cause such name or number to be affixed on any 
building in the cantonment in such place as it thinks fit and 
may also cause a number to be ·affixed to any such building."; 
,(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "twenty rupees", the 
words "one hundred rupees" shall be substituted; 5 
(c) in sub-section (3) ,-
(i) for the word "number" at both the places where it 
occurs, the ,words "name or number"shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the word "Board", the words "Executive Officer" 
6h~1l be substituted. 
W. In 'section 194 of the principaJ Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the word "Board", the words "~ecu. 
tive ·OlIicet" shall -be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2) ,-
10 
(i) in the opening portion, for the words CIA Board", the 15 
words "The Executive Officer" shall be substit'llted; 
(ii) in the proviso, for the words "orders of the Board", the 
words "orders of the Executive Officer" shall be substituted; 
(c) in sub-eection (3), for the word. 
'~E1Cecuij.ve Officer" shall be substituted. 
"Board", the words 
11'- ,In section 196 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words "twenty rupees",the words "two hundred and 
·fifty .rupees" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words "five 1'1lPees", the words "flftyrupees" shall 
_ substhuted. 
lB. In 'Section 200 of the prinCipal .Act,-
\(a) ill the prov.iso, after the words "General OflicerCommand-
iug.-Ohief of .the ·Command", ·the words "or the Director" shall be 
iMerWd; 
.(b,) after the proviso, as so amended, the 
provisoBhall be inserted, namely:-
following further 
"Provided further ,that the ·enjoyment of any ,such afore-
.. NO 1'ight ,}aT 'any person for -any length of time shall never be 
deemed ,to CN8te or-confer any tenancy right in such .stall, shop, 
standing, shed, pan, .public market or public slaughter-house.". 
116. In section 202 of tht' principal Act,-
'(u) in s\lb-saetion .(~), ·in clause (b), the 'Words ", 'when such 
animals are slaughtered for consumption by :the otroopB 'or ifor the 
purpose of the.sale of the 1Iesh thereof to the tr.oops" shall be 
~mIbId; . ___ _ 
20 
30 
35 
4 

5 
(b) insub·section (3) ,-
(i) for the words "fifty rupees ll, the words "two hundred 
and fifty rupees" shall be substituted; 
, (ii) , foI' the words "ten rupees", the words "fifty rupees" 
shall be- substituted. 
117. In section ::!04 of the principal Act, in sub·section (1),-
(a) for the words "fifty rupees", the words "two hundred and 
fifty, rupees" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words "five rupees", the words "twenty-ft\le rupees" 
Amend-
ment of" 
section 
204. 
10 . shall, be substituted. 
20 
30 
35 
118. In section 205 (If the principal Act,-
(a) for the words "fifty rupees", the words "twO' Jnibdred and 
fifty rupees" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words "five rupees", the woriis "twenty-five rupees" 
IShall be substituted. 
Amend-
mmtot. 
section. 
205. 
119. In section 207 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the' Amend-
words "the President of the Board.", the words "the President of the ment ot 
Board or the ExeC'Utive Officer" shall be substituted. section, 
128. In section, 208 of the principal Act,-
(a) in clause (f), the word "and" occurring at the end, shall 
be omitted; 
(b) after clause (g), the fonowing clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(h) any other matter with respect to the regulation of 
such markets and slaughter-houses.". 
121; In section 209 'of the principal Act, in sub-section (3) for the 
words "twenty rupees", the wo.;ds "one hundred rupees" shall be, 
substituted. 
122. In section 210 of thepdncipal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) after clause (i), the following clause shall be ill1lel'ted, 
namely:-
.. (ia) vendors of spirituous liquor;"; 
(ii) in, clause (q), the word "and" occurring at the end 
shall be omitted; 
. (iii) after clause (r), the following clause shall be-inserted, 
IlaIDely:-
"(8) any other persons carrying on, such other tJ:ade, 
calling or occupation as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf;"; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "are 'IlIlSuitable", the 
words "are unfit or unsuitable" shall be substituted; 
207. 
Amend-
ment ot 
section 
208. 
Ame~, 
ment of· 
section 
209. 
AmendP 
ment of 
sect.ion 
210. 

A1Ileat-
ment f'f 
s@CtiOft 
213. 
Amend. 
ment of 
aection 
214. 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 
215. 
Amend-
ment of 
aectioa 
216. 
Amend-
ment of 
secMon ' 
219. 
Amend-
ment of 
sect\O'1 
221. 
Amend-
ment of 
III!Ction 
224. 
....... . .....,.s... 
32 '''":0'.,.' • 
(c) in sub-section (3), in clam~e (b), for the words and figures 
"Indian Petroleum Act, 1899", the words and figures "Petroleum 8 of 1899. 
Act, 1934" shall be substituted; 30 of 1934. 
(d) in sub-section (4), for the words "such fees not exceeding 
the cost of granting the licem:eo", the words "such reasonable fees" 5 
shall be substituted. 
123. In section 213 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words "two hundred rupees", the words "five hund-
red rupees" shall be substituted; 
lb) for the words "forty r\.\pees", the words "fifty rupees" shall 10 
be substituted. 
1M. In section 214 of the principal Act, for the words "fifty rupees", 
the words "two hundred rupees" shall be substituted. 
125. In section 215 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the 
words "one hundred rupees", the words "five hundred rupees" shall be 15 
substituted. i 
126. In section 216 of the principaJ Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1),-
(i) for the words "of the Board", the words "of the Executive 
Officer" shall be substituted; 20 
(ii) the following proviso shall be added, namely:-
"Provided that the Executive Officer shall not grant 
such permission unless recommended by the Health Officer."; 
. (b) in sub-section (3), for the words "fifty rupees", the words 
"two hundred and fifty rupees" shall be substituted. 25 
In. In section 219 of the principal Act for the word "Board", 
wherever it occurs, other than in the proviso, the words "Executive 
Officer" shall be substituted. 
128. In section 221 (If the principal Act, for the word "Board", in both 
the places where it occurs, the words "Executive Officer" shall be 30 
substituted 
129. In section :~24 of the principaJ Act,-
(a) in clause (a), 'for the words "as the Board may appoint", 
the words "as the Executive Officer may appoint" shan be 
.substituted; 35 
(b) in clause (b), for the words "authorised by it", the words 
"authorised by him" shall be substituted; 
(c) in clause (c),-
(i) for the word "Board", at the first place where it OCCUl'l 
the words "Executive Officer" shall he substituted: 40 

lot 1898. 
2 ot 1974. 
33 
(ii) in sub-clause (v), for the words "by the Executive 
Officer", the words "by any other oftlcer or servant of the Board 
authorised by the Executive Officer in writing in this behalf" 
shall be substituted. 
5 130. In section 226 of the principal Act, for the ·words "fifty rupees", 
10 
the words "two hundred and fifty l'\Ipees" shall be substituted. 
131. In section 230 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words "A Board", the words "The Executive Officer" 
shall be SUbstituted; 
(6) for the words "testing the quantity of any water, or the 
qtrantity or quality of any gas", the words "measuring the quantity 
of any water or gas or testing the quality thereof" shall be suhtti-
tu~d. 
132. In section 231 of the principal Act, for the words "to the satts· 
J 5 faction of the Board", the words "to the satisfaction of the Executive 
Ofticer" shall be substituted. 
20 
~o 
133. In section 232 of the principal Act, for thl;! words "for testing the 
quantity or quality' thereof'~, the words "for measuring the quantity, 
or teating the quality thereof" shall be substituted. 
134. In sedion 236 of the principal Act,-
(4)' in sub-section (1), for the words "two hundred rupees", 
the words "five hundred rupees" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), before the words "or Air Force", the 
word ", Naval" shall be inserted. . 
135. In section 238 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) in the opening portion, for the words "Magistrate of 
the first class", the words "Judicial Magistrate of the ftrs1 
class" shall be substituted; 
(ii) clause (0) shall be omitted; 
(iii) in dause (d), for the words and figures "Code ot 
Criminal Procedure, 1898", the words and figures "Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sUb-section (3), for the words "so directs", the words 
35 "so agrees" shall be substituted. 
Amend. 
ment ot 
section 
228. 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 
230. 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 
231. 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 
232. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
236. 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 
238. 
136. In section 239 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the Amend-
wcrds "Armed Forces of the Union", the word "Forces" shall be' ment of 
subRtituted. Rection 
137. In section 240 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words "two hundred rupees", the words "five hund-
red rupees" shall be substituted; 
(b) for th~ words "twenty. rupees", the 
shall be substituted.· 
words "flfty rupees" 
'I 
138. In section 241 of the prinCipal Act,' for the words "authorised by 
45 the Health Ofticer", the words "authorised by the E~e.cqtiv~ QtfI~r or 
the Health Offlcer" sqall be su~stituted. 
239. 
Amend-
ment ot 
section 
240. 
Amend. 
ment of 
sectt"n 
"1. 

Amea.d-
ment of 
section 
243. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
247. 
AmeNl~ 
ment af 
section 
249. 
Amend'; 
ment of 
section 
250. 
Amend-
ment ot 
section 
251. 
Amend-
ment of 
sectlon 
~3. 
'139. In section 243 of the principal Act. in sub-sections (1) lind (2), 
after the word "Board", the words "or the Executive Officer" shall be 
inserted. 
141. In section 247 of the principal Act, for th.e proviso, the follGwing 
proviso shall be substituted,namely:- .. 5 
"Provided that no such notice shall be" necessary if the place 
to be inspected is a factory or workshop or trade premises or a 
place used for carrying on any trade, calling or occupation specified 
in section 210 or a stable for horses or a shed for cattle or a latrine, 
privy or urinal or a work under construction, Or for the purpose of 10 
.'Bseertaining whether any animal intended for human food is 
slaughtered i1'l that place in contravention of this Act or any bye-
law made thereunder.", 
1-61, In section 249 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words "employed by a Board", the words "acting on J 5 
behalf of the Board" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words "one hundred rupees", the words "flve hund-
red rupees" shall be substituted. 
142. In section 250 of the principal Act, in the proviso, in clause (b), 
in sub-elause (ii), before the words "or Air Force", the word ", N'Bval" 20 
shall be inserted. 
143. In section 251 of the principal Act, for the words "commission of 
any offence", the words "commission of, or attempt to commit, any 
offence" shall be substituted. 
144. Section 253 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub- 25 
section (1) thereof and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the 
following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Whenever under this Act or any rule or bye-law made 
thereunder the doing of\, or the omission to do, anything or the 
validity of anything depends upon the approval, sanction, consent, 30 
concurrence, declaration, opinion or satisfaction of the Board, a 
written document Signed by any officer or m~mber specified in 
sub-section (1) purporting to convey or set forth such approval, 
sanction, consent, concurrence, declaration, opinion 9r satisfaction; 
shall be suffic;ent evidence thereof. 35 
(3) Every licence, written permission, notice, bill, summons or 
other document which is required by this Act Or any rule C1t bye-
law made thereunder to bear the signature of the President, Vice-
President or Executive Officer, or of any such member of 'any com-
mittf!e a~ has been specially authorised by the Board in this behalf 40 
~hal1 he deemed to be properly signed if it bears facsimile of the 
signature of any such officer or member, as the case may be, stamped 
thereon.". 

5 
10 
"'.: 
1~. In section 256 of the principal Act,-
(a) after the words "lawful for the Board", the worda "or the 
civil area committee or the Executive Oftlcer at whose instance the 
notice, order or requisition has been issued" shall be inserted· , 
(b) for the words "recoverable by the Board", the following 
shall be substituted, namely:-
·'recoverable by the Executive OUicer on demand, and if 
not paid within ten days after such demand, shall be recover-
able in the same manner as moneys recoverable by the Board 
under section 2'59: 
Provided that where the action or step relates to the demo-
lition of any erection or re-erection under section 185 or the 
removal of any projection or encroachment under section 187, 
the Board or the civil area committee Or the Executive Officer 
may request any police officer to render such assistance as 
considered necessary for the lawful exerciSe of any power in this 
regard and it shall be the duty of l:!uch police ofJicer to render 
forthwith such assistance on such requisition.". 
Amllld~ 
IIltiitDf 
IICtIOIt' 
251:-." . 
146. After section 256 of the principal Act and before the heading Insertion 
20 "Recovery of money", the following section shall be inserted, namely:- of new 
35 
"256A. If the owner of any property in respect of which a 
. notice as is refl!rred to in section 2.56 has been given is prevented 
by the occupier from complying with such notice, the Board or the 
civil area committee or the Executive Officer at whose'instance such 
notice haG been given, may, by order, reqUire the said occupier to 
permit the owner within eight days from the date of service of such 
notice to take all such action as may be necessary to comply with 
tlut said notice and such owner shall, for the period during which 
he is prevented as aforesaid, be exempt from any fine or penalty to 
which he might otherwise have become liable by reason of non-
compUance with such notice.". 
(: 
16'1. In section 257 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),-
(4) after the words "the Board", the words "or the civU area 
committee or the Executive Officer at whose instance such notice. 
has been issued" shall be inserted; 
(b) for the words "pay to it", the words "pay to it or him" 
shall be substituted; 
(c) for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, 
namely;-
"Provided that, if the occupier, on application made to him 
40 by the Board or the civil area committee or the Executive 
QffiCer at whose instance such notice has been issued, 1'erUSes 
truly to disdo')p the amount of his rent 01' the name or address of 
the person to whom it is payable, the' Executive Officer may 
recover from the occupier thp. whole amount recoverable under 
45 section 256 in the same manner as moneys rccovcrnbl(' b~' the 
Board under section 259.··. 
section 
256A. 
Occupier 
not to 
obstruct 
owner 
when 
cQITlply· 
ing with 
notice. 
Amend-
JneIIt of 
sect1cIa 
25Y 

Amend-
ment 01 
aection 
259. 
Amend-
ment of 
aec:t1ort 
266. 
Amen..!-
meat of 
section 
288. 
Insertion 
of ne" 
section 
26M. 
• 3tI 
U8. In section 259 of the principal Act,-
(4) in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) for the words "rent on land and buildings and any other 
money recoverable by a Board or a Military Estates Officer", 
the words "and any other money recoverable, including rent ons 
land and buildings due under leases or licences ,executed by 
or in favour of a Board or the Defence Estates Officer," shall 
be substituted; 
(ii) for the word "Magistrate", the words "Judicial Magis-
trate" shall be substituted; ro 
(iii) for the words "by the distress and sale of any mov-
able property of, or standing timber, or growing crops ,belong-
ing to, such person which is within the limits of such Magistrate's 
jurisdiction", '~e words "either by the distre9S and sale ~f 
movable property of such person, or by the attachment and sale 15 
of immovable property of that person, which is within the 
limits of the jurisdictien of 'such Judicial Magistrate, or by both 
these methods" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) for the word "Magistrate", the words "Judicial Magis- AO 
trate" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "Military Esta1jes Officer", the words 
"Defence Estates Officer" shall be substituted; 
(c) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely: - :l5 
I, (3) Upon receiving the applicati'on, the Judicial Magia-. 
trate referred to in sUb-section (1) may take action for the 
recovery of the amount of tax, rent or money from the person 
speci.ft.ed in the application as if such amount were a fine re-
coverable under a sentence passed by him I and the provisions of 30 
sections 421 and 422 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, 
shall. so far as may be, apply to the recovery of such amount: 
Prcvided that the recovery of no such amount shall be 
made by the arrest or detention in prison of the said person.". 
I". In section 266 of the principal Act, sub-section (2) shall be 35 
omitted. 
~. 
150. In section 268 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words "two hundred rupees", the words Clfive hund-
red rupees" shaU be substituted; 
(b) for the words "twenty rupees", the words "fifty rupees" 40 
shall be substituted. 
151. After section 268 of the principal Act, the following section shaD 
be inserted, namely:-
'268A. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed 
by a company, every person who, at the time the offence wu 45 
2011G7f. 

• t 
5 
10 
15 
20 
85 
45 
·11 
ieomnrltted, was 'in charge of, and was responsible to the company 
for the conduct of the business of the company, as wen as the 
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be 
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing conta.ined in this sub-section shall 
render any such person liable to any punishment, if he proves th&t 
the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exer-
cised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(a) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company 
and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the COD-
sent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part 
of. any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, 
such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed 
to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate anJ incllides a 
firm or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, meaIli a partner In the 
firm.'. 
152. For section 269 of the principal Act, the following section shall SubStitw-
be substituted, namely: -. tion 
"269. Where any person to whom a licence or written permission 
has been granted under this Act or any agent or servant of such 
person commits a breach of any of the conditions thereof, or of 
any bye-law made under this Act for the purpose of regulating the 
manner or circumstances in, or the conditions subject to, which 
anything permitted by such licence or written permisaion is to be or 
may be done, or where the Board or the civil area committee, as 
the case may be, is satisfied that such licence or' written permission 
hu been secured by the holder through misrepresentation or fraud, 
the Board or the civil area committee, as the cue may be, may, 
without preJudice to any other penalty which may have been 
incurred under t.his Act, by order in writing, cancel the licence er 
written permission or suspend it for such period as it thinks fit: 
Provided that no such order shall be made unlesl an oppor-
tunity has been given to the holder of the licence or written permis~ 
sion to show cause why it should not be made.". 
153. In section 270 of the principal Act,-
Of new 
section 
tor lIection 
289. 
CanceUa-
tion or 
8uspen- . 
sion of 
licences, 
etc. 
Amend-
(a) for the words "by the Magistrate", the words "by the Judi~ ment 01 
cial Magistrate" shall be substituted; section 
(b) for the words "by distress and sale of the movable property 
of such person, and the Magistrate shall issue a warrant for its 
recovery accordingly", the words "either by the distress and sale 
of the movable property of such person, or by the attachment and 
sale of the immovable property of that person, . or by' both these 
270. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
271. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
, 274. 
Substitu-
tion o't 
new 
sco:tion 
for 
section 
278. 
~~sion 
of actiQll 
penclbla 
appeal. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
280. 
Amend-
ment of 
.action 
281. 
~ .• 
meth.odti and the Judi<:ial Magistrate shall rec()ver the. amolID,t in 
a~cqrdance with the provisioll;s of sections 421 and 422 of the ~de of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973, as if it were a fine recoverable under a 201191'-
sentenc.e W!l~d bY'him" shall be substituted. 
154. In section 271 of the principal Act, for the word "Magistrate", 5 
the words "Judicial Magistrate" shall be substituted. 
". 
~ In section 274 of the principal Act,-· 
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "second column" and 
"third column", the words "third column" and "fourth column" 
shall respectively be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "fourth column", the 
words "fifth column·' shall be substituted; 
(c) in s\lb-section (3). for the words and figures "Indian Limi-
tation Act, 1908", the words and figures "Limit~tion Act, 1Q6a" shall 
be substituted. 
10 
9 of 1908-
15 36 ot1863. 
156. For section 276 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"276. On the admission of an appeal from an order, other than 
an order contained in a notic~ issued under section 140,. section 176, 
section 181, section 206 or section 238, where the appellate authority 20 
so directs, all proceedings to enforce the order and all prosecutions 
for any contravention thereof shall be held in abeyance pending the 
. decision of the appeal, and, if the order is set aside on appeal, dis-
obedienc~ thereto shall not be deemed to be an offence.", 
157. In section 280 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),- 25 
(i) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
" (c) the tenure of offi<:e, salariell and allowances, provident 
funds, pensions, gratuities, leave of abs~nce and ot~r conditions 
Of service of servants of Boards;";· 30 
(i!,) clauses (cc) , (e) and (f) shall be olllitted. 
158. In section 281 of the principal Act,-
.(~) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section s~ll be 
inserted, namely:-
.. (lA) The power to make rules under clause (C') of sub- 35 
section (2) of section 280 shall include the power to giv.e retros-
pective effect from a date not earlier than the date of commence-
ment of the Cantonments (Amendment) Act, 1982, to the rules . 
or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any 
rule so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any persoll to 40 
whom such rule may be applicable: 
Provided that where any rule has to be given retrospective 
operation, the reasons therefor and the effect of giving such 
retrn;pectiv(' operation shall be published along with the draft 
of the rules when such draft is published for elicitinJ. public 45 
opinion under sub-section (1) of section 280."; 

10 
20 
25 
35 
:'If .,,; 
39 
I" (b) in sub-section (2), for the words "rules so made", the words 
""rules made under this Act" shall be substituted and after sub-
section (2) <IS 50 amended, the following sub-section shall be insert-
ed, namely:-
<. '.\ "(3) Evc"ry rule mude by the Central Government under this 
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
. , I :" mote successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessiollS' afore-
said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereaftcr have effect only in such modified form 01' be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
..., or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any-
tni1lg previously done under that rule.". 
'.. ! 
159. In section 282 of the principal Act,-
(a) for clause (2), the following clause shall 
pamely:-
be 1ubstituted, 
"(2)· the' enforcement of compulsory vaccination and inocu-
lation and levy of fees where such vaccination or inoculation 1s 
~._.': .... .~arriedout at the houses ot residents;"; 
. " . (b) ··for clause (4), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(4) the regulation of any description o~ tramc in the street. 
and the enforcement of measures for the reduction of noise 
caueed thereby or the prohibition o'f any description of Buch 
traffic·"· • , , 
(c) in clause (6), after the words "the cantonment", the words 
"and regulation and ,control of cattle pounds" shall be inserted; 
(d) in clause (14), the words "pounds, washing-places,'· shall be 
omitted; 
". .... ..(e) in clause (16), for the words and figures "under section 
210", the words and figures "under section 124 or section 210" shall 
be substituted; 
.-.'(1) in clause (18), after the words "the cantonment", the 
words "and the fees chargeable in respect thereor' shan be inserted; 
(g) after clause (19), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
40 ., "(19A) the form of and the particulars which shall be con-
tained in a development scheme or an improvement scheme and 
the manner in which such scheme shall be framed or altered;"; 
4,5 
, .. " 
(h) in clause (21), after the word "animals", the words "and 
the fees chargeable in respect thereof" shall be inserted; 
(i) in clause (25) ,-
(a) in sub-clause (b), after the words "on hire", the words 
'.~or used for hawking articles" shall be inserted; 
. (b) in sub-clause (c), after the words "for hire", the words 
"or used for hawking articles" shall be insetted; 
Amend-
ment ot 
.action 
282. 

Amend-
ment at 
8flCtton . 
283, 
40 
(j) after clause (27), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(27A) the pres('ribing of fee payable for any licence (ex-
cept as· otherwise specifically provided in the Act) or for any 
written permission granted by the Board;"; 5 
(k) in clause (37), for the word "stables", the words "stables, 
kennels, sties" shall be substituted; 
(l) in clause (38), the word "and" occurring at the end shall be 
omitted; 
(m) clause (39) shall be renumbered as clwse (41) and before 10 
clause (41) as so renumbered, the following clauses shall be In-
serted, namely:-
"(39) the regulation of sU'pply of copies of oftlclal documents 
and prescribing the fee payable in respect thereof; 
(40) the regulation of permission for granting licence for 15 
use of loud-speakers and prescribing the fee payable in respect 
thereof;", I 
168, Section 283 iJf the principal Act shall be renumbered ItS sub-
section (1) thereof, and-
(a) in sub-section (1) as so renumbered,-
(i) in clause (a), for the words "one hundred rupees", ttie 
words "five hundred rupees" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in cla'USe (b), for the words "one hundred rupeea" and 
"twenty rupees", the words "five hundred rupees" and liMy 
!OIO 
rupees" shall respectively be substituted; 25 
(iii) in clause (c), 'for the words "ten rupees", the words 
"fifteen rupees" shall be substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-
section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Any such bye-law may also provide that a person COIl- SO 
travening the same shall be required to remedy, so far as ltea 
in his power, the damage or mischief, if any, ca~ by su~ll 
contravention." . 

5 
161. For section 286A of the principal Act, the following section shall Sub8t1tu.-
be substituted, namely:- tiOR of 
new aec-
tion fOr 
section 
288A. 
I/286A. (1) The Board may, by a resolution passed in this behalf. 
delegate to the President, Vice-President, Executive Oftlcer or Health 
Officer, subject to such conditions, if any. as may be speci1ied in the 
resolution, all or any of its functions under clause (b) ot sub-aection 
(5) of section 119, section 161, section 163, section 188, section 169, 
section 196 and section 197. 
(2) The civil area committee may, by passing a similar reso-
Power 
to dele-
gate tunc-
tio1l'8 to 
the Pre-
sident, etc. 
10 lution, delegate, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified 
in such resolution, all or any of its functions under section 189 and 
section 195 to the Vice-President, Executive Officer or Health 
Officer.". 
16Z. In section 287 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),-
(a) for the words "Indian Registration Act", the words "Regis-
tration Act" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words "to the Board or", the words "to the Execu-
tive Officer and the Defence Estates Ofticer and" shall be substituted. 
163. In section 289 of the principal Act, for the words "by the Board", 
:W the words "by the Executive Officer" shall be Bubstituted 
1M. In section 291 of the prinCipal A,ct, after the words "municipal 
authorities respectively", the words and figure "and the references to 
State Government in seetion 4 of that Act shall be construed as refer-
ences to Central Government" shall be inserted. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
287. 
Amend-
dlentof 
section 
289. 
Amend-
ment ot 
section 
291, 
165. In Schedule I to the principal Act,-
(a) for the word "distress", the words __ , "diatreta· ___ _ 
attachment" 
Amend-
ment of 
shall be ScheduleT. 
substituted; 
(b) the following shall be inserted at the end, namely:-
"·Strike out whichever is not applicable:'. 
166. In Schedule II to the principal Act,-
"diBtr in. (a)' for the word "distrain ", the words-- a .. attach 
..hall be 
substituted; 
Amend-
ment of 
Schedule 
n. 

Subatttw-
tion or 
new 
Sched1ile 
for Sche-
dule V. 
·'mov,We-(b) for the word "movable", the words 
substituted; imrn~V:Q~" shall be 
(C) for the word .. seized", the words 
substituted; 
"acized* 
attachC'd" shall be 
(d) the following shall be inserted at the ena, namely: - !l 
"·Str1ke out whichever' is not applicable.". 
111. For Schedwe V to the principal A,ct. the following 
shail be subsUtuted, namely:-
Schedule 
S. 
No. 
5 
8 
S~ctiol1 
'34 
135 
136 
qo 
"SCHEDULE V 
ApPEALS FROM: ORDERS 
(See section 274). 
10 
----------
3 
Executivr 
Order 
Noticc to remove, repair, 
prote c t or end Ole a 
buildul!, wan or anythiq 
aflixed thereto, or wall •. 
tank, reservoir, pool, dep-' 
realion or excavation. 
Notice to fill up well, ~nk, 
etc., or to drain oft' or 
remove water. 
Notice requiring the. owner 
to ~O'ride latrine, urinal, I 
CCII pool, dust-hin or 
other rl'",.ntadr.. 
;-.iotict' rf'!411~rmg proViSiOnl\ 
of aanitary faeilitiel in 
mM'k~t, 1Oh001, theatre\ 
or other place of Illlb1k 
resort. I 
Notice for r--mova! of con-\ 
ge~ted buildin~. I 
I 
Notice requiring a building 
to he repair~ 01' altel'lltf 
10 .. to remove sanitary 
defects. 
Notice prohlbitin~ _ner 
or occupier to use a 
buildl." or part of a 
building for huma" ha-
bitation. 
Order directing a penon to 
remove from the eantefl-
m~nt and prohibiting 
him ftoom re-entering it 
without perml.non. 
4 
Appellate 
Authority 
Officer Commanding-in-
Chief, th~ Command, or 
othet authority authori~-l 
eel in thl. behalf bv the 
Central Governml"nt. 
OIicer Oonunandina- in-
Chitf. the Command, or 
other authority authoris-
ed in this behalf by the! 
Central Glwernment. 
Board 
Hoard 
Officrr Commanding-in-
Chief, the Command. 
or other authority 
allthori,ed in this behalf \ 
hv th,. C,.ntral Goverft-
ment. I 
Officer Commanding-in-
Chitf, the Command, or 
other authority authorised 
in thi. bt-half by th~ 
Central Governm("nt. 
OR\cer Oommandlng-in-
Chief, the Command, or 
nther ~thority au~ 
ed in thi. bel-alf by the 
Central Government. 
Officer CommaDCling-in-
Ohief', the Ce8lmaDd, er 
other authority authori .. 
cd in thillIebaIt by the 
Central Oovemment. 
Time allowl"d 
for appeal 
Thiny oays from 15 
."J'\·ic,. of notice. 
Thirty days from 
service of notice. 
Fifteen da,. from 
service of noticr. 
Fifteen days from 'iO 
~t'rvice of notice .• 
Thirty days from 35 
srn'ice ofnoti«c .• 
Thirty days frolll 
.~r\'i(',. of lIotier. 
Twenty-one days 
from ler'vice of 
notice. 
I Thir~r day, from 
Iel'Vlte or notic(' . 
I 
45 
55 

5 
10 
15 
20 
35 
45 
5.') 
------ ----------
ci. 
No. 
10 185 
I 
I fiB 
'2IQ 
l'i 2'21 
17 
3 
._--- ... _----"-
Ex~cutife Order 
(4) Rcf\.llal ~o aanclion thc erec-
tion or re-erection of a 
buildint in a civil area. 
(/J) 
Refuaal to IIUIction the 
¢feotion .r re. .... tiQn q{ a 
buildinl( in a cantonment 
(othcrthan a dvif area). 
Notice to atop t'rection or 
l'e-ucction (If. or to al ter 
or demolish. a huilding in 
a civil area. 
Notice to stop erection Or 
I re-erection ot,' or to a Iter 
or dcmoliah, a build.in, in 
a c,ntonment (other than 
a civil area). 
:'\otice requiring the owner 
or occupier to alh~r or 
remove allY projection. 
or eneroachml'lIt. 
Notice to pull down or 
otherwise dcal with a I 
buildin, oewly ltI'ected. or I 
reb~iH without pcnnia- I 
sion OV~ a sewer. drain, I 
culvert, water course or 
water-pipe. 
Sotie .. prohibiting or rel-
trictiOllhe tile of a Ilau-
ghter-house. 
Notice requmn({ mainte-
nance or clOling of private 
~n:e of public drinking 
water supply. 
, 
Noticc I'equiring the owner. ' 
1$tIC or occupier 01 a I 
building Or land to ~tain , 
water ffom a source of 
puhlir watf'!' ~l!ppJy. 
5 
Appellate Authority 
&ard 
• I 
Officcr CO~andinl-in- I 
Thirt.Y d,.y, from 
aervlcc oT com-
munication. 
Chief. &be ~,or 
other a"~ty f,Utborited 
in thi. behalf by the 
OelltraJ Oovcmmon t • 
Thirty daYI from 
IIn'icc of CPl-
municlUion. 
Board TlairLy days from 
servicc of notice. 
'" 
Officci Commanding-in- 'l'hirL), oa)'s from 
Chicf. the Cdmmand. or sen·ie,' of notict'. 
other authorityauthorl.-
ed in thit .llf'hal f by thr ,-
Central Go\'ernmcrt. 
Officer Cowmanding-ill-
Chief, the Command. or 
other ~ity autboriled 
in this behalf by the 
Central Government. I 
Officer Commallding-in- I 
Chief, the Command, I 
or othet authority au- I 
thoriaed in this behalf I by the Central Govern-
ment. 
Officer Commanding-in- I 
Chi"'. the C~. or: 
othel- authority autho-I 
riled in thle bellalf bv 
the Central Governmrnt. 
Boarci 
Board 
Thiet} day. ii'om 
service of notiCe. 
Thirt)· da),s frolIl 
lel'\'i!" .. of 1I0t icr. 
Twenty-one da}"5 
from service of 
notic ... 
Fiflt'cn dll}"s from 
len';cl' of notke. 
Fifteen days from 
aervice of notire. 
:'oJ oticI' for cuttinll off the TIoard Fifteen days from 
lervicr of notice. connection bl'tweclI any 
IPurc:e.of public wfttr-
~IJPply and any buiJi:linll; 
<lr land to which watf'r i~ 
supplied. i 
!'Jot;' dil'ectinll diaGrclerly I District MII.-illrat .. 
perlon to rmove from 
cantonment anf) prohi- I 
IIIII.! him From re-enter-
411. " witll!l1t P'.r~OI'. i . 
Thirty dllYs frOID • 
micc of no-
ticr. ". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Cantonments Act, 1924 provides for the administration of 
cantonments. The Act, for the first time, allowed representation of the 
civil population in the administration of the cantonments. Amend-
ments to the Act were made from time to time and the last such amend-
ment was made in 1954. The existence of the growth of a large popu-
lation inside cantonments necessitates the organisation of local self-
government institutions side by side with different kinds of control. The 
governance of a large civil population involves civic responsibilities. A 
balance has to be struck between the interests of the Anned Forces from 
health, welfare and security point of view and the aspirations of the 
local population for participation in the administration of the canton-
ments. 
2. Taking into consideration representations and suggestions made 
from various quarters and also other related matters like changes in the 
concept of' municipal administration consistent with the necessity to 
ensure discipline, security, sanitation and health of the troops, the ques-
tion as to what amendments should be made to the Act was referred 
to a Task Force which made a number of recommendations in this 
behalf. 
3. Government has taken into consideration the recommendations 
made by the Task Force coupled with the need for streamlining and 
strengthening local administration of the Cantonment Board and pro-
poses to make exhaustive amendments to the Cantonments Act. Some 
of the important amendments to the Act are-
(a) to provide for declaration of naval stations ,also as canton-
ments under tbe Cantonments Act, when necessary; 
(b) to extend the term of office of the members of the Board 
from three to five years; 
(c). to reduce the term of office of the Vice-President from 
three years to two and a half years which amounts to one-half of 
the tenure of a member in order to facilitate mOre than one elected 
member to hold the office of Vice-President and to provide for his 
removal through a no-confidence motion; 
Cd) to empower the Executive Officer to discharge certain 
routine day-to-day functions Of the administration of Cantonment 
Board; 
(e) to provide that the Cantonment Board acts as an appellate 
authority against the orders of the Executive Oftlcer; 
(I) to confer on the civil area committee some of the powers 
of the Cantonment Bciard in so far as the administration at eivU 
areas is concerned; 

45 
(g) to enlarge or modify the list of obligatory duties and dls-
cretionary functions of the Cantonment Board; 
(h) to remove lacunae in the Act in regard· to recovery of pro- . 
perty tax in respect of private buildings occupied by the Govern-
ment and recovery of rent on account of leases; 
(i) to enhance the amount of fines, fees and financial powers 
as provided in the Act, keeping in view the present-day rise in 
prices; 
(j) to add to the list of orders issued under the Act against 
which an appeal would lie to the prescribed appellate authority and 
also provide that the stay of any orders appealed against would not 
be automatic but would lie at the discretion of the appellate 
authority; 
(k) to remove certain difficulties experienced in the adminis-
tration of the Act; 
(1) to amend obsolete proviscins, bring the Act uIi-to-date and 
re-arrange some of the sections consistent with the s11bject matter 
of the sections; 
(m) to introduce order and clarity; 
(n) to make consequential amendments in the Act for giving 
effect to the above proposals. 
4. The notes on clause~ explain in detail the various provisioIl'3 con-
tain~d in the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; R. VENKATARAMAN. 
The 22nd April, 1982. 

Notes on claus •• 
Clause 2.-Exprt¥Sions like "civil area", "civil area eomnUttee", 
"Defence Estates Officet" , "Director", "factory", . 'FOrce6" , "hoapital", 
"lower grade employee", "market", "military oftleer", "nuisanct'''. 
''Omcer Commanding the Area", "soldier" and "sub area" have been 
defined in accordance with the scheme of the Cantonments Act, 1924 
(hereinafter referreti to as the Act) as proposed to be amended by this 
Bill. The amendments t6 clauses (iia) , (vii), (]!:ii) and (xxiva) of 
section 2 of the Act and the omission of clauses (iii) and (XXii) thel·eof 
are verbal and consequential. 
ClaWle 3.-This clause seeks to amend section 3 of the Act to em-
power the Central Government to declare also places occupied by navfll 
stntions as cantonments. 
Clauses 4 and 5.-The amendment to section 10 and the omis-
sion of section 12 of the Act are consequential to the substitution of 
section 24 of the Act (vide clause 16). 
Clause 6.-The amendment to section 13 of the Act has become neces-
i>ary in view of the coming into force of the Code of Criminal Proce-
dure, 1973 (2 of 1974). 
Clau!e 7.-This clause ~eeks to amend section 14 of the Act to 
provide for nomination of a civilian member by the Central Govern-
ment in consultation with the Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Com-
rr.and, in a Board, the co~stitutlon of which was varied by the Central 
Government. 
Clause B.-This clause seeks to amend section 15 of the Act to pro-
vide that the term of office of all members of the Board shall be llve 
years instead of three years and to ensure that the term of all elected 
members whose term is extended under the proviso to sub-section (1) 
of that section terminates on the date the election of their successors is 
notified in the Official Gazette. The date of commencement of the office 
of a member elected to fill a casual vacancy shall be calculated from 
the date of the notification of 'his election instead of the date of his 
election. 
Clause 9.-Under section 16 of the Act no casual election will be 
held to fill 'Up a vacancy occurring within three months of any date on 
Nhich the vacancy will occur by efflux of time. This period of three 
months is considered inadequate and is proposed to be enhanced to six 
months . 
. Clause 10.-Section 17 of the Act relates to vacancies in a Board. 
It is proposed to provide for a person elected from more than one ward 
46 

47 
to resign from all but one of the words. It is also proposed to omit 
the .division of fnhabitants O'f the cantonments into cla.sses as no such 
rlasst!s Of inhabitants e:dst. 
(,lause n.-This clause seeks to substitute a new section for exist-
ing section 18 of tM Act. The intention is to standardise the form of 
oat.h Of allegianC~ and to ensure that it is invariably taken. 
Clau.s.z 12.-The procedure as contained in section 19 of the Act 
for resignation by an el~cted or nominated member frOm office and its 
acceptance by the Board is being revised. 
Clause 13.~The expressions "temporary absence" and "station leavp." 
occurring in the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 20 of the Act have 
creCt~d some difficulties in their· interpretation. To remove these diffi-
culties, it is proposed to provi'de that the Officer Commanding the 
Station, when he is holding the office of the President, shall not vacate 
the said office of the President for a temporary absence from the stRtion 
for a period not exceeding thirty consecutive days. 
CLause 14.-This clause seeks to amend section 21 of the Act. The 
term of oOke of a Vice-President is being fixed as two years and six 
months instead of three years. A provision has also been made that a 
Vice-President may be removed from oftice through a no-confiden~ 
motion passed by not less than two-thirds of elected members holding 
office and attending the meeting in which a resolution to that effect is 
passed. 
Clau.se 15.- This clauGe seeks to amend section 22' of the Act to pro-
vide that the President of the Board shall control, direct and supervisp. 
the tinancial and executive administration of the Board, 
Clam;e 16.-This clause seeks to substitute two new sections for 
section 24 of the Act and the new sections relate respectively the appoint-
ment and duties of the Executive Officer. 
Clause 17.-This clause seeks to amend section 28 of the Act to pro-
vide that a person who holds any office of profit under the Government 
or is in employment of a local authority or is found guiliy of a corrupt 
practice or fails to pay arrears of any kind to the Board may be dis-
qualified for election or nomination as a member. It also provides to 
raise from rupees one thousand five hundred to rupees three thousand 
the monetary limit which will attract disqualification o'f a person who 
has an interest in a contract or work with the Board. 
Clause l8.-This clause seeks to substitute a new section for the 
exij;ting section 29 of the Act. The intention is t~ add the definition I)f 
the expression "corrupt practice" specified in sub-section (2) of section 
28 on the lines of section 123 of the Representation of the People Act., 
11ml (4.~ of 1951). 
Clau,e 19.-At present there is no provision in section 31 of the 
Act to make rules for the levy of fee for admission and consideration 
of any application relating to election or election disputes. The Com-
mittee on Subordinate Le~islatlon has recommended that the power to 

• 
levy fees of such a nature should flow from the statute itself. Aocord-
ingly, a new clause is being inserted in that section to enable the levy 
of fees. 
Clause 20.-Sub-section (1) of section 32 of· the Act is being 
amplified to prohibit a member from participating in discussion in 
a meeting of the Board or any of its committees on questions a1fecting 
his pecuniary interest and similar matters. A new sub-section is also 
being inserted in that section for excluding a person presiding over a 
meeting of the Board and from its deliberations in cases where he hRs 
somp pecuniary or other interest in the matter under discussion. 
Clause 21.-The liability of the members of the BOard as ~ontain­
ed in section 33 of the Act is being ampll6.ed so as to make it applicable 
also to any money or other property vested in, or entrusted to the 
management of, the Board. 
Clause 22.-This clause seeks to amend section 34 of the Act. The 
power to remove from the Board any military officer nOminated as a 
member of the Board is proposed to be conferred on the Officer Com-
manding-in-Chief, the Command, instead of the Central Government. 
Clause 23.- This clause seeks to insert new section 35A in the Act 
to provide that every member of the Board shall be deemed to be a 
public servant. 
Clause 24.-This clause seeks to amend section 36 of the Act and 
the change is verlSal in nature. 
Clau.se 25.-Section 39 of the Act is being amended to provide for 
the meeting of the Board to be adjourned' by the Vice-President in the 
absence of the President and by the Secretary in the absence of both 
the President and the Vice-President. 
c.:laus~ 26.-The amendment proposed to sub-section (1) of section 
41 of the Act is clariflcatory in nature. The amendment to sub-section 
(2) of section 41 is necessitated because of the proposed amendment to 
section 3 to declare naval stations also as cantonments (vide clause 3). 
Where cantonments are located in the navy or air 'force stations, the 
proceedings of the Board should be sent to the respective Command 
Headquarters of the navy or air force. 
Clause 27.- The amendment proposed to sections 42 and 43 of the 
Act is clarificatory in nature. 
Clause 28.-This clause seeks to insert new sub-section (3) in section 
43A of the Act. With the demand of democratisation of administration 
"of cantonments, administrative instructions had been issued to the can-
tonment Boards to make provision in their regulations framed .under 
clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 44 of the Ad that the deciaion 
of a civil area committee in certain matters pertaining to civil area 
would be construed as decisions of the Board. Since this was only 

under a delegated power, it is now proposed to make a spec11le provi-
sion in this behalf in the Act itself. However, if the Health Oftleer 
dissents from any dc'cision arrived at by the civil area committee on 
matters pertaining to con!lideration of health of the people, the matter 
will be referred to the Board by the President for decision. 
Clause 29.--Section 44 of the Act empowers the Board to make regu-
latiOn<;. Tt is proposed to amend this section suitably to provide for the 
laying of the regulations made by the Board before each House of 
Parliament us per the recommendations of the Committee on Subordi-
nate Legislation. 
Clause 30.-The amendment proposed to section 45 of the Act pro-
vides that the powers 0'£ a lOf!al authority to establish octroi limits and 
octroi stations within a cantonment in the event of an agreement between 
that local authOrity and the Board should be available in the same 
manner also to the cantonment Boards. 
Clal1~e 31.-This clause seeks to amend section 46 of the Act to provide 
that the power of the Central Government to call for documents from 
the Board should also be given to such officer or authonty as may be 
~uthorised by the Central Government. This is considered necessary 8' 
it is not possible in all matters for the Central Go~rnment to form an 
opinion in matters where documents are required to be called for. 
Clau.se 32.-1t is considered desirable to make specific provision tor 
8uthorising the Director, Defence Lands and Cantonments, the Command 
or su~h other officer or authority as may be authorised by the Central 
Government to exercise the power of inspection under section 47 of the 
Act. 
Clause 33.-Th~ amendment proposed empowers the ~rectnr, Defence 
Lands and Cantonments. the Command 11so to exercise the power to call 
for documents under section 48 of the Act. 
Clause 14.-Thi., clause seeks to amend section 51 of fhe Act to enable 
the President in his canadty AS officer commanding the station to dissent 
from a decision of the Foard. if it Affects also the ~ecuritv of the Forces In 
the cantonment. The other amendment to the section is of a consequential 
nature. 
Clause 35.-This clause seeks to insert new section 51A in the Act to 
enable the Central Government to review any decfc;1on or order of the 
Board or the Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command. 
, C1ause.~ 36 a'nd 37.-Sub-clause (a) of clause 36 and sub-claus!'! (a) of 
clause 37 seek r~pectivelv to Rmend secUon M and section 57 of the Act 
consequent on the amendment to section 3 of the Act to declare places 
occupied by naval st:ltions as cantonments (vide cl<!use 3). Sub-clause 
(b) of clause 36 and sub-clauses (b) and (c) of clause 37 seek respectively 
to amend section 56 and 6ection 57 sa as to enhance the fine prescribed 
for the offences as the existing ftne is considered inadequate in view nf 
the escalation in prices. 
Clause 38.-The amendments to secti0n 58 of the Act have beeome 
n~ssarv in view of the coming into force of the Code of Criminal Pro-
-cedure, 1973 (2 of 1974). 
Clause 39.-Sub-sectlolJ (2) section 60 of the Act provides that a tax 
imposed under this section shall take e1fect from the date ot notiftcatlon 
in the OfftcfaJ Gazette. Thi1! provision do~ not rortfer pmru' oft the 

Board to notify that the tax may also be imposed from a date specified 
in streh notification as this will give information to the persons residing 
in the cantonment and also facilitate realisation of tax. An amendment 
for the this purpose is pr!,posed to be made in this section. 
ClaU8e Ml.-The amendment proposed to sub-section (1) of section 
62 of the Act is verbal. The other amendment to substitute a new sub-
section for sub-sections (2) and (3) provides for the publication of tax 
proposals once only on the lines of similar provisions contained in some 
m'Unicipal laws. . 
Clause 41.-This clause seeks to insert new section 63A in the Act 
to empower the Central Government to issue directions to a cantonment 
Board to impose new taxes or to enhance an existing tax when the 
Government considers it necessary so to do for augmenting the revenues 
of the Board. 
Clause 42.-A provision is being made in section 65 of the Ad to 
enable apportionment of tax liability amongst several owners. Whepe the 
property is jointly owned by more than one owner, the liability will be 
joint and several. . 
Clause 43.- The function of the Board under section 66 of the Act 
Is routine administrativ~ function and it is proposed to confer this func-
tion on the Executive Officer. Sub-clause (b) seeks to empower the 
Government not only to make rules specifying the form tn which 
assE!$sment list is to be prepared, but also the manner in which such list 
Is to be prepared. 
Clauses 44, 45, 46, 50, 53, 84, 85, 88, 92, 93, 96, 109; 113; 127; 128; 129 
and 132.-The functions. powers and duties of the Board under 
sections 67, 68, 72, 77A, 83, 131, 132, 135, 143, 145, 164, 190; 194; 219; 221; 224 
and 231 of the Act are by and large routine day-to-day administrative 
functions, powers and duties. It is proposed to confer these functions, 
powers and duties under thOse sections on the Executive Officer and 
carry out in the relevant sections, wherever necessary, such consequen-
tial amendments as the rules of grammar may require. 
Clauses 47, 51, 00, 95, 97, 107, 114, 117, 118, 121, 123, 124; 125; 130; 
137 and lW.-The existing punishment for an offence under sections 74. 79, 
139, 159. 167, 184, 196, 204, 205, 209, 213, 214, 215, 226, 240 and 263 jscons'-
dered inadequate in view of the escalation in prices and is being 
enhanced. 
Cl4use 48.-Section 75 of the Act provides for remission and refund 
of tax when a building is wholly or partlv demolished or destroyed on 
the application of the owner. It is proposed to provide that no remfe-
sion or refund shall take effect in respect of any period commencing 
more than two months be'fore the'" delivery of such application. , 
Clause 49.-Sections 76 .and 77 of the Act provide for the remlsston 
of tax for buildings. It is proposed that such remit;sion shall not exceed 
one-half of the tax levied on such buildings. 
Clause 52.-Penalty for evasion o'f octroi or terminal tax under sec-
tion 82 of the Act is considered inadequate in view of t.he escalation in 
prices and is being enhanced. It is also proposed to confer on the 
Executive Officer the powers and functions of the Board 'I.lndll' tblJ 
section as these arp routin(' in nature 

8i 
ClaUie 54.-This clause seeks to amend section 84 of the Act. The 
-.dOlent to substitute sub-section (1) of that section provides that an 
appeal aPinst the, assessment or levy of, or against the refusal to 
refund, any tax under the Act will lie to the D!stnct Court. The other 
amendments are of consequential natute. 
Clause 55.-ln view of the am-:ndmem proposed to be made to section 
84 of the Act, a consequential amt!u{1tnent !s belng made in section 85. 
Clause 56.-ln view of the amendments proposed to section 84 of 
tJut'Act, a 'consequential amendment is being made in section 86. A new 
sub-section is also proposed to be inserted in section 86 for the recovery 
bY' the Board the costs awarded to the Board in the 'same manner as 
moneys rer:overable by the Board under section 259. 
Clause, 57 and 5E.-In view of the changes proposed to be made in 
section 84 of the Act, consequential arnenc:Gnents are being made in 
aect.Lons 87 and 88. 
Clau'e "59.-ln view of the escalation in prices, it is proposed to 
enhance the fee for every notice of demand under SUb-section (2)" of 
section 91 of the Act from one rupee to two rupees. 
ClaiLse 60.-ln addition to the distress and sale of movable property, 
it is also proposed to provide in section 92 of the Act for attac4ment and 
Bale of immovable property in the event of a tax remaining unpaid even 
after the service of the notice of demand. The provision would act as 8 
deterrent to habitual defaulteJ.·s who do not pay the taxes on demand. 
A safeguud has, however, been provided that the attached property 
would not be sold except under the orders of the Board. 
Clauae 61.-This clause seeks to insert new section 92A in the Act 
for levying interest on the tax which has not been paid in time. The 
interest thus payable would also be recoverable in the same manner as 
m<>neys recoverable by the Board under section 259. The interest could; 
hOwever, be remitted by the assessing authority with the sanction of 
the' Board, where no appeal has been preferred, and by the District Coul1 
in bther casell. 
CZdUH 62.-lt is proposed to provide that the surplus sale proceeds 
from the disposal of distrained property shall also be given to the legal 
representatives. Further it is proposed to enhance the fee for a warranl 
of restraint or attachment from one rupee to two rupees in view of the 
escalation in prices. . 
ClauSe 63.-1n view of the amendment proposed to section 92 of the 
Act, a new section 94A is proposed to be inserted in the Act for the dis .. 
posal of attached immovable property. 
ClCluse 64.-The changes proposed in section 95 of the Act are verbal 
aDd' consequent to the amendment to section 92. 
Cl4me 65.--The amendment to section 96 of the Act is consequent to 
the amendment to section 92. 
ClAUse 66.·-The amendment proposed to section 99 of the Act seeks 
to'exclude only buildings or lands of the Government from the levy of 
Property tax. 

Clause 67.-Tbe power of the Board under section 102 of the Act to 
write off any sum due to it is proposed to be enhanced from tifty rupees 
to two hundred and fifty rupees with the previous sanction of theOftlcer· 
Commanding-in-Chief, the Command. 
Clause 68.--The amendment proposed to section 103 of the Act em-
powers the Executive Officer to call upon any inhabitant of the canton-
ment to ascertain not only about his liability to pay a tax, but also the 
fact that the tax has been correctly paid. This is necessary in cues 
where a person is about to move out of the cantonment to avoid imme-
diate payment of tax by such person. The existing punishment for an 
offence under this section is considered inadequate in view of the escala-
tion in prices and is being enhanced. 
Clause 69.-The amendments proposed to section 105 of the Act are 
of consequential nature in v ~ew of the amendments to section 02 
vide claUle 60). • 
C[ause 'O.-The amendment proposed to section 101 of the Act en-
ables the Board to keep cantonment fund in the State Bank of India or 
a subsidiary bank or a natbnulised bank. The other amendments to this 
section are of consequential nature. 
Clause 71.-C1ause (d) of the second proviso to section 109 of the Act 
is being omitted as the E~bility of mainta!nlng public lunatic asylums 
and mental hospitals r.ests with the State Government under the Indian. 
Lunal:Y Act, 1912 (4 of 1912). 
Clauses 72 and 73.-The limit up to which the Executive Officer 
can enter into a contract under section 113 of the Act is proposed 
to be raised from rupees two hundred to rupees one thuusand in view of 
the escalation in prices. Similarly, the limits beyond which a contract 
should be in w"riting under secLon 114 of the Act and up to which the 
Executive Officer can sign for the Board in time of emergency are pro-
posed to be increased for the same reason from one hundred rupees to 
five hundred rupees and from five hundred rupees to two thousand ~d 
five hundred rupees respectively. 
Clause 74.-At pIesent there is no provision in section 116 of the Act 
for reguJ:ating the use of streets, culverts, markets, etc. It is now propos-
ed that such places sholJld be regulated under specific bye-laws. There 
is no provision for establishing and maintaining a system of publicinocu-
lation and it is now proposed to provide for it. At present, establishing 
and maintaining or supporting public hospitals and dispensaries 18 the 
obligatory duty of the, Board" Similarly. establishment and maintaining 
or assisting primary schools is its obligatory duty. Since these are pri-
marily State ·subjects, it is propClsed to omit these duties from the obU-
gatory list and include them in the dis'!retionary functions of the Board 
under section 117. I t is also proposed to amend section 116 to ensure 
that the Boards are obliged to establish and maintain civil ~ 
terV1ces and to prepare and implement town planning schemes. 

·Clause 75.-:-Consequent to the deletion from section 116 ot the Act 
cefLiiW oLlugatory dU~l~ 01 tne tioard. re!afJng r.o e~~acwwment and. mam-
teuau¥e 01 puo.l.1c .aO:'Plt.a!~, prlUlary scnoOUi, el.C., 1& is p.rO'po~d r.o provlUe 
tllt:1:ie duueo as OJ.l:icrt!uouary lWlCUOns of tne Board UUder secuon H'i. it 
18 pL'Oposed to prOVIde tuat It WUl be tne diScretionary IunCl.ion 01 the 
tiOaL'U 1.0 prOVlue re.a.iel on toe occurren..:e of 1100ClS. lammes or ottler 
naLuriU caJ.iWllues. ~ome aduiuonaJ. funcUons of a discretionary nature 
are now oeiug incJ.uded ill tnlS SeCfJOD. 
Clause 'i6.-The use 01 megaphone or loudspea:\:er which may dis-
tu.ro me pUDJ.ic peace or O'tueL' ana. toe use Ol. any prellu:;es Wltuout tne 
prevlous peullbl:iJ.on ot t!le JW(e:::utlve Ufficer tor any trade invoJ.vmg 
oite.wuve smell or &lOOKe are lOcluaed as DUlSallCe5 Wlder secuon lJ.~ ot 
Ule A.;t. 'l'ne powers 01 tne .J:Soard under sub-cl.ause (XV) 01 cJ.au.;e 
(a), Claw;es ~U), ~g) and (k) of suo-secl.ion (1) of. tile &ala &eCl.ion are 
proposed to be given to Ule Executive Officer as ttley are routlne 
ac1mjOlstrative lUDcUons. The eXIsting penaJ.l.y LOr an onence under suO-
se_tWn (1) or suo-section (~) ot seclolon HIS ot Ule Act is coIlSldered. 
inadequate in view ot the escalation in prices and is t eing en.aanced. 
The other amendments are verbal. 
Clause 77.-The scope of the term "military unit" in section 119(2,) 
of the Act is being widened so as to include an est.ao.usnment or a 
detaChment of troops. Provision regarding registration of dogs in military 
uruts is bemg made apphcable to such establ!8lunents or detachme'Ots. 
The power 0.( tne Board under suo-se. tion (3) of that section reg8!'ding 
confining the dogs suspected to be suttering irom rabies is proposed to 
be'vested in the l!;xecutive Officer as this is a matter relating to day-to-day 
~tratioIL 
Clause 78.-The amendment proposed to section 121 of the Act is 
verbal. .' M I 
Clause 79.-It is considered that no permission of the Board should 
be req.uired under se.tion 12ij of ttle Act for ttle purpose of illumination 
on the occasion of a festival or public or private entertainment as it is 
cWficult to control such celebrations. Accordingly, reference to such 
permission is being deleted. 
Clause 80.-The reference to the Cinematograph Act, 1918 in section 
124 of the Act is proposed to be changed into a reference to any other law 
relatmg to sanctionmg· of cinematograph films for exhibition. Per-
fo.rmances such as circus, carruval, exhibition, dance or other similar show 
for public recreation or amusement are bemg brought under the provi-
sions of this section. The penalty provided under that section is consider-
ed Inadequate in view of the escalation in prices and is being enhaD(:ech 
Clause 81.-The scope of section 125 of the Act relating to operations 
involving public hazards is proposed to be enlarged so as to cover 
quanies, building operations, et~., involving risk of injury to ~ns, 
property or goods. The quantum of fine is considered inadequate in VIeW 
of the escalation in prices and is being raised. 
Clause 82.-Besides caiTying out amendments in section 128 of the 
Act consequent on the inclusion of naval stations in section 3 (vide 
clause 3) the area of responsibility in respect of various autboritiee ia 
a cant~ent in the matte' of sanitation is proposed to be clHrly dd:DN. 

Clatile 83.-- This clause seeks to insert new section 130A in the- Act 
m order to fix respc:msibility on occupier of a building or land to collect 
ad depolit rubbish and other offensive matter. 
Clause 86.-The Executive Officer under section 133 of the Act can 
require occupiers of buildings to collect and deposit offensive matter re-
maining in the building in a receptacle for removal by the conservan-cy 
establishment of the Board. There is a restriction that such receptacle 
should be situated within one hundred feet of the nearest boundary of the 
premises. This being not practic~ble of implementation, it is proposej tc 
remove the restrictipn relating to distance. 
Clause 87.-This clause seeks to amend section 134 of the Act to 
provide that the power to sanction expenditure for filling up of tank, re-
servoir, etc., on the recommendation of the Health Officer could also be 
exercised by the Director, Defence Lands and Cantonments, the Com-
mand. in addition to Oificer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command. 
Clause 89.-As the functions under section 136 of the Act are routine 
administrative functions, it is proposed to vest these functions in the 
Executive Officer. The other amendment is for changing the reference ta.. 
the Indlc1l' ~'actories Act, 1911 into a reference to the Factories Act, 1948. 
Clat£le 91.-This clause seeks to substitute a new section for section 
1"1 of the Act to eJ'lat>le the Executive Officer to require land or building 
to be cle~nsej. ThlS new section is more comprehensive and is in line 
with we p.rovlsions contained in other municipal laws. 
Clause 94.-Section 150 of the Act is proposed to be substituted by a 
new seCtlo.a so as to bring it in line with similar provisions contained in 
other mUOlcipai laws. Penalty for furnishmg false in1ormation is al80 
proposed to be enhllDced in view of the escalation in prices. 
Clat£le 98.-The proviso to section 173 of the Act is obsolete and is 
being omitted. 
Clause 99.-The amendments proposed to section 178 of the Act· are 
claIificatory in nature. 
Clause 100.-This clause seeks to substitute a flew section for section 
1 'I8A of the Act to provide that for the sanctjon of building plans a notice 
by an individual intending to e.rect or re-erect a building in the civil area 
should be given to the Executive Officer. In the remaining area of the 
cantonment, however, the building application. will be submitted to the 
Board as usual. This is considered necessary to alleviate the hardship 
of the people intending to erect or re-erect buildings particularly in the 
civil· area where most of the constructions take place. 
Clause 101.-It is proposed to substitute section 179(1) of the Act so as 
to include within its scope any buildings originally constructed tot 
mmum habitation and later converted into commercial purposes. The 
other amendments are consequential to the substitution of new section 
for section 178A (vide clause 100). 
ClaUle 102.-'I'his clause seeks to amend section 180 of the Act and 
i,s consequenti'81 to the substitution of new section for section'l78A (Vide 
clauIe·1OO). 

Clause 103.-This clause seeks to insert new section 180A in the Act 
to empower the Executive Officer to exercise in civil areas the powers, 
duties and functions of the Board under certain sertions of the Act 
enumerated therein. 
Clause l04.-This clause seeks to amend section 181 of the Act. The 
amendment to substitute a new sub-section (2) for sub-section (2) of 
section 181 is consequential to the insertion of new section 18lA (vide 
clause l05). An additional provision is beinror made enablin~ the Board 
to refuse sanction of a buildin£! plan if a land has been placed under the 
manai{ement of the Board and the erection or re-eorection of a building 
c,?nstttutes a breach of the terms of the entru'stmE'nt of management. The 
otber amendments proposed are of consequential nature. 
Clause 105.-This clause seeks to insert new section 181A in the Act 
This new section is belng introduced to enable the Officer Commandinsr-
in-Chief, the Command to sanction a genera I scheme for imD{\sintt rei-
trictions on the erection or re-erection of bulldin£!s with:n !lu,.h Hmits as 
may be specified in the sanction for prevention of overcrow-ii'l~ or. for the 
purposes of sanitation. A safel!'Uard is bein£! 'Drovioip..-1 tl,,,,t ..,,, """" .,.... 
triction will be imposed without inviting objectionq or 'II""'''e~t'O'ls and 
after taking into consideration such objections and su~"tilr.ls. 
Clause 106.-This clause seeks to insert new seC'ti('\n , !l~~ in t., .. Act 
to make it obligatory on the part of every person inte",dfnr;! to erect or 
re-erect a building to give a notice of completion of the building ,ae"'Ord· 
ing to the sanctioned plans. 
Clause lOB.-This clause seeks to am€'nd section 186 (\f the Act r .. lat-
in/t to the Board's power to make bye-laws in re~Dp.ct: of ct'!rta;n mRtters. 
Underc100se (a) of this section. a notice of iQh·ntion to erect or re-erect 
a building in a cantonment should be given to the Board. Suh-l'IRuse 
(a) of this clause seeks to empower notices being £l'iwm also to theExe-
cutfvp Officer. Sub-clause (b) seeks to in~E'rt a new dau!le In the section 
to emnower the Boaord to make bye-law!'! to re£!ulate the manner in wht"b 
and the fonn in which a notice of comnletion of ereC'tion or re-e1"ection 
of anv bullding in the cantonment shall bf' given to the Board or tlte 
Executive Offi('er and the infonnation and nlans to he furnished with the 
not·('e. Sub-clause (c) seeks to amend clause (f) of the said secti<m ~ 
make certain amendments of dariftcatory nature. 
Clause llO.-Temporary occupation under section 101 of the AC't of 
any street or land vested in the Board requires permission of· the Board 
in writing. This power of the Board is proposed to be conferred on the 
Executive Officer subject to such conditions as the Board may prescribe. 
To prevent unauthorised occupation of any such street or land. it is 
proposed to empower the Executive Officer to remove any article placed 
without authority on such street or land and conftscate such article if 
tl}e person who placed the saId articles fails to offer satisfactory explana-
tion. Similarly, the Defence Estatelj OtBcer would be authorised to con-
flscate and remove 'any artid£' plaCE'{{ without authority on an: ... street or 
land under his management. .- --, 

'II 
Cl4use ll1.-The power of the Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the 
Command under sub-section (1) of section 192 of the Act is proposed to 
be concurrently given to the Director, Defen~e Land! and Cantonments, 
the Command. The power of the Board under sub-section (2), of the sald 
section is proposed to be given to the Executive OfRcer. 
Clause 112.-The amendment to substitute a new sub~section for sub-
section (1) of section 193 of the Act p!'()vi~E'~ to empo 'er the Board to 
rrlve names to variou,; areas in the cantonments, The exi8tin~ penalty 
under sub-section (2) of the said section is considered inadequate in 
view of the escalation in prices and is be'ng enhanced. The power of the 
Board under sub-section (3) of the said section is proposed to be given 
to the Executive Offtcer. 
Clause 115.-The power of the Officer Commanding-in-Chi~f. the 
Command to approve under section 200 of the Act the levy of staUages, 
rents or fees by the Board is proposed to be concurrently given to tbe 
Director, Defen"e Lands and Cantonments, the Command. Another pro-
riIo is being added to this section to enc;ure that no tenancy right is 
conferred on an individual who is allowed the use or occupation of any 
Itall, shop, etc., in a public market. 
Clau.ellft-The reference to slaughter of animals for sale of flesh 
to the troops is being deleted from clause (b) of sub-section (2) of 
section 202 of the Act as it is considered obsolete. The penalty for non-
. compliance of the conditi:ms as regards a market or slaughter-house is 
being enhanced due to escalation in prices. 
Clause 119.-The power to inspect slaughter-houses under sub-section 
(1) of section 207 of the Act is proposed to be given also to the Executive 
<>.n!cer.· . 
Clause 120.-Section 208 of the Act provides for the power of the 
l30ard to make bye-laws. A new clause is betn~ introduced. in that 
sc"tion enabling the Board to make bye-laws to regulate any other mat-
ter with respect to the regulation of any private rttarket or private 
_ slaughter-bouse. 
Clause 122.-Section 210 of the Act provides for the issue of licen-
ces for ('art"Vin~ on certain occuoations. It is proposed that vendors of 
S1'irftuou8 ll~U01'S should also obtain a licence for carrying on tbe trade. 
An E'nal)1ln~ provision is also being made empowering the Board to 
issue U.-ences for such other trade, calling or occupations as the Cen-
tral Gnve1"T\ment may notlty. The reference to the Indian Petroleum· 
Aet, 1899, in section 210 (3) is being chanJled into a reference to the 
}t\,..otroleum Act. 1934. At preBent, aection 210(4) provides that Ueencc 

fee should not exceed the cost of granting the licence. As the precise 
asses~ent of cost is not possible, it is proposed to amend thisprovisiQn 
to provide that fee chargeable by the Board in granting any licence 
should be reasonable. The other changes are verbal. 
C;~2f8e . ~.-:-The power un~er section 216 of. the Act to permit 
tbp .inlpor~ df any animal in~nded for human consumption or the 1lesh 
of any animal slaughtered outside the cantonment is proposed to be 
v~tecl ip. the ~xecuiive Oftker and he will exercise this power on the 
ad\rtce,· of t~e He81tli Officer. The existing penalty is being enhanced 
t-,·'·",'", . I 
du4' to e{calation in p,rices. I .>:.... ' , .' 
. Clause 131.-The p~wer of the Board under se'!tion 23() of the Act· 
~,.p~o'po~d to be giv!!O to the ExeC'Utive Officer. The other amend-
~~in that section is of a clarificatory nature. 
Ckluse 133.-The amendment proposed to sectiOl). 232 of the Act is of 
• clarjf\catory nature. 
Clause 134.-Penalty under section 236(1) of the Act for loitering, 
and importuning for purposes of prostitution is being enhanced due to. 
escalation in prices. The word "Naval" is being'introduced in sectign 
23f(a) to .C<>Ve.J;" naval stations also consequ~nt to the amendment of 
aection 3 (vide clause 3). 
(.1ause 135.-'1'he reference in section 238 of the Act to the British 
"'ffilY AC,t, Pe~ng obsolete is proposed tp be omitted. The re'ference to 
t~e .. ~, of Criminal Procedure, 1898, is being chari.ged into a reference 
to .. the ,CQ.de of Criminal Procedure, 1973. The other changes are conse-
quential and verbal. . 
C14u.se 136.-This clause seeks to amend section 239 of the Act and 
the change is consequential to the insertion df a new definition of the 
expression "Forces lt in the Act. 
Clausea 138 and 139.-The powers to authorise entry under section 
2~1 and of inspection under secti(m243 of the Act are proposed to be 
givep to' the Executiye Oftlc;er. 
Cla14Se 140.-The present provisio~ in .sec.tiOI), 247 of the Act. relating 
W eqt,J:;y i~ premises without notice are being amplified to cov.;r COIn-
DlerciaJe.tabUahmeQ-ts, etc. 
Clct~e lAl.-1'here is no provision at present in section 249 of the 
A4:t tp impose. penalty on a ~son wh,o obstructs or molests a person 
Nrting on peha}f of the Board. A provisi.,on is now being in~oduc~d to 
~er su~h cases. The penalty for causing obstruction is pJ:oposed to be 
enhanced in view of the escalation in prices. 
ciause 142.-ln section 250 of the Act, the word "Navar' is being 
fbtroduced to cover' persons in the employinent of the Indian Navy. "nUs 
l6nendmeiltiS co!llequent to the amendment of section 3 (tride clause 3), 

Clause 143.-In the Act, there is no proVIsIon under which an 
attempt to commit an offence is to be reported to the Board by the police. 
This lacuna is 'proposed to be removed by suitably amending section 
251 of the Act. 
Clause 144.-The exisUng provisions in !?ection 253 of the Act regard-
klg authentication and validity of notices issued by or on behalf of the 
Board are being amplified to bring the provisions in line with other 
municipal laws. 
Clause 145.- The existing provision in section 256 of the Act is 
belng amplified because some of the powers of the Board are being 
vested either in the civil area committee or the Executive Officer. In 
the exi8ting section, there is no provision to indicate as to how the 
expenses incurred by the Board on account of non-compliance· ~ 
notices, etc., issued by it or on lts behalf are to be recovered and this 
is being clarified. It has also been provided that for the purposes of 
removing an unauthorised construction or encroachment on Govern-
ment land, the Board or the civil area committee or the Executive 
Officer may request a police officer to render such assistance as might 
be considered necessary and it shall be the duty of such police officer 
to render forthwith such assistance on such requisition. In the absence 
of an enabling provision in this regard, the Board and its servants had 
been experiencing a lot of difficulty. 
Clause 146.-This clause seeks to i~sert new section 256A in tne Act 
til cover the contingencies in which the occupier of property prevents 
the owner from complying with any lawful requisition or notices issued 
by the Board. ' ' 
Clause 147.-As powers and functions of the Board under certain 
sectiollB of the Act are proposed to be given to the Executive OfBcer or 
the civil area committee, the amendments to section 257 of the Act are 
consequential in nature. 
Clause 148.-At present, the rent of buildings and land and any other 
money recoverabie by the Board under the Act or the rules made there-
under cah be recovered in accordance with the procedure prescribed in 
sec~ion 259 of the Act. It is proposed to amend this section to provide also 
for recovery of rent on land and buildings due under leases or licences 
execufed by or in favour of a Board or the Defence Estates Officer. It is 
also proposed to provide fur attachment of immovable propertv as one of 
the modes of recovery. In view of fhe coming into force of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the reference of the Magistrate in 
the 'section is substituted with the reference to Judidal Magistrate. It 
. is proposed to insert a new sub-section (3) enabling a Judicial Magistrate 
fo recover the amount of tax, rent or money due to the Board as if such 
amount were a fine recoverable under a sentence passed bv him 'and the 
provisions of sections 421 and 422 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, '1973 
• shall apply to the recovery of such amount. The other amendment is 
consequential. -~-, 
Clauses 149. and 154.-The amendment to sections 266 and 271 hag 
become necessarv in view df the coming into foree of the Code of Crimi-
nal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974). 
Clause 151.-This clause seeks to insert a new section 268A in the 
Ac:t to enable the Board to prosecute a company for offence!! committed 
under the Act. . 

!, 
) 
Cla:u.se 152.-Section 269 of the Act relates to cancellation of licences 
by the Board. It is proposed to substitute a new section for this section 
to confer this power also on the civil area committee and to bring within 
its scope written permissions. It is also proposed to confer on the Board 
or the civil area committee, the power to cancel or suspend a licence 01' 
writfen permission in a case where the llcence' or written permission has 
been secured through misrepresentation or fraud. 
Clause 153.-Section 270 of the Act relates to recovery of amot.m.t 
payable in respect of damage to cantonment property. This section is 
being amended to effect recovery also by atta('hment and sale of immo-
vable property and to make the prOvisions of sections 421 and 422 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) applicable to such recovery. 
Clause 155.-:..The reference in sectiop 274 of the Act to ,the Indian 
Limitation Act, 1908, is being changed into a reference to the Limitation 
Act, 1963 and the other amendments are consequential. 
Clause 156.-Section 276 of the Act provides for the suspension 
of action pending appeal. It is proposed to substitute this section 
to provide for the said suspension only if the appellate 'authority 
so directs. This, however, is not applicable to an order contained in a 
notice issued under section 140, 176 or 238 of the Act. In this list of . 
exceptions, notices issued under section 181 and section 206 are proposed 
to be added. 
Clause 157·-Section 280 of the Act empowers the Central Govern-
ment to make rules. For the existing sub-clauses (c), (e) and (f) 
of sub-iection (1) of the said section relating to the service conditions 
of servants of Boards, a comprehensive clause is being inserted as clause 
(c). Sub-clause (cc) of the said sub-section is being omitte~ as a result 
of the proposal to constitute Defence Lands and Cantonments Services 
under article 309 of the Constitution. 
Clause 158 -Difficulties have arisen with regard to rules framed under 
the Act relating to service conditions which had to be given retrospective 
effect. However, this could not be done in the absence of an enabling 
provision in the Act. It is now proposed to amend section 281 of the Act 
SUitably with adequate safeguards. New sub-section (3) provides for 
laying of the rules made by' the Central Government before each House 
of Parliament as per the recommendation of the Centre on Subordinate 
Legislation. 
Clause 159.-The existing provisions contained in section 282 of the 
Act enabling a Board to frame bye-laws for various purposes to regulate 
the day-to-ctay administration of the cantonment are being amplified. 
wherever considered necessary. 
Clause 160.-Tbis clause seeks to amend section 283 of the Act relating 
to penalty for breach of bye-laws. Existing section 283 is being renum-
bered as sub-section (1) thereof. Un4er sub-clause (a) the penalties 
prescribed therein for breach of bye-laws are being enhanced due to 
escalation in prices. Sub .. dause (b) seeks to insert new sub-section (2) 
to the effect that any bye-law framed by the Board may provide that a 
person contravening the same would be required to remedy, so far a. 
Hes within his power, the damage Or mischief, if any, caused by such 
contravention. - , 

Clause 161.-histing section 286A of the Act is being re-struetUred 
to bring it in conformity with the various amendments propol8d to be 
made in the Act . 
.. Clause 162.-The refereI),ce to the Indian Registr~oD: .~ iQ.s~~ 
~8! of the Act is being cilap.ged intQ a reference to t~ Regiatr~~~; ~ 
Provision is also being made that information pertainingto ... ~I~~ 
relating to a property situated. within the cantonment registered with 
the· ·RegiStrar or the Sub-Registrar will be submitted by the Registrar 
or the Sub-Registrar to the Executive OffiA:ler arid the Defence ·JrBtatea 
Officer. 
Cla~e . 163.-As the' Executive Ot&er. is the keeper o~. all ~~J 
maintained. on behalf of the Board, he is being authorised, instead ot the 
Board, wider section 289 of the. Act, to certify documents for the 'pur-
poses of their admissibility in evidence. 
qause 164.-This clau~e seeks to amend section 291 of the Act to" 
provide that with. reference to the .pplication of the GoverDIQent 
Buildings Act, 1899 within a cantonment, Ulepower ofa Ste~ Go~~ 
ment under that Act should. be construed as . vesting, in th~ Central' 
Government. I . 
Clauses 165 and 166.-These clauses seek respectively tQ amend S~Ile-, 
dule 1 ahd Schedule II to the Act, and· the amendmentS are co~,;; 
Ual to the amendments proposed in section 92 of the Act (vide clali8e80). 
" .. '. .,.,' '.'/ ,., } 
, Claus.e 167.-Schedu1,.V to the Act s~~esthat anY.'.pe~n. aanj!' Yr~ 
by an order made under ,any of the seCt~ons ~nuine~~ .~~, .. ' ' 
~refer an appeal to thea\tt!lority specified in that 'belWt. it 'i~: ~~ IL ·:, '! 
to specify that an order under section 13B, 142 or 187 will be,ap~tablf 
m view of the amendmentswoposed to sections'135, 136, 181,219, 221,t1iI.d 
ft4, an order passed there'tlDder will also be appe81ab;1e. ,';l'hls c~~ 
seeks to substitute a new Schedule for existing Schedule V, for gtVfDI 
dect to the said proposal. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to amend section 31 of the Cantoiunenta 
Act which deals with the power of the Central Government to make 
rilles i:egulating elections. 'Th.is rule-making power is being amplified 
lo" inClude therein a new clause empowering the Central Government 
to make rules for specifyiItg the fee to be paid for admission and consi~ 
~ration of any application relating to election Or election disputes. 
Clnuse 43 of the Bill seeks to amend section 66 of the Cantonments 
AJ;~ to ~mpower the Central Government not only to make rules speci-
~y!ng t~ for.m in which assessment list is to be prepared, but also the 
manner in' which such list is to be prepared. 
Clause 108 of the Bill seeks to amend section 186 of the Cantonments 
Ac~ to empower the Board to make bye-laws to regulate the manner 
in, which ,and the form in which a notice of completic,n of erection or 
r~e~ecti6n of any building in the cantonment shall be given. to the Baard 
or the EXecutive Officer, as the case may be, and the information and 
plans to be furnished with the notice. Certain other amendments of 
clarificatory nature are being made in sub-clauses (iv), (vi) and (x) of 
that section. 
Clause 120 of the Bill seekS to amend section 208 of the Cantonments 
Act to empower the Board to make bye-laws in respect of any other 
matter with respect to the regulation of any private market or private 
slaughter-house. 
Clause 157 of the Bill seeks to amend secti.on 280 of the Cantonments 
Act which empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry 
out the purposes and objects of the Act. It is proposed to substitute 
clause (c) of sub-section (2) of that section to empower the Central 
Government to make rules fur the tenure of office, salaries and allow-
ances, provident funds, pensions, gratuities, leave of absence and other 
conditions of service of servants of the Boards. Consequently, clauses 
(cc) , (e) and (f) of the said sub-section are being omitted. 
Clause 158 of the Bill seeks to insert new sub-section (3) in section 
281 of the Cantonments Act to empower the Central Government to 
make rules, under substituted clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 
280, with retrospective effect and with adequate safeguards. New sub-
section (4) proposed to be inserted in tais section provides for laying of 
the rules made by the Central Government before each House of 
Parliament. 
Clause 159 of the Bill seeks to amend section 282 of the Canton-
ments Act to empower the Board to make bye-laws in respect of other 
matters as speCified in that clause. The important matters in respect of 
which such bye~laws may be made are listed below:-
(a) the enforcem~nt· of compulsory vaccination and inocula-
tion and levy of fees where such vaccination or inoculation ,.s 
~ at the houses of residents; 
6, I" 

(b) the regulation of any description of ,tramc in the streets 
and the enforcement of measures for the reduction of noise caused 
thereby or the prohibition of any description oil such tramc; 
(c) the form of and the particulars which shall be contained in a 
development scheme or an improvement scheme and the manner in 
,which such scheme shall be framed or altered; . 
(d) the prescribing of the fee payable for any licence (except 
as otherwise specifically provided in the Act) or for any written 
permission granted by the Board; 
(e) the regulation of supply of copies of official documents 
and prescribing the fee payable in respect thereof; 
(f) the regulation of permission for granting licence for use 
of loud-speakers and prescribing the fee payable in respect 
thereof. 
The matters in respect of which rules and bye-laws may be made 
are generally matters of procedure and of administrative detail and 
It is not practicable to provide for them in the legislation. The dele-
gation of legislative power is, therefore, of ~ norm'al character. 

ANNEXURE 
ExTaAcrs FROM THE CANTONMENTS ACT, 1924 
(2 OF 1924) 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER I 
PRl:LIMINARY 
• • • • • 
Z. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
~~~ I' 
• • • • • 
(iia) "boundary walP' means a wall which abuts on a street 
and which does not exceed eight feet in height; 
(iii) "brigade area" meaDS one of the brigade areas, whether 
occupied by a brigade or not, into which India is for military purposes 
for the time being divided, and includes for all or any of the' purposes 
of this Act any area which the Central Government may, by noti- • 
fication in the Official Gazette, declare to be a brigade area for such 
P'll1>ose or purposes; ! 
• • • • • 
(vii) "casual vacancy" means a vacancy occurring otherwise than 
by efflux of time in the office of an elected member of a Board; 
• • • • • • 
(xii) "Executive Engineer" means the Public Works o~cer of 
that grade, or the Officer of the Military Engineer Services of the cor-
responding grade, haVing charge of the military works in a canton-
ment or where more than one such oflicer has charge of the military 
works in a cantonment S'llch one of those officers as the OfBcer Com-
manding the station may designate in this behalf, and includes the 
ofBcer of whatever grade in immediate executive engineering charge 
of a cantonment; I 
• • • • • 
(xx) "market" includes any place where persons assemble for 
the purpose of selling meat, flsh, fruit, vegetable, livestock or any 
other article of food; 
(xxa) "Military Estates Officer" means the officer appointed by 
the Central Government to perform the duties of the Military 
Estates Officer under rules made under clauses (a) anl,i (b) of sub-
section (2) of section 280; 
63 
DeIId-
tions. 

DeftDltion 
of canton-
ment.. 
(:ui) "military offtcer" means-
(a) a person who, being an officer within the meaning c.f 
the Indian Army Act, 1911, or the Indian Air Force Act, 19S2, 
is commissioned aDC\. in pay as an officer doing military or air 
force duty with mi __ y or air forces, or is an officer doing such 
duty in any arm. braneh or part of those forces; Qr 
· (b) a person doing military or air force duty as a warrant 
oftlaer with either of. those .forces or with any arm. branch, or 
'part thereof, whether he is or is not an officer within the meanmg 
of the Indian Army Act; 1911, or the Indian Air Force Act, 
1932; . 
(:z:xU) "nuisance" includes any act, omission, plaeeor thing 
w.hich causes or is likely to cause injury, danger, annqy~ or 
oftence to the sense of sight, smell or hearing, or which is or .~y ~ 
dangerous to life or injurious to health or property; 
• • • •• • 
(xxiv) "Oftlcer Commanding the District" mean, the· QtBcer 
Commanding anyone of the districts into which India is for military 
purposes for the time being divided, or any brigade area which does 
not form part of any such district, or any area which the Celltral 
Government may, by notification in the OffiCial Gazette, decl&le to 
be Bueh a district for· ell or any of the purposes of this Act; . 
(.rxiVtJI) "Officer Commanding the station" means the mUitary 
oftlcer ~or the time being in command of the forces in a cantonment, 
or, if that officer is the Officer Commandi'1g the District or Officer 
Commanding~in-Chief, the Command, the military officer W;ho would 
be in command of those forces in the absence of the Ofticer Com-
, ','-manding the District and Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Com-
mand; I 
• • ... ... • 
(xzxv) "soldier" means a person who is a soldier or airman 
within the meaning of the Army Act or tfie Air Force Act, or ia sub-
ject to the Indian Army Act, 1911, and who i:; not a military offtcer; 
• •• • • • 
CHAPTER II 
DEnNmON AND DELIMl'TATION OF CANTONMENTS 
S. (1) The Central Government may, by notific~tion in the Q,ftlcial 
Gazette, r\eclare any place or pl'aces in which any. part of the Indian 
Army or the Indian Air Force is quartered or which, being in the 
vic1!1ity ot any such place or places, 'is or are required for the .service of 
such forces to be a cantonment for the purposes of this Act ~nd of all 
other enactments for the time being in force, and may, by a like. notl-
8catioD, declare that any cantonment shall cease to be a cantonment. 
• • • • • 
8 of 1911. 
1f of 1131. 
8011.1L 
If of 1832. 
"and .. 
Vlct, c. 58. 
8 of 1811. 

dI I • 
CHAPTER III 
CANTONMENT BoAiws 
BoaTels 
10. For every cantonment there shall be a Cantonment Board and 
an Executive Officer. 
• • • • • 
12. (1) The Executive Officer of every cantonment shall be appoint-
ed by the Central Govern'llent, or by such person as the Central Gov-
ernment may authorise in this behalf, from the Military Lands and 
Cantonments Service constituted by rules made under section 280: 
Provided that where a member of the Military Lands and Canton-
ments Service is not readHy available for such appointment, a Military 
Officer may be appointed as the Executive Officer for a period not ex-
ceeding three months: 
Provided further that an Executive Officer appointed before the com-
24 of 1936. mencement of the Cantonments (Amendment) Act, 1936, shall, unless 
the C~ntral Government otherwise directs in any case, be deemed to 
have been duly appointed in accordance with this suh-section. 
24 of 1936. 
(2) Not less than half the cost of the salary of the Executive Offtcer 
shall be paid by the Central Government and the balance from the 
cantonment fund: 
Provided that the salary of an Executive Officer appointed before the 
commencement of the Cantonments (Amendment) Act, 1936, shall, until 
the Central Government otherwise directs, continue to be paid from the 
source from which it was being paid at the commencement of the said 
Act. 
(3) The Executive Officer shall be the Secretary of the Board and of 
every committee of the Board, but shall not be a member of the Board 
or of any such committee. . 
13. (1) • • • • • 
(3) In Class I Cantonments, the Board shall consist of the following 
members, namely:.- I 
• • • • • 
(b) a Magistrate of the first class nominated by the District 
Magistrate; 
• • • • • 
(4) In Class II Cantonments, the Board shall consist of the following 
members, namely:- ~ 
• • • • • 
(b) a Magistrate M the first class nominated by the District 
Magistrate; 
• • • • • • 
Canton-
ment 
Board and 
Executive 
Officer. 
Appoint-
ment of 
Execut.ive 
Officer. 
Constitu·· 
tion of 
Canton-
ment 
Boards • 

Power to 
vary cons-
titution 
of Boards 
in special 
drown-
stances. 
Term 
of offtce 
Of mem-
bers. 
Filline of 
vacancies. 
Vacancies 
in 8I)eclal 
U. (1) ..• • • • • 
(2) Upon the making 'Of a declaration under sub-section (1), the 
Board in the cantonment shall consist of the following members, 
namely:-
• • • • * 
(c) one member, not being a person in the service of the Gov-
ernment, nominated by the Officer Commanding the 'station . 
• • • • • . ' 
15. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office 
of a member of a Board shall be three years and shall commence from 
the date of the notification of his election or nomination under sub-
section (7) of section 13, or from the date on which the vacan<:y has 
occurred in which he is elected or nominated, whichever date is later: 
Provided that the Central Government may, when satisfied that it is 
necessary in order to avoid administrative difficulty, extend the term of 
office of all the elected members df a Board by such period, not exceed-
ing one year, as it thinks fit. 
• 
,~ 
• • * 
(3) The term of office of a member elected to ft11 a casual vacancy 
shall commence from .the date of election, and shall continue so long only 
as the member in whose place he is elected would have been entitled to 
hold office if the vacancy had· not occurred, 
• • • • • 
18. (1) * * . • • • 
(2) A casual vacancy shall be filled by a casual election the date of 
which shall be fixed by the Central Government by notification in the 
Official Gazette, and shall be, as soon as may be, after the occurrence of. 
the vacancy: 
Pro~ded that no casual election shall be held to fill a vacancy occur-
ring within three months of any date on which tne vacancy will occur 
by' efflux of time, but such vacancy shall be filled at the next ordinary 
election. 
17. (1) • • • • • 
cases. (3) For the pUI1pOses of sub-section (2) of section 16, a member 
nominated in pursuance of sub-section (2) o'f this section shall, where 
there has been a division of the cantonment into wards or of the inhabi-
• tants thereof into classes, be deemed to have been elected by such ward 
or class: as the case' may be, as the Central Government 'may at the 
time of making the nomination or at any time thereafter declare . 
• • • .. 

'. 
II. (1) .Every person who is by virtue of his oflice, or who is nom!-
Bated or elected to be, a member of a Board shall, before taking his seat, 
make 6t a meeting of the Board an oath or affirmation of his allegiance 
to the Cortstitution of India in the follOwing fonn, namely:-
"I, A. B., having 
become 
-------
been elected 
been nominated 
a member 
of this Board, do solemnly swear (or afRrm) that I will be faithful 
and bear true allegiance to the Constitution Of India as by law estab-
lished, and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am 
about to enter.". 
(2) If any such person fails to make the oath or aftlrmation within 
such time as the Central Government considers reasonable, the Cen-
tral Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazet~e, declare his 
seat to be vacant. 
Oath ~ 
affirma-
tion. 
19. (1) Any nominated or elected member of a Board who wishell to Resign.-
resign his office may forward his resignation in writing through the, tion. 
President of the Board to the Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Com-
mand, who shall forward it for orders to the Central Government. 
(2) If the Central Government accepts the resignation, such accep-
tance shall be communicated to the Board, and thereupon the seat of the 
member resigning shall become vacant. 
20. (1) The Officer Commanding the station if a member of the 
Board shall be the Presid~t of the Board: 
Provided that when a military officer holding the oftlce of President 
ceases to be the Oftlcer Commanding the station merely by reason of a 
temporary absence from the station on -duty or on station leave, or 
during the transfer of his headquarters to a hill station, he shall not 
vacate the office of President. 
'" '" '" '" '" 
President 
and Vice-
PresideRt. 
21. (1) The term of office of a Vice-Presklent shall be three yean Term of 
or the residue of his term of office as a member, whichever is less. office of Vice-Pre-' 
'" • • '" 
22. (1) It shall be the duty of the President of every Board-
• • '" • 
(b) to exercise supervision and control over the financial and 
executive administration of the' ,Board; 
• "' . • 
sident. 
Duties ot 
. President.. 

Duties lilt 
the Exe-
cutive 
Offtcer. 
Qualifu:a-
\ion for 
hein, a 
..... ber 
ot 
the 
Board. 
Interpre-
t.tim1. 
Power to 
Dlake 
rules re-
gulating 
election •. 
68 
14. The· Executive Officer shall perform all the a~ties imposed upon 
him by or under this Act, and shall be responsible for the custody of all 
the records of the Board, and shall arrange for the performance of such 
duties relative to the proceedings of the Board or of any Committee at 
the Board or of any Committee of Arbitration constituted under this 
Act, as those bodies may respectively impose on him, and shall comply 
with every requisition of the Board, on any matter pertaining to th. 
administration of the cantonment. 
• • • • • 
%8. (1) Save as hereinafter prOvided, every person, not being a per-
son in receipt of pay in the military or civil service of Government, 
whose name is entered on the electoral roll of a cantonment shall be 
qualified for election as a member of the Board in that cantonment. 
• • • • • 
(2) No person shall be qualified for election or nomination as a mem-
ber of a Board, if he-
• • • • • 
(dd) is an offtcer or servant, permanent or temporary, of • 
Board; or I 
• • • • • 
Provided that-
• • • • • 
(ii) a person shall not be deemed to have any interest in such a 
contract or work as is referred to in clause (d) by reason only ot 
. his having a share or interest in-
• • • • • 
(d) the sale to the Board of any articles in which M-
regularly trades or the purchase from the Board of any articles, 
to a value in either case not exceeding Rs. 1,500 in the aggregate. 
in any year during the period of the contract or work. 
21. For the purposes of sections 26, 27 and 28-
(a) "person" means an individual human being, and 
• • • • • 
31. The Central Government may, either generally or ~pecially for-
any cantonment or group of cantonments, after previous publication .. 
~ake, r.ules consistent with this Act to regulate all or any of the follow-. 
Ing matters for the purpose ~f the holding of elections under this Act~ 
namely:-
• • • • • 

• 
Members 
32. No member of a Board shall vote at a meeting of the Board or 
of any Committee of the Board on any question relating to his own 
conduct or on any matter, ether than a matter affecting generally the 
inhahitants 01. the cantonment, which affects his own pecuniary interest 
or the valuation of any property in respect of which he is directly or 
indirectly interested, or I)f any property of or for which he is a manager 
or agent. 
33. Every member of a Board shall be liable for the loss, waste or 
misapplication of any money or other property belonging to the Board if 
such loss, waste or misapplication is a direct consequence of his neglect 
or misconduct while such member; and a suit for compensation for the 
same may be instituted ngainst him either by the Board or by the 
Central Government. 
34. (1) • • • • • 
(2A) The Central Government may, on receipt of a report from the 
Officer Commanding the station, through .the Officer Commanding-in-
Chief, the Command, remove from a Board any military officer nominat-
ed a member of the Board who is, in the opinion of the Officer' Com-
manding the station, unable to discharge his duties as member of the 
Board and has failed to resign his office. 
• • • • • 
Servants 
36. (1) • • • • • 
(of) Every person applying for employment as a servant of a Board 
shan. if he is related by blood or marriage to any member of the Board 
or to any person, not being a menial servant, in receipt of remuneration 
from the Board, notify the fact and the nature of such relationship to 
the appointing authority before the appointment is made, and i1. he bas 
failed to do so, his appointment shall be invalid but without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done by him . 
• • • • • 
39. (1) • • • • • 
(2) If a quorum is not present, the President shall adjourn the meeting 
and the business which would have been brought before the origin'81 
meeting if there had been a quorum present thereat. shall be brought 
before, and may be transacted at, an adjourned meeting, whether there 
~ a quorum present Or not. 
r' .!. • • • • 
Membera 
not to 
vote on 
matter 
in which 
he is in-
terested. 
Liability 
of mept-
hers. 
Removal 
of mem-
bers. 
Dilquali-
fleation 0'1 
person all 
servant of 
Board, 
Quorum. 

Minute 
MeeUnp 
to be pub-
lic. 
Method 01 
decidinl 
questions. 
Poewer 
to make 
regula-
tions. 
Joint ac-
tion with 
other loc&~ 
authority. 
41. (1) Minutes of the proceedings of each meeting shall be recorded 
• a book and shall be signed by the President before the close of the 
meeting, and shall, at sllch times and in such place as may be fixed by 
the Board, be open to inspection free of charge by any inhabitant of 
the cantonment. 
(2) Copies. of the minutes shall, as soon as possible after each meet-
ing, be forwarded for information to the Officer Commanding-in-Chief, 
the Command, the Officer Commanding the District, the Officer Com-
manding the brigade area, the District Magistrate and the Military 
Estates Officer. 
42. Every meeting of a Board shall be open to the public unless in 
any cue the President, for reasons to be recorded in the minutes, other-
wise. dir~ts. 
43. (1) • • • • • 
(2) In the case of an equality of votes, the President shall have a 
.cond or casting vote, 
• • • • • 
44. (1) • • • • • 
(3) No regulation made under this section shall take effect until it 
has been published in such manner. as the Central Government may 
direct: 
a; (1) A Board may-
• • • • • 
(b) with the previous sanction of the Officer Commanding-in-
Chief, the Command and the State Government concerned, enter 
into an agreement with any other local authority regarding the levy 
of any tax or toll whereby the said tax or toll respectively leviable 
by the Board and by such other local authority may be levied toge-
ther instead of s.eparately within the limits of the aggregateirea 
comprising the areas subject to the control of the liJoard and such 
~her local authority. 
• • • • • 
(3) When any agreement such as is referred to in clause (b) of sub-
...cUon (1) has been entered into, then-
(a) where the agreement relates to an octroi or ~ina1 tax 
or toll, the other local authority with which the Board has made such 
agreement shall have the same powers to establish octroi limits and 
octroi stations and olace!; for the collection of the terminal tax l.and 
terminal toll within4 the cantonment, 'as it has within the area ordi-
narily subject to its cont~l; . 
(b) such other local authority shall have the same power of·· 
collecting ·such tax or· toll in the cantonment, and the .pr()viBiOO8o'f 
any enactment in force relating to the levy of· lJ\leh.·tax·-or toll by 
Mlch oth,er local authority shall apply in the same manner, as if the 
cantonment were comprised with'n the area ardinarily S'Ilbject to its 
control j and 
• • • • 

7' 
Control 
46. The Central Government may at any time require a Board-
(a) to produce any record, correspondence, plan or other docu-
ment in its possession or under its control; 
(b) to furnish any return, plan, estimate, statement, account or 
statistics relating to its proceedings, duties or works; 
(c) to fumish or obtain and furnish any report. 
47. The Centra~ Government or the Officer Commanding-in-Cbief, 
the Command, may depute any person in the service of the Government 
to inspect or examine any department of the office of, or any service or 
work undertaken by, or thing belonging to, a Board, and to report 
thereon, and the Board and its officers and servants shall be bound to 
afford the person so deputed access at all reasonable times to the pre-
mises and property of the Board and to all records, accounts and other 
documents the inspection of which he may consider necessary to enable 
him to discharge his duties. 
48. The Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, .nay, by order 
in writing,-
(a) call for any book or document in the possession or under 
the control of the Board; 
(b) require the Board to furnish such statements, accounts, reports 
and copies of documents relating to its proceedings, duties or works 
as he thinks fit. 
.... ... ... ... ... 
51. (1) If the President dissents from any decision of the Board, 
which he considers prejudicial to the health, welfare or discipline of 
the troops in the cantonme~t, he may, for reasons to be recorded in the 
minutes, by order in writing, direct the suspension of action thereon for 
any period not exceeding one month and, if he does so, shall forthwith 
refer the matter to the Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, the 
reference being made, save in cases where the Officer Commanding the 
District is himself the Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, for 
the p'llrposes of this. Act, through the Officer Commanding the District, 
who may make such recommendations thereon as he thinks fit . 
... ... ... ... 
CHAPTER IV 
SPIRITIJOUS LIQUORS AND INTOXICATING DRUGS 
56. If within a cantonment, or within such limits adjoining a canton-
ment as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, define, any person not subject to military or air-torce law or any 
person subject to military or air-force law otherwise than as a military 
officer or a soldier knowingly barters, sells or supplies, or offers or 
attempts to barter, sell or supply, any spirituous liquor or intoxicating 
drug to 'Or for the use of any soldier Or follower or soldier's wife <?f minor 
child without the written permission of the Officer Commanding the 
1ttation or of. some person authorised by the Oftlcer Commanding the 
Itation to grant such permission, he shall he punishable with fine which 
may extend to one hundred rupees, or with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three months, or with both. 
Power of 
Central 
Govern· 
ment to 
require 
production 
of docu-
ments. 
Inspection. 
Power to 
~all for 
aocuments. 
Power to 
override 
decision 
cJf Board. 
Unautho-
rised 
saleot 
spiri tuolll 
liquor or 
intoxicat-
Ing drug. 

Unautho-
rised pos-
session of 
spiri-
tuous 
liquor. 
Arrest of 
persons 
and sei-
zure and 
confisca-
tion of 
things 
for offen-
eea 
apinst 
the two 
iast fore-
going sec-
tions. 
Ge~ral 
power of 
taxation. 
7'l 
57. If within a cantonment, or within any limits defined under section 
56,-
(a) any person subject to military or air-force law otherwise 
~han as a military officer or a soldier, or 
(b) the wife or servant of any such person or of a soldier, 
has in hi!'; or her possession, except on behalf of the Central Government 
OT for the private use of a military officer, more than one quart of any 
srjrituol1s liquor, other than fermented malt-liquor, without the written 
permission of the Officer Comma\lding the station or of some person 
authorised by the Officer Commanding the station to grant Guch permis-
sion, he or she shall be punishable, in the case of a first offence, with ftne 
which may extend to fifty rupees, and, in the case of a subsequent offence, 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with 
fine which may extend to one hundred rupees. 
;tS. (1) Any police officer or excise officer may, without an order from 
a Magistrate and without a warrant, arrest any person whom he finds 
committing an offence under section 56 or section 57, and may seize lind 
detain any spirituous liquor or intoxicating drug in respect of which such 
an offence has been committed and any vessels or coveringo~ in which the 
liQuor or drug is contained. 
(2) Where a person accused of an offence under section 56 has been 
previously convicted of an offence under that section, an officer in charge 
of a police station may, with the written permission of a Magistrate, seize 
and detain any spirituous liquor or intoxicating drug within the canton-
ment or within any limits defined under that section which, at the time (If 
the alleged commission of the subsequent offence, belonged to, or was in 
the possession of. Guch person. 
• • • • • 
(4) Subject to the provisions of Chapter XLIII of the Code of Crimi-
nal Procedure, 1898, anything, seized under sub-sect!on (1) Or sub-section 5 of 1898. 
(2) and not confiscated under sub-section (3) shall be reatored to the 
person from whom it was taken. 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER V 
TAXATION 
Imposition of taxation 
60. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Any tax' imposed under this section shall take effect from the date 
of its notification in the Oftlclal Gazette. 
• • • • • 

. . 7) 
62. (1) Any inhabitant of the Cantonment may, within thirty ct8YI 
from the publication of the notice under section 61, submit to the Board 
an objection in writirl.g to all or any of the proposals contained therein 
and the Board shall take any objection into consideration and pass orders 
thereon by special resolution. 
'(2) If the Board decides to modify its propQSals or m:ay of them, It 
shall re-publish the modified proposals in the manner provided by section 
61 indicating that the proposals are in modification of the proposals pre-
viously published; and ,the provisions of sub-section (1) of this section 
shall apply to such modified proposals. 
(3) When the Board has finally settled the proposals, it shall submit 
t1iem. along with the objections, if any, made in connection therewith to 
the Central Government through the Officer Commanding-In-Chief, the 
Command . 
• • • • • • 
86. When a tax assessed on the annual value of buildings or lands 
or both is imposed .. the Board shall cause an assessment list of all build-
IDas or lands in the cantonment, or df both, as the case may be, to be 
prepared in such form as the Central Government may by rule 
prescribe. " '. ., 
67. When the assessment list has been prepared, the Board shall give 
public notice thereof, and of the place where the list or a copy thereof 
may be inspected, and every person claiming to be the owner, lessee or 
oeeupier of any property included in the list, and any authorised agaat 
of such person, shall be at liberty to inspect the list and to make extracts 
therefrom free of charge. 
68. (1) The Board shall, at the same time, give public notice of a 
date, not less than one month thereafter, when it will proceed to con-
sider the valuations and assessments entered in the assessment list, altd, 
in all cases in which any property is 'for the first time assessed or the 
useasment is increased, it shall also give written notice thereot to the 
owner and to any lessee or occupier of the property. 
(2) Any objection to a valuation 01' assessment shall be made In 
writing to the Board before the date fbred in the notice, and shall state 
in what respect the valuation or assessment is disputed, and all objections 
so made shall be recorded in a register to be kept for the purpose by the 
Board.· I ~' .. ~.'~' , 
•• • • • • 
Objectlw 
and dis-
posal 
thereot 
Publlca-
tion of 
~ 
ment Hat. 
Revisioza 
.. UIeJ8-
ment Uat. 

p~,,-. 
ti~'Ot 
new 
a~ 
menlli.st. 
Notice 
of eree&. 
of build-
inss. 
DemoU-
tion, etc., 
.f.b~ 
... 
_ i.. , __ 
74 
7,1. n. Board shall px:e~e a DeW: a~t Jist at l~as~once In 
every ,th,teeyears, 8lld tor this purpose the provisions of 6ections 66 to 71 
s}liUI. apply in. l~e manner as, they apply for the purpose of the pp.p~ra­
tl~. of, rm, llS8~ent li$t for the first time. 
• • • • • • 
.'1" ... (l). • • • • • 
(2) Any person failing to give the notice required by sub-section (1) 
~ be ,pwushable w·ith· fbIe wJsieh may extend to fifty ~. orten 
t,bn,. the. am.o.unt, of th~ t;ax payable on the said 'buildipgs, as erected or 
~ted, . as the case may be, in res~ct of a period of ,thl'$e months, 
whichever is greater. 
, 
" - - -. Remission and refund 
'7~. If any building is' wholly or partly demolished or destroyed or 
o~ depriveQ of va41el the Board m83", on the application in wtitinJ 
of, ~,"own" or occupler,. remit or refund such portion of any ~xasseS8ed; 
OIl the annlW valu~ tbOl'eQf as it thinks fit, 
7S. In a cantonment when any building or land has remained vacant 
and unproductive of rent for sixty or more consecutive days the Board 
.. hall remit or refund, as the case may be, such porticm of any tax assessed 
on. the annual value thereof as may be proportionate to the number of 
days during which the said building or land has remained vacant and 
unproductive fit rent: 
Provided that in any cantonment which the Central Government, by 
notification, in the Official Gazette, has declared to be °a hill cantonment 
and ini respect of which the Central Government by the same or a like 
notification has declared a portion of the year to be the season for the 
cantonment, when any building or land is leased for occupation through 
tJle season only, but the rent charged is the full animal rent, no remisslon 
or refund shall be admissible under this section in respect of any time 
outside the season nuring which the building or land remains vacant, but 
in respect 01 any time, not being less than sbcty consecutive days during 
whjch. withjn the season such building or land has remained vacant and 
unproductive of rent, the Board shall remit or refund such pQl'tion of any 
tax assessed on the annual value thereof as bears to the whol~ of .the tax 
so assessed the same prop'lrtion as the number of nays during whkh the 
building or land has remained vacant and unproductive of rent bc!ars to 
the total length of the season: 

75 
"17. For the purpose of obtaining a partial remission or refund of tax, 
the owner of a buUding composed of separate tenements may request the 
Board, at the time of the assessment of the building, to enter in the 
assessment list, in ar\'dition to the annual value of the whole buUdiJig, a 
note recording in detail the annual value of each separate tenement. 
When any tenement, the annual value of which has been thus separately 
recorded, has remained vacant and unproductive of rent for sixty or more 
consecutive days sueh portion of any tax assessed, on the 81\IlUa! value of 
the whole building shall be remit~d or refunr\ed as w01,Jld have been 
remitted or refunded if the tenement had been' separately assessed. 
71A. No remission or refund under section 76 or section 77 shall be 
made unless notice in writing of the faet that the building, lanrt or 
tenement' has become vacant and unproductive of rent ha~ been gt~e~ 
to the Board, ahd no remission or refund shall take effect in respect of 
any period commencing more than fifteen -days before the deHvery of 
such notice. 
• • • • 
79. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Any owner failing to give the noUce required by sub-section (1) 
shan be punishable with fine which shall not 'be leSs th8n tWice the 
amount of the tax payable on SUch building, tenemerit or lanrl in r~pect 
of the period during which it has been re-occupied arid which 1'I1'8y extend 
to fifty rupees, or to ten times the amount of the said tax, whichever sum 
is greater. 
• • • • • 
Octroi. termww tax o.nd ton 
• • • • ,. 
82. (1) Any person who takes or attempts to t~e past any octroi 
station or any other place appoirited within a cantorimentfor the collec-
tion of octroi, terminal tax or toll anygt>ods, Vehicles or anim&1s, on 
account of which octroi, terminal tax or toll is leviable and th~eby 
evades, or attempts to evade, the payIl'ient of such octroi, terminal fax or 
tolla and any person who abets allY such evasion or attempt at ev~on, 
~hall -De punishable with fine which may exte:qd ,either to ten times the 
value of such octroi, terminal tax or toll, or to fifty rupees, Whichever • 
greater aJid which shall not be less than twice the value o'f such octroi, 
ternunal tax or-toll, as the case may be. 
• • • • • 
(3) The Board, after the lapse of five days from the setztire, ansi 
after the issue of a notice in writing to the person in whose possession the 
goods, vehicles or animals wer"e at the time of seizure, fixing the tinu:: t:ind 
place of sale, may cause the property so seized, or so much thereof as may 
be necessary, to be sold by auction to satisfy the demanrl. and ~ ~X'­
penses occasioned by the seizure, custody and sale thereof, unieSi the 
demand and expenses are in the meantime paid: 
Power to 
require 
entry in 
assessment 
list of de-
tails ot 
buildinp. 
Notice to 
be given 
of the c1r-
cumsten-
ces in . 
which re-
. mission or 
refund is 
claimed. 
Notice to 
be given 
C1f every 
occupa-
tion 
of vacant 
buildinl 
or house. 
Evasion 
ot octroi 
or termi-
nal tax. 

Leae of 
octroi. ' 
terminal 
taxartou. 
:,;.. 
Provided that the Executive Officer may, in any case, order that 8D1. 
article of a perishable nature which cannot be kept for five days without 
serious risk of damage, or which cannot be kept save at a cost which,-
together with the amount of octroi, terminal tax or toll, is Ukely to 
exceed its value, shall be sold after the lapse cJf such shorter time as he 
may, having regard to the nature of the article, think proper . 
• • • • • 
(5) The surplus, if any, of the sale-proceeds shall be credited to the 
cantonment fund, and shall, on application made to the Board Within 
one year after the sale, be paid to the person in whose possession the 
property was at the time of seizure, and, if no such application is made, 
shall be the property of the Board. 
83. It shall be lawful for the Board, with the previous sanction of 
the Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, to lease the ~oUectioD 
of any octroi, terminal tax or toll for any period not exceeding one year; 
and the lessee and all persons employed by him in the management and 
collection of the octroi, terminal tax or toll shall, in respect thereof,-
(a) be bound by any orders made by the Board for theJr 
guidance; 
(b) have such powers exercisable by officers or servants of the 
Board under this Act as the Board may confer upon them; and 
(c) be entitled to the same remedies and be subject to the same 
responsibilities as if they were employed by the Board for the 
management and colledion of the octroi, terminal tax or toll, as the 
case may be: 
Provided that no article distrained may be sold except under the 
orders of the Board. 
Appeals 
84. (1) An appeal against the assessment or levy of, or against the 
refusal to refund, any tax under this Act shall lie to the District Magls-
trate or to such other officer as may be empowered by the Central 
Government in this behalf: 
Provided that, where the person to whom the appeal would ordi-
narily lie is, or was when the tax was imposed, a member of ' the Board, 
the appeal shall lie to the Commissioner of the Division, or, in a State' 
where there are no Commissioners, to the District Judge. 
(2) If, on the hearing of an appeal under this section, any question 
as to the liability t6, or the principle of assessment of, a tax ~ises on 
which the officer hearing the appeal entertains reasonable doubt, he 
may, either of his own motion or on the application df the apP,e1lan.t, 
draw up a statement of the facts of the case and the point on which 
doubt is entertained, and refer the statement with his own opinion on 
the point for the decision of the High Court. 
. (3) On a reference being made under sub-section (2), the subsequent 
proceedings in the case shall be, as nearly as may be in. conformity with 
the rules relating to references to the High Court' contained in Order 
XLVI of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
85. In every appeal the COIta shall be in the discretion of the ofBcer 
hearing the appeal. ." . ,. - "IUILI: . 
• ·.l_~ 

" 
:i. 
... If the Board tails to pay any costa awarded to an appellant within 
ten dayS after the date of the order for payment thereof, the officer 
awarding the costs may order the person having the custody of the 
balance of the cantonment fund to pay the amount 
Recover; 
of costs 
from 
Board. 
w,.. No appeal shall be heard or determined under this Chapter Conditions 
unless- - of right 
to appeal. 
(a) the appeal is, in the case of a tax assessed on tlie -annual 
value of buildings or lands or both, brought within thirty days next 
after the date of the authentication cit. the assessment list under 
section 69 (exclusive of the time requisite for qbtaining a copy of the 
-relevant entries therein), or, as the case may be, within thirty day~ of 
the date on which an amendment is finally made under section 71, 
and, in the case of any other tax, within thirty days next after the 
date of the receipt of the notice of assessment or of alteration of 
assessment or, if no notice has been given, within thirty days next 
after the date of the preSentatioll of the first bill in respect thereof:' 
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiration of • 
the period prescribed therefor by this section if the appellant satisfies 
the court before whom the appeal is preferred that he had sutTlcient 
cause for not preferring it within that period; 
• • • • • 
88. The order of an appellate authority confirming, setting aside or Fi!lalit y of 
modifying an order in respect of any valuation or assessment or liabfiity appellate 
to assessmen~ or taxation shall be final: orders. 
Provided that it shall be lawful for the appellate authority, upon appU-
cation or On its own motion, to review any order passed by it in appeal 
if application in this behalf is made within three months from the date of 
the original order. 
Payment and recOW7'y of ta:x:es 
• • • • • 
'1. (1) • • • • • 
(2) For every notice of demand which the Executive Officer causes to 
be served on any person under this section, a tee of such amount. Dot 
exceeding 'one rupee, as shall in each case be fixed by the Executive 
Officer, shall be payable by the said person and shall b~ included in the 
costs of recovery. 
Notice of 
demand. 
92. (1) If the person liable for the payment of any tax does not, Recover)' 
within thirty days from the service of the notice cit. demand, pay the of tax. 
amount due, or show sufficient cause for non-payment of the same to the 
satisfaction of the Executive Officer, such sum, with all costs of recovery, 
may be recovered under a warrant, issued in the form set forth in Scbe-
dule II, by distress and sale of the movable property of the defaulter: 

Disposal 
of· ... 
tralried 
property. 
Recovery 
from a 
person 
about to 
leave can-
tonment. 
Power to 
inltitute 
suit tor 
recovery. 
Exemption 
in the 
case of 
bulldinp. 
78 
Provided that the Executive Offioor shall not recover any sum the 
liabflltyfor which has been remitted on appeal tinder this Chapter. 
* • • * * * 
94. (1) • • * * * 
(3) The surplus of the sale-proceeds, if any, shall forthwith be credit. 
ed to the cantonment fund, and notice of such credit shall be given at the 
same 'time to the person tram who~ possession t~e property was taken, 
and, if the same is claimed by written application to the Board within 
one year from the date of the notice,' a refund thereof ~hal1 be made to 
stich person. Any surplus not claimed within one year as aforesaid shall 
be the property of the Board. 
(4) For every distraint made under this Chapter a fee of such amount, 
n~t exceeding one rupee, as shall in each case be fixed by the Executive 
Officer shall be charged, and the said fee shall be included in the costs of 
recovery. 
'IS. (1) If the Executive OfB.cer has reason to believe that any person 
from whom any sum' is due or is about to become due on account of any 
tax is about to remove from the cantonment, he may nireet the imine-
diate payment by such person of the sum so due or about to become due, 
and cause a bill for the same to be served on such person. 
(2) If, on the service of such bill, such person does not forthwith pay 
the sUm so due or about to become due, the amount shall be leviable by 
distress and sale in the manner hereinbefore provided in this Chapter, 
except that it shall not be necessary to serve upon the defaulter any notice 
of demand and the warrant for distress and sale may be issued and exe-
cutedMthout any delay. 
96. Instead of proceeding against a defaulter by distress and sale all 
hereinbefore provided in this Chapter, or after a defaulter has been so 
proceeded against unsuccessfully or with only partial success, any sum 
due or the balance of any sum due, as the case may be, from such defaulter 
on account of a tax may be recovered from him by a suit in any court of 
competent jurisdiction. 
Special provisions relating to t~4tioft. 
* • * • * • 
99. (1) • * • * • 
(2) The follOWing buildings and lands sfuill be exempt from any tax 
on property. other than a fax imposed to cover the cost of specific ser-
vices rendered by the Board, namely:-
• • * • • * 
(f) any buildings or lands, used or acquired for the public servlee 
or for any' public purpose, which are the property of the Govem-
ment or in the occupation of the 'Central or any Stllte Govem-
mint 
• • • • • 

-79 
102. A Board may write off any sum due on account of any tax Irretover-
- rat. or Of the costa of recovering any tax or rate if such sum If, able debt.. 
. in its opinion, irrecoverable: 
Provided that, where the sum written off in favour of anyone person 
exceeds fifty rupees, tlle sanction of the Ofti<:~ Command.ing'-in-Chief, 
the Command, shall be first obtained. . 
103. (1) The Executive Officer may, by written notice, call upon any 
lQhabj~Ilt of the cap,tonment to furnish such information as may be 
necessary for the purpose of ascertaining-
(a) whether such inhabitant is liable to pay any tax imposed 
under this Act; 
• • • • • 
(?) If any person, when called upon under sub-section (1) to furnish 
information, neglects to furnish it within the period specified in this behalf 
by the Executive Officer or furnishes information which is not true to the 
best of his knowledge or belief, he s11411 be punishable w:th fu).e which 
may extend to one hundred rupees and shall also be llame to be asseseed 
at such amount on account of tax as the Board may deem proper. and 
the assessment so made shall, subject to the provisions o~ this Act, be 
8nal. 
. - • • • • 
105. No distress levied under this Chapter shall be deemed unlawful, 
nor shall any person making the same be deemed a trespasser, on account 
only of any defect of form in the notice of demand, warrant of distress 
or other proceeding relating thereto; nor shall any such person be 
deemed a trespasser ab initio on account of any irregularity afterward. 
committed by him; but any person who sustains any special damage 
by reason of any such irregularity shall be entitled to recover compen-
sation for the same by suit in a' court of competent jurisdiction. 
• 
CHAPTER VI 
CAHTOJlMJIINT FtmD AND PROPBB'l'1' 
Cantonment fund 
• • • • 
107. (1) Where in or near a cantonment there is a Government trea-
sUI)' or sUb-treasury. or a branch of the Imperial Bank of India, the 
cantonment fl:lnd shall be kept in such treasury, sub-treasury or bank, 
as the case may be. 
(2) Where there is no such treasury, S'Ub-treasury or ban~ ,lhe can-
tonment fund may be deposited with any bank to which the Government 
treasury business has been entrusted, 3lld, in the absence of such a bank, 
with any banker or person acting as a banker who has given such security 
for the safe custody of the fund and the payment on demand of the 
funds so deposited as the Central Government may in each case direct 
• • • • • 
Obliiation 
to dis· 
clQse lia-
bility. 
Distraint 
not to 
be inval14 
by reason 
ofimma- . 
terial 
detect. 
Custody 
of can-
tonment 
fund. 

Applica-
tion of 
canton-
mlltlt fun4 
and pro-
perty. 
Sancticm. 
Execution 
of con-
tract .. 
80 ", ~ 
(4) The income resulting from any fixed deposit or from any 8ucli 
security as is referred to in wh-section (S) or from the proceeds of the 
sale of any such security shall be credited·to the cantonment fund. 
Property 
• • • • • 
lot. The cantonment fund and all property vested in a Board shall 
be applied for the purposes, whether express or implied, for which, by or 
under this Act or any other law for the time being in force, powers are 
conferred or duties or obligations are imposed upon the Board: 
Provided -tTlat the Board shall not incur any expenditure for acquir-
Ing or renting land beyond the limits of the cantonment or for con-
atructlng any work beyond such limits except-
(4) with the sanction of the Central Government, and 
(b) on such terms and conditions as the Central Government 
may impose: 
Provided, further. that priority shall be given in the order herein-
after set forth to the following liabilities and obligations of a Board, that 
is to say,- ; 
• • • • • 
(d) to the payment of such expenses on account of pauper luna-
tics sent from the cantonment to public lunatic asyl'limk and mental 
hospitals as the Central Government directs the Board to pay; and 
• • • • • 
• • 
C~VII 
CONTRACTs 
• 
113. . (1) Every contract-
• • • 
• • • 
• • 
(b) which involves a value or amount exceeding two hundre4 
ro~es, ' 
shall require the sanction of the Board. 
• • • • • 
114. (1) Every contract made by or on behalf of a Board the value 
or amount of wbich exceeds one hu~dred rupees, shall be in writing, 
and every such contract shall be signed by two members, of whom 
the President or the Vice-President shall be one, and be countersigned 
by the'Executive Officer and be sealed with the common seal of the 
Board: 1 
P.rovided that the EXec'Utive Officer may in a case of urgency, with . 
the previous sanction of the President of the Board, execute on behalf 
of the Board any contract the value or amount of which does not exceed 
five hunlh'~d rupees. 
• • • • • 

", .... ~" 
CHAPTER #lIII 
DvTms AND DISCRETIONARY FUNlCTIONS OF BoARDS 
U8. It shall be the duty of every Board, so far as the funds at ita Duties of 
disposal permit, to make reasonable provision within the cantonmel1t Board. 
18r-
• * * * • 
(h) constructing, altering and maintaining streets, culverts, 
markets, slaughter-houses, latrines, privies, urinals, drains, drain. 
works and seWerage works; 
• • • • • 
(l) establishing and maintaining a system of public vaccination; 
(m) establishing and maintaining or supporting public hospitala 
and dispensaries, and providing public medical relief; 
(n) establishing and maintaining or assisting primary schools; 
• • * * 
(P) maintaining and developing the value of property vested in, 
or entrusted to the management of, the Board; and 
* • • • • 
117. (1) A Board may, within the cantonment, make provision for-
• • • • • 
(d) furthering educational objects by measures other than the 
establishment and maintenanee of primary schools; 
• • • • 
(g) giving relief on the occurrence of local epidemics by the 
establishment or maintenance of relief works or otherwise; 
• • * * • 
(j) constructing, subsidising ~r guaranteeing tramways or other 
means of locomotion, and electric lighting or electric power works; 
or 
• • • • 
CHAPTER IX 
PUBLIC SAFETY AND SUPRESSJON OF NUISANCES 
General nuisances 
111. (1) Whoever-
• 
(0) in any street or other public place within a cantonment,-
• • • • • 
(viii) pickets animals, or collects carts; or 
• • • • • 
(zv) carries night-soil or other offensive matter or rubbiah 
at any hour prohibited by the Board by public notice, or in ,any 
pattern of cart or receptacle which has not been approved for 
the pUJlPOSe by the Board, or fails to close such cart or recep-
tacle when in use; or 
Discre-
tionarY 
fUnctions 
of Board. 
Penalty 
for caus-
ing nui-
sances. 

l\e,wtra-
tion and 
control 
of do,s, 
Uae of 
iDftam-
mDle 
materlala 
for build-
in,P'II"" 
pOe ... 
(b) carries night-soil or" other offensive matter or rubbish alq 
any route in contravention of any prohibition made in this behalf 
by the Board by public notice; or 
• • • • 
(g) at any time or place at which the same has been prohibited 
by the Board by public or special notice, beati a drum. or tom-
tom, or blows a hom or trumpet, or beats any utensil: or sounds an., 
braas or other instrument, or plays any music; or 
(h) disturbs the public peace or order by singing, screaming or 
shouting; or 
• • • • • 
(k) save with the written permission of the Board and in such 
lD8Illler as it may authorise, stores or uses night-soil, manure, 
rubbish or any other substance emitting an offensive smell; or 
• • • • • 
thall be punishable with fine which may extend to fUty rupees. 
• • • • • 
(3) The owner or keeper of any animal found picketeci. or straying 
wUhout a keeper in a street or other public place in a cantonment shill 
be punishable with fine which may extend to twenty rupees. 
• • • • • 
Dogs 
119. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Such bye-laws shall-
(a) require the reg~tration, by the Officer Commanding _ch 
military unit, of all dogs kept in the lines occupied by that unit; 
• • • • • 
and may provide for such other matters as the Board thinks fit. 
(3) A Board may-
(a) cause to be destroyed, or to be confined for such period u 
It may direct, any dog or other animal which is, or is reasonably 
suspected to be, suffering from rabies, or which has been bitteD '" 
any dog or other animal suffering or S'Uspected to be suffering from 
rabIes; 
• • • • • 
Prevention Of fire, etc. 
121. (1) • • • • • 
(Z) A Board may, by notice in writing, require the owner of any 
building in the cantonment which has an external roof or wall made of 
any such material as aforesaid to remove such roof or wall within such 
time as may be specified in the notice, 'notwithstanding that a publlc 
notice under S'Ub-section (1) has not been issuc.i or that such roof or wall 
was made with the eonllent of the Board or before the issue of sueIl 
publlr. notice: 

2011918. 
Provided that, in the case of any such roof or wall in exi8tenc~ before 
the issue of such a public notice or made with the consent of the Board, 
that Authority shall make compensation, not exceeding the original cost 
of constructing the roof or wall, for any damage caused by the reIl'o.,a1. 
• • • • • 
123. No person shall set a naked light on or near any building in any 
street or other public place in a cantonmenf in such manner as to ('Ruse 
danger of fire: 
Provided that nothing in thi/> section shall be deemed to prohibit the 
use, subject to the permission in writing of the Board, of lights for 
purposes of illumination on the occasion of a festival or public or privat,e 
entertainment .. 
l24. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Cinematograph 
Act. 1918-. no exhibition .of pictures or other optical effects by means of 
a cinematograph or other like apparatus for the purpose of which inflam-
mable films are used. and no public dramatic performanc e or panto-
mime, shall be given in any cantonment elsewhere than in premises for 
which a licence has been granted by the Board under this section. 
(2) If the owner of a cinematograph or other apparatus uses the ap-
paratus or allows it to be used, or if any person takes any part in any 
public dramatic per'formance or pantomime. in contravention of the pro-
visions of this section, or if the occupier of anv nremises allows them to 
be used in contravention of the provisions of this section or of any con-
dition of anv licence J!Tanted under this section. he shall he punishable 
with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees. ~md. in the ca~f'! of 
a continuin,:! offence. with an additional fine which may extend t" ftfty 
rupees for each day after the first during which the offence continues. 
(,'1) Nothin~ in thic; spction shall be deemed to prohibit thf! !riviop 01 
any exhibition or any dramlltic neriol'mance or p!lntomime in any 
tne!ltre or institute which is the propertv of the Government where the 
exhibition, performance or pantomime is held with the permission and 
under the cnntrol of the military authorities. 
125. Whoever in a CAntonment discharges any ftre-lirm or lets off fire-
work!! or ftre-balloons. or engagf!03 in any game in such manner RS to 
('a use or to he likely to cause dan,:!er to persons pllssing by or dwelling 
or wcrkin't in the neighbourhood or risk of injury to property shall be 
liable to fine which may extend tt) ftfty rupees . 
• • • • • 
CHAPl'ER X 
SANJTATrON AND THE PRJ!VP:NTJON AND TREATMENT 0'" DISEAn: 
Sa:l1Iitary authorities 
lZ8. The following officers shall, for the purposes of sanitation have 
control over. find be responsibJe for maintaining in a sanitarv condition 
ttiOtle parts of a cantonment. respectively. which are specifled in tb~ 
ease df each, that is to say:-
(a) the Officer Commanding the station-aU buf1din~ and 
lands which are occupied or used for military pUrpole': . 
Care of 
naked 
. lights. 
Re,ula-
tion of 
cinemato. 
graphic 
and dra-
matic 
. perfor-
mances. 
Discher-
lin, Ure· 
works. 
fire-arms, 
etc:. 
Reaponai. 
biHty for 
sanitation. 

Power of 
Board to 
under-
take 
private 
COll8er-
yancy 
arrange.. 
ments. 
Deposit 
and dis-
poaal of 
rubbish, 
etc. 
- ~. 
Cesspools, 
recepta-
clesfor 
filth. etc. 
Fitting up 
o'ftank, 
etc. 
Provision 
of latrines, 
etc. 
84 
(b) the Officer Commanding the air-forces in the cantonment-
.U· buildings and lands which are occupied or used for air-force 
purpose; 
(c) the head of any civil department or railway administration 
occupying as such any part of the cantonment-all buildings and 
lands in his charge as head of that department or administration. 
. . ... . ... 
Conservancy and sanitation 
• • • • • 
131. (1) On the application or with the consent of the occupier of any 
building or land,. or, where the occupier of any building or land fails to 
make arrangements to the satisfaction of the Board for the matters 
referred in this section, without such consent, and after giving notice 
in writing to the occupier, a Board may undertake the house scavenging 
of 'any building or land in the cantonment for such period as it thinks fit 
on such terms as it may prescribe in this behalf. 
(2) Where the Board has undertaken the duties referred to in this 
section, all matter removed in the performance of such duties shall be 
the property of that Board. 
(3) For the purposes of this section, "house scavenging" means the 
removal of filth or rubbish or other offensive matter from a privy, latrine, 
urinal, drain, cesspool, or other common receptacle for such matter. 
131. (1) til • til • .. 
(2) The Board may, by public notice, issue directions as to the time 
at which, the manner in which, and the conditions subject to which, any 
matter referred to in sub-section (1) may be removed along a street or 
may be deposited or otherwise disposed of . 
... ... ... • • 
133. The Executive Officer of any cantonment may, by notice in 
writing,-
(a) require any I?erson having the control wheth~r as owner, 
lessee or occupier of any land Or building in the ,cantonment-
•• • • • • 
(iv) to collect and deposit for removal by the conservancy 
establishment of the Board, within such time and in such re-
ceptacle or place. situate ft not more than one hundred feet 
from the nearest boundary of the premises, '8S may be specified 
in the notice, any offensive matter or rubbish which such person 
has allowed to accumulate or remain under, in or on such build-
ing or land; or 
• • • • • 
134. (1) • til • • • 
(2) The Board may. if it thinks fit. with the previous sanction of 
the Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, meet the whole or any 
portion of the expenses incurred in complying with a requisition under 
SUb-section (1). 
135. A Board may, by notice in writing, require the owner or lessee 
of any building or land in the cantonment to provide, in such manner 
aamay be specified in the notice, any latrine, urinal, cesspool,dust.bin 
or other receptacle for filth. sewage, or rubbish, or any additional 
latrine, uri:Q81, cesspool or other receptacle as aforesaid, which should, 
in its opinion, be provided for the building or land. 

12 of 1911. 
85 
136. Every person employing, whether on behalf of the Government 
or otherwise, more than ten' workmen or labourers, and every person 
managing or having control of a market, school, theatre or other place of 
public, resort, in a cantonment shall give notice of the fact to the Board, 
and shall provide such latrines and urinals, and shall employ such number 
of sweepe1'll, as the Board thinks fit, and shall cause the latrines and 
urinals to he kept cleap and in proper order: 
Provided that nothing in this sectwn shall apply in the case of a 
factory to which the Indian Factories Act, 1911, applies. 
... ... ... ... ... 
139. (1) ... ... ... ... ... 
(2) Any person who fails, without reasonable cause, to comply with 
a requisition made upon him under sub-section (1) shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to fifty rupees, and, in the case of a conti-
nUing oft'ence, to an additional fine which may extend to five rupees for 
every day after the first during which the failure has continued. ... .... ... ... ... 
!fl. (1). The Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the 
owner, lessee or occupier of any building or land in the cantonment, 
which appears to him to be in a filthy or insanitary state, within twenty-
four hours to cleanse the same or otherwise put it in a proper state, in 
such manner as may be specified in the notice. 
(2) If, withi1\ fhree months from the date of the service of a notice 
under sub-section (1), any building or land in respect of which the notice 
was issued is again in a filthy or insanitary state, the owner, lessee or 
occupier, as the case may be, shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to two hundred rupees . 
... ... • • ... 
143. A Board may, by notice in writing, require the owner, lessee, 
or occupier of any land in the cantonment to clear away and remove any 
thick or hoxious vegetation or undergrowth, which appears to it to be 
-injurious to health or offensive to persons residing in the neighbour-
hood. 
... ... • ... ... 
Burial and burning grounds 
145. A Board may, by notice in writing, require the oWner or per-
son in charge of any burial or burning ground in the cantonment to 
supply such information as may be specified in the notice concerning 
the condit~on, management or position of such ground. . 
... ... ... • • 
Prevention of infectious or contagiOUS diseases 
150. Any person, beIng in charge of, or in attendance, whether as 
a medical practitioner or otherwise, upon any person in a cantonment 
whom he knows or has reason to believe to be suffering from a cdhta-
gious or infectious disease. or being the owner, lessee or occupier of any 
building in K cantonment in which he knows that any such person is 
so suffering, shall, if he fails to give information, or if he gives false 
Information, to the Board respecting the existence of such disease,be 
punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees; 
Sanitation 
in facto-
ries, etc. 
Over-
crowding 
of dwel-
ling 
houses. 
Power to 
require 
land or 
building 
to be 
cleansed. 
Removal 
of noxi-
ous vege-
tation. 
Power to 
call for 
intonna-
tion re-
~ 
burial 
and burn-
ing 
groundB. 
Obliga-
tion to 
giVe 
informa-
tion of 
intectiOUe 
or conta. 
lIouadla-
ea.a.. 

Penalty 
torfaUure 
to report. 
Disinfec-
tion of 
building 
before 
lettUi, 
the same. 
Makin, 
or selUnI 
of food, 
etc., or 
washing 
cloth~ 
by infeCt-
ed person. 
Free 
patients. 
86 
Provided that no person shan be punishable under this section for 
failure to give information if he had reasonable cause to believe that the 
information had alreaciy been duly given: 
Provided; further, that this section shall'not awly in the cas,:! of 
venereal disease where the person suffering therefrom il under specific 
and adequate medical treatment and is, by reason of his habits and con-
ditions of life and reSidence, unlikely to spread the disease . 
• • • • 
159. Whoever fails to make to the Executive Officer any report which 
he is required to make by section 157 or section 158, shall be punishable 
with fine which may extead to one hundred rupees. 
• • • ,. 
164. (1) Where in a cantonment any building or part of a building is 
intended to be let in which any person has, within the six weeks imme-
diately preceding, been suffering from an infectious or contagious 
disease, the person letting the building or part shall before doing so 
disinfect the same in such manner as the Board may, by public or special 
notice, direct, together with all articles therein liable to retain infection. 
• • • • 
167. Whoever, while suffering from, or in circumstances in whiCh he 
is likely to spread, any infectious or contagious disease,-
(a) makes, carries or offers fOr S'8le in a cantonment ot takes 
any part in the business of making, carrying or offering for sale 
therein any article of food or drink or any medicine, or drug for 
human cpnsumption, or any article of clothing or bedding for per-
sonal use or wear, or 
(b) takes any part in 'the business of the washing or carrying 
of clothes, 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees . 
• • * • 
173. At every hospital or dispensary maintained or aided under sec-
tion 171, the sick poor of the cantonment and· other inhabitants of the 
canionment suffering from infectious or contagious diseases, and with 
the sanction of the Board, any other sick pe:tsons, may receive medical 
or surgical treatment free of cost, and, jf treated as in-patients, shall be 
either dieted gratUitously or, if the medical omcer in charge so directs, 
shall be granted subsistence allowance on such scale as the Board may 
fix: 
Provided that the subsistence allowance shall not be less than the 
lowest allowance for the time being fixed for the subsistence of judg-
ment debtors by the State Government under section 57 of the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908. 5 of 1908 . 
• • • • • 

Speci4Z conditions regarding easential services 
in the Condit1Ob8 
without of aervlce ot 
178. (1) Whoever, being a sweeper employed b~ a Board 
absence of a written contract authorising him so to do and 
reasonable cause, resigns his employment nr absents himself from his 
duty without having given one month's notice to the Board, or' neglects 
or refuses to perform his duties, or any of them, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment which may extend to one month. 
• • • • • 
(3) For the purpose of this section, "sweeper" includes any menial 
H'l'Vant employed by a Board in the removal or disposal of tUth or 
rubbish. 
CHAPTER XI 
CONTROL OVER BUlLDIINGS, STREETS, BOUNDARIES, 'I'JlEES, ETC. 
Building' 
sweepers. 
17SA. No person shall erect or re-erect a building on any land In a Sanction 
cantonment, except with the previous sanction of the Board, nor other- for build-
wise than in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and df the ing. 
rules and bye-laws made under this Act relating to the erection and re-
erection of buildings. 
179. (1) Whoever intends to erect or re-erect any building in a Notice 01 
cantqnment shall apply for sanction by giving notice in writing of his new 
intention to the Board. buildings. 
(2) For the purpose's of this Act, a person shall be deemed to erect 
or re-erect a building who---
• • • • • 
180 .. (1) • • ... • ... 
(2) No notice shall be valid until the information required under 
sub-sectioD, (1) and any further information and plans which may be 
required under bye-laws made under this Act have been furnished to 
the satisfaction. of the Board along with the notice. 
181. (1) • • • • ... 
(2) The Board may refuse to sanction the erection or re-erection of 
any building, either on grounds sufficient in the opinion at the Board 
affecting the partiCular building, or in pursuance of a general scheme 
sanctioned. by the 016cer Commanding-in-Chief t the Command, restrict-
ing the erection or re-erection of buildings within specified limits for the 
prevention of over-crowding or in the interests of persons residing within 
such limits or for any other public purpose. 
(3) The Board, before sanctioning the erection or re-erection ofa 
building on land which is under the management of the Military Estates 
9ftlcer, shall refer the application to the MUitary FAltates Oftlcer for 
Con-
ditlonsof 
valid 
notice. 
Power 
of Board 
to unc-
tion or 
re1u ... 

Power 
to make 
bye-laws. 
~rtaining whether there is any objection on the part of Government 
to such erection or re-erection; and the Military Estates Officer shall 
return the application together with his report thereon to the Board 
within thirty days after it has been received by him. 
(4) The Board may refuse to sanction the erection or re-erection of 
any building-
'" '" '" '" '" 
1M. Whoever begins, continues or completes the erection or re-erec-
tion ... of a building-
(a) without having given a valid notice as required by sections 
179 and 180, or before the building has been sanctioned or is deemed 
to have been sanctioned, or 
(b) without complying with any direction ma~e under sub-
section (1) of section 181, or 
(c) when sanction has been refused, or has ceased to be avail-
able, or has been suspended by the OtBcer Commanding-in-Chief, the 
Command, under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 52, 
shall be punishable with fine which may ext~nd to five hundred. rupeel . 
'" '" '" • • 
186. A Board may make bye-laws prescribing-
(a) the manner in which notice of the intention to erect or re-
erect a building in the cantonment shall be given to the Board and 
the information and plans to be furnished with the notice; 
• '" '" • '" '" 
(f) with reference to the erection or re-erection of buildings, or 
of any class of building, all or ~y of the following matters, name-
ly:-
'" • • '" '" • 
(iv) ,the position, the material and the method of construc-
tion cJf fire-places, chimn.eys, drains, latrines, privies, urinals and 
cesspools; 
'" • • • • • 
(m) the level and width of the foundation, the level of the 
lowest floor and the stability of the structure; 
• • • • • • 
(x) the materials and method of construction to be used for 
godowns intended for the storage of foodgrains in excess of fifty 
maunds in order to render them rat proof. 
• • • • • • .,1 

.1 
89 
190. A Board may attach to the outside of any building, or to any 
tree in the cantonment, brackets for lamps in such manner as not to 
occasion injury thereto or inconvenience. 
Streets 
191. A Board may, by order in writing, permit the temporary 
occupation of any street, or of any land vested in the Board, for the 
purpose of depositing any building materials or making any temporary 
excavation therein or erection thereon, subject to such conditions as it 
may prescribe for the safety or convenience of the public, and may charge 
a fee for such permission and may in its discretion withdraw such permis-
sion. 
192. (1) A Board shall not permanently close any street or open any 
new street without the previous sanction of the Officer Commanding-in-
Chief, the Command. 
(2) A Board may, by public notice, temporarily close any street or 
any part of a street for repair or for the purpose of carrying out any 
work connected with drainage, water-supply or lighting or any other 
work which it. is by or under this Act required or permitted to carry 
out: 
Provided that where, owing to any works or repairs or from any 
other cause, the condition of any street or of any water-works, drain, 
culvert or premises vested in the Board, is such as to be likely to cause 
danger to the public, the Board shall-
(a) take all reasonable means for the protection of the adjacent 
buildings and land and provide reasonable means of access thereto; 
(b) cause sufficient barriers or fences to be erected for the secu-
rity of life and property, and cause such barriers Or fences to be 
suffiCiently lighted from sunset to sunrise. 
193. (1) A Board may cause a name to be given to any street and to 
be affixed on any building in the cantonment in such place as it thinks 
fit, and may also cause a number to be affixed to any such building. 
(2) Whoever destroys, pulls down, defaces or alters any such name 
or number or puts up any name or number differing from that put up 
by the order of the Board shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to twenty rupees. 
(3) When a number has been affixed to any building under Ilub-sec-
tion (1), the owner of the building shall maintain the number in order, 
and shall replace it if removed or defaced, and if De fails to do so the 
Board may by notice in writing require him to replace it. 
Boundaries and trees 
194. (1) No boundary wall, hedge or fence of any material or des-
cr);ltion shall be erected in a cantonment without the permission in 
writing of the Board. .... 
(2) A Board may, by notjce in writing, require the owner or lessee 
of any land in the cantonment-
(a) to remove from the land any boundary wall, hedge or fence 
which is in its opinion unsuitable, unsightly or otherwise objection-
able; or 
Power 
to attach 
brackets 
for lamps. 
Tempo-
raryoccu-
pation of 
street, 
land, etc. 
Closing 
and open-
ing of 
streets. 
Names of 
streets 
and num-
bers Of 
buildings. 
Boundary 
wallS, 
hedges 
and 
fencetl. 

Digging 
ofpubUc 
land, 
Power to 
transfer 
by public 
auction, 
etc. 
Private 
market. 
and 
go 
(0) to, construct 'on the land stiftidel1t boundary walls, liedges or 
fences of sUch materi~U, description or dimensions as may be specified 
in the notice; or 
(c) to maintain the boundary walls, hedges or fences of such 
lands in good order: 
Provided that, in the case of any such boundary wall, hedge or 
fence which was erected with the consent or under the orders of the 
Board, or which was in existence at the commencement of this Act, 
the Board sball make compensation for any damage caused by the 
removal thereof. 
(3) The Board, may, by notice in writing, require the owner, lessee 
or occupier of any such land to cut or trim any hedge on the landlin such 
manner and within such time as may be specified in the notice . 
• • • • • 
196. Whoever, without the permission in writing of the Board, digs 
up the surface of any open space in the cantonment, whic'll is not private 
property, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to twenty 
rupees, and, in the case of a continuing offence, with an additional flne 
which may extend to flye rlrpees for every day after the first during 
which the offence continues . 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER XII 
MARKETS, SLAUGHTER-HOOSES, TRADES AND OCCOPATIONS 
• • • • • 
200. The Board may transfer 'by public auetion, for any period not 
exceeding three years at a time, the right to occupy or use any stall, 
shop, standing, shed or pen in a public market, or public slaughter-house, 
, or the right to expose goods for sale in a public market or the right to 
weigh or measure goods sold therein, or the right to slaughter animals 
in any public slaughter-house: 
Provided that where the Board is of opinion that such transfer of the 
aforesaid rights by pubHc auction is .not cOnsidered desirable Or expe-
dient, it may, with the previous sanction of the General Ofticer Com-
manding-in-Chief of the Comrriand,-
(a) either levy such stallages, rer;lts or fees as it thinks fit, or 
(b) farm the staHaps, rents and fees leviable under clause (II) 
for any period not exceeding one year at a time. 
• • • • • 
ZClZ. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed-
8laughter- • • • • • houue. 

,I 
Cb) to prevent the Executive Oftlcer, with the sanction of the 
Board, from setting apart places for the slaughter of animals in 
accordance with religious custom, when such animals are slaughter-
ed for consumption by the troops or for the purpose of the sale of 
tl\e flesh thereof to the troops. 
(3) Whoever omits to comply with any condition i~posed by the 
I:xecutive Oftlcer under clause (a) of sub-section (2) shall be punishable 
With fine whlch may extend to fifty rupees ~, in the ~seof a continu-
ing offenc.e, with an adrUtional. fine which. may exte~d to ten rupees for 
every day after the first during which the offence is continued. 
• • • • • • 
204. (1) Any person who keeps open for public use any market or 
Ilaughter-house in respect of which a licence is required by or under this 
Act, withollt obtaining licen~e th~{or ,or w~i1e ~}le li~ence therefor is 
suspended, or after the same has been canceLled, shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to fifty rupees and, in the case of a conti-
nuing offence, with an additional fine which may extend to five rupees 
for every day after the first . during which the offence is continued. 
• • • • • • 
2,q5 •. WhQever, knowing that any mvket or slaughter-house has been 
._.OP~, ~o the pl,lblic w~tho~t .a. ~ic-m,<re . p..vjn,g b~obtain~ therefor 
:w~en such licence is ,required by or ~e.r tb,ts 4ft, or that the licence 
""'"~t~d tja.erefor is for the time Q.eUtg suspe~~ or t~t it has been 
cancelled, sells or expos~ for sale any article in- such market, or slaugh-
ters any animal in such slaughter-house,' shall be' punishable 'with fine 
which may extend .to fifty rupees and, in. the case of a continuing offence, 
with an additional fine which may extend to five rupees for every day 
after the 'first during which the offence is continued. 
• • • • • • 
207. (1) Any servant of a Board. authorised by or.der in writing in 
this behalf by the President of the Board or the Health Officer, may, 
If he has reason to believe that any animal has been, is being, or is about 
to be .laugbtered in any place in contravention of the provisions of this 
Chapter, enter into and inspect any such place at any time, whether by 
day or by night. 
• • • • • • 
208. A Board may, with the approval of the. Central Government, 
_?Jlake bre-Iaws consistent with this Act to provide for all or any of the 
lo11c;>wing matters, namely:-
• • • • • • 
-<f> the disposal or destruction of animals gffered for slaughter 
which are, from disease or any other cause, unfit 'for human c0t:lsump-
tion; anet 
• • • • • • 
Peftalty 
fOr keep-
in, 
market 
or slaugh-
ter-house 
open 
without 
licenee. 
etc. 
Penalty 
for usinl 
unlicensed 
market 
or 
slaughter-
house. 
Power 
to inspect 
slaulhter_ 
hOUseL 
Power 
to make 
bye-~W80 

Provision 
of 
washing 
places. 
Licences 
required 
for 
carrying 
cIn of 
certains 
occupa-
tions. 
Carrying 
on trade, 
etc., with· 
!)ut 
licence 
or in 
contra-
ventio» 
~ 
eec\iOD 
lit. 
Trades and occupations 
209. (1). • • • • • 
(3) Whoever contravenes any prohibition contained in a notice issu-
ed under sub-section (2) shall be punishable with fine which may extend 
to twenty rupees. 
~O. (1) No person of any of the following classes, nBIriel.v;-
• • • • • • 
(q) makers and vendors of sugar or sweetmeats; and 
• • • • • • 
shall carry on his trade, calling or occupation in any part of a. canton-
ment unless he has applied for and obtained a licence in this behalf from 
the Board. 
(2) A licence granted under sub-section (1) shal1 be valid until the 
end of the year in which it is issued and the grant of such licence shall 
not be withheld by the Board unless it has reason to believe that the 
business which it is intended to establish or maintain would be offensive 
or dangerous to the public or that the premises in which the business is 
intended to be established or maintained are unsuitable for the purpose. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),-
• • • • • • 
(b) no person shall be required to take out a licence for the sale 
or storage of petroleum or for the sale or possession for sale of 
poisons or white arsenic in any case in which he is required to take 
out a licence for such sale, storage or possession for sale by or under 
the Indian Petroleum Act, 1899, or the Poisons Act, 1919. 
(4) The Board may charge for the grant of licences, under this sec .. 
tion such fees not exceeding the cost of granting the licences, as it may 
fix with the previous sanction o'f the Central Government. 
• • • • • • 
General provisions 
• • • • • • 
213. Whoever carries on any trade, calling or occupation for which 
a lice'Bee is required without obtaining a licence therefor or while the 
licence therefor is suspended or after the same has been cancelled, and 
whoever, after receiving a notice under section 212, uses or allows: 
to be used any building or place in contravention thereof, shall be-
punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees and, in 
the case of a continuing offence, with an additional fine which may ex--
tend to forty rupees for every day after the firat durin~ which the 
offence is continued. 
13 of 1899. 
12 of 1919. 

214. Whoever feeds or allows to be fed on filthy or deleterious sub-
stances any animal, which is kept for the purpose of supplying milk to. 
or which is intended to be used as food for, the inhabitants Of a canton-
ment or allows it to graze in any place in which grazing has, for sanitary 
reasons, been prohibited by public notice by the Board shall be punish-
able with fine which may extend to fifty rupees. 
Entry, inspection and seizure 
215. (1) • • • • • 
(4) The owner or person in possession. at the time of'seizure under 
sub-sectiol! (1), of any animal or carcsse which is diseased or of any 
article or thing which is unwholesome or unfit for human food, drink or 
medicine, as the case may be, or is aduiterated or is not what it is 
represented to be, or of any utensil or vessel w:hich is of such kind or 
in such state ·as is' described in clause (b) of sub-section (1), shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, and the 
animal, article, utensil, vessel or other thing shall be liable to be for-
feited to the Board or to be destroyed or to be so disposed of as to 
prevent its being exposed for sale or used for the preparation of food, 
drink or medicine, as the case may be. 
Explanation I.-If any such article, h1ivtng been exposed or stored fn, 
or brought to, any place mentioned in sub-section (1) for sale as ghee, 
contains any substance not exclusively derived from milk, it shall be 
deemed. for the purposes of this section, to be an article which is nolt 
what it is represented to be. 
E;rplanation 11.-Meat subjected to the process of blowing shall be 
deemed to be unfit for human food. 
E.r.planation II1.-The artidc of food or drink shall not be deemed to 
be other than what it is represented to be merely by reason of the fact 
t!1at there has been added to it some substance not injurious to health: 
Provided that-
(a) such S'llbstance has been added to the article because the 
same is required for the preparation or production thereof as an 
article of commerce in a state fit for carriage or consumption and 
not fraudulently to increase the bulk, weight or measure of the 
food or rirink or conceal the inferior quality thereof, or 
(b) in the process of production. preparation or conveyance. of 
such article of food or drink, the extraneous substance has un-
avoidably become intermixed therewith, or 
(c) the owner or person in possession of the article has given 
sufficient notice by means of a label distinctly and legibly written 
or printed thereon or therewith, or by other means of a public des-
cription, that such substance has been added, or 
(d) such owner or person has purchased the article with a written 
warranty that it was of a certain nature. substance and quality and 
had no reason to believe that it was not of such nature, substance and 
quality, and. has exposed it or hawked it about or brought it for sale 
in the same state and by the same description as that in and by 
which he purchased it. . 
Feedip,. 
animals 
on dirt, 
etc. 
Power. 
of entry 
and 
leizure. 

JmportQ( 
cattle and 
fleIb. 
Power to 
require 
mainten-
anceor 
c10tling of 
private 
80urceal 
public 
drinking 
water-
supply. 
Power to 
require 
water-
lupplyto 
be taken. 
Condi· 
tiona of 
univerNI 
applica-
tion. 
94 
Im,poort of cottle Gnd 'jfesh 
iUl. (1) No peJ'sqn shall, without the pennission in writing of the 
Board, bring into a cantQlUIl~t a~ aniq:la] intended for human coil-
l!1imption, or the ~h of :8I1Y ~~ slaughtered outside the cantonment 
otheiwise than in a sla4ih~r-h9~ lJlajn~ed by the Government· or 
the Board. I 
• • • • • 
(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be 
punishable with fine whic:h may extend to fifty rupees. 
• • • 
CHAPTER XIU 
W.A~~Y, ~~.!fAGE A.ND LIGHTING 
W a.t~r~~pplll 
• 
• • • • • 
ZI9. The Board may, by notice in writing, require the owner or any 
person having the control of any source of public water-supply which 
is used for drinking purposes-
(a) to keep the S8J:lle ),n,gqqci order ,~nd to clear it from time to 
time of sUt, refus/! ,and ~ying v,e~et~~~n, or 
(b) to protect the same trom contamipation in such manner as 
the Board may direct, or 
(c) if the water therein is_ proved to the satisfaction of the 
Boa.rdto.'pe ·Wlfit,f~r .gripwng pUIpO~s, to t~ke such measures as 
may be specified in the notice '0 prevent the public from having 
access to or using such water: 
,Provi.ded that. in the case of a well, such person as aforesaid may, 
in~tea~ of complying ·~th the notice, signify in writing his desire to be 
r~lieved of all responsibility for the proper maintenance of the well and 
his readiness to pla<:e it under the control and supervision of the B.oard 
.1qr the use of the public, and, if he does so, he shall not be bound to 
ccarry oijt ~he requisit~on, and'the Board shall undertake the control and 
,s~pervision of the well. 
• • • • • 
221. If it appears. to the ~ard. ~~at ,~, building or land in the can-
I tonm.ent is without.a proper supply of pure water, the Board may, by 
p.otice. in writing, require the oWner, lessee or occupier of the building 
. or land to obtain from a source of public water-supply such Quantity of 
water as is 'adequate to the requirements of the persons usually occupy-
ing or employed upon the J;n.tilding ,or l~nd, and to provi,de communica-
tion pipes of the prescrib~ size and descrip~ion, and to take ~ll neces-
sary steps for the above. WfPO"es. 
• • .. • • 
224. Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained or contained in 
any agreement under Section 222, ,the supply of water by a Board to any 
huilditlg or land shall be, and shall be deemed to have been, granted 
sUbject to the fonowing conditions, namely:-
(a.) the owner, lessee or occupier of any building or land in or on 
which water supplied by the Board is wastecI by reasor at the pipea. 

drains or other works being out of repair shall, if he has knowledge 
thereof, give notice of the same to such officer as the Board may 
appoint in this behalf; . 
(b) the Executive Officer or any other officer or servant of the 
Board authorised by it in writing in this behalf may enter into or on 
any premises supplied With water by the Board, for the purpose of 
examining all pipes, taps, works and fittings connected with the 
wpply of water and of ascertaining whether there is any waste or 
misuse of such water; 
(c) the Board may, after gtviiig notice in writing, cut o1f the 
connection between any source of public water-$upply and any bulld-
ing or land to which water is supplied fbr l1I1y purpose therefrom" or 
turn off such supply if--
• • • • • 
(t) any pipes, taps, works or fittings connected with the sup-
ply of water to the building or land are found, on examination 
by the Executive Officer, to be out of repair to guch an extent as 
to cause a waste of water; 
• • • • • 
Z26. Whoever-
(a) uses for other than domestic purposes any water supplied by 
a .Board for domestic use, or 
(b) where water is supplied by a~ment with a Board for a 
specified purpose, uses that water 'for any other purpose, 
shall be punishable with fine which may ex~nd to fifty rupees, and the 
Board shall be entitled to recover from him the price of the water 
misused. 
Water, drainage 4ftd' otMt c07uwctimu 
• • • • • 
230. A Board may prescribe the s~ . of the feiTUles to be used for 
the supply of gas, if any, and may establish meters or other appliances for 
the purpose of testing the quantity of any water, or the quantity or 
quality of any gas supplied to any premises by the Board. 
231. The ferrules, communication pipes, connections, meters, stand-
pipes and all fittings thereon or connected therewith leading 'from water 
mains or from pipes, drains, sewers or channels into any hoUSe or land, 
to which water or gas is supplied by a Board, and the pipes, fittings and 
wbrks inside any such house or within the limits of any such land, shall 
ir1 all cases be installed or executed subject to the inspection and to the 
satisfaction of the Board. 
232. A Board may fix the charges to be made for the establislunent 
by them or through their agency of communications from, and connec-
tions with, mains, or pipes for the supply of water, or gas, or for mete~ 
or other appliances for testing the quantity or quality thereof sUpplfed, 
and may levy wch charges accorc:lina)Y. 
• • • • • 
Penalty. 
Power to 
prescribe 
ferrules 
and to 
establish 
meters, 
etc. 
Power of 
inspec-
tion. 
Power to 
fix rates 
and 
chargee. 

Penalty 
for loiter-
In, and 
impor-
tuning for 
purposes 
Of proeti-
tut1on. 
Removal 
and ex-
clusion 
!rom can· 
tonmell\ 
of cH.-
orderI,. 
perlOllI. 
CHAPTER XIV 
RJ:MOVAL AND EXCLUSION FROM CANTONMENTS AND SUPPRESSION OF SEXUAL 
IMMORALITY 
• • • • • 
236. (1) Whoever in a cantonment loiters tor the purpose of prostitu-
tion or importunes any person to the commission of sexual immorality, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one month, 
or with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees. 
(2) No prosecution for an offence under this section shall be instituted 
elt(:ept on the complaint of the person importuned, or of a military officer 
in whose presence the offence was committed, or of a member of the 
Military or Air Force Police, being employed in the cantonment and 
authorised in this behalf by the Officer Commanding the station, in 
whose presence the offence was committed, or of a police officer not 
below the rank of a sub-inspector or a, sergeant who is employed in 
the cantonment and authorised in this behalf by the Officer Commanding 
the ~t8tion with the concurrence of the District Magistrate. 
• • • • • 
238. (1) A Magistrate of the first class, having jurisdiction in a can-
tonment, on receiving information that any person residing in or 
frequenting the cantonment-
• • • • • 
(c) has been convk1ed, either within the cantonment or else-
where, of any offence punishable under sectiotl 156 of the Army 44 & 45 
Act, or Vict.c. 5&. 
(d) has been ordered under Chapter VIII of the Code of Crimi-
nal Procedure, 1898, either within the cantonment or elsewhere, to 5 of 1898. 
• execute a bond for his good behaviour, 
may record in writing the substance of the information received, and 
may issue a summons to such person requiring such person to appear 
and· show cause why he should not be required to remove from the 
cantonment and be prohibited from re-entering it. 
• • • • • 
(3) The Magistrate shall, when the person so summoned appears 
before him, proceed to inquire into the truth of the information received 
and take such further evidence as he thinks fit, and if upon such inquiry, 
it appears to him that such person is a person of any kind described. in 
sub-section (1) and that it is necessary for the maintenance of good order 
in the cantonment that such person should be required to remove there-
from and be prohibited from re-entering the cantonment, !he Magistrate 
shall report the matter to the Officer Commanding the station, and; if the 
Oftlcer Commanding the station so directs, shall cause to be served on 
such person' an order in writing requiring him to remove from the 
cantonment within such time as may be specified in the order and pr0-
hibiting him from re-entering it without the permission· in writing of 
the Offtcer Commanding the station . 
• • • • 

9', 
238. (1) It any person in a cantownent causes or attempts to cause 
or does any act which he knows is likely to cause dialoyalty, didection 
or breaches of discipline amongst any portion of the Armed ForCH of 
the Union or is a person who the Officer Commanding the station has 
reason to believe, is likely to do any such act, the Officer Comm~ding 
the station may make an order in writing setting forth the reasons for 
the making of ' the same and requiring such person to remove from the 
cantonment. within such time as may be specified in the order and pro-
hibiting him b'om re-entering it without the permission in writing of 
the Officer Commanding the station: 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section against an1 
person unl.e:is he has had a reasonable opportunity of being informed 
Qf the grounds on which it is proposed to make the order and df showing 
cause why the order should not be made. 
• • • • • 
m. Whoever-
(0) tails to comply with an order 1uued 1IDder fuis Chapter 
within the period specifted therein, or, whilst an order prohibiting 
him from re-entering a cantonment without permission is in force, 
re-enters the cantonment without such permission, or 
(b) knowing that any person has, under this Chapter, been re-
tJ.uired to remove from the cantonment and has not obtained the re-
quisite permission to re-enter it, harbours or conceals such person' in 
the cantonment, 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, 
aud, in the case of a continuing oftence, with an adci.itional fine which may 
atend to twenty rup .. for every day after the ftrst during which he hal 
~ in the olfence. 
eHABTER XV 
PoWlll$, PROCl!:DtJBJ:, PENAL'1'IB6 AND APPJIAI.S 
:i"try a_ iupectiotl. 
JU. It Ihall be lawful for the President or the Viee-Prestdent of a 
Board, or the Executive Ofticer, or the Health Officer or Assiatant B..Jth 
Oftlcer, or any person specially authorised by the Health OJBcer or tile 
~t Health Officer, or for any other person authorised by pneral. or 
epecial order of a Board in this behalf, to enter into or upon any bulld-
m, 01' land with or without assistants or workmen in order to make any 
iDqQiry, inspection, measurement, valuation or survey, or to execute any 
work, which is authorised by or under this Act or which it ia DeeeIiary 
to make or execute for any of the purposes or in pursuance of any of the 
,rovisions of this Act or of any rule, bye-law or order made thereunder: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to CODfet upon' 
any person any power such as is referred to in section 207 or aeetlOD. 115 
or to authorise the conferment upon any persOll of any such power . 
• • • • • 
US. (1) A Board may, by general or special order, authorise any 
~ l , 
(4) to inspect any drain, privy, latrine, urinal, cesspool, pipe, 
lIIW,fIr or channel in or OIl any lyuildini or land ill. the eantollD*lt, 
Removal 
and ex-
elusion 
from ean-
tonment 
of sedi-
tious 
persons. 
powers of 
entry. 

t, 
Owner'a 
conaent 
ordinari-
lytobe 
obtained. 
\ 
Penalt7 
foroba-
truction. 
Arrest 
without 
warrant. 
IJ).4, ill his discretion, to cause the ground to be opened for the 
~': . 
purpose of preventing or removing any nuisance arising from the 
drain, priVY, latrine, urinal, cesspool. pipe. sewer or cliannel, a. the 
case may bei 
(b) to examine works under construction in the cantonment, to 
take levels or to remove. test, examine, replace or read any meter. 
(2) If, on such inspection, the opening of the ground is found to be 
~essl17 for the prevention or removal of a nuisance, the expenses 
thltreby incurred shall be paid by the owner or occupier of the land or 
Quil<Ung, but if it is found that no nuisance exists or but for such open-
ing would have arisen the ground or portion of any building, drain, or 
other work opened, injured ·or removed for the purpose of such inspection 
sha!l be filled in. reinstated. or made good. as the case may be, by the 
Board. 
• ... ... ... • 
itT. Sa\'e as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no building or 
land shall be entered without the consent of the occupier, or if there is no 
OQCU~, of the owner thereof, and no such entry shall be ~ade without 
giving the said occupier or owner, as the case may be, not less than four 
houn' written notice of the intention to make such entry: 
Provided that no such notice shall be necessary if the place to be 
iMpe.eted is a stable for hOl'Hl or a shed for cattle, or a latrine, privy 
01' .urinal, or a work under construction . 
... ... ... ... . . 
Z49. Whoever obstructs or molests any person employed by a Board, 
who is not a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the '5 of 1810. 
Indian Penal Code or any person with whom the Board has lawfully 
contracted, in the execution of his duty or of anything which he is em-
powered or required to do by virtue or in consequence of any of the 
pro.IODs of this' Act or of any rule, bye-law or order made thereunder .. 
or; ill fulftlment of his contract, as the case may be, shall be punishable" 
with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, 
POtDerB aM duties c;J police officer. 
Ziq.My . member' of the police force employed in a eantonment ma,., 
~~~. wBJ:'rant, arrest any person committing in his view a bi'eaeb of 
anI' " tile. PfOViaioDI of this Act which are specified in Sehedul8 IV: 
... ... • • 
. (b) no person shall be so arrested for an .offence under MCtiOD 
_ex~t-
.. . '" .. . 
(ii) by or at the request of a member of the Military or Air 
~ PoliCe, wh. is emplo~ in the cantolUI1ent and authorised 
.. thil behalf by the Oftieer Commanding the statIon, and in 

Whose preeence the offence was cOmmitted or by or at tile' No 
quest of any police officer not below the rank of a ~1JIIp'" 
who is employed in the cantonment and authorised.ial U. 
behalf by the Officer Commandinl the station. 
Zll. It .hall be the duty of all poUee offteers to sf're f'""'4'dt ... fa. 
fonnation to the Board of the commilliion of any offence.,.... &II 
provisions of thi. Act or of an,. rule or bye-law made 'th-.u.nUr, ... 
to assist aU cantonment oftlceN ao.d servant. in the exerc1ae of ~ 
lawful authority. 
* • • • • • 
258. In the event of non~ompliance with the tenns ot allY not.t~e. 
order or requisition issued to any person under this Act, or any rute or 
bye-law made thereunder, requiring such person to execute any work or 
to do any act, it shall be lawful for the Board, wbether or not the perwn 
~ default 1s liable to punishment for such default or has been pro.8CUt-
ed or sentenced to any punishment therefor, after giving nottee in writ-
ing to S'Ileh person, to take Buch action or such steps 81 may be neeee-
SaT'y for the completion of the act or work reqUired to be done or ex...... . 
e4 by him, and all the expenMI incurNd on IUch accowrt· IhalI "-
recoverable by the Beanl. 
• .,. (1) If any sueh notice as is reterrecl to in _tion 258 hal .,... 
P'Y1tll to any penon in retlpect of property of which he is the own_, the 
Board may require any occupier of s.ch property or of any pad thereof 
to pay to it, instead ot to the. owner, any rent payable \)y him iD .... 
pact of luch property, as it falls due, up to the QDl.Ount recoverahie frma 
tb;e owner under section 2WJ: 
Provided that, if the occupier, on application made to him by the 
Board, refuses truly to disclose the amount of his rent or the name or 
address of the person to whom it is payable, the Board may NCOWr 
from the occupier the whole amount recoverable under .ect1on ... 
• • • • • 
_ .(1) Notwithstanding anything elsewhere contained in this Aet. 
arrears of any tax, rent on land and buildings and any other money re-
coverable by a Board or a Military Estates Officer under this Act or the 
rules made thereunder may be recovered together with the cost at re-
covery either by suit or, on application to a Magistrate having jups~ 
tion in the cantonment or in any place. where the person from whom 
such tax, rent or money is recoverable may for the time being be reaid-
mg,by the distress and sale of aay movable property of, or··~ 
timber, or growing crops' belonging to, -sUCh Person which fa withID. tbI 
ltmitsof such Magistrate's jurisdiction, and .ball, if payable by tIwt ..... 
en: any propertr..as s,!ch, be Ii ebara. OIl the proper1;J UIltil ptl4e 
Dutieeof 
pollee 
ofIIcert. 
Po •••• 
Board in 
cue of 
non-com-
pllance 
wiUl 
~ 
eta. 
LiaWJ.ity 
of~ 
pier .~ 
payiR.". 
faultOt 
own •• 
,.' , " ,. ' .... a ... ' • 
. , , ...... 
, .... .-

ProIe-
eutloDl. 
Geoeral 
penalty. 
CaDcella-
tiOA and 
auapID-
alon of 
1~ 
·Reeovery 
ofUDGWlt 
payableln 
respect of 
damale 
to OID-
tonmIDt 
property. 
I(J{J 
Provided that the tools of artisans, growing crope up to the value 
Of tlve hundred rupees and impl~ments and cattle uaed tor the ~ 
tTt 'agridlilture shall be exempt from such distress or sale. 
(2) An application to a Magistrate under sub-section (1) shall be m 
writing and shall be signed by the President or Vice-President of the 
Board or by the Executive Oftlcer or the Mllltary Estates 0fIleer, but 
Ihall not require to be personally presented . 
• • • • • 
•. (1),· • • • • 
(%) No offence made punishable under this Act shall be tried by 
any Magistrate or by any Bench, if such Magistrate or any ot the Magis-
trates composing the Bench is a member of the Board . 
• • • • • 
Gmerczl penalty prooirion.! 
•. Whoever, in any case in which a penalty is not exprealy provid-
ed by this Act, fails to comply with any notice, order or requisition Jaued 
under any provision thereof, or otherwise contravenea any of the provf-
Ilqns of this Act, shall be punishable with ftne which may extend to two 
hundred rupees, and, in the case ()f a continuing failure or contravention, 
wtth an additional fine which may extend to twenty rupees for every 
day after the ftrst during which he has persisted in the failure or eon-
traventlon. 1 1 ' • - ... ,.,.,~~ 
•. Where any person to whom a licence hal been grant~ under thls 
Act or any agent or servant of such person commits a breach of any of the 
conditions thereof, or of any bye-law made under this Act for the purpose 
of regulating the manner or circumstances in, or the conditions subject 
to, which anything permitted by such licence is to be or may be done, the 
Board may, without prejudice to any other penalty which may have been 
. incurred under this Act, by order in writing, cancel the licence or w. 
pend it for such period as it thinks fit: 
Provided that no such order shall be made until an opportunity has 
been given to the holder of the licence to show cause why it should not 
be made. 
278. WheTe any person has incurred a. penalty by reason of hav!ng 
caused any damage to the property of a Board, he shall be llable to 
make good such damage, and the amount payable in respect of the 
damage shaD, in case of dispute, be determined by the Magistrate by 
whom the person incurring such penalty is convicted, and, on Don-
payment of such amount on demand, the same shall be recovered by 
distress and sale of the movable property of such person, and the 
Magistrate shall issue a warrant for its recovery accordingly. 
Limitation. 
m. No court shall try any person for an offence made puniahable 
by or under this Act, after the expiry of six months from the date of 
the commielion of the offence, unlna compla1nt in respect of the oftcee 
has been made tn a Ma~trat~ within the ~i:r montlul aforell!cl 
" • • • • 

.011_ 
lO! 
Appeal.t GRcI reviliOn 
214. (J) Any person aggrieved by any order d .. crtbed in the second 4ppeaJa 
column C1t Schedule V may appeal to the authority specified in that =:aft---
behalf in the third column thereof. ...... 
(2) No such appeal shall be admitted if it is made after the expiry 
of the period specified in that behalf in the fourth column of the said 
. Schedule. 
(3) The period speclfted as aforesaid shall be computed in accordance 
with the provisions of the Indian Limitation Act, 1'908, with l'8Ip8d to 
the computation of periods of limitation thereunder, 
• • • • • 
IT •. On the admiuion of an appeal from an order, other than an order 
OOIltaiDed in a noUce issued under section 140, secUon 176, or l18Ctioa 
238, all proceedinp to enforce the order and all prosecutions for any 
contravenUon thereof shall be held in abeyance pending the deds10n of 
the appeal, and, if the order is set aide on appeal, cUaobedtence there-
to, mall not be deemed to be an offence, 
• • • • • 
CHAPl'D XVI 
Supee. 
aiOD 01 
aetioD 
pend In. 
appeaL 
Power to 
... (1)' • • • • • .... 
(2) In particular, and Wttliout pre'judice to the generalfty of tha fore. nala 
going power, IllUeh ru1ea may provide for an or any of the followfD.. 
mattera, namely:~ 
• • • • • 
(c) the apPointment, control, supervision, suapension, removal, 
dillmilllal and punishment (),f geM'Mlts of Boards; 
(cc) the CODItitution of a Military Landa and Cantonment Ser-
viee and the appointment, control, supervision, eonditiolll of aenrice, 
pay and allowances, suspension, removal, d.lsmissal and ptm,.bmeut 
of the members thereof; 
• • • • • 
(e) the grant of leave, absentee or acting allowanee to servants 
of Boards; I 
(J) the creation and management ot PrOvident Funds, and the 
ain:umstanees in whieh, and the condiUons subject to which, contrl-
butiolll thereto shall be made from cantonment funds and by Ie!'-
VUlt. of Boarda; 
• • • • • 
81 ... 
-.atI1 
(2) All rules so made shall be published in the Official Gazette and pro. 
in such other manner, if any, as the Central Government may direct vIalOIII 
I'IIJIII""'" 
211. (1) • • • ... • 
and, on such publication, shall have effect .. if enacted in this AC!t IDI 
• '!I •• ..... , 

~.rto 
make 
by ..... ~ 
-~ -_.. ., -.' ... --:.t::.: ,~": 
." " 
Penelty:' . 
for ...... . 
of by ...... :: 
l'WlI 'i-r' 
lOll 
2IZ. Subject to the provisio~ .9f tl$ Act and of the rules made .... 
under, a Board may, in ad~:lition to ariy bye-laws which it is empoweNd 
temake by any other :provislon of this Act,make'by<e-law tn'pnmde 
for ttl or any of the following matters in the can~ .... ,:-. 
• • • •• .-
(2) the enforcement of compulJory vacmn-.&UQD; 
• • . ; 
• •• • 
(4) the regulation or prohibition of any descrt.ptloD· 01 tnfIlo .. 
, . -.atreetsi 
• • • •• 
(6) the seizure and confiscation of ownerless animals atraJIBI 
within the limits of the cantonment; 
• • • • • 
i14) the regulation and control of el)eam~g.grountfs, ~, . 
. washing-places, serais, hotels, dak-bunialows, 1o(tging-h_s, 
~ng-nous~, bundin~~ I~t in tenements, residential c!1~;' n!!ifau. 
rants, eating-house8, cafes,refreshment-room~ and pl~ iJf j1iblte' 
recreatiPD, entertainment or r~~rt: .. - . . 
• * • • • 
(15) the matters reg:\rding which eondittons may be tmpoaed by 
licences granted under sE!etfeil' 2tt~ .... -. .-
... -., . • • • 
(18) . the regulation of the ereetion of 'anyenctOln1l'e, fem!e, _t, 
awning or other temporary structure of whatsoeVer ma'teitat or 
nature on any land situated within the oantonment; 
• • • • 
,- . 
(21) the regulation ot the grazing of anJIu.U; 
• • • • • 
.) the rmdering necessary of licenc. wtthln. the . .c~t-
· -.- • • • • 
. (b) for animals or vehicles let out on hire; 
(I:) for the-proprietors or drivers .. ef. yeb,lcles, bpat,.or other 
eonveyances, or of animals kept or plying for hire.; ". .... ". 
• • • • • . . 
~7) .the reuclerlng necessary ellicences tQr the .. "~Qf prem.fIIeI 
w,ithin the- cantonment as, stables or cowhoUleS or a$' .-ceOmDl9aatton 
. for sheep, goats or fowls; .. ' . 
(38) the control of the use· in the cantonment of .. mechanteal 
whtstles.syren·s or trumpets; and 
• • • 
, •. ~ by-e-Iaw made by u Board under tb.!s .t\c:t my. provide '~"t 
a enntra"lentipI} thereof shall .be punisbabl":- . ". .. "._ 
, . ," ... , '" .... "-
(a) with fine which may emnrl to one hundred rupees; at 

Ulotl801. 
~ .. ' 1~.;1; 
(b) with.fine which-ma.y eHteDd to one hundred rupees and, in 
the cue of a continuin~ c~tra.~~tion,: with an additional fine which 
may extend to twenty rupees f6revery day during which such con-
travention continues after conviction for the first such contraven-
tion; or 
. (c) with fine which may extend to ten rupees for every day 
during which the contravention continues after the rec!eiptof a 
~ce from the Board by the person contravening the by~law re-
quiring Bueh person ,:to discontinue such contravention . 
• ' ~." .1 ... :" "'. • • • • • 
CRAFTER xvn 
" , SUPPIJIlMJiIN'l'AL PROVISIONS 
" 
* * * • • 
, ,..., (l) The Board, may empower any of its members or oftlcen 
to exercise or Perform in. the absence of the Executive Officer from the 
cantonment all or any of such powers or duties of an Executive Oftlcer 
under this Act as the Central Government may, by notifioatiOll in the 
Official Gazette, specify in this behalf. 
,(2) The Board may. by a resolution passed in this behalf, de1egate 
to u., ~~t, Vice-President, Executive Officer or Health Ofticer, s~ 
j~ to" sUCh con4itions, if any. as may be specified in the resolution, all 
'&' any" of its functions 'under sub-section (3) of section 82, sub-section 
(I) or clause (b) of sub-section (5) of section 119, section'131, sub-
HCtion (2) of section 132, section 143,section 161, section 163, section 164, 
MCtion 168, section 169, section 189, section 190, section 191, section 
184, section 195, section 196 or section 191: 
JI7. (1) • • • • • 
(I) 'l1ie Regi8ttar or. Sub-Registrar of the district or sub-distriCt 
formed for the purposes of the Indian Registration Act, 1908; in which 
_ lUly cantonment is situated, sh!ill, when any document relating to immov-
" 'iiDIe propitty withiIi "the cantonment is registeted, send itLforDiation 
Of the registration forthwith to the Board or such othet autqortty as the 
, , , 
Central Government may pfesCribe In this behalf. , . , . . 
• • • * • 
I, • a-A eo-py· ef .. dy receipt, applioation, plan, noti061, order or, other 
document or of any entry in a register, jn the possession of a Boardsball, 
if d.uly certi.&ed by the legal keeper thereof or other person authorised 
by ~the'~ in thia ,behalf, be admissible in evidence of the existence 
'elf ~ '~cqment or entry, and !lhall be admitted as evidence of, the 
, 'matt8ri' ,mei' traniaCuQns therein recorded in every caSe where, and to 
tHe same eXtmt to which; the originsl document or entry would, if 
produced, have been admissible to prove such matters. ' 
• • l'. .. ' 
• 
. :'(' 
Power to 
delqate 
!UDCtionI 
at. Execu. 
tive 
Officer. 
Relistra-
Uon. 
Admiai-
bility of 
document 
orentrv 
.. evid-
ence. 
*., For the purposes of the Government Buildings Act, l899, can- Applica-
~t~ 8!1d" Soards shall be deemed to be municipalities and J1l\U1id- tion ot Act 
'JjM'llU:th6nties respectively. 4 of 1898, 
• • • • • - . 

nd~at 
SCBZDm..J I 
Ncm:CII OJ' ~ 
(See aeetion 91) 
Tab notice that the Board demands from. ..... 
or due from on aceount of 
(here describe the property, occupation, c1rWlUt8Dce or tIdDa m ....-t 
of which the sum is payable) leviable under _ 
the period of commencing on the day of 11 . , 
and ending on the day of 19 ,and that if, witbiD thirty 
days from the service of this notice, the said sum ill DOt paid to tD 
Board at , or 8'U1Ilcient cause for non-payment is DDt shOW'll to 
tbe satisfaction of the Executive OJIlcer, a warrant of diabwI wW .. 
Jaued for the recovery of the same with eoIta. 
day 01 19 
(Signed) 
SCHBDULE n 
(S.e section 92) 
LHere inaert the name of the officer char&ed with the execution of 
1M warrant.) I 
WhereaS A. B. at hal DOt paid, anel hal zaot aIunnl 
uaatactory cause for the n.on.-payment of, the sum of 
ClUe on account of • tor the period of 
commencln, on the day of 19 • and eDdiDa with the 
day of 19 • which aum is leviable uDder ; 
And whereas thirty dall have elapsed aiDce the I8rvice on him of 
aoUce of demand for the same; 
Thia is to command you to distrain, aubject to the provisloDa of the 
Cantonments Act, 1924, the movable property of the said A.B. to the 
liIlDunt of the said sum of Rs. ; uul forthwith to cert:Ify to me, 
toaether with this warrant, all partieulars of the property eeiDMl by JOU 
...... UDder. 
:Dated tWa day of 
• • 
19. 
(Signed) 
• • • 

Sec-
tion 
1116 
134 
140 
181 
188
1 
I 
105 
SCHEDULE V 
A.PPbLs I'ROM 0&1IIIW 
(See section' 274) 
II 
Executive Order 
Board'. notice to remove, re-
J*ir, protect or enclOlC a 
building, wall or anything 
allbed tbereto, or well, 
tank, reservoir, pool, de-
preuion or excavation. 
Board'. notice to fill up wel!z ; 
tank, ete., or to drain on I 
or remove water. 
!I 
Appellate Authority 
Officer Commandint-in-
Chief, the CCIIIlmaD d 
01' other authority au-
thorised in this behalf 
by the Central Govern-
• ment. 
Board's notice requiring a I 
building to be repaired or t 
altered 10 .. to remove I 
sanitary defectl. 
Officer Commanding-in-
Chief, the IJommand, 01' 
tither authority au-
thorised in this behalf by 
the Central Government. 
OfIiccr Commanding-in 
Chief, the Command, 
or other authority au· 
thorised in thil behalf 
by the Central Govern-
ment. 
Order of Officer Command- I 
ing the station on report of 
Medical Officer, directing· 
a person ~o remove from 
the cantonment and pro-
hibiting him from re-enter· 
ing it without permillion. 
Board's refusal to sanction 
the erection or rc-erection 
of a building. 
Officer . Commanding-in-
Chief, the Command, or 
other autlaority autho-
rised in thil behalf bv the 
Central Governinen t: 
Ofticer . Cornman ding-in-
Chief, the Command, or 
other authority au· 
. thoriacd in this behalfby 
tbe Central Govemmcn t. 
Time allowed for appeal 
Thirty days from service of 
notice •. 
Thirty daYI from lervice of 
noticc. 
Thirty da~'s from ICrvice of 
notice. 
Thirty days from lervicc of 
Dotice. 
Thirty daYI from the date on 
which the refusal Ihan 
have bren communicated 
to the penon applying for 
.anetion. 
Board'. notice to alter 
demolish a building. 
or Officer Commanding-i n·1 Thirty days from lervice 
Chief, the Command, of notice. . 
or other authority au· 
thoNed in thi. behalfby 
the Central Govern· 
Board's notice to pull down or 
otherwiac deal with a build-
ing newly erected or rebuilt 
without permiaion over a 
_er, drain, culvert, water 
,:oune or water-pipe. 
Board's notiee prQJIibiting 
or reltricnng the UIe of a 
slaughter.hoUie. 
Magistrate's notice directing 
disorderly peraon to re-
move from cantonment 
and prohibiting him from 
re-l!Iltering it without per-
million. 
• • • 
ment. 
Officer €ommanding-in.; 
Chief, the Command, or . 
other authority au-
thorised in this behalf 
by the Central Govern-
ment. 
OfIicer Commanding-in-
Chief, the Command, or 
other authority autho-
rised in tbis behalf by 
the Central Government. 
District Magiatrate. 
Thirty daYI rrom aervice of 
notice. 
Twenty-one days from service' 
of notice. 
Thirty daya rrom ~Ice of 
Donee. 
• .--------,..-----

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Cantonments AAt, Ji2~ 
• 
Shri R. Venkataraman. 
Minister of Defence) 