DiU No. " of 195'-
THE DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPEN-
SATION AND REHABILITATION) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1956. 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOlt SABHA) 

Bill No. " of 19$," 
THE DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND 
REHABILITATION) AMENDMENT BILL, I956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) 
Act, 1954. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Displaced Perso~ (Compensa- Short title 
tion and Rehabilitation) Amendment Act. 1956. :!ce:t: 
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the twenty-
second day of October, 1956. 
Z. In section 2 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Reha- AmeDdmeDt 
.4 (·f 1954. bilitation) Act, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) ,_ of lOCtioa 2. 
(i) in clause (d). in sub-clause (iti), for the words "by the 
10 Central Government or a State Government of. any property or 
any interest therein;", the following shall be substituted, 
namely:-
IS 
20 
"of any property or interest therein by-
(a) the Central Government; or 
. (b) any State Government; or 
(c) any body corporate Or other authority or person 
financed by the Central Government or a State Govern-
ment for the purpose of the acquisition, development 
or construction of any immovable property for the 
rehabilitation of displaced persons;";. 
• 

2 
(ii) in clause (e), for the words "but does not include", 
the following shall be substituted, namely:-
, 
"and includes any claim registered on or before the 31st 
day of May, 1953, under the East Punjab Refugees (Registra-
tion of Claims) Act, 1948, or under the Patiala Refugees 
(Registration of Land Claims) Ordinance, 2004, and verified 
by any authority appointed for the purpose by the Govern-
ment of Punjab, the Government of Patiala or the Govern-
ment of PaUala and East Punjab States Union, as the case 
may be, which has not been' satisfied wholly or partially by 10 
th~. al~qtment of any evacuee land under the relevant 
notiftC8tion specified in section 10 of this Act, but does not 
include--". 
5 Bait Punjab 
Act XII of 
1948. 
Old. 10 of 
ZOO4 BK. 
AmondmCDt 3. In section 11 of the principal Act, sub-section (2) shall be 
of HCtion I I. omitted. J S 
~~meDt 4. In section 19 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the 
1CCU0I1 19· following sub-section, shall be SUbstituted, namely:-
"(2) Where any person,-
(a) has ceased to be entitled to the po'::session of any 
evacuee property py reason of any action taken under sub. 20 
section (1), or 
(b) is otherwise in unauthorlsed possession of any e~a­
cuee property or any other immovable property forming part 
of the compensation pool; " 
• 
he. shall, after he ha3been given. a reasonable opportunity of 25 
showing cause against his eviction from such property. surren~ 
possession of the property On demand being made in thh behalf 
by the managing officer or managing corporation or by any other 
person duly authorised by such officer' or corporation,", 
.AmeadnIOnt 5. In section 20 of the principal Act, in clau;:e (d) of su'b~section 30 
ofeectionao. (I), after the words "to a displaced person", the following words 
shall be inserted, namely:- ' 
"or any association of· displaced persons, whether incorpprat-
ed or not, or to any other person". 

S 
31 of 1950. 
10 
IS 
20 
2S 
35 
3 
. 6. (1) After section 20 of the principal Act, the following sectien lDtertion. of new section 
shall be inserted, namely:- 2oA. • 
"20A. (1) Where any evacuee or his heir has made an Udlisatienof 
application under section 16 of the Administration. of Evacuee ::P;::'i in 
Property Act, 1950 (hereinafter in this sec~on referred to. as the :~::::... 
Evacuee Property Act), and the Central Government is of opin- lion of eva-
iQn that it is not expedient or practicable to restore the whole ~ p:=~ 
or any part of such property to the applicant by reason of the cases. 
property or part thereof being in occupation of a displaced 
person or otherwise, then, notwithstanding .anything conbained in 
the Evacuee Property Act and this Act, it shall be lawful for the 
Central Government-
(a) to transfer to the applicant in lieu of the evacuee 
property or any part thereof, any immovable property in 
the compensation pool or any part thereof, being in the _ 
opinion of the Central Government as nearly as may be of 
the same value as the evacuee property or, as the case may 
be, any part thereof, or 
(b) to .pay to the applic.ant such amount in cash f·rom 
the compensation pool in lieu of th.e evacuee property or 
part thereof, as the Central Government having :regard to 
the value of the evacuee property or part thereof, may~ in 
the circumstances deem fit. . 
ExpZanation.-The provisions of ~ia sub-section shall apply. 
whether or not, a certificate for the restoration of ~e evacuee 
property has been issued to the applicant under sub-section (1) 
of section 16 of the Evacuee Property Act, as in force imme-
diately before the commencement of the Administration of 
Evacuee Property (Amendment) Act, 1956, if the evacuee 
property has not in fact been restored to the applicant. 
(2) Where in pursuance of suHectiotl.· (1) any evacuee or 
his heir has been granted any Unmovable property from the 
compensation pool or has been paid aay amount in cash from 
the compensation pool, his application under section 16 of ~he 
Evacuee Property Act for the restoration of the evacuee property 
shall be deemed to have been disposed of, and his right, title and 
interest in such evacuee property shall be deemed to have been 
extinguished tut such extinguishment shall not affect the power 
of the Central Government to acquire the evacuee property 
under section 12 of this Act. 
,. 

RecoYery of 
certain swns 
It urea" of 
IIIId 
I'ftenue. 
Repeal or 
OldinaDCe. 
4 
'to For section 21 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
ae substituted, name!y:-
1&21. (1) Any sum payable to the Government or to the 
Custodian in respect of any evacuee. property, under any agree-
ment, express or implied, lease or other document or otherwise S 
howsoever, for any period prior to the date of acquisition of 
IUch property under this Act, which has not been recovered 
under section 48 of the Administration of Evacuee Property 
Act, 1950, and any sum payable to the Government in respect 31 of 19!!;). 
of any property in the compensation pool, may be recovered in 10 
the same manner as an arrear of land revenue· 
(2) If any question arises whether a sum is payable to the 
Government or to the Custodian within the meaning of sub-
.etion (1) in respect of any property referred to therein, it shall 
be referred to the Settlement Commissioner within whose IS 
jurisdiction the property is situated, and the Settlement Com-
missioner shall, after making such inquiry u he may deem fit 
and giving to the person by whom the sum is alleged to be 
payable an opportunity of being heard, decide the question; 
and the decision of the Settlement Commissioner shall, subject 20 
to any appeal or revision under this Act, be final, and shall not 
be caUed in question by any court or other authority. 
(3) For the purposes of this section, a sum shall be deemed 
to be payable to the Custodian, notwithstanding that its recovery 
ia barred by the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, or any other law 2S ,.f 1901. 
for the time being in force, relating to limitation of actions.". 
8. (1) TAe Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) 7 of 1956. 
Amendment Ordinance, 1956, is hereby repealei!. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, any thing done or any 
action taken in the exercise of any powers conferred by or under 30 
the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken 
in the exercise of the powers conferred by or under this Act as 
if this Act were in force on the date on which such thing was 
done or action was taken. 
• 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 
1954, was passed to enable the Central Government to acquire the 
right, title and interest of evacuees in evacuee properties in India 
so that those properties as well as the contribution in the shape of 
Government-built properties atld loans advanced by the Central 
Government could be utilised for the payment of compensation and 
rehabilitation grants to displaced persons. In the light of the 
experience gained in the working of the Act and in consequence of 
the amendments made in the Administration of Evacuee Property 
Act, 1950, certain amendments to the Displaced Persons (Compen-
sation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1954, became necessary. The Bill 
makes the following amendments in the principal Act:-
(i) The definition of 'public dues' in section 2 is being 
modified to include amounts due to a corporation or other body 
financed by Government in connection with housing schemes for 
displaced persons [Clause 2 (i)]. 
(ii) The definition of 'verified claim' in section 2 is being 
expanded to include a claim in respect of agricultural land 
verified under the laws in force in the States of Punjab and 
Patiala and East Punjab States Union before the enactment of 
th~ Central law on the subject, namely, the Displaced Persons 
(Claims) Act, 1950. TIlis amendment is necessary in order to 
enable the authorities to allot, by way of compensation, acquir-
ed evacuee agricultural land in the States of Punjab and 
Patiala and East Punjab States Union in accordance with the 
scale prescribed under the quasi-permanent land allotment 
scheme in force in those States to Punjabis and persons of 
Punjabi extraction whose claims have remained wholly or 
partially unsatisfied [Clause 2 (ii)]. 
(iii) Sub-section (2) of section 11 is being omitted because 
maintenance allowance paid before the commencement of the 
Act is not intended to be a burden upon the compensation pool 
(Clause 3). 
(iv) Section 19 (2) is being amended So as to facilitate 
eviction of all persons who are in unauthorised possession of 
any immovable property forming part of the compensation 
pool (Clause 4). 
, 

*' 6 
(v) In certain cases evacuee properties which are restor-
able under the provisions of the Administration of Evacuee 
Property Act, 1950, have already been allotted to displaced 
persons. In some cases such properties have already been 
acquired under the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Re-
habilitation) Act. In order to safeguard the interests of dis-
placed persons, it has been decided that where it is not 
expedient to restore the original property to an evacuee owner, 
he should be given alternative. property or cash compensation 
or partly alterlliitive property and partly cash compensation. 
The new section 20A makes the necessary provision in this 
behalf '(Clause 6) . 
(vi) Section 21 is being amended on the lines of the 
amendment proposed in the correspond~ng section 48 of the 
Administration of . Evacuee Property Act, 1950, in the Bill relat-
ing to the amendment of that Act (Clause 7). 
NEW DELIU; 
The 15th November. 1956. MEHR CHAND KHANNA.-

FINANCIAL MEMORADUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the omission of sub-sec,tiC?n (2) 
of section 11 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabili-
tation) Act, 1954, according to which all payments made before the 
commencement of that Act in respect of Maintenance Allowance 
to displaced persons were to be recovered from the compensation 
pool. Ma~nance Allowance was granted from I-I-50 on a sliding 
scale to displaced widows, unattached women, minors and other old 
and infirm persons who depended in West Pakistan on income from 
their immovable property. Since these payments were in the nature 
of relief to displaced persons, it is proposed that the' expenditure 
should be met from the General Revenues and not out of the compen-
sation pool. The amount involved is Rs. 137 lakhs approximately. 
2. The allowance has been stopped with the payments of compen-
satien and practically all claimants belonging to this category have 
received the compensation due to them. 

ANNEXURE 
Ex'l'ltACTS FROM 'I1IE DISPLACED PBRso~s (COMPUSATION AND 
REHABILITATION) ACT, 1954 
(44 OF 1954) 
• • • • 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requirel,-
• • • • • 
(d) "public dues" in relation to a displaced person, includes-
• • • • • 
(iii) the amount of purchase money or any part thereof 
and any interest on such amount or part remaining unpaid 
and recoverable from the displaced person on account of 
transfer to him by the Central Government or a State 
Government of any property or any interest therein; 
• • • • 
(e) "verified claim" means any claim registered under the 
Displaced Persons (Claims) Act, 19fX) (XLVI of 1950), in respect 
of which a final order has 1;>een passed under that Act or under 
the Displaced Persons (Claims) Supplementary Act, 1954. (12 of 
1954), but does not include-
(i) any such claim registered in respect of property 
held in trust for a public purpose of a religious or 
charitable nature; 
(ii) except in the case of a banking company for the 
purpose of sub-clause (i) of clause (b) of sub-section (3) of 
section 6, only-
<a) any such claim made by or on behalf of any 
company or association, whether incorporated or not; 
(b) any such claim made by a mortgagee or other 
person holding a charge or lien on immovable property 
belonging to a displaced person in West Pakistan; 
• • • • 
8 

Rehabili-
tation and 
other grants 
to displaced 
perBOAI. 
9 
1L (1) 
• • • • 
(2) All payments made before the commencement of this Act 
• by the Central Government in respect of maintenance allowance to 
displaced persons shall be deemed to have been validly made under 
sub-section (1) and shall be recoverable by the Central Government 
out of the compnsation pooL 
• • • • • 
P01Ver to 19. (1) 
vary or can-
cel leases or • • • • 
allotment of 
any property (2) Where by reason of any action taken under sub-section (1), 
=~;~s any person has ceased to be entitled to possession of any evacuee 
Act. property acquired under this Act, he shall, on demand by the mana-
ging officer or managing corporation, surrender possession of such 
property to such officer or corporation or to any person duly authori-
sed by him or it in this behalf. 
• • • • 
Power to 20. (1) Subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, 
~rn~f~!tr~ the managing officer or managing corporation may transfer any 
the. compeD- property out of the compensation pool-
.. uon pool. 
• • • • • 
(d) in the case of a share of an evacuee in a company, by 
transfer of such share to a displaced person, notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in the Irulian Companies 
Act. 1913 (VII of 1913), or in the memorandum or articles of 
association of such company; 
• • • • 
RecoveI'J of 21. Any sum due to the Custodian in respect of any evacuee pro-
arrears. pertv acquired under this Act for any period prior to the date of the 
acquisition, or to tne Central Government in respect of any property 
in the copensation pool may, on a certificate issued by the Chief 
Settlement Commissioner, be recovered. in the same manner as ua 
arrear of land revenue . 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Displaced Persons (Compensation and 
Rehabilitation) Act, 1954. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of 
article 117 of the ConstitutIon of India, recommeruted 
to Lok Sabha the consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Meho.r Chand KIumna, 
Minister 0/ Rehabilitation.) 