As mrmopucen mw Lox Sain 7 DEC 204

Bill No, 69 of 2004

THE RESERVATION IN EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS (FOR
CHILDREN OF PARENTS LIVING BELOW POVERTY LINE) BILL,
2004
By
Suet Iqpat Aime SARADG!, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for reservation of seats in all educational and technical education
institutions for children whose parents are living below poverty line.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:— ५
Short title
1, (7) This Act may be called the Reservation in Educational Institutions (For Children ¢xtent,
of Parents living Below Poverty Line) Act, 2004. be
(2) It extends to the whole of India. application.
(3) It shall come into force at once.

(4) It shall apply to every educational institution which is maintained by the Central or

a State Government or receives grant-in-aid from either Government or recognized by the
Central or State Government or University established by an Act of Parliament or a State
‘Legislature or deemed University.


Reservation
of seats in

educational
institutions.

Appropriate
Government
to bear
expenditure
incurred on
education.

Power to make
rules.

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise Tequires,—

(०) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government
State and in other cases, the Central Government;

(0) “persons living below poverty line” means all such persons who according
to norms fixed by the Central Government from time to time are living below poverty
line.

3. There shall be reserved twenty-five percent of seats in all educational institutions

including higher technical education institutions for children of parents living below poverty
line:

Provided that such benefits shall be restricted to only one child of the parents.

4. The appropriate Government shall bear all expenditure incurred on education of
children of parents living below poverty line.

5. The Central Government may by notification in the official Gazette make rules for
carrying ‘out the provisions of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Various surveys reveal that during the post-independence period, there has been
considerable expansion in educational facilities and enrolment in educational institutions.
Both the Central and State Governments have been expanding the provisions of formal and
non-formal education to realize the goal of universalisation of education, Consequently,
literacy rate has improved in the last few decades, According to census estimates, the
literacy rate has increased by about 12 percentage points in a period of ten years from 52.21

in 1991 to 65.38 percent by 2001. However, a considerable part of our population still remains
illiterate. The primary cause of illiteracy is the poverty prevalent in the country, 27 percent of
ur population is still living below the poverty line. Their income is so meagre that they live
at the level of subsistence only. These poor people cannot afford the expenditure incurred
on education of their children. It is,therefore, necessary that a certain percentage of seats in
all educational institutions be reserved for children whose parents are living below poverty
line. It will not only help in eradicating illiteracy from the country but also protect the
interests of economically weaker sections of the society,

New Deum; IQBAL AHMED SARADGI.
August 18,2004,


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall bear the entire
expenditure incurred on education of children whose parents are living below poverty line in
the country, the provision of which shall be made by the respective Governments in annual
budget. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, will involve a recurring expenditure
of about rupees one hundred crore per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore is also likely to be incurred.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules to be made will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character,



LOK SABHA

A
BILL
to provide for reservation of seats in all educational and technical education
institutions for children whose parents are living below poverty line.

(Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi, M.P.,)
MGIPMRNO—2342LS—17.09.2004.