THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (AMENDMENT)  BILL, 2020
By
SHRI KODIKUNNIL SURESH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Information Technology (Amendment) Act,
2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 7 of the Information Technology Act, 2000, after sub-section ( 1)
the following Sub-Section shall be inserted, namely:—
''(1A) Every document, record or information, whether personal or of a
general nature, of any Indian citizen in electronic form under sub-section ( 1)
shall be retained or maintained only in datacentre located within the territory of
India.".
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
   Bill No. 69 of  2020
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 7.
21 of 2000.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Information Technology Act, 2000, is an important legislation that protects
the right to privacy of individuals utilizing the electronic and internet enabled services
and equipments provided by internet service providers in the country.
With alarming rise in breach of privacy and data, including personal and financial
identity being rampantly breached, often with established service providers and
companies in connivance, it is imperative to consistently safeguard the right to privacy
and data integrity of individuals. In a recent development several individuals who
visit shops and service providers are fraudulently made to divulge their mobile phone
numbers under flimsy pretexts and numbers collected thus are transferred to various
fraudulent groups that steal and pilfer personal data by means of vishing and
spamming. It is thus needed to enact a legislation that protect the rights of citizens
against all evolving forms of data theft.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000, with
a view to—
(a) comprehensively protect and safeguard the rights of individuals against
data theft and data privacy; and
(b) extend the ambit of the principal Act to ensure the evolving techniques and
modus of individuals engaged in data theft,
by ensuring that every document, record or information, whether personal or of
a general nature, of any Indian citizen in electronic form shall be retained or maintained
only in datacentre located within the territory of India.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KODIKUNNIL SURESH
February 13, 2020.
2

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000
[ACT  NO. 21 OF 2000]
* * * * *
7. (1) Where any law provides that documents, records or information shall be
retained for any specific period, then, that requirement shall be deemed to have been
satisfied if such documents, records or information are retained in the electronic form,
if—
(a) the information contained therein remains accessible so as to be usable for
a subsequent reference;
(b) the electronic record is retained in the format in which it was originally
generated, sent or received or in a format which can be demonstrated to represent
accurately the information originally generated, sent or received;
(c) the details which will facilitate the identification of the origin, destination,
date and time of dispatch or receipt of such electronic record are available in the
electronic record:
Provided that this clause does not apply to any information which is
automatically generated solely for the purpose of enabling an electronic record to be
dispatched or received.
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to any law that expressly provides for the
retention of documents, records or information in the form of electronic records.
* * * * *
Retention of
electronic
records.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000.
————
(Shri Kodikunnil Suresh, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5357LS(S3)—02.0 3.2020.