As introduced in Lok Sabha
                   
                                                       
          
Bill No. 69 of  2024
THE MAHATMA GANDHI NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT 
GUARANTEE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
By
Shri Hibi Eden,  M.P.
A
BILL
 further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment  
Guarantee Act, 2005. 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—      
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee (Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government, may by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2. After section 5 of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 
2005 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following sections shall be inserted,—
Short title and 
commencement.
5
Insertion of  
new section 5A. 42 of 2005.

“5A. The Central Government or the State Government may, within the limits of their 
jurisdiction ensure that the persons employed under the Scheme,—
(a) are paid their wages on time;
(b) are not imposed any technological change and innovations without proper 
consultation and training; and
(c) are not made to suffer due to paucity of funds.”.
3. In section 25 of the principal Act, for the words, “which may extend to one thousand 
rupees”, the words “which shall not be less than rupees ten thousand but which may extend 
upto rupees one lakh” shall be substituted.
  
2
Amendment of  
Section 25.
5
Timely payment 
of wages under 
the Scheme, etc.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) 
is a flagship programme of the Government of India aimed at providing employment to 
rural households in the country. The success of the programme depends on the efficient 
functioning of its employees. However, person employed under the  MGNREGS are often 
subject to payment delays, technological impositions, and paucity of funds, which affect 
their efficiency and morale.
 The need is to protect the persons employed under the MGNREGS from payment 
delays, technological imposition, and paucity of funds. It is the responsibility of the Central 
Government and the State Governments concerned to take necessary steps to ensure that 
the persons employed under the MGNREGS are paid their wages on time, technological 
changes and innovations are not imposed on the employees without proper consultation and 
training, and there is no paucity of funds for the implementation of MGNREGS. It is also 
required to have a requisite penalty for non-compliance for timely payment to the persons 
employed under the MGNREGS.
 The Bill therefore, seeks to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act, 2005 with a view to put an obligation on the Central Government and the 
State Governments for the timely payment of wages to the persons employed under the 
Scheme, etc.
 Hence this Bill.
     New Delhi;                                                  HIBI EDEN 
 July 9,  2024.
3

 ANNEXURE
[Extracts from the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
 Guarantee Act, 2005]
(Act No. 42 of 2005)
 * * * * *  
25. Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall on conviction be liable to a 
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees. 
 * * * * *  
4
Penalty for
non-compliance

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment  
Guarantee Act, 2005.
————
(Shri Hibi Eden, M.P.)