1
Bill No. 69 of 2015
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI PRAHLAD SINGH PATEL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2015. Short title.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Amendment
of section
376.
2. In section 376 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, after sub-section (2), the following
sub-section shall be added at the end, namely,—
“(3) Notwithstanding anything in this section, whoever commits rape and makes
its audio, video or audio-video recording either himself or through any other person,
shall be punished with death.
(4) Whoever keeps or circulates the audio, video or audio-video recording of
rape with the intent to tarnish the image of a victim of rape or exploiting or harassing
her, shall be punished with imprisonment which shall not be less than three years and
fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees.”.
45 of 1860.
5

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Recent increase in the circulation of audio-video clips of rape victims are causing
additional torture to the shattered soul of rape victim and her family members. It is not only
creating law and order problem but also manipulating the tender mindset of youngsters, who
watch such rape crime video clips. This is also noticed that such audio-video clips are
available in the black market at very high prices, which is another matter of grave concern.
This also opens up doors for easy money at the cost of violation of basic rights of victims
and their families. Therefore, a strict law is essential to control this new crime, having potential
to cause collateral damage to the victim and her family. The Bill, accordingly, seeks to amend
the Indian Penal Code, 1860 with a view to provide that whoever commits rape and makes its
audio, video or audio-video recording, either himself or through any other person, shall be
punished with death. The Bill also provides for punishment for keeping or circulating audio,
video or audio-video recording of rape with intent to tarnish the image of a rape victim or
exploiting or harassing such victim.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; PRAHLAD SINGH PATEL
February 10, 2015

4
ANNEXURE
AN EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * * *
376. (1) * * * * * *
(2) Whoever,—
(a) being a police officer commits rape—
(i) within the limits of the police station to which he is appointed; or
(ii) in the premises of any station house whether or not situated in the
police station to which he is appointed; or
(iii) on a woman in his custody or in the custody of a police officer
subordinate to him; or
(b) being a public servant, takes advantage of his official position and commits
rape on a woman in his custody as such public servant or in the custody of a public
servant subordinate to him; or
(c) being on the management or on the staff of a jail, remand home or other place
of custody established by or under any law for the time being in force or of a women’s
or children’s institution takes advantage of his official position and commits rape on
any inmate of such jail, remand home, place or institution; or
(d) being on the management or on the staff of a hospital, takes advantage of his
official position and commits rape on a woman in that hospital; or
(e) commits rape on a woman knowing her to be pregnant; or
(f) commits rape on a woman when she is under twelve years of age; or
(g) commits gang rape,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
ten years but which may be for life and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the
judgement, impose a sentence of imprisonment of either description for a term of less than
ten years.
Explanation 1.—Where a woman is raped by one or more in a group of persons acting
in furtherance of their common intention, each of the person shall be deemed to have committed
gang rape within the meaning of this sub-section.
Explanation 2.—“Women’s or children’s institution” means an institution, whether
called an orphanage or a home for neglected woman or children or a widows’ home or by any
other name, which is established and maintained for the reception and care of woman or
children.
Explanation 3.— “Hospital” means the precincts of the hospital and includes the
precincts of any institution for the reception and treatment of persons during convalescence
or of persons requiring medical attention or rehabilitation.
* * * * * *
Punishment
for rape.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri Prahlad Singh Patel, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4773LS(S3)—04-03-2015.