As Intropucen In Lox Sania
0 ONLY 2008
Bill No, 69 of 2005
THE SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONES BILE, 2005

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES ”

CHAPTERIT
PRELIMINARY
(CLAUSES.

i. Short titic, extent and commencement.
. Definitions,
CHAPTER}
ESTABLISHMENT OF SPECIAL BcoNomic Zone
. Procedure for making proposal to establish a Special Economic Zone.
Establishment of Special Economie Zone and approval and authorisation to operate it
to, Developer. 5
. Guidelines for notifying Special Economic Zone.
. Processing and non-processing areas.
. Exemption from taxes, duties, or cess,
CHAPTER IIE
Constirution oF 80/फ ay AppRovaL
8. Constitution of Board of Approval.
. Duties, powers and functions of Board,
. Suspension of letter of approval and transfer of Special Econcimic Zane in certain
cases,

CHAPTER IY
DeveLovmENT Cometasionsn

UL. Development Commissioner,
12. Functions of Development Commissioner,
CHAPTER V

Sincee Wusvow Cisakance
13, Constitution of Approval Committee.
14, Powers anil functions of Approval Committee.
15, Seiting up of Unis.
16, Cancellation of leiter of approval to entropreneur,
17, Setting up and operation of Offshore Banking Limit.
ik. Setting up of International Financial Services Centre,
19, Single application form, retura, ete.
20. Agency to inspect.
21. Singte enforcement officer or agency Far notified offences.

22. Investigation, inspection and search or izuro.
2, Designated Courts to try suits anu notified offences,
24, Appeal to High Court.

25, Offences by companies.


ti

CHAPTER ¥1
SPECIAL FISCAL PROVISIONS FOR Special Economic ZONES

CLAUSES
26, Exemptians, drawbacks and concessiuns lo every Developer and entrepreneur.

27, Provisions of Income-tax Act, 1961 to apply with certain modificution in retation. to
Developers and entreprenets. हु

i 28, Duration of goods or services in Special Economic Zones,

29, Transfer of ownership and removat af 90005.
30, Domestic clearance by Units.
। CHAPTER शा
Spectat Economic Zone AUTHORITY

३1, Constitution of Authority.

32, Officers of Authority and other staff,

33, Special Provision for transfer of officers or other employees to Authority.

Functions, of Authority.

we
=

35, Grants and loans by Central Government.
36, Canstitution of Fund and its application.
हर 37, Accounts and audit.

38. Directions by Central Gavermocnt,

39, Returns and reports.
40, Power to supersede Authority.

41, Members, officers and other etnployees of Authority to be public scrvanls,

CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLARTOUS

42, Reference of dispute.

43, Jimitation.
हि 44, Applicability of provistous of this Act to existing Special Reonomic Zones.

48. Person to whom a communication may be sent under this Act
y inder this Act,

46, Identity Card.
47, Authorities responsible for administration,

i 48. Protection of action taken in good faith.

49, Power to modify provisions of this Act or other ena. nents in relation to Speci
Fcononic Zones.

50. Power of Slate Government to grant exemption.
5], Act to have overriding effect.
52, Certain provisions not to apply.

53, Special Economic Zones to be ports, airports, inland ¢ — =iner depots, land stations, :
ctc., in certain cases. :



CLAUSES

44.

55,
56,

57
58.

Amendmeut to First Schedute.
Power 10 make rules,
Power to remove difficultics

Amendment of certain enactments.

Savings.

TITER FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE,



1 : : . व
1 THE SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONES BILL, 2005
{ a .

BILL

1
to provide for the establishment, development and management of the Special Economie
Zones for the promotion of exports and far maiters connected therewith or incidenta}

thereto.
Be it enacted by Parflament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as

‘follows:—
. CHAPTER]

PRELIMINARY

5 1, {7} This Act may be called the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005, Short tin
01
| (2) It extends to the whole of india, _ extent ond
. commence-
(3} it shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, bynotification ™¢.
| . inthe Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different PIDVisionig
of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall
be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.


2
Definitions. 2. 10 this Acl, mnleys the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “appointed day" with reference to a Special Economic Zone means the

date on which the Special Economic Zone is notified by the Centrat Government
under sub-section (7) of section 4:

(6) “Approval Coramittee” means un Approval Committee constituted under डा
sub-section (/) a! section ] 3;

(८) “authorised operations" means operations which may be authorised under
sub-secting (2) of section 4 and sub-section (9) of section 15;

{d} “Authority” means a Special Econamic Zone Authority constituted under
sub-section (1) of section 31; 1०

(e) "Board” means the Board of Approval constituted under sub-section (1) of
section 8;

()"Co-Develaper" means a person wha, or a State Government which, has been
granted by the Central Government a letter of approval under sub-section (22) of .
section 3; Is

1 (8) “Developer” means a person who, of a State Government which, has been
granted by the Central Government a letter of approval under sub-section (70) of
section 3 and includes an Authority and a Co-Developer;

(A) "Development Commissioner” means the Development Commissioner appointed
for one or more Speciat Economic Zones under sub-section (/) of section 11; 2o

(0 “Domestic Tariff Area" means the whole of India (including the territorial
waters and continental shelf} but does not include the areas of the Special Economic
Zones;

@) “eotzepreneur" means 4 person who has been granted a letter of approval by
the Development Commissioner under sub-section (9) of section 15;

(4) “cxisting Special Economic Zone” means every Special Economie Zone which
is in existence on or before the commencement of this Act;

“existing Wait” means every. Unit which fas been set up on or before the
conumencement of this Act in an existing Special Economic Zone;

(७) “export” means — 3०

(taking. goods, or providing services, out of india, from a Special
Economic Zone, by land, sea or air or by any other mode, whether physical or
othenvisc; or

{fiysapplying goods, or providing services, from the Domestic Tariff Area
. toa Unitor Developer; or ce

(19 ‘supplying goods, or providing services, from one Unit to
another Unit or Developer, in the same or different Special Economic
Zone;

(४). “Free Trade and Warehousing Zone” means a Special Economic Zone
wherein mainly trading and warehousing and other activities related thereto are Wo
carried on;

(०) “import” means~—

(i) bringing goods or receiving services, ina Special Economic Zone, by
8 Unit or Developer fiom a place outside India by land, sea or air or by-any other
mode, whether physical or otherwise; or ५५



८: a

(i/} receiving goods, ar services by a Unit or Developer from another Unit
or Developer of tie same Special Economic Zone or a different Special Economic
Zone,

(p) “infrastructure fucilitics" means industrial, commercial or social infrastrecture
5 0 other facititics necessary for the development ofa Special Evonomic Zone or such
other faciJities which may be prescribed;

(4) “Intemalionat Financial Services Centre“ means an International Financial
Services Centre which hus been approved by the Central Goverment under sub-
section (7) of section 18;

(७) “manufacture” means to make, produce, fabricate, assemble, process or
bring into existence, by hand ar by machine, a new product having a distinctive name,
character or use and shall include prucesses such as reftigeratian, cutting, polishing,
blending, repair, remaking, re-engineering and includes agriculture, aquaculture,
animal husbandry, floriculture, horticulture, pisciculture, poultry, sericulture,
viticulture and mining;

{s) "notification" means 8 notitication published in the Official Gazette and
the expression “notify” shall be construed accordingly; है

(4 “notified offences” means the offences specified as such under sub-sevtion
(7) of section 21;

{u) “Offshore Banking Unit” means a branch of a bank located in a Special
Economic Zone and which has obtained the permission under clause (a) of sub-
section (/) of section 23 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949;

(४) “person” includes an individual, whether resident in India or outside India, a
Hindu undivided family, co-operative society, a company, whether incorporated in
India or outside India, a firm, proprietary concern, or an association of persons or
body of individuats, whether incorporated or not, locat authority and any agency,
office or branch owned or controlled by such individual, Hindu undivided family, ए0-
operative, association, 1009 authority or conipary;

(w) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government
under this Act;

(x) “Reserve Bank” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under section
3 of the Reserve Bank o! India Act, 1934,

(9) “Schedule” means Schedules to this Acg
(2) “services” means such tradable services which, —

(i) are covered under the Genvrat Agreement on Trade in Services annexed
as IB to the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation concluded at
Marvakes on the 1 Sth day of April, 1994;

(7i} may be preseribed by the Central Goverunent for the Purposes of this
Act; and

५० (#2) earn foreign exchange;

(za) "Special Economic Zone" means each Special Economic Zone notified
under the-proviso to sub-section (4) of section 3 and sub-section (/) of section 4
{including Free Trade and Warehousing Zone) and includes an existing Special
Economic Zone;

us (28) “State Government? means a State Government of the State in which a
Special Economic Zone is established or proposed to be established;

(2०) "Unit" means a Unit set up by an entrepreneur in a Special Economic Zone
and inclades an existiny Unit, an Offshore Banking Unit and a Unit in an International
Financial Services Centre, whether established before or established after

© commencement of this Act;



Procedure tor
making
proposal tn
establish a
Special
Economic
Zone

4

(z4) all other words and expressions uscd and not defined in this Act but defincd
in the Central Excise Act, 1944, the Industries (Development and Regulation} Act,
1951, the Income-tax Act, 1961, the Customs Act, 1962 and the Foreign Trade
{Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 shal] have the meanings respectively assigned

1 of 1944
65 at 1951
43 of 1965

to them in those Acts. S22 ot 1992,

CHAPTERII

EsTABLISHMENT OF SPECIAL Eiceinomac: ZONE

3. (AA Special Economic Zone may be established under this Act, either jointly or
severally by the Central Goverament, State Government, or any person for manufacture of
goods or rendering services or for hoth or as a Free Trade and Warehousing Zone.

(2) Any person, who intends to set up a Special Econamic Zone, may, after identifying
the 208, make a proposal to the State Government concermed for the purpose of setting up
the Special Economic Zone.

{3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), any parson, who intends

to set up a Special Economic Zonc, may, after identifying the area, at his aption, make a iS

propasal directly to the Board for the purpose of setting up the Special Economic Zone:

Pravided that where such a proposal has been received directly from a person under
this sub-section, the Board may grant approval and after receipt of such appraval, the person
concerned shall obtain the concurrence of the State Government within the period, ४४ may
be prescribed,

(#).In case a State Government intends to set up a Special Economie Zone, it may
after identifying the area, forward the proposal directly to the Board for the purpose. of
selling up the Special Economic Zone:

Provided that the Central Government may, after identifying the arca, 3४० mofo set

up and notify a Special Economie Zone without referring the propasal ta Lhe State 2S

Gavermment concerned or the Board.

(5} Every propusai under sub-sections (2) to (+) shall be made ia such form and
manger containing such particulars as may be prescribed,

(6) The State Government may, on receipt of the proposal made under sub-section

(2), Corward the satne together with its recommendations 10 the Board within such period 36

as may he prescribed

(7) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-seclion (4), the Board may,
aficr reccipt of the propesal uuder sub-sections (2) to (#4), approve the proposal subject
to such termis end conditions as it may deem fit to impose, or modify or reject the praposal

(8) The Centrat Government may prescribe the following requirements for 35”

establishment of a Speciaf Reonomic Zone, namely:—
(a) the minimurn area of 1804 and other terms and-conditions stbject ta which
the Board sha!l approve, modify or reject any proposal received by it under sub-
sections (2) to (#), and

(A) the terms and conditions, subject to which the Developer shall undertake 4?

the authorised operations aid his obligations and entitlements;

Provided that different mininyum area cf land and other terms and conditions referred
to in clause (9) may he presenbed by the Central Government for a class or classes of
Special Economic Zones,

(9) if the Board,—

(०) approves witheut any modification, the proposal reecived under sub-
sections (2) to (4), it shalt communicate the same 10 the Central Government;

(5) approves with modifications the proposal received under sub-sections (2)
to (4), it shatl, communicate such modifications to the persen or the State

Government concerned and ifsuch modifications have been accepicd by such person 5 ७

or State Government, the Board shall communicate the approval to the Central
Government;

[०

2o



5

(c} rejects the proposal, received under sub-sections (2) to (4), it shall record the
reasons therefor and communicate the rejection to the Centeal Goverament which
ghall intimate to (he State Government or the person concemed,

oe

(70) The Central Government shail, on reecipt of communication under clause (a) or
21086 (8) of sub-section (9), grant, within such time as may be prescribed, a letter of approval
fasuch terms and conditions and abligations and erititlements as may $e approved by the
Board, to the Developer, being the person dr the State Government concerned:

Provided that the Central Government may, on the basis of approval of the Board,
approve more than one Developer in a Special Economic Zone in cases where one Develaper

iges not have in his possession the minimum area of contiguous land, as may be prescribed,
for setting up a Special Economic Zane and in such cases, cach Devetoper shat be considered
“a5 a Developer in respect of the Jand in his possession.

(21) Any person who, ora Stale Government which, intends to provide any infrastructure
tities in the identified area referred to in sub-sections (2) lo (4), ar undertake any authorised
eration may, after entering into an agrevmtcni with the Developer referred to in sub-section

(70), make ४ proposal for the same to the Board for its approval and the provisions of sub-
Meection (5) and subsections (7) to (10) shall, as far as may be, apply (0 the said proposal
e ynade by.such person or State Government,

‘has been approved by the Board aad who, or which, has been granted letter of approval by
©the Central Government, shall be considered as a Co-Developer of the Special Economic

Zone.

(23) Subject to the provisions of this section and the fetter of approval granted lo a
Ss” Developer, the Developer may allocate space or built up area or provide infrastructure services
56. to the approved units in accordance with the agreement entered into by him with the
ontrepreneurs of such Units,

4. (7) The Developer shail, after the grant of lelter of approval under sub-section
(19) of section 3, submit the exact particulars of the identified area referred to in sub-
sections (2) to (4) of that section, to the Central Government and thereupon that
9 Government may, after satistying that the requirements, under sub-section (8) of section
3 and other requirements, as may be prescribed, are fulfilled, notify the specifically
identified area in the State as a Speciat Economic Zone:

Provided that an existing Special Economic Zone shall be deemed to have been notified
and ¢stablished in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the provisions of this Act
shall, as far as may be, apply to such Zone accordingly:

Provided further that the Central Government may, after notifying the Special Economic
Zone; if it considers appropriate, notify subsequently any additionat area to be included as
4 pact of that Special Economic Zone.

: (2) After the appointed day, the Board may, authorise the Developer to undertake ina
५० Spucial Economic Zone, such operations which the Central Government may authorise.

5, The Central Government, while notifying any area as a Special Economic Zone or an

additional avea to be included in the Special Economic Zune and discharging its functions
under this Act, shall be guided by the following, namely:—

. (@) gencration of additional economic activity;
us (8) promotion af exports of goods and services;
(८) promotion of investment from domestic and foreign sources;
{d) creation of employment opportunities;
(¢) development of inftastructure facilities; and

(/ maintenance of sovercignty and integrity of India, the security of the State
So गाव friendly relations with foreign States.

22

(12) Every person o7 State Government referred to in sub-section (2/), whose proposal ह

Establishatedt
of Special
Economic
Zone and
approval und
authorisacion
Ww opereie it te,
Developer.

Guidelines for
notifying
Special
Economic
Zone


Processing 6, The areas falling within the Special Economie Zones may be demarcated by the
und non-

० Central Government or any authority specified by it as—
processing

reas, (a) the processing area for setting up Units for activities, being the manufacture
of goods, or rendering services; or

(2) the area exclusively for trading or warehousing purposes; or

(०) the non-processing areas for activities other than those specified under
clause (०) or clause (4).

g

Exemption 7. Any goods or services exported out of or imported into, or procured from the
from taxes, — Domestic Tariff Area by—

avis oF cass () 4 Unit in a Speciat Recnomic Zone; or fo
(if) @ Developer,
shail, subject to such terms, conditions and limitations, as may be Prescribed, be exempt
from the payment of taxes, duties or coss under all enactments specified in the First
Schedule.
CHAPTER 15
ConsTiTuTION OF BOARD OF AFPROVAL
Constitution 8, (7) The Central Government shall, within fifteen days of the commencement of
of Board of this Act, by notification, constitute, for the purposes of this Act, 2 Board to be called the
Approval. Board of Approval.
(2) The Board shal] consist of~ zo

(a) an officer not below the rank of an Additionat Secretary to the Government
of India in the Ministry or Department of the Central Government dealing with
commerce—Chairperson, ex officio;

(5) two officers, not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Government of
India, to be nominated by the Central Government to represent the Ministry or 267
Department of the Central Government dealing with revenue—Members, ex officio,

(7) one officer not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Government of
India to be nominated by the Central Goverment to represent the Ministry or
Depariment of the Central Government ‘dealing with economic affairs (financial services) »
Mentber, ex officio; हे 206

(4) such nuniber of officers, not exceeding ten, not below the rank of the Joint
Secretary to the Government of India, to be nominated by the Central Government to
represent the Ministries or Departments of the Central Government dealing with
commerce, industrial policy and Promotion, science and technology, small scale
industries and agro and rural industries, home affairs, defence, environmontand forests,
Jaw Overseas Indian Affairs and urban development—Members, ex officio;

(०) anominee of the State Government concemed—Member, ex officio;

(0 the Director General of Foreign Trade or hisnomi inee—Member, ex officio;

{g) the Development Commissioner concemed—Member, ex officio;

(4) a Professor in the indian Institute of] Management, being a society registered Ub
under the Societies Registratién Act, 1860 or the Indian Institute of Foreign Trade,
being a society registered under the Societics Registration Act, 1860, as may be,
nominated by the Central Government—Member, ex officio;

(4 an officer not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to the Government of
India dealing with the Special Economic Zones in the Ministry or Department of the 45’
Central Government, dealing with commerce to be nominated by the Central
Government —Member-Secretary, ex officio:

Provided that the member, being the Joint Secretary nominated under clauses (6)t0(a}

of this sub-section may, if he is unable to attend the meeting of the Board, authorise any
other officer to attend the meeting of the Board on his behalf.



7

(3) The term of office of an ex officio Member shall come to an end as goon as he
ceases to hold the office by virtue of which he was so nominated.

(4) For the purposes of performing its functions, the Board may 20-opt as members,
such number of persous as it deems fit, who have special knowledge of, and practical
experience in, matters relating to, or relevant to activity connected with the Special
Econontic Zones and any such person shall have the right to take part in the discussions of
the Board but shall not be counted for the quorum and shall not be a member for any other
purpose and such person sball be entitled to receive such allowances or fees, as the case
may be, fixed by the Board.

(5) The Board shall meet at such times and places as may be appointed by it and shal!
have the power.to regulate-its own procedure.

(6) One-third of the total Members ofthe Board shall form a quorum, and all the acts of
the Board shail be decided by general consensus of the Members present.

(7) No act or proceeding ofthe Board shall be calied in question on the ground merely
of existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board.

(8) Allorders and decisions of the Board and all other instruments issued by it shall be
authenticated by the signature of the Member-Secretary, or any other Member as may be
authorised by the Board in this behalf.

9. (7) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board shall have the duty to promote
and ensure orderly development of the Special Economic Zones.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section
(2), the powers and functions of the Board shal! include—

(a) granting of approval or rejecting proposal or modifying such proposals for
establishment of the Special Economic Zones;

(4) granting approval of authorised operations to be carried out in the Special
Economic Zones by the Developer;

(c} granting of approval to the Developers or Units (other than the Developers
or the Units which are exempt from obtaining approval under any law or by the Central
Government) for foreign collaborations and foreign direct investments (including
investments by a person resident outside India). in the Special Economic Zone for
its development, operation and maintenance;

(व) granting of approval or rejecting of proposal for providing infrastructure
facilities in a Special Economic Zone or modifying such proposals;

(e) granting, notwithstanding anything contained in the Industries (Development
and Regulation) Act, 1951, a licence to an industrial undertaking referred to in clause
(2) of section 3 of that Act, if such undertaking is established, as a-whole or part
thereof, or proposed to be established, in a Special Economic Zone;

(0) suxpension of the letter of approval granted to a Deyeloper and appointment of
an Administrator under sub-section (7) of section 10;

(g) disposing of appeals preferred under sub-section (4) of section 15;
(४) disposing of appeals preferred under sub-section (4) of section 16;

(0 performing such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government,

(3) The Board may if so required for purposes of this Act or any other law for the

S time being in force relating to Special Economic Zones, by. Notification, decide as to
whether a particular activity constitutes manufacture a3 defined in clause (r) of section 2
and such decision of the Board shal! be binding on all Ministries and Departments of the
Central Government.

(4) The Board may delegate such powers and functions as it may deem fifto one or
2 more Development Commissioners for effective and proper discharge of the functions of
the Board.

(3) Without prejudice to the foregoing. provisions of this Act, the Board shall, in
exercise of its powers or the performance: of Its furtctions under this Act, te bound by such

Duties,
powers and
functions of
Board.


Suspension at?
letter uf
approval ani
uansfer of
Speciat
Esonatnic.
ote in
certain cases.

iid

directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it trom
time to time.

(6) The decision of the Centraj Government whether @ question is one of Polivy ar ant
shali be final,

19. (/] IG at any time, the Board is of the Opinion that a Developer— 5
(u) is unable to discharge the functions ar perform the duties imposed on him ay
or under the provisions of this Act or vules made thereunder; ur हर
(#) has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction Biven by the
Board under this Act: or

(c) has vivlated the tenny and conditions of the letter of approval; or lo

(व) whose financial position is such that he is unable to fully and efficiently
discharge the duties and obligations imposed on him by the letter of approval, and
the circumstances exist which render it necessary for it in public interest so to do, the
Board may, on application, of with the Consent of the Developer, or otherwise, for reasons
to be recorded in writing, suspend the letter of approval, granted to. tie Developer for a is
whole or part of his area established as Special Economic Zone, for a period not exceeding

accordingly.

(2) Consequent upon appointment ofan Administrator, the matiagement of the Special 20
Economie Zone of the Developer referred to in sub-section (2) shal vest in the
Administrator. .

(3) No letter. of approval shall be suspended under sub-section (2) unless the Board
has given to the Developer not Jess than three months’ notice, ta writit ing, stating the grounds
00 which it proposes to suspend the fetter of approval, and has considered any cause 25°
shown by the Developer within the Pertod of that notice, against the proposed Suspension,

(4) The Board may, instead nf suspending the letter of pproval under sub-section
(2), permit ito remain in farce subject ta such further terms and conditions as it thinks fit
to impose, and any-further terms or conditions so imposed shall ke binding upon and be
complied with by the Developer and shall be of like force and effect 85 if they were 20
contained in the Jeter of approval,

(5) In case the Board suspends a letter of approval under this section, it shall serve
# notice of suspension upon the Developer and fix a date on which the suspension shalt
take effect. :

(6) Upan suspension of the fetter of approval under sub-section {/), the Speciat as"
Economic Zone of the Developer referred to in sub-section (5) shali vest in the

case may be. Yo-

(7) Where the Board has given notice for suspension of totter of approval under
sub-section (5), the Developer may, atter prior approval of the Board, transfer his letter of
approval 10 any person who is found eligible by the Board tor grant of such Approval.

(8) [Fat any time, it appears to ihe Board that the purpose of the order Appointing the
Administrator has been tnifilled or that for aby reason it is undesirable that the order of 4S”
appointment should remain in torce, the Board may cancel the order and thereupon the
Administrator shall be divested of the management of the Special Economic Zone which
shall, unless otherwise directed dy the Board, again vest in the person, being the Deve foper,
in whom it was vested immediately prior to the date of appointment of the Administrator.

(9) Where the Board Suspends the letter of approval. under this section, in respect 5०
of any Developer, the following provisions shall apply, namely:— हु

(a) the Board shall invite applications for transferring the letter of. approval “1
tho Developer, whose approvat hay been suspended and seicct the Deron oF persons,
in accordance with the procedure as may be prescribed, to whom the letter of approval
of the Developer in the Special Economic Zone nay be transferred;

ss



9

(4) upon selection of person or persons under sub-clause {a), the Board may,
by notice in writing, require the Developer to transfer his letter of approvat in a
Special Economix: Zone to the berson or persons so selected and thereupon: the
Developer shall transfer his interests, rights and liabilities in the Special Economic
Zone to any of the persons (hereafter in tilis section referced 10 as the “transferie”}
who has been selected by the Board on such terms and conditions and consideration
as may be agreed upon between the Developer and the transicree;

(०) all the rights, duties, obligations and liubilities of the Developer, on and from
the date of suspension of Jetter of approval or on and from the date, ifearlier, on which
his letter of approval in the Spevial Economic Zane of the Developer has been
transferred fo the transferce, shall cease absolutely except for any liabilities which
have accrued prior to that date;

(८) the Board may maky such interim arrangements in regard to the operation of
. the Special Economic Zone as may be considered appropriate ;

(6) the Administrator shail exercise such powers and discharge such fimctions
as the Board may direct,

(70) The Board may, in order to promote export or to protect the interest uf Units
or in the public interest, issue such directions or formulate such scheme as it may consider
necessary for operation of the Special Economic Zone

CHAPTER IV

DeveLorMent ComMisstoner

1 (/) The Ceatral Geverament may appoint any of iis officers not below the
rank of Deputy Secretary ty the Government of India as the Development
Cammisslaner of one or more Special Economie Zones.

{2} Fhe Centrat Goveroment Dlay appoint such Gfficers and other empinyees
as it considers necessary to assist the Development Commissioner in the
performance of kis functions in the Special Economic Zones established by a
Developer (other than the Central Government) under this Act on such terms and
coitditions 38 it deems fit,

(3) Every Development Commissioner, officer and other emipleyee shail be
entitled to suck sulary aud allowances and subject fo such terms and conditions at
service in respect of ६९४४९, pensinn, provident fund and other matters ag may, from
time to time, be spevified by the Centra] Guvernment, पु

12. (/) Every Development Commissioner shall take all steps in order to discharge
his functions under this Act to ensure speedy development of the Special Economic Zone
and promotion of experts therefrom,

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Development
Commissioner shall—

(a) guide the entrepreneurs for setting up of Units in the Special Economic
Zone;

(8) ensure and take suitable steps for effective promotion of exports from the
Special Economic Zone;

(०) ensure proper co-ordination with the’ Central Government or State
Government Departments concemed or agencies with respect to, or for the purposes,
of clauses (a) and (4); .

(व). monitor the performance of the Developer and the Units in a Special
Economic Zone;

(e) discharge such other functions as may be assigned to him by the Centrai
Government under this Act or any other law for the time being in force; and

Develupment
Commissioner,

Functions of
Development



10

(0) discharge such other functions as may be delegated to hin by the Board.

(3) Every Development Cummissioner shall be overall in-charge of the Special Economic
Zone and shall exercise administrative control and su pervision over the officers and employces
appointed under sub-section (2) of section 11 {inciuding the officials deputed to such Special
Economic Zone) to discharge any.of the functians under this Act. =

(4) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-sections (2) to (3), every Development
Commissioner shall discharge such functions and exercise such powers as may be delegated
to him by a general or special order by the Central Government or the State Government
concerned, as the case may be,

(5) Every Development Commissioner may call for such information from a [०
Developer or Unit from time to time as may be hecessary 0 monitor the performance of
the Developer or the Unit, as the case thay be.

(6) The Development Commissioner may delegate any or all of his powers or का

functions to any of the officers employed under him, 3

CHAPTER V 1s x

1 Sinai: 9७00४ Clearance x
| Constitution of 13. (/) The Central Government shall — 2
CN Oe (8) in the case of existing Special Economic Zones, within six months from a

the date of commencement of this Act;
(3) in case of other Special Economic Zones established after the 20
commencement of this Act, within six months from the date of establishment of
such Special Economie Zone,
by notification, constityte a Committee for every Special Economic Zone, to be: called
the Approval Committee to exercise the powers and perform the functions specified in
section 14. 25
(2) Every Approval Committee ’shall consist of —
(a) the Development Commissioner—Chairperson, ex Officia;
(6) two officers of the Centrat Government to be nominated by that

Government—-Memhers; ex Officio; .

(c) two officers of the Central Government to be nominated ‘by that Government 3

to represent the Ministry or Department dealing with revenue —- Member ex officio;
(व) one officer of the Central Government to be nom inated by that Government i
(0 represent the Ministry or Department dealing with Economic affairs (financial
services); Member ex officio;
. (०) two officers of the State Government concemed . to be nominated by that 35:

State Government—Members, ex officia;

G) a representative of the Developer convemed—Special invitee. हे

(3) For thé purpose of exercising its powers and performing its functions, the.
Approval Committce may invite to its meetings, such persons as the Committee deems fit,
whose assistance of ‘advice it may consider necessary.

(4) Every Approval Committee shall Meet at such times and places as it considers
necessary and shal] have the power to regulate its awn procedure.

(5) One-half of the total Members of the Approvel Cammittce shall form a quorum,
and al! the acts of the Approval Committee shall be decided by a general consensus of the
Members present .: :

Provided that in case the Approval Committee is unable to decide any matter by 9:
general consensus, such matter shall stand referred to the Board of Approval for its decisior

(6) No act of the Approval Committee shall be called in question on the ground
merely of existence of any vacancy in, or any defect ‘in the constitution of, the Appravat.
Cammnittee,

(7) All orders and decisions of the Approval Committee and ail other communication:
issued by it shall be authenticated by the Signature of the Chairperson or any other menibe
as may be authorised by the Approval Committee in this behalf.



11

(8) The term of office of an.ex officio Member shall come to an end as soon as he
ceases 10 hold office by virtue of which he was $0 nominated,

14. (7) Every Approval Coramittee muy discharge the fimetions end exercise the powers
inrespect of the following matters, Ramely:—

(७) approve the import or Procurement of goods from the Domestic Tariff Area,
in the Special Economic Zone for carrying on the authorised operations by a Developer;

(8) approve the Providing of services bya service provider, from outside India,
or from the Domestic Tariff. Area, for carrying on the authorised ‘operations by the
Developer, in the Special Economic Zone;

(०) monitor the utilisation of goods or services or warehousing or trading in
the Special Economic Zone; .

(4) approve, modify or reject Proposals for setting up Units for manufacturing
or rendering services or Warehousing or tradin g in the Special Economic Zone fother
than the grant of licence under clause (९) of sub-section (2) of section 9] in accordance
with the provisions of sub-section (8) of section 15 :

Provided that where the approval committee is unable to decide whatever a
particular process constitutes manufacture OF not it shall refer the same to the Board
of Approval for decision;

(2) allow, on receipt of approval under clause (८) of sub-section (2) af section 9,
foreign collaborations and fore ign direct investments (including investments by a
person outside India) for setting up a Unit;

(0 monitor and supervise compliance of conditions subject to which the letter
of approval or permission, if, any, bas been granted to the Developer or entrepreneu ia
and

(8) perform such other functions as may be entrusted to it by the Central

Goverment or the State Government concemed, as ihe case may be,

(2) The Approval Committee shall not discharge such functions and exercise such
bowers referred to in sub-section (7) in relation to- a Developer, being the Centrat
Goverment, as may be specified, by notification, by the Centrai Government :

Provided that till such time, the Approval Committee is constituted, the concerned
Development Commissioner shall discharge 81] functions and exercise ali powers of the
Approval Committee,

15, (/) Any person, who infends to set up a Unit for carrying on the authorised
Operations in a Special Economic Zone, may Submit a proposal to the Development
Commissioner concerned ta such form and Manner containing such Particulars as may be
Prescribed:

(2) On receipt of the Proposal under sub-section (7), the Development Com missioner
shait submit the same 10 the Approval Committee for its approval. .

(3) The Approval Coramittee Tnay, either approve the Proposal without modification,
Or approve the proposal with modifications Subject fo such terms and conditions as it may

Provided that in case of Modification or Tejection of 3 Proposal, the Approval
Committee shalt afford a feasonable opportunity of being heard to the person concemed
and after recording the Teasons, either modify or reject the proposal,

(4) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Approval Committee, made under sub-
Section (3), may prefer an ay peal fo the Board within Such tine as may be prescribed.

(5) No appeal shail be admitted it it is Preferred after the expiry of the time
Prescribed therefor:

Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period Prescribed
therefor if the appellant satisfies the. Board that he had sufficient cause for not preferring
the appeal within the Prescribed time.



Cancellation of
Jeter of
Approval to
entreprencur.

Setting up and
‘Operation of
Offshore
Banking Unit,

12

(6)' Every appeal made under sub-section (4) shall be in such form ung Shall be
Sccompanied by a copy of the order appealed against and by such fees as may be Prescribed

(7) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shali be such as may be PTLSCribed.
Provided that before disposing of un Sppeal, the appellant shal] be given a Teasonable
Opportunity of being heard.
(8) Fhe Central Government may prescribe,—
{@) the requirements (including the period for which a Unit may be sep up)
subject to which the Approva! Committee shall approve, modify or reject ANY Praposal
referred io in sub-section (3);

(0) the terms and conditions, subject ta which the Unit shall undertake the {
authorised operations and its obfigations and entitlements,

(9) The Development Commi; issioner may, after approval of the proposal Teferred to in
sub-section (3}, Brant a Ietier of approval to the person concerned (0 set up a Unit and
undertake such Operations which the Development Commissioner may authorise and every
Such operation so authorised shall be mentioned in the letter of approval, i$

16. (2) The Approval Committee may, at any time, if it has any reason or cause tp
believe that the entrepreneur has Persistently contrayened any of the terms and conditions
or its obligations subject 10 which the letter of approval was granted to the entrepreneug,
cancel the letter of, approval:

Provided that no such letter of approval shall be cancelled Unless the Sntrepreneur has 2.5
been afforded ६ reasonable opportunity of being heard,

(2) Where the letter oF approval has been cancelled under sub-section (7}, the Unit
shall not, from the date of such cancellation, be entitled (0 any exemption, Concession;
benefit or deditction available to it, being a Unit, under this Act,

(3) Without Prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the entrepreneur whose letter of 2s
approval has been cancelled under sub-section (4), shail Femmit, the exemption, concession,
drawback and any other benefit availed by him In Tespect of the capital 8००45, finished |
8०048 lying in Stock and unutilised raw Materials relatable to his Unit, in such manner ag may 1
be prescribed, H

(४) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Approval Committee made under sub- 36 :
section (2), may prefer an appeat to the Board within such time as may be Prescribed, i

(5) No appeal shalt be admitted if it is Preferred after the expiry of the time Prescribed
therofor:

Provided that an appeaf may be admitted after the expiry of the period Prescribed
therefor ifthe appellant satisfies the Board that he bad su ficient cause for not preferring the 357
appeal within the prescrited time,

8
3
A
&
J
Fa
&
®
z
«

17, (An application for Setting up and Operation of an Offshore Banking Unit ina
Special Economic Zone may be made to the Reserve Bank in stich form and tanner as may be
Prescribed,

‘ (2)On receipt of an application under Sub-section (7), the Reserve Bank shali, ifitis YS" -
satisfied that the applicant fulfils all the conditions specified under Sub-section (3), grant

Permission to such applicant for Setting up and operation of an offshore Banking unit,
(3) The Reserve Bank may, by notification, Specify the terms and conditions subject
to which an Offshore Banking Unit May be set up and operated in the Special Economic

Zone. soy



| be

ded,

i3

18. (7) The Central Goverment may approve the setting up at'an Intemational Financial Setting up of
Services Centre in a Special Economic Zone and prescribe the requirements for setting up international

tion of such Centre: Financial
and operation of such C. sean

Provided that the Central Government shall approve only one International Financial Ceatte.

a Services Centre in & Special Economic Zone,

(2) The Central Government May, subject to such guidelines as may be framed by the
Reserve Bank, the Securities and Exchange Board of India, the Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority and such other concemed authorities, as it deems fit, prescribe

S. the requirements for setting up and the terms and conditions of the Operation of Units in

aa International Financiat Services Centre,

19, Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, Single
the Central Government may, if required,— application
form, retum,
(a) prescribe a single application form for obtaining any licence, permissing ete
or registration or approval bya Developer, or an entreprencur under one or mere
Central Acts;

(6) authorise the Board, the Development Commissioner or Approval
Committee, to exercise the powers of the Central Government on matters relating f
to the development of a Special Economic Zone or setting up and operation of Units; |

॥
(०) prescribe a single form for furnishing returns or information by a Developer
or an entrepreneur under one or more Central Acts,

20. Notwithstanding anything contained in any othor law for the time being in force, Agency to i
the Central Government 019); by notification, specify any officer of agency to carry out inspect.
surveys or inspections for securing of comptiance with the provisions of any Centraf Act
by a Developer or an enireprenenr, as the case may be, and such officer or agency shall
submit verification and compliance Teports, in such manner and within such time as may
be specified in the said notification,

21. (7) The Central Government may, by Notification, Specify any act or omission Single
made punishable under any Central Act, as notified offence for purposes of this Act: eniorcement q
officer ar
(2) The Central Goverament may, by general or special order, authorise था) officer agency for
Of agency to be the enforcement officer or agency in respect of any notified offence or . Mtified
. . ial Fe : offences,
offences committed in a Special Economic Zone, .

(3) Every officer or agency authorised under sub-section (2) shall have all the
corresponding powers of investigation, inspection, search or seizure ag is provided under
the relevant Central Act in respect of the notified offences,

22. The agency or officer, specified under Section 20 or section 21, May, with prior Investigation,
intimation to the Development Commissioner concerned, carry out the investigation inspection
inspection, search or seizure in the Special Economic Zone or ina Unit if such agency or pores *r
Officer has reasons to believe (reasons to bé recorded 10 writing) that a notitied offence हु

has been. committed or is Ukely to be commitied in the Special Economic Zone:

Provided that ao investigation, inspection, search or seizure shall be carried out ina
Special Economic Zone by any agency or officer other than those referred to in suh-
section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 21 without Prior approval of the Development
Coramissioner concerned:

Provided further that any officer or agency, if so authorised by the Central
Government, may. Carry out the investigation, inspection, search or seizure in the Special
Economic Zone ar Unit without Prior intimation or approval of the Development
Commissioner.



nomic Zane ४ situated, may,
८, designate one 0:

the Special Ecol
६ High Court caf that Stat

pena 23. (0) The State Government in which
OY yi : i
soits and TY with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of th
outisied
offences,

(a) to try ail suits of a clV)

more courts——
ecial Economic Zone; and

jh nature arising in the Sp
committed in the Special Ecanomic Zone.
er sub-section (1); shall try 809 suit
n that sub-section:
ecial Economic Zone
to try such suit afler

(pp to try notified offences ©
nthe court designated und:
ified offeace referred to |
uit of acivil nature ina Sp
f this Act, shall continue

(2) No court, other thay
‘or conduct the irial of any nat
courts, in which any s

provided that the
he conymencement ०

had been filed before fl
such commencement:
Provided further that the courts गा which aay cial ‘of any notiti
conducted before the commencement of this Act, shall continusto cond
atfence after the commencement of this Act:

Provided also that the
commencement of this Act, shall conduct t
- commencement of this Act until the courts
and all such cases relating to such trials sha!
designated which shall conduct the trial from the stas

transferred.
24. Any person aggrieved, by any decision or order of the court designated under
Viigh Cour. sub-section (7) ofsection 23, may file an appeal to the High Court within sixty days from the
date of communication of the decision or order of the courts So designated to him on any
* question of fact or law arising out of such orders:

ed offence is being
uct the trial of such

courts competent to try any notified offence, before the
pe trial in respect of such offence after the
have becn ‘designated under sub-section (7)
॥| thereafter be transferred t0 such courts 30
ge at which such cases Were so

Appeal to

d that the appellant was prevented by
How it to be filed within a further

Provided that the High Court may; if itis satisfies
sufficient cause from filing an appes! within the sald period, al

period nat exceeding sixty days-
(0 means the हि igh Court

_ in seotion 23 and in this section “High Cour
the Special Economic Zone is situated.

Offences by 25, (1) Where 90 ० ommpitted by 3 companys every person, who at

2 offence Was committed was in charge of, and was responsible ७०, the company

{the company, 45 well as the company, shall be deemed to

eded against and punished accordingly:

companies. the time thi
he business 0!
ace and shall be fiable to be proce
render any such person

for the conduct of पे
be guilty of the offe
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-'
liable to any punishment provided for the offence, if he has proved that the offence was
his knowledge OF that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the

committed without
commission of such offence.

(2) Notwithstanding, anything contained in sub-section (4३ where an offence has
beon commited by 8 company and it is proved that the offence has beet committed with the
consent ot connivance of, of 18 attributable to any neglect on the part of, any directos,
manager, secretary OF other officer of the company, such director, manager secretary of other

officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded

against and punished accordingly.

Explanation.
of the State in which
dence has becn ६

section shall

of this sevtion,—~

Explanation. —-For the purposes
rin or other association

{a} “company” means any body corporate and includes a fi

of individuals, and है
10211 “director”, in relation to 8 firm, means a partner in the firm.


15
CHAPTER VI
may,

1 or 2 SPECIAL FISCAL PROVISIONS FOR SrECIAL Econosac ZONES

ES 26. (7) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), every Developer and the
i entrepreneur shall be entitled to the following exemptions, drawbacks and concessions,
fe '§ namely: —

7: (a) exemption ftom any duty of customs, under the Customs Act, 1962 or the
Customs Tariff Act, 1975 or any other law for the time being in force, an goods
imported into, or service provided in, a Special Economic Zone or a Unit, to carry on
the authorised operations by the Developer or entrepreneur;

(8) exemption from any duty of customs, under the Customs Act, 1962 or’ the
Customs Tariff Act, 1975 or any other law for the time being in force, on goods
exported from, or services provided, from a Special Econumic Zone or from a Unit, to
any place outside India;

(c) exemption ftom any duty of excise, under the Central Excise Act, 1944 or
the Central Excise Tariff 40, 1985 or any’ other law for the time being in force, on
goods brought tram Domestic Tariff Arca to a Special Econamic Zone or Unit, to
carry on the authorised operations by the Developer or entrepreneur;

{d) drawback or such other bencfits as may be admissible from time to time
on goods brought or services provided from the Domestic Tariff Area into a Special
Economic Zone or Unit or services provided ina Special Economic Zone or Unit by the
service providers located’ outside India to tarry on the authorised opérations by the
Developer or entreprencur;

(९) exemption from service tax under Chapter V of the Finance Act, 1994 on
taxable services provided to a Developer or Unit to carry on the authorised operations
ina Special Economic Zone;

( exemption from the securities transaction tax leviable under section 98 of the
Finance (No. 2) Act, 2004 in case the taxable securities transactions are entered into by
3 non-resident through the International Financial Services Centre;

{g) exemption frum the levy of taxes on the sale or purchase of 80045 other than
newspapers under the Centrat Sales Tax Act, 1956 if such goods are meant to carry on
the authorised operations by the Developer of entrepreneur

(2) The Central Government may prescribe the manner in which, and the terms and

a conditians subject to which, the exemptions, concessions, draw back or other benefits shall
aS be granted to the Developer or eaterpreneur under sub-section (1),
26175" 27, The provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961, as in force for the time being, shall

apply to, or in relation to; the Developer or entrepreneur for carrying on the authorised
2 operations in a Special Economic Zone or Unit subject [0 the modifications specified in
the Second Schedule.

at

28. The Central Government may prescribe the period during which any goods brought
: ५0 into, or services provided in, any Unit or Special Economic Zone without payment of taxes,
fe duties or cess shall remain or continue 10 be provided in such Unit or Special Economic
Zane,

Exemptions,
drawbacks and
concessions
10 every
Developer
und
‘entrepreneur,

Provisions of
Income-tax
Act, 1961 to
apply with
certain
modification
in relation 10
Developers
and
enlerprencurs

Duration of
goods of
services in
Special
Ecnaomic
Zanes.



‘Transfer of

16

29. The transfer of ownership in any goods brought into, or produced or manutactured

ownership and in, any Unit or Special Economic Zone or removal thereof from such Unit or Zone shali be

removal of
goods
Domestic
clearance by
Units.

Constitution
i of Authority.

allowed, subject to such terms and conditions as the Central Government may prescribe.

34. Subject to the conditions specified in the rutes made by the Central Government in
this bebalf:—

{a) any goods removed from a Special Economic Zone to the domestic Tacit

Ares shall be chargeable to duties of customs including anti-dumping, countervailing

and safeguard duties under the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, where applicable, as leviable

on such goods when imported, and
(8) the rate of duty and tariff valuation, ifany, applicable to goods removed from

a Special Economic Zone shail be at the rate and tariff valuation in force as on the date

of such removal, and where such date is not ascertainable, on the date of payment of

duty.
CHAPTER V0
Spectac Economic ZONE AUTHORITY

31. (7) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute,
for every Special Economic Zone established by it before the commencement of this Act or
which may be established by it after such commencement by the Central Government, an
Authority to becalledthe ....., (name of the Special Economic Zone) Authority to exercise
the powers conterred on, and discharge the functions assigned ww. it under this Act:

Provided that in respect of existing Special Economic Zones established by the Central
Government, such Authority shall be constituted by the Cental Government within six
months from the date of commencement of this Act:

Provided further that until such Authority is constituted, ihe jerson or the authority
(including the Development Commissioner) exercising contral over such existing Special
Economic Zones shall continue to exercise such control over the Special Economic Zone till
the Authority is constituted.

(2) Every Authority shalt be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and & common seal, with a power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to
acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovabte, and to contract and
shall, by the said name, suc and be sued.

(3) The head office of every Authority shall bs at such place as the Central Government
may specify in the notification referred to-in sub-section (7) ).

(4) Any Authority may, with the previous approval of the Ceatral Government, establish
branch offices at other places in India.

(5) Every Authority shalt consist of —
(a) the Development Commissioner of the Special Economic Zone over which
the Authority exercises its jurisdiction—Chairperson, ex officio;
__ (b) two officers of the Central Government to be nominated by that Goverment
having knowledge of, or experience in, dealing with matters relating to Special Economic
Zones—Members, ex officio,

(ट) an officer af the Government of India in the Ministry or Department dealing
with Commerce on thatters relating to Special Economic Zone—Member, ex officio;
(व) not mare than two persons, being enterpreeurs or their nominee, to be
nominated by the Central Government—Members, ex afficio,
(6) The term of office of the Members of ‘an Authority (other than ex officio Members)
and the manner of filling of vacancies shall be such as may be prescribed,

शा

2०

I

go

as

ue

as

(7) An Authority may associate with itself in such manner, subject to such conditions *

and for such purposes ax may be prescribed, uny person whose assistance or. advice it
requires in discharging its functions effectively and that person shall be entitled to receive
such allowances or fees as may be fixed by the Authority.

ड०9



17

(8) One-third of the total Members of the Authority shall form a quorum, and ail the
acts of the Authority shail he decided by 4 majority of the Members present.
(9) No act or proceeding ofan Author ity shall be invalidated m:

erely by reason 01- -
(a) any yacency in, or any defect in

the constitution of, the Authority; or
{4) any defect in the appointment ofa Person acting as a Member of the Authority;

or

(०) any irregularit:

y in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of.
the case.

(/0) Every Authority shall meet st such times and
of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at
‘such meetings) as may be prescribed.

Places and shall observe such rules
its meetings (including quorum at

32.(/) Every Development Commissi
is appointed as such, shail be the chief
such powers and perform such function:

onér of the Special Econantic. Zone, for which he Officers of
executive of thé Authority concemed and exercise Aathority and
IS as may be prescribed, - other statf,
(2) Every Authority may, in addition to the officers and employees transferred to it
under section 33, appoint such other officers and employees, as it considers necessary for
the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.

(3) The method of appointment, the conditions of
allowances of such other officers and c1
such as may be prescribed,

33, (/) It shail be lawful for the Central Government to transfer to each Authority, by — Special
order, and with effect from such date or dates, as may be specified in the order, any officer or Provision fur
other employee holding office as such (except officers or other employees on deputation) in oapster oF
the existing Special Economic Zone concemed; ects or

other
Provided that the scale of pay of the Post to which such officer or other employer is  &™nloyces to

transferred shal! not be lower than the scale of pay of the post which he was holding Authority,
immediately before such transfer and the other terms and conditi

pension, ieave, provident fund and medical benefits) of the
shall not be less favourable than the terms and conditions
held by him immediately before such transfer:

service and the scales of Pay and
mployees ayipointed under sub-section (2) shall be

Provided further that if, inmediately before the date of his transfer,
other emptoyer is officiating ina higher post under the Central Governm

any such officer or
ent either in a leave
his pay and other allowances, if any, on

(2) if any question arises as to whether the prescribed terms and conditions of service
in respect of any matter, including remuneration, pension, leave, provident fund and medical
benefits, are less favourable than those attached to the Post held by an officer ur other

employee immediately before his transfer to the Authority, the decision of the Central
Government in the matter shall be final

34. (7) Subject to the provisions of this Act, it Functions of,

undertake such measures as it thinks fit for the development, operation and Management of Authority.
the Special Economic Zone for which it is constituted,

shall be the duty of each Authority to

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the
Measures referred to therein may provide for —

(०) the development of infrastructure in the Special Economic Zone;

(4) promoting €xports from the Special Economic Zone;

(८) reviewing the functioning and performance of the Special Economic Zone;



Grants and
100७ hy
Central
Government.
Constitution
of Fund and
its
application,

Accounts and
audit,

Directions by
Central
Government.

Returns and
reports,

18

(a levy user or service charges or fees or rent for the use of properties belonging
to the Authority;
(2) performing such other functions as may be prescribed:

35. The Central Government may, aller duc appropriation made by Parliament by’ jaw
in this behalf, make to every Authority by way of grants and loans or such sums of money
as that Goverament may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.

36. (/) There shall be established by every Authority ४ Fund to be ‘called the...
(the name of the Special Economic Zone concerned) Authority Fund and there shall be
credited thereto—

{a)all sims of money, which the Central Government may, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by faw in this behalf, provide to the Authority;

(0) all grants or loans that may be made to the Authority under this Act;

(c) all sums received on account of user or service charges OF fees or rent for the
use of properties belonging to the Authority;

(a) all sums received by the Authority from such othat sources as may be decided
upon by the Central Government, :

(2) The Fund shalf be applied for mceting—

(a) the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and
other employees of the Authority;

(8) the expenses af the Authority in the discharge of its functions under
section 34;

(ले repayment of any loan,
{d) the expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Act;
(e)} meeting any other administrative expenses of the Authority. ©

37. (7) Every Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed hy the Central
Goverament, in consultation with the Comptrofler and Auditor-General of India.

(2) The accounts of every Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India at such intervala as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in
connection with such audit shail be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor
General of [ndia.

(3) The Comptroiler and Auditor-General of India or any person appointed by him in
-connection swith the audit of the accounts of the Authority shall have the same rights and
privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptrofler and Auditor-
General generally’ has in connection with the audit of the Goverament accounts ‘and,*in
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected

vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Authority.

(4) The accounts of every Authority as certified by the Comptroiler and Auditor-
General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit
report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and the Central
Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.

38. Every Authority shall be bound to carry out such directions as may be issued ta
it from time to time by the Central Government fot the efficient administration of this Act.

39. (7) Every Authority shat! furnish to the Central Government at such time and in
such form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central Goverament may direct, such

a a ae Be

I

lo

T

io

go

25

yo

as



‘exports and the operation and maintenarice of t
“Central Government niay, from time to tte, req
(2) Without prejudice to the provi “section (2), every Author ity shall, as
Woney ३: ५ soan as possible, ¢ fi 1] I, Submit to the Central Government 4

af its activities, Policy and Programmes during the 1४

(3) A copy of every report received under sub
be, after it is recvived, before each House of Parti;

40, (/) If at any time the
unable to perform, or has persis;
on it by or under this Act or hai
sufficient cause, failed to compt
section 38, the Central Governm:
period not exceeding six month:

section (2)

shail be laid, as soon as may
ament.

Central Government is of the opinion that an
tently made detautt in the Performance of the duty impased supersede
S excecded or abused its powers, or has wilfully or without Authority
ly with any direction issued by the Central Government under

leat may, by notification, Supersedé that Authority for such

S, 88 may he specified in the notification:
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-section, the Central
Government shall give reasonable time to that Authority fo make representation against the
Proposed supersession and shall consider the Topresentations, if any, of the Authority,

(2) Upon the Publication of a notification under sube
Authority—

Authority is power to

section (/) Superseding the

(०) the Chairpers
that their term of office
Offices as such;

‘on and other Members of the Authority shall, notwithstanding
has not expired as from the date of supersession, vacate their

५0५ or under the Provisions of

fe Authority shail, during the
exercised and performed by such Person or persons as the

(2) all Property vested in the Authori &Y shalt, during the Betiod of, Supersession,
vest in the Central Government.

(3) On the expiration of the
under sub-section (7), the Central

Periad of supersession 5 ipecified in the notification issued
Government may—

(@) extend the Period of Supersessiog for such further Period nat exceeding six
months; or

(5) reconstitute the Authority in the imanner provided in section 31.
41. AN Members, officers and other employeey of every Authority,
OF purporting to act in pursuance of any of the Provisions of-this Act ०;
thereunder, be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of secti
Penal Code,

shall, when acting Members,
rthe rules made oificers and
ion 21 of the Indian other
employers of
Authority to
be public
servants,
CHAPTER Vit

Miscer.Langous

Refercoce of
dispute



Limitation.

Applicatutity
of provisions
of this Act tu
sxisting
Special
Economic
Zanes.

Person to
whom 3
communication
muy be sent
under thés
Act.

(denuty Card.

Authorities
responsible
for.
administration.

Protection of
action taken
in good faith.

Power [ul
modify
provisions of
this Act or
other
enactments in
relution to
Spr
Lconamic
Zones.

20

(8) the court or the courts to try suits int respect of such dispute had not been
designated under sub-section (/) of section 23,

such dispute shall be referred to arbitration:

Provided that no ‘dispute shatl be referred tu the arbitration on or after the date of the
designation of court or courts under sub-section (/} of sectian 23,

(2) Where a dispute has been referred to arbitration under sub-section (1), the same
shall be settled or decided by the arbitrator to be appointed by the Central Government.

(3) Save as otherwise provided under this Act, the provisions of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, [996 shall apply to all arbitration under this Act as ifthe proceedings for
arbitration were referred in settlement or decision under the provisions of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996,

43. (7) The period of limitation in the case of any dispute which is required to be
referred to arbitration shall be regulated by the provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963, as if
the dispute was a suit and the arbitrator is civil court.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), the arbitrator may admit a
dispute after the expiry of the period of limitation, if the applicant satisties the arbitrator that
he had sufficient cause for nut.rcfercing the dispute within such period.” .

44. Ailthe provisions of this Act (except sections 3 and 4) shall, as far as may be, apply
to every existing Specis] Economic Zane, है

45, A communication by any competent authority or person under this Act may be
sent{o the person who has the ultimate control over the affairs of lhe Special Economic Zone
or Unit or where the said affairs are entrusted to a manager, director, chairperson, or managing
director, or to any other officer, by whatever ame called, such communication may be sent
to such manager, director, chairperson, or managing director or any other officer,

46. Every person, whether employed or residing or required to be present in a Special
Economic Zone, shal] be provided an identity card by every Development Commissioner of
such Special Economie Zone, in such form and containing such particulars as may be
prescribed. ”,

26 of 1534,
10

6 of $64

i

a0

47. Any authority which, bas been conferred upon any. power, or, is, required to .+

discharge any function under any Central or'State Act, may, Subject to the provisions of this
Act, exercise such powers or discharge such function in any Special Economic Zone under
that Act.

48, No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shail lie against the Central
Government or any Chairpersun, Member, officer or other employee of the Board or the
Approval Committee or the Authority or Development Commissioner for anything done or
intended to be done in goad faith under this Act.

49, (/) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that any of the provision of
this Act {other than sections 54 to 56) or any other Central Act or any rules or regulations
made thereunder or any notification or order issued or direction given thereunder (other than
the provisions relating to making of the rules or regulations) specified in the notitication—

(a) shall not apply to a Special Economic Zone ar a class of Special Economic
: Zones ण alt Special Economic Zones; or हु

(8) shall apply to a Special Economic Zone or a class of Special (९0101 Zones
or all Special Economie Zones only with such exceptions, modification and adaptation,
as may be specified in the notification. .

we ¥

Kee

yo



21

(2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub-section (1), shall be
jaid in draft before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one'session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, oth Houses agree in disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses
agree in making any modification jn the notification, the notification shail not be issued or, 88
the case may be, shall be issued only in such modified form as may be agreed upon by both
the Houses.

§0. The Stats Government may, for the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of
this Act, notify policies for Developers and Units and take suitable steps for enactment of
any law—

(a) granting exemption from the State taxes, tevies and duties to the Developer or
the entreprencur,

(8) directing that any of the provisions of any State Act relating to trade unions,
industrial and labour disputes, welfare of labour including conditions of work, provident
finds, employers’ Jiability, workmen’s compensation, invalidity and ald age pensions
and maternity benefits or any other activity relating to the Special Economic Zones—

(i) shall not apply to a Speciat Economic Zone or aclass of Special Bconomic

Zones or ult Special Economic Zones; or

Zones of ali Special Economic Zones only with such exceptions, modifications
and adaptations, as may be specified in the notification;
{c) delegating the powers conferred upon any person or authority under any

State Act to the Development Commissioner in relation to the Developer or the

entrepreneur,

51. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.

52, (7) The provisions contained in the Chapter XA of the Customs Act, 1962 and the
Special Economic Zones Roles, 2003 and the Special Economic Zones (Customs Procedure)
Regulations, 2003 made thereunder shall not, with effect from such’ date as the Central
Government by notification appoint, apply to the Special Economic Zones.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), al offences committed,
before the commencement of this Act, under any provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 and
the Special Economic Zones Rules, 2003 and the Special Economic Zones (Customs
Procedure) Regutations, 2003 made thereunder, shail continue to be governed by the said
Act or rules, us the case may be.

(3) Anything done or any action taken of purported 10 have been done or taken
including any rule, notification, inspection, order ot notice made or isstied or any permission,
authorisation or exemption granted or any document or instrument executed under the said
provisions of the Act, rules and regulations referred to in sub-section (2) shall, in so far as
they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or
taken or made or issued or granted under the corresponding provisions of the Act or-rules or
regulations seferred to in that sub-section.

53. ASpecial Economic Zane shalt, on and from the appointed day, be deemed to be 3
territory outside the customs territory of India for the purposes of undertaking the authorised
opezations,

(2)A Special Economic Zone shal, with effect from such date as the Central Government
may notify, be deemed to be a por, airport, inland container depot, land station and रक्षा)
customs stations, as the case may be under section 7 of ‘the Customs Act, 1962;

Provided that the for purpases of this section, the Central Government may notify
different dates for different Special Economic Zones.

(if) shall apply to a Speciat Economic Zone or a class of Special Econotnic *

Power of
State.
Government
to grant
exemption

Act ta have
overriding
effect.

Certain
provisions
nat to apply.

Special
Economic
Zones to be
parts,
airports,
inland
oontainer
depats, lend
stations, ctc.,
da certain
cases,



Amendment
tu First
Schedule.

Power to
make rules.

22

54, (7) The Central Government may,
considers necessary or expedient so to do, ७
from the First Schedule any énactment spe;

having regard to the objects of this Act, and if it
Y Notification add to, or as the case may be, omit
cified therein,

(2) A copy of evury notification
laid in draft before each Hi
days which may be comp:

Proposed to be issuer
005४ of Parliament, while i
rised in one session or in pw
before the expiry of the session immediately following the sessiun or the ‘SUCCESSIVE Sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agrec in disapproving the issue of the notification ar both Houses
agree in ciaking any ntodification in the aotification, the notification shall not be issued ‘OF, as
the case may be, shall be issued onty in such modified form as may be agrecd upon by both 12

d under sub-section (7), shall be
tis in session, for atatal period of thirty
‘0 OF More succe:

the Houses,

55. (1) The Central Gov

Sriment may, by notificatian,
Provisions of this Act. हु

make rules for carrying out the

(2) ए particular, and without prejudice to the Beneratity of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— iS
(०) the infrastructure facilities necessary for the development of the Special
Economic Zones under clause (p) and services in the Special Econamic Zones under
clause (2) of section 2;

(6) the period within which the person concern

ed shatt obtain the Concurrence
of the State Governmen

| Under sub-section (3) of section 3;

(०) the form and the mater in which a
10 be contained thereia un

Ro

proposal may be made and the particulars
der sub-section (3) of section 3;

(@ the period wiain which the State Gover
together with its tecommendation under sub-secti

(७) the requirements subject to which the Board may Spprove, inadify or reject 2:
the proposal under sub-section (8) of section 3; पु °

minent may forward the Proposal
on (6) of section 3; .

(0) the period within whic!

+h the grant of letter of: pproval shal] be commun icated .
to the State Government or छ

eveloper or entrepreneur under sub-section (/0) of
~ section 3; हु

(8) the other requirements for notify

ing the spec ifically identitied area in a Stat
35 4 Special Economic Zone under sub

section (/) of section 4;

(A) the terms, Conditions and limitations subje
exported out of. or imported into, or
Special Economic Zo
section 7;

ect to which the 80005 or services
Procured from the Domestic Tariff Arca to, ;

ne, be exenipt from Payment of taxes, duties, or cess unde

“() the procedure for transfer of letter of ap
of approval ofa Developer under el.

@) the form and ihe manner
particulars to be contained therein

Proval in case of. Suspension of let
ause (4) of sub-section (9) of section 10;
in which a Proposal may be submitted and |]
under sub-section (7) of section 15; है
(४9 the time within which 4 person aggrieved by the order of the Approy.
Committee snay prefer an appeal under sub-section (4) of section 15;
(0 the form in which the appeal shajl be mad:
appeal under sub-section (6) of section 15;

(m) the procedure for disposing of an appeal under sub-section (7) 3
section 15;

fe and the fees for making suc!

(७) the requirements (including the Period for which a Unit may be set up
subject to which the Proposal may be approved, modified or rejected under clause:(<
of sub-section (8) of section 15; ८



8 Act, and if it
Pmay be, omit

1(7), shall be
‘riod of thirty
stons, and if,
sive sessions

oth Houses

sued or, as >>
701 by bath {ois

‘ing out the

Wer, such

t

© Speciat
183 under

म्राद्याए८

ticulars

Oposal

7४००६ 2५

23

(०) the terms and conditions for the Unit subject to which it shail undertake
authorised operations under clause (4) of sub-section (8) of section 15 and the
obligations and entitlements of the Unit;

{p) the time within which a person aggrieved by the order of the Approval
Committee may prefer an appeal under sub-scction (4) of section 16;

(gq) the form in which the appeat shall be made and the tees for making such
appeal under sub-section (6) of section 16;

(7) the procedure for disposing of an appeat under sub-section (7) of section 16;

(s) the form and the manner in which an application may be made for setting up
of an Offshore Banking Unit in a Special Economic Zone under sub-section (1) of
section 17;

( the requirements for setting up and’operation of an International Financial
Services Centre in a Special Bconomic Zone under sub-section-(/) of section 18 ;

(४) the requiremenis and terms and conditions subject to which a Unit in the
International Financial Services Centre may be set up and operated ina Special Economic
Zone under sub-section (2) of secticn 18;

(v) the form of singie application for obtaining any Sicence, permission ar
registration or approval under clause (a) of section 19;

G+) the forra of'single rerum or information to be furnished by an entrepreneur
or Developer under clause (2) of section 19;

{a} the manner in which and the terms and conditions subjéct to which the
exemptions, concessions, draw back or other benefits shall be granted to every
Developer and cutreprencuy under sut-section (2) of section 26;

9) the period during which any goods brought into, or services provided in, any
Special Economic Zone shall remain or continue to be provided io such Unit or Special
Econamic Zone under section 28; .

(2) the terms and conditions subject 19 which transfer of ownership in any goods
brought into, or produced or manufactured in, any init or Special Economic Zone, or
removal thereof ftom such Gait or Zone, shall be allowed under section 29 ;

(za) the conditions subject to which the Units shall be entitled to seil the goods
manufactured in a Speciaf Economic Zone to the Domestic Tariff Area under
section 30;

(88) the term of office of the Members, other than ex officio Members, of every
Authority and the manner of filling of vacancies under sub-section (6) of section 3 1;

(2०) the manner in which snd the conditions subject to which and the purposes
for which any person may be associated under sub-section (7) of section 3 1;

(zd) the times and the places of mectings and ihe procedure to be followed in the
transaction of business at the meetings under sub-section (/0) of section 31;

{ze) the powers and the functions of every Devetopment Commissioner under
sub-section (/) of section 32;

(afithe method of appointment of ottivers and othier employces of every Authority,
conditions of their service and the scale of pay and allowances under sub-section (3)
of section 32;

(zg) the other fanctions -to 98 performed by the Authority under clause (०) of

7 sub-section (2) of section 34;



i 24
(zh) the form in which the accounts and other relevant records of every Authority

shall be maintajned and annual statement of accounts shali be prepared under sub-
section (/) of section 37;

(27) the form and the tanner in which and the time at which every Authority shal]
4 furnish returns and statements and other particulars to the Central Government under $7
sub-section (/) of section 39;

(व) the form in which aud the date before which every Authority shail furnish to
the Central Government the report of its activities, policy and programmes under sub-
section (2) of section 39;

- (zk) the form in which and the particulars to be contained in the identity cards |2

under section 46;

(zi) any other matter which, is ta be, or may be, prescribed.

may be after it is mada, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
} successive sessions aforesaid, bath Houses agree, in making any modification in the rule or
‘both Houses agree that the rule should 101 be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
! in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
uo modification or annulment shail be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 20
done under that rule.

॥

|

|

| (3) Bvery rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
| ४
i

fl Power to : 56, (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
पु गक्षा10४6. Government may, by order published in thé Official Gazette, make such provisions not
H difficulties. consistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient
1 for removing the difficulty: aS

| Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiration of two
years from the date of commencement of this Act.

{2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament. हु

Amendment 57. With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification, 30
of certain appoint, the enactments specified in the Third Schedule shall be amended in the manner
cnactments,  secified therein:
हि ; Provided that different dates may be appointed on which the amendments specified in
|! पु the Third Schedule shall apply to a particular Special Economic 2016 ora class of Special | -
i it Economic Zones ar all Special Econamic Zones. हे cy
है Savings. 58, Ali rules made or purporting to have been made or all notifications issued or

purporting to have been issued under any Central Act relating to the Special Economic
Zones shall, in so far as they relate to matters for which provision is made in this Act or rules
made or notification issued thereunder and are not inconsistent therewith, be deemed to
have been made orissued under this Act as if this Act had been in force on the date on which YO
such rules were made or notifications were issued and shall continue to be in force unless

and until they are superseded by any rules made or notifications issued under this Act.



wee new के ० २

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
(See sections 7 and 54}
Enacements

The Agricultural Produce Cess Act, 1940 (27 of 1940).
The Coffee Act, 1942 (7 of 1942).
Tho Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1946 (22 of 1946).
The Rubber Act, 1947 (24 of 1947).
The Tea Act, 1953 (29 of 1953).
The Salt Cess Act, 1953 (49 of 1953).
The Medicinal and Toilet Preparations (Excise Duties) Act, 1955 (16 of 1955).
The Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special importance) Act, 1957 (58 of 1957}.
‘The Sugar (Regulation of Production) Act, 1961 (55 of 1961).
The Textiles Committee Act, 1963 (41 of 1963).
The Prodiice Cess Act, 1966 (15 of 1966).
The Marine Products Export Development Authority Act, 1972 (13 of 1972),
The Coal Mines (Conservation and Development) Act, 1974 (28 of 1974).
The Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974 (47 of 1974).
The Tobacco Cess Act, 1975 (26 of 1975}.
The Additional Duties of Excise (Textiles and Textile Asticles) Act, 1978 (40 of 1978).
The Sugar Cess Act, 1982 (3 of 1982).
The Jute Manufactures Cess Act, 1983 (28 of 1983),
The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Cess Act, 1985 (3 af 1986).
The Spices Cess Act, 1986 (11 of 1986).
The Research aud Development Cess Act, 1986 (32 of 1986).

25


THE SECOND SCHEDULE,
~ (See section 27)
Mooprrtcartons 10 46 INCOME TAX ACT, 1964
(43 oF 1961)

(a) in section 10,— 5

(4) in clause (15), after sub-clause (01), the fotlowing clause shall be inserted at
the end, namely:—

“(viii) any income by way of interest received by 2 non-resident or a

person who is not ordinarily resident, in India on a deposit made on or after the

Ist day of Aprif, 2005, in an Offshore Banking Unit referred to in clause (u) of 0

section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005;";

(B) in clause (230), after the words, brackets, figures and letters “sub-section
(4) of section 80-18", the words, brackets, figures-and letters “or sub-section (3) of
section 80-IAB” shall be inserted; पु

(2) in clause (34), the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely;—

“Explanation.—For the temavat of doubts, it is hereby declared that the

dividend referred to in section 1 £5-O shall avt be included in the total income of

the assessce, being a Developer or enterprencur,”,
(6) insection 104, after sub-section (74), the following sub-section shail be inserted,
namely:—~ हैं Ra

“(7B) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any undertaking, being 2
Unit referred to in clause (zc) of section 2 of the Special Heonemic Zones Act, 2305,
which has begun or begins to manufacture ५१ prodace articles or things or computer
software during the previous year relevant to the assessmeat year commmesicing on or |

a after the 1 et day of April, 2006 in any Special Economic Zone.”; aS

(०) after section LOA, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—

Spevia! “‘JQAA. (1) Subject to the provisions af this section, in computing the total

aad in income of an assesses, being an entrepreneur as referred to in clauxe (/) of section (2)

pow! of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005, from his , whe begins to manufacture or 4
extabh lis produce articles or things or provide any services during the previous year relevant to. 20
t Special any assessment year commencing on or-after the Ist day of April, 2006, a deduction
i Economic of— : :
1 ONES,

(hundred per cent. of profits and gains derived from the export, of such
articles or things or from services for a period of five consecutive assessment
years beginning with the assessment year relevant to the previons year in which 3
, the Unit begins to manufacture or produce such aricles or things or pro

services, as the case may be, and fifty-per cent. of such profits and gains for

further five assessment years and thereafter,
7 (ii) for the next five consecutive assessment years, so much ofthe amount.
- not exceeding fifty pet cent. of the profit as is debited to the prafit and loss Yo

हि account of the previous year in respect of which the deduction is to be allowed
H and credited to a reserve account (ta be called the "Special Economic Zone Re-
investment Reserve Account") to be created and utilised for the purposes
of the business of the’ assessee in tho manner laid down in

sub-section (2).

(2) The deduction under clause (if) of sub-section (7) shall be allowed only ifthe
following conditions are fulfilled, namely:— . हा

(4) the amount credited to the Special Bconomic Zone Re-investment

Reserve Account is to 96 utilised— 3

26

ug



10

ap

as

39

क्र

Yo

us

27

(i) for the purposes of Requiring machinery or plant which is first
Put to use before the expiry ofa Period of three years following the previous
year in which the reserve was created; and

(#) until the acquisition of the machinery o7 plant as aforesaid, for
the purposes of the business of the undertaking other than for distribution

by way of dividends or profits or for remittance outside [ndia as profits or
for the creation of any asset antside India,

(8) the particulars, as may be specified hy the Central Board of Direct
Taxes in this bebalf, under clause (4) of sub-section (78) of section 10A have
been furnished by the assessce in Tespect of machinery or plant along with the
return of incom for the assessment year relevant to the previous year in which
such plant or machinery was first Put to use,

(3) Where any amount credited to the Special Economic Zone
Re-investment Reserve Account under clause (ii) of sub-section (1),--

(a) has been utilised for any purpose other than those referred to in sub-
section (2), the amount so utilised: or

(4) has not been utilised before the expiry of the period specified in sub-
clause (/) of clause (a) of sub-section {2}, the amount not so utilised,

shall be deemed to be the profits, —

(i) in a case referred to in clause (a), in the year in which the amount was
50 utilised; or

(1017 8 case referred ७ in clause (8), inthe yeer immediately tollowing the
period of three years specified in sub-cta

use (i) of clause (०) of sub-section (2),
and shall be charged to tax accordingly:

Provided that where in computing the tatat income of the Unit for any assessment
year, its profits and gains had not been included by application of the provisions of
sub-section (78) of section 108, the undertaking, being the Unit shall 08 entitled to
deduction referred to in this sub-section only for the unexpired period of ten vonsecutive
assessment years and thereafter it shall be elj igible for deduction from income as
provided in clause (##) uf sub-section (/);

Explanation:—For the removal af doubts,
undertaking, being the Unit, which had alceady availa
the Special Economic Zénes Act, 2005, the deductio
ten consecutive assessment years, such Unit shall
income under this section,

Provided further that whero a Unit tnitialty focated in any free trade zone or
export processing zone is subsequently lovated ina Special Economic Zone by reason
of conversion of such free trade zone or Sxport processing zone into a Special Economic
Zone, the period of ten consecutive agsessment years referred to-ahove shalt be
reckoned. from the assessment year relevant to the previous year in which the Unit
began to manufacture, or produce or process such articles or things or services in:
such free trade zone or export Processing zone:

it is hereby declared that an
0, before the commencement of
ns referred to in section 10A for
not be eligible for deduction from

Provided also that where a Unit initial}
Processing zone is subsequently located in
conversion of such free trade zone or export processing zone into a Special Economic
Zone and has compieted the periad of ten consecutive assassment years referred to
above, it shall not be eligible for deduction from income as Provided in clause (j) of
sub-section (7) with effect from the Ist day of April, 2006,

ly located in any free trade zone or export
a Speciat Economie Zone by reason of



|
|

28

(4) This sectian applies to any underlaking being the Unit, which has begun ot
produce articles or things or services during the previous

begins to manufacture or
19 day of April, 2006,

year relevant (0 the assessment year commencing on or after the
im any Special Economic Zone;

(3) Where any undertaking beiag the Unit which is entitled to the deduction, 5
under this section ig transferred, before the expiry of the period specified in this
section, to anathet undertaking, being the Unit in a scheme of amalgamation or
demergety—
(a)no deduction shall be admissible under this section 0 the amalgamating
or the demetged Unit, being the company for the previous ycar in which the Jo
amalgamation or the demerger takes place; and

(6) the provisions ‘of this section shall, as they would have applied to the
amalgamating oT the demerged Unit being the company as if the amalgamution
or demerger had not taken place.

(6) Loss referred to in sub-section (2) of section 72. or sub-section (1) or sub- 15°
section (3) of section 74, in so far as such loss relates to the business ofthe undertaking,
being the Unit shall be allowed to be carried forward or set off.

(?) For the purposes of sub-section (7), the profits derived from the export of
articles of things or services {including computer software) shali be the amount which
bears to the profits of the business of the undertaking, being the Unit, the same 20
proportion as the export turnover in respect of such atticles or things of str १085 bears

to the kotal turnover of the business carried on by the assessee,

(8) The provisions of sub-sections (5) and (6) of section JOA shall apply to the
articles or things ot services referred to in sub-section (1) as if—

(a) for the figures, letters and word “ist April, 2001”, the figures, letters as
and word “ist April, 2006” had been substituted; पर

(8) for the word “undertaking”, the words “yndertaking, being the Unit”
pad been substituted.

(9) The provisions of sub-section (8) and sub-section (10) of section B0-IA
shall, so tar as may be, apply in relation to the undertaking referred to in this section as 39
they apply for the purposes of the undertaking referred to in section S0-IA.

Explanation }.—For the purposes of this section,—

(i) "export tumoyer" means the consideration in respect of export by the
undestaking, being the Unit of articles or things or services received in, oF brought
into, India by the assessee put does not include freight, telecommunication 3
charges or insurance attributable to the delivery of the articles or things outside
India of expenses, if any, incurred in foreign exchange in rendering of services
(including computer software) outside {ndia,

- Gi) "export™ and "import" in elation to the Special Economic Zones taking

goods or providing services out of India from 8 Special Economic Zone by tand, YO |

sea, air, or by any other mode, whether physical or otherwise,

Gi) “manufacture” shat} have the same meaning as assigned to it in
clause (r) of section 2ofthe Special Economic Zones Act, 2005;



29

(iv) "relevant assessment year" means any assessment year falling within
a period of fifteen consecutive assessment years referred to in this section;

(»)“Speciat Economic Zone” and “Unit” shall have the same meanings as
assigned (o them under clause (za) and (ze) of section 2 uf the Special Economic
Zones Act, 2005.

Explanation 2— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the profits
and gains derived trom on site development of computer sotiware (including services
for development of software) outside india shall be deemed to be the profits and gains
derived from the export of computer software outside India:

(वी) after section’ 540 the following section shall bc inserted, oamely:—

“S4GA. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 54G, where the capital Excmptian of
gain arises from the transfer af a capital asset, being machinery or plant or building or gant gai 0
Jand or any rights in building or Jand used for the purpuses of the business of an assets in Cases
industrial undertaking situate in an urban area, effected ia the course of, or inf shifing of
consequence of the shifting of such industrial undertaking to any Special Economic incest
Zone, whether developed in any urban area or any other area and the assessee has from wba
within a period of one year before or three years after the date an which the transfer area lo any

_ Speceal
took place, Esonomis

(2) purchased machinery or plant for the purposes of business of the 24"e-
industria! undertaking in the Spevial Economic Zone to which the said undertaking
is shifted;

(6) acquired building or tand or constructed building for the purposes of
his business in the Special Economic Zone;

{c) shified the originat asset and transferred the establishment of such
undertaking io the Special Economic Zoi; and

(व) incurred expenses on such other purpases as may be specified in a
scheme framed by the Central Govenunent tbr the purposes of this section,

then, instead of the capital gain being charged to income-tax as income of the previous,
year in which the transfer took piace, it shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section
(2), be dealt with in accordance with the fitlowing provisions of this Sertioa, that is to
3ay,—

(2) if che amount of the capitat gain is grester than the cost and expenses
incurred in refation to alt or any of the pureases mentioned in clauses {a) ta {et
(such cost-and expenses being hereafler in this section referced (७ as the nev’
asset), the difference between the amount of the capital gain and the cost of the
new asset shail be charged under section 45 as the ienme of the previous year;
and for the purpose of computing ia respect of the new asset any capita] gain
arising from its transfer within a period of three years of its being purchased,
acguired, constructed or transferred, as the case may be, the cost shall be Nil; or

Ud. (४) ifthe amount of the capital gain is equal to, or less than, the cost of the
new asset, the capital gain shail aot he charged under section 45, and for the
pwpuse of computing in resvect of the uew asset any capital gain arising trom
its transfer within a period 01 three years of its being purchased, acquired,
constricted ar transferred, as the cave may be, the cost shall be reduced by the
amount of the capital gain,

Fxplanation —in this sub-section, —

(4) “Special Economic Zone” shall have the meaning assigned to iL in
clause (za) of the Special Eoonomic Zones Act, 2005;



30
(6) “urban area” means any such area within the limits of a municipal
corporation or municipatity es Ihe Central Government may, having regard to the
population, concentration of industries, nee¢ for proper planning of the areg
and other relevant favturs, by general or special order, declare to be an erhan
area for the purposes of this sub-section.

ae (2) The amount al capital gain which is not appropriated by the assessee towaras
the cost and expenses incurred in relatiog to all or any of the purposes mentioned in
clauses (a) to (४) of sub-section (7) within one year before the date on which the
transfer of the originat asset took place, or which is not utilised by him forall of any of
the purposes aforesaid before the date of furnishing the return of income under section
139, shall be deposited by bim befure furnishing such return [such deposit being made
in any case not tater than the due date applicable in the case of the ussessee for
furnishing the return of income under sub-section (7) of section 139] in an account in
any such bank of institution as may be specified in, and utilised in accordance with,
any scheme which the Central Government may, by notification, frame in this behalf
and such return shall be accompanied by proof of such deposit; and, for the purposes
of sub-section (/), the amaunt, if any, already utilised by the assessee for all or any of
the aforesaid purposes together with the amount so deposited shall be deemed to be
the cost of the new asset:

Provided that if the amount deposited under this sub-section is not utilised
wholly or partly for ai! or any of the purposes mentioned in clauses (a) 10 (व) of sub-
i section (/) within the perind specified in that sub-section, then,—
| (i) the amount not so utilised shali be charged under section 45 as the
i income of the previous year in which the period of three years from the date of
the transfer of the original asset expires; and
(2) the asscssce shail be entitled to withdraw such amount in accordance
with the scheme aforesaid.”,

(०) in section 86-IA, aficr sub-section (/2), the following secticn shalt be inserted,
namely:—
, * “(73) Nothing contained io this section shall apply to eny Special Economic
Zoncs notifiedion or after the Ist April, 2005 in accordance with the scheme referred to
in sub-clause (ii) of clause (c) of sub-section (4)."

(f) after section 80-1A, the following section shail be inserted, samely:—

: Deductions in’ “80-1 AB, (7) Where the gross total income of an asseasee, being a Devetoper,
1 respect of includes any profits and gains derived by an undertaking or an enterprise from any
aby ad business of developing a Special Economie Zone, notified on oF after the Ist duy of
undertaking April, 2005 under the Special Economie Zones Act, 2005, there shall, in accordance
निगम with and subject to the provisions of this section, be allowed, in computing the total
devel ‘opment income of the assessee, a deduction of an amount equal to one hundred per cent, of
of Special the profits and gains derived from such business for ten consecutive assessment
j Zone. years.

(2) The deduction specified in sub-section (7) may, at the option of the assesscc,
be claimed by him for any ten consecutive assessment years out of fifteen years
beginning from the year in which a Special Economic Zone has been notified by the
Central Government:

Provided that where in computing the total income of any undertaking, being a
Developer for any assessment year, its profits and gains had not been included by
application of the provisions of sub-section (/3) of section 80-1A, the undertaking
being the Developer shall be entitled to deduction referred ta in this section only for
the unexpired period of ten consecutive assessment years and thereafter it shail be
eligible for deduction ftom income as provided in sub-section (7) or sub-section (2), as
the case may be:

प्र

&

oa

Ro

>

30

Ye

us

Se



1 municipal
tgard to the
of the area
© an urban

Ss
+0 towards
xioned in
which the
ofany of
Tsection [७
ing made
sssee for
count in सर

ce with,

sbehalf {S~
urposes
rany of
'd to he

$८4५४५४3४

Hilised 2o
df sub-

as the
ate of

tance

iS

ae

25

30

(५० - along with the return of inc

31

eveloper
fon under
ing period

to such transferee Developer for the remain
in the ten consecutive assessment ‘cars as if the operation and maintenance
30 (raasFered to the transferee Developer.

were not

(3) The provisions of sub-section (5) and sub-

TA shall apply to the Special Ecunomic Zones for th
under sub-section (7)

sections (7) (0 (72) of section gp.
४ purpose of allowing deduc tions

Explanation-—For the purposes of this secting, “Developer”
Economic Zone” shall have the same Ineanings respectively as assign
clauses (g) and (०) of section 2 of the Special Fe

80d “Special
20 to them in
‘onamic Zones Act, 2005" "

(2) for section SOLA, the following section shat! be substituted, namely—

“ROLA. (2) Where the 87035 total income of an ‘assessee, —

Deductions iq
() being a scheduled bank, ar, any bank incorp.

respect af
orated by or under the laws — certain
of @ country outside India; snd having an Offshore Banking Unit in a Speciat 5 of
ic Zones shore
Economic ANG; or Banking [015

(i) being a Unit ofan International Financial Services Centre, tavesnatieral
includes any income Teferred to in sub-section (2), there shail be allowed, in accordance’ Semen
with and subject to the Provisions of this Section, a deduction from such income, ofan Centre,
Amount equal to—

(a) one hundred Percent, of such incame for five consecutive 85585:
years beginning with the assessment year retevant to the PREVIOUS year in
which the Permission, under clause (a) of ‘sub-section (/) of section 23 of thy
Banking Regu lation Act, 1949 of Pertnission or registration under the Securitig

and Exchange 80410 of, India Act, 1992 or ary other refevant law was obtained,
and thereafter;

(5) fifty per cent,
(2) The

sment

of such income for five consecutive assessment years,
income referred to in sub-section (7) shall be the income—

(०) ftom an Offshore Banking Unit ina Special Economic Zone; or
ction (7) of section 6 Of the
lertaking located ina Spectal Economie
develops, develops and Operates of

develops, aperates and maintains a Special Economic Zone; or

(ec) trom any Unit of the Intemational Financial Services Centre from its
business for which it has been approved for setting up in such ६ Centre in a
Special Economic Zone,
(3) No deduction und

er this section shall be allowed unless the assessee furnishes
‘ome, —

(A) the repon, in the form specified by the Central Board
under clause (i) of “sub-section (2) of section 80LA, as it stood immediatety
before its substitution by this section, of an accountant as defined in the
Explanation below sub-section (2) of section 288, certifying that the deduction

has been correctly claimed in accordance with the Provisions of this Section;
and

of Direct Taxes

(ti) a copy of the Permission obtained under clause (a) of, ‘sub-section 9)
of section 23 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949,


32
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—

(०) “International Financial Services Centre” shyt] have the same
#8 assigned to id in clause (9) of section 2 of the Speciat Economic Zi
2005;

Mesning
ones Act,

(4) “scheduled bank" shall have the same Meaning as assi

ed to ॥ i
clause (७) of section 2 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; ened to iia 5

2 of 4)
(०) “Special Economic Zone” shall have the same meaning ws assizned to
It in clause (za) of section 2 of the Special Eeonomic Zones Act, 2005;

(व) “Unit” shalt have the same meaning as assigned (6 Itin clause Gc) of
section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2605"; to

| Gy in section 1 1538, after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted
namely; — कु

+(6) The provisions of this section shal] not apply to the income accrued or
arising on ar afier the Ist day of Apri), 2005 from any business. Sarried on, or services
rendered, by an entrepreneur or a Developer, in a Unit or Special Economie Zone, as [7
the case may be,”

(A) in section 115-0, after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—

“(8 Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no tax on, distributed
profits shait te chargeable in respect ofthe total income of an undertaking orenterprise’ 2.0
i engaged in developing or developing and operating or developing, Operating and
गा maintaining 3 Special Economic Zone for any assessment Year on any amount declared,
é distributed or paid by such Developer or enterprise, by way of dividends (whether 3
! interim or otherwise) on or after the Ist day of April, 2005 out Of ts current income
: पु sither in the bands of the Developer or enterprise or the erson receiving such dividend as
not falling under clause (238) of section 10.”
(0) in section 197A, after sub-section (2८), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely: —
(79) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no deduction of tax
हि shall be made by the Offshore Banking Unit from the interest paid-— 30
: (2) ०७ deposit made on or after the Ist day of Aprit, 2005, by d non-resident ora
Person not ordinarily resident in India; or .
(8) on borrowing, on or after the Ist day of April, 2005, from a non-resident ora
Person not ordinarily resident in India,
Explanation—For the Purposes of this sub-section “Offshore Banking Unit” shall 35°
have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (x) of section 2 of the Special Economic E
Zones Act, 2005,7,



THE THIRD SCHEDULE.

(See section 57)
AMENDMENT TO CERTAIN ENACTMENTS
PART I
AMENDMENTS 10 THE INSURANCE act, 1938
(40F 1938)

3. In section 2C, in sub-section (/), after the third proviso, insert -
“Provided also an insurer, being an Indian Insurance Company, insurance co-
operative society or a body corporate referred to in clause (८) of this sub-section
carrying on the business of insurance, may catry on any business of insurance in any
Special Economic Zone as defined in clause (za) of section 2 of the Special Economic
Zones Act, 2005."
2. After section 20, insert-—
“2CA. The Central Government may, by notification, direct that any of the Power of

provisions of this Act,— Central
A . , हि Government
(a) shall not apply to insurer, being an Indian Insurance Company, insurance 5, apply

co-operative society ora body corporate referred to in clause (cof sub-section (7), peavisions of
of'section 20, carrying on the business of iwsurance, in arty Special Economic Zone this Act to
as defined in clause (za) of section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005; or ae क
(6) shall apply to any insurer being an Indian Insurartce Company, insurance Jones.
co-operative society or a body corparate referred to in clause (2) of sub-section
(J) of section 2C, carrying on the business of insurance, in any Special Economic
Zone as defined in clause (2a) of section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act,
2005 only with such exceptions, modifications and adaptations 8४ may be
specified in ‘the notification.”.
PART
AMENDMENTS 10 THE BANKING REGULATION ACT, 1949
(10.0% 1949)
1. Section 53 shall be renumbered as sub-section (/) thereof and in sub-section (2)
30 a8 so re-numbored, for “banking company or institution or to any class of | banking companies”,
substitate,— .
“banking company or institution or to any class of banking companies or any of
their branches functioning or located in any Special Economic Zone established under
the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005.”; .
35° 2. After sub-section (/) as so mambered, the following sub-section shail be inserted,
namely:—

“(2} A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub-section (2),
shali be laid in draft before cach House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty duys.which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in disapproving the
issue of the notification or both Houses agree in making any modification in the
notification, the notification shall not be issued ‘oy, as the case may be, shall be issued
only in such modified form as may be agreed upon by both the Houses.”

PART IW
AMENDMENT TO THE INDIAN STAMP ACT, 1899
(20F1899)
In section 3, in the proviso, after clause (2), insert;-—

‘any instrument executed, by, or, on behalf of, or, in favour of, the Developer, or
Unit or in connection with the carrying out of purposes of the Special Economic Zone.
Explanation—For the purposes of this clause, the expressions “Developer”, "Special
Economic Zone" and “Unit” shail have meanings respectively assigned to them in clause
(g), (za) and (zc) of section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005.’.

33


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Government of India had announced a Special Ecanomic Zone scheme in Apzil,
2000 with a view to provide an internationally competitive environment for exports. The
objectives of Special Economic Zones include making available goods and services free of
taxes and duties supported by integrated infrastructure for export production, expeditious
and single window appravat mechanism and a package of incentives to attract foreign and
domesti¢ investments for promoting export-led growth.

2, There are at present eleven functioning Special Eeenomic Zones. While seven
Zones have been set up by the Central Government, four by the private/joint/State sector. In
addition, approvals have been given for setting up of thirty-five sew Special Economic
Zones in the private/joint/State sector.

3, While the poticy relating to the Special Economic Zones is contained in the Foreign
- Trade Policy, incentives and other facitities offered to the Special Economic Zone developer
and units ate implemented through various notifications and circulars issued by the con-
cerned Ministries/Departments, The present system, therefore, does not lend enough con-
fidence for investors to commit substantial funds for development of infrastructure and for
setting up of the units in the Zones for export of goods and services. In order to give a tong
term and stable policy framework with minimum regulatory regime and to provide expeditious
and single window clearance mechanism, a Central Act for Special Economic Zones has been
found ta be necessary in line with international practice. To achieve this purpose, a“‘Special
Economic Zones Bill, 2005” is proposed. The satient features of the Bill are as under:—

(matters relating to establishment of: Special Economic Zone and for setting up of
units therein, including requirements, obligations and entitlements;

(i) matters relating to requirements for setting up of off-shore banking units and
uruts in International Financial Service Center in Special Economtc Zone, includ-
ing fiscal regime governing the operation of such units;

Gi} the fiscat regime for developers of Speciat Economic Zones and units set itp
therein;

{iv) single window clearance mechanism at the Zone ievel;

(9) establishment of an Authority for each Special Economic Zone set up by the
Centrat Government to impart greater administrative autonomy; and

(vi) designation of Special courts and single enforcement agency to ensure speedy
trial and inivestigation of notifted offences committed in Special Economic Zones.

4. The Bill secks to achieve the aforesaid objects,

KAMAL NATIE,

New Deri;
The 5th May, 2005,



PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICL4 117 AND 274 O¥ THE
mil, CONSTITUTION OF fNDIA,
The
of
yus
nd =

[Copy ofietter No, Nil, dated the 6th May, 2005 from Shri Kamal Nath, Minister
of Commerce and Industry to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabhaj

The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the proposed Special
Economic Zones Bilt, 2005 recommends to the House the introduction and consideration
of the Bill under article | !7(1), 1 17(3) and 274(1) of the Constitation.



Notes on clauses
Clause 2.—This clause defines certain expressions used in the Bill.

Clause 3.— This clause relates to procedure for making proposal to establish Special
Economic Zone.

This clause provides that the Central Government, State Goverament, or any other
person, jointly or severally, may establish a Spectal Economic Zone. Any person who, intends
to set up 3 Special Economic Zone, may, after identifying the area, make a proposu! to the
State Government concemed for the purposes of setting up a Special Economic Zone. It also
provides that the person, at hig optjon also make a proposal directly ta the Board for the
‘purpose of setting up Special Economic Zone. In casos where such proposal has been
received directly from @ person, the Board may grant approval and after receipt of such
approval, the person concerned, shall obtain the.concurrence of the State Government
within prescribed time, In, case where a State Government intends to set up the Special
Economic Zone, it may after identifying the area, may forward the proposal directly to the
Board of Appravat for setting up the Special Economic Zone. However, the Central
Government can set up and notify the Special Economic Zone without referring the proposal
to the State Government concemed or the Board. The State Government may, on Teceipt of
the proposal for setting up a Special Economic Zone forward the proposal together with its
recommendations to the Board of Approval within the time specified by rules made by the
Central Government. The Board of Approval may, after receipt of the proposal for setting
up a Special Economic Zone either approve the propusel cr, approve the proposal subject to,
such terms and conditions as it may deem fit to impose. It can also modify or reject the
Proposal for setting up a Special Economic Zone, The Centrai Government has been conferred
the power 20 specify by rules the minimum area of land for setting up a Special Economic
Zone and other terms and conditions subject to which the Board may approve, modify or
reject any such proposal received by it. This clause further provides that if the Board of
Approval approves the proposal without any madification, it shall comminicate the sams
to the Central Government. If it approves the propasat with modification, it shall, communicate
the same to the person or the State Government concerned, after hearing the views of such
person or State Goyernment and thereafter, the Board of Approval shall communicate the
approval to the Central Government. If it rejects the proposal, it shall record the reasons
therefor and communicate the rejection to the person or the State Government concemed,
This clause further provides that the Central Government shail, on receipt of communication
from the Board of Approval, grant, within such time as may be prescribed, a lettcr of ‘approval
on such terms and condition, as approved by Board of, ‘Approval, to the person or the State
Government coacerned. However the Central Government may, on the basis of approval of
the Board, approve more than one developer in one Special Economic Zone in such cases
where onc Developer does not have in his possessivn the minimura area of Jand, as may be
prescribed, for-sutting up a Special Economic Zone and in afl such cases, cach Developer
shall be considered as a Developer in respect of the land in his possession.

This ciause also provides that any person or a State Government, who intends to
provide any infrastructure facilities in a Special Economic Zone may, after entering inte an
agreement with the Developer, make a proposal for the same to the Board of Approval, fer its
approval. Every such person ar State Government, whose proposal hax been approved by
the Board and who, oz which, has been granted letter af approval by the Central Government,
shail be considered a Co-Developer. हि :

Clause 4.—This clause retates to establishment of Speciat Economic Zone and approval
for, and authorisation it to operate to Developer.

This clause provides that the Developer shall, aiter the grant of Jeter of approval
submit the exact particulars of the identified aréa to the Central Government and thereupan
that Government may, after satisfying that the requirements, as may be specitied by niles,
are fulfilled, notify tha specifically identified area in the State as « Special Economic Zone,
However the Central Government can also notify any additional area as a part of a Speciat

36



37

Econemic Zone, This clause further provides that the Centra! Government may, after the
appointed day, authorise the Developer ta undertake in a Special Economic Zone, suck
operations which the Central Government may suthorise.

Clause 5—This clause relates to guidelines for notifying Special Economic Zone.

This clausé provides that the Central Government, white Notifying any area as a
Special Economic Zone and for discharging its functions under the proposed legislation
shall be guided by factors such as (a) veneration of additicnal economic activity; (4)
promotion of exports of goods and services; (c) promotion of investment from domestic and
foreign sources; (व) creation of employment opportunities; fe) development of infrastructure
+ facilitics; and (f) maintenance of, soverelpnty and integrity of India, the security of the State
and friendly relations with foreign States,

Clause 6.—-This clause relates to the processing and non-processing areas.

It provides that the areas falling within the Special Economic Zones may be demarcated
by the Ceatrat Government. or any authority specified by it as (a) the Processing area for
setting up Units for activities, being the manufacture of goods, or tendering services, (6)
the area exclusively for trading or warehousing purposes; and (c) the non-processing arcas
for activities other than those specified under (2) or (6) above

Clause 7.— This clause relates to the exemption from taxes, duties or cess.

‘This clause provides that any goods or services exported out of, ar imported into, or
procured from the Domestic Tariff Area, to ६ Unit or Developer ina Special Economic Zone
shall, subject to such terms, conditions and timitations, as may be specified by rules made by
the Central Government, be exérnpt from the payment of taxes, duties 06 cess under any oralt
of the Central Acts which are specified in the Pirst Schedule to the proposed legislation. The
(लाए Acts specified in the First Schedule generally relate to levy and payment of cess.

Clause 8.—Thiy clause retates to the constitutian of Board of Approval.

This clause provides that the Central Government shall, within fifteen days of the
conunencement of the propased legislation, by notification, constitute, far the purposes of
the proposed Icgistation, a Board to be calied the Board of Approval and the composition of
such Board has been specified in the sub-clause (2) of the said clause. This clause further
roniains provisions for the term of office of Members, co-option of certain persons as
Members of the Board of Approval, its meetings and quorum, ete,

Clause 9— This clause relates to the duties, powers and functiots of Board of
Apprayal.

This clause provides that it shall be the duty of the Board to promote and ensure
orderly development of the Special Economic Zonys, The powers and functions of lhe Board
specified in this clause, ‘ner atic, include (a) granting of approval or reiccting propasal ot
modifying such propdsals, fer establishment of the Special Economic Zones; (8) granting
approval of authorised cperations to be carried out in the Special Economic Zones by the
Developer; (८) granting of approval to the Developers ox Units (other than the Developers or
the Units which are exempt from obtaining approval under any law or by the Central
Government) for foreign coltaborations and foreign direct investments (including investments
by a person resident outside India) in the Special Economic Zone for its development,
Operation and maintenance; (व) granting of approval or rejecting proposal for providing
infrastructure facilities in a Speciat Eoonomic Zone or modifying such proposals; (९) granting,
notwithstanding anything contained in the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act,
1951, a licence to an industrial undertaking referred to in clause (d} of section 3 of that Act, if
such undertaking is established, as a whole or pert thereof, or praposed to be established, in
ब Speciat Economic Zone; (0) suspension of the letter of approval granted toa Developer and
appointment of an Administrator under clatise 10; (६) disposing of appeals preferred under
sub-clause (4) of clause 15; (4) disposing of appeals preferred under sub-clause (4) of ciause
16; (7) performing such other functions as may be assiysted to it by the Central Government,
‘This clause further confers power upon the Board of Approval to delegate such powers and


38

functions as it may deem fit to one or more Development Commissioners for effective and
proper discharge of the functions of the Bourd.

It also provides that the Board, while exercising powers and discharging functions
under the proposed legistation shall be guided by the directions relating to policy issued by
the Central Government and such direction shall be binding on the Board. It alsa provides
that the Board may, ifso required for purposes of direction or any other law for the time being
in force relating to Special Economic Zone, by notification, decide ag to whether a particular
activity constitutes manufacture ag defined in sub-clause (7) of clause 2 and such decision of
the Board shail be binding on all Ministry and Departments of the Central Government.

Clause /0.— This clause relates to the suspension of letter of approval and transfer of
Special Economic Zone in certain cases.

This clause contains provisions for suspension of the letter of approval granted to the
Developer for a whole or part of his area established as Special Economic Zone for a perind
not exceeding one year and appoint an Administrator to discharge the fictions of the
Developer in accordance with the terms and conditions of the letter of approval and manage
the Special Economic Zone accofdingly. However, no letter of approval can be suspended
unless the Board has given to the Developer not less than three months’ notice, in writing,
stating the grounds on which it proposes 10 suspend the ietter of approval, and has considered
any cause shown by the Developer within the period of that notice, against the proposed
suspension.

It further provides that the Board may, instead of suspending the letter of approval
permit ७ 10 remain in force subject to such further terms and conditions as it thinks (it to
impose, and any further terms or conditions so imposed shall be binding upon and be
complied with by the Developer and shaji be of like force and effect as if they were contained
in the letter of approval. In case the Board suspends a letter of approval under this section,
it shalt serve a notice of suspension upon the Developer and fix a date on which the suspension
shall take effect. Upon suspension of the letter of approval, the Speciat Economic Zone of
ths Developer shalt vest in the Administrator for a period not exceeding one year or up to the
date on which his létter of approval for such Special Economie Zone is transferred to the
transferee, whichever is earlier. This clause also contains provisions for transfer. of the
Special Economic Zone of a Developer whose licence has been suspended and take other
actions consequent upon the suspension of the letter of approval. The Board of Approval
has been-conferred power, to issue such directions or formulate such scheme as it may
consider necessary for operation of sucti Special Beonomic Zone.

Clause 1}. This clause relates to the Development Commissioner.

This clause contains provisions far the appointment of the Development Commissioner
for one ot more Special Economic Zones and for appointment of such Officers and other
employees as it considers necessary to assist every Development Commissioner. It also
contains provisions for salary and allowances and - other terms and conditions of service in
respect of leave, pension, provident fund and other matters of the Development Commissioner,
officers and other employees .

Clause 12.—This ciauye relates to the functions of the Development Commissioner.

This clause provides that the Development Commissioner would ensurs speedy
development of the Special Economic Zone and promotion of exports therefrom. The functions
of the Development Commissioner specified in this clause are to (६) guide the entrepreneurs
for setting up of Units in the Special Kconomic Zone; (6) ensure and take suitable steps for
effective promotion af exports from the Special Economic Zone; (२) ensure proper co-
ordination with the Central Government or State Government Departments concerned’ $i ir
agencies with respect to, or tor the purposes of (a) 10(b) above; (4) monitor the performance
of the Developer and the Unit; (९) discharge such other functions as may be assigned to him
by the Central Government under the proposed legislation or any other jaw for the time being
in force; and (7) any other functions as may be delegated to him by the Board of approval,



Clause 33.~-This clause rolates to the Constitution of Approval Comunitiee.

This clause provides that the Centra} Government shall, by notification, constitute a
Commitiee farevery 5; pecial Evotiomic Zone, to be called the Approval Committee to exercise
the powers and perforin the functions Specified in clause 14 of the Bill, In the case of existing
- Special Economic Zones, the Approval Commitiee shal! ba Constituted within six months
“from the date of commencement of the Proposed legislation and in case of other Special

Economic Zones establishod after the cordmencement of ihe Propesed legislation, the
Approval Committee shail he constituted within six months from the date of Estab ishment of
such Special Economic Zone, This clause also contains provisions for meetings and its
quorunt. This clausy atso Provides thal alt orders and decisions of the Approval Committee

and exercise the Powers itt respect of the tatters specified in this Clause, naneiy, (a)
approve, import of procurement of 80०05 from the Dontestic Tarifz Avea, in the Speciat
Economic Zone for carrying on the authorised operations by a Developer; (4) approy

. Providing of services by 2 service Provider trom oittside india or trom the Domestic Tariff

Area for carrying on the authorised operations by the Developer, in the Special Economic
Zone; (c) monitor the utilisation of 80085 oF services or warehousing or trading -in the
Speical Economic Zone; {a} approve, modify or reject proposals for asiting up Units in
accordance with the Provisions of the. Proposed legistation; (८) *pptove foreign callaborations
and foreign direct investzents, iticluding investments by a person outside India for setting
op a Units (0 rrionitor and Supervise compliance of Conditions subject to which the letter of
approval or penttission, if; my, is granted to the Developer ar to an entrepreneur; and (x)
Perform any other fintctiony as may be delegated to it by the Central Government or the State
Government concemed, as the case may be. This clause further provides that the Approval
Commitee shall not discharge such fonctions and exercise such powers in relation bo
Developer being the Central Government as may be specified by it

Clause 15.—This Clause relates to the setting up of Unit.

This clause provides that any Person, who intends 1035६ up a Unit for Carving on the
authorised Operations in a Special Economic Zone, may submit a proposal to the Developzient
Commissioner concerned, It further Provides that the Development Commissioner sha U, on
seceipt of the Proposal place the Proposal before the A, PProval Committee for its approval.
The Approval Committee nfay, citner. approve the Propesai without mod ification, of approve
the proposal with mace ions subject to such terms and conditions ag [६ may deem fit to
impose, ar Tejectthe Proposal in accordance With the provisions contained in this.clause. In
tase of modification or rejection of 3 proposal, the Approva! Committee shall afford a
reasonable Opportunity of being heard to the person concemed and after recording the
Teasons therefor, cither modify OF reject the Proposal. This cisuse alsg confers nowers Upon
the Central Government to Prescribe the requirements Subject to which the Approval
Comntittee 7199 approve, modify or Teject the proposal, The Development Commissioner
tay, after the 2pproval of the Proposal, grant a letter of, approval to the person concerned tb
Setup a [fait and undenake in she Unit such operations which the Development Coititiissioner



>

40
may authorise und every such Operation so authorised shall be Mentioned in the lettey of
approval.
Clause /6—This clause 7elates to the cancellation of letter of approval granted w
entrepreneur,

This clause, infer alia, confers power upon the Approval Comntittee to cancel the
letter of approval of an entrepreneur after reasonable opportunity of being heard hag bean
afforded fo the entreprencur. The Approvat Committee may, at ally time, cancel the fetter of
approval if it has any reason or cause to believe that the entrepreneur has persistently
contravened any"of the terms and conditions subject ta which the letter of =pproval was :
Granted to the entrepreneur, It further provides that where the letter of approval has heen 3
cancelled, the Unit shail not, from the date of such canceltatian; be entitled to any eXeniption,

concession, drawback and any other beneiit availed by him in respect of the capital 80005,
finished goods and unutilised raw materials in such manner as the Approval Committee may 4
direct. it also contains Provistons for making an appeal by any person aggrieved from an
order of the Approval Committee,

Clouse 17.—This clause relates to the setting up and operation of Offshore Banking

Unit. me हा
This Ctause provides that an application tor setting up and operation of an Offshore
Banking Unit ina Special Economie Zone may be made to the Reserve Bank insuch form and
manner a3 may be specified by it. If, the Reserve Bank, on rece ipt of an application, is
Satisfied that the applicant 118 all the conditions specified under sub-clause (3) of this
clause, it shall grant permission to such applicant for Setting up and operation of an Offshore
Banking Unit in a Special Economic Zone. ‘This clause further Provides that the Resérye
Bank, by notification, specify the terms and condi tions subject to which an Offshore Banking
Unit may be set up and operated in the Special Economic Zone, ~

Clause 12.—This clause relates to the setting up of International Financial Services

Centre, . हे H

: This clause confers power upon the Central Government to Approve setting up of an j
Intemational Financial Services Centre in a Special Economic Zone and also to specify by
the rules made by it tho requirements for setting up the operation of such Centre, Such
requirements shall be specified by the Central Governinent su bject to the guidelines as may
be framed by the Reserve Bak, the Security and Exchange Board of 17018, the Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority and such other authority as it may deem fit.

‘Clause /9.—This clause retates to the single application form, return, etc.

‘This clause provides that the Central Government may, ifrequired, , Specify by the rules
made by it a single application torm for obtaining any licence, Permission or registration or
approval by a Developer, or an cuirepreneur under one or more Central Acts and
form for furnishing retuens or information by a Developer or an entrepreneur under one or
more Central Acts

Clause 20.—This clause relates to the agency to inspect,

This clause confers power upon the Cenjrat Government to specily, by nation,
1 . any officer or agency for carrying out surveys 66 inspections to ensure or verify compifance
hh pe with the provisions of; any Central Actby a Developer or an entrepreneur, as the case may be,

हु and such officer or agency is required to submit verification or compliance report, in such

a Offence.

This clause provides that the Central Government may, by notification, specify any act
or omission made punishable ander any Central Act, as notified offence for purposes of the
oa Proposed legisiation, [६ further confers power upon the Central Government to authorise
any officer or Agency to be the enforcement officer or agency in respect of any notified



था

offence committed in a Special Economic Zone. Every officer or agency authorised under
sub-clause (2) of this clause shail have afl the corresponding powers of investigation,
search of seizure as is provided under the relevant Central Act in respeet of the notified
offences.

Clause 22.—This clause retates to investigation, inspection, search or seizure,

This clause provides that the agency or officer, specified under clause 20 er clause 2 1,
of the Bill may, with prior intimation to the Development Commissioner concemed, carry cut
the investigation, inspection, seatch or seizure in the Special Economic Zone or in a Unit if
such agency or officer has reasons to betieve (reasons ६0 be recorded in writing) that a
notified offence has been committed or is likely to be commtitted in the Special Economie
Zone. However, no investigation, inspection, search or seizure shail he carri ied out in a
Special Economic Zone by any agency or officer other than those teterred to in sub-clause
(2) or sub-clause (3) of clause 21 of the Bill. without prior epproval of the Development
Commissioner concerned, However an officer or agency, if so authorised by the Central
Governmont, may carry out the investigation, inspection search or seizure in the Specia]
Economic Zone or Unit without prior intimation or approval of the Development Commissicner.

Clause 23.—This clause relates to Designated Courts to try suits and notified offences,

. This clause requires that Designated Courts shall try all suits of a civil nature arising in
the Special Economic Zone and conduct trial of notifie

Economic Zone, No court, other than the court desi igmated under this clause can try any suit

or conduct trial of any suit or offence referred above, This clause also contains provision of

transitory in nature so far as trial of the suits of a civil nature and conducting of trial of

notified offences arising in the Special Economic Zone are concemed,

Clause 24.—This clause contains provisions for appeal to High Court.

This clause provides that any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the coust
designated under sub-clause (/) of clause 23 of the Bill, may file an appeal to the High Court
within sixty days from the date of communication of the decision or order of | the said courtto
him on any question of fact or law arising out Of such orders. However the High Court can,
if it is satisfied that the appellant was Prevented by sufficient cause from filing an appeat
within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period not exceeding sixty days,
This clause further defines the expression “High Court’ which means the High Court of the
State in which the Special Economic Zone ts situated,

Clause 25.—This clause relates to offences by companies,

This clause provides that where an offence under the proposed legistation has been
committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in
charge of and was responsible to, the company for the conduct.of the business of the
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed ta be guilty of the offence and-shal! be
Hable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly, However such Person shall not-be
liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was comunitted without his knowledge
or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.

It fither provides that where an offence has been committed by a company and it is
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of
the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall, also be deemed to be
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished actordingly,

Clause 26,—This clause relates to exemptions, drawbacks and concessions to every
» Developer or entrepreneur.

This clause contains provisions for the exemptions, drawbacks and concessions to
Developer or entrepreneur from any duty of: customs under the Customs Act, 1962, the
Customs Tariff Act, 1975, the Central Excise Act, 1944 or the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985
or any other law for the time being in force which may be admissible to them from time to
time, exemption from the service tax under Chapter ¥ ofthe Finance Act, 1994 and exemption

ied offences committed in the Special *



42

from levy of taxes an sale ot purchase of goods tny carrying on authorised operations, Thy
Central Geverament has been alse Proposed to be cunterred power 0 specify by niles the
measicr on which and the terms and conditions subject to which, the exemptions and
concessions shall be granted,

Cleuse 27—This clause applies the provisions of the fncome-tax Act. 1961 with
certain modification in relation ta Developers and vatcepreneur.

‘This clause, inter atia, propases 10 apply the provisions ofthe Income-tax Act, ] 961
with vertain modification in celalion te the Developer and catrepreneur for cerying on the
authorised operations fn ihe Specisl Beonamic 20965 or Unk and such modifications are
specified in the Secund Sehedute to the Bill.

the modifications which are, inter कीच, spe
under:—

0 ia the Second Schedule are as

(a) It is proposed 1० insert a new thuse 10AA in the Income Act, £96]
incorporating certain special provisions in respect ot'newly established Units in Speciat
Economic Zones providing deductions of bundred Der cent. of profits and gains
derived From the export braadly on the lines of; section 103 of the Income-tax Aci, 196]

(8) It is further proposed 0 grant cxemption of capital gains on traaster of
assets in case of shifting of industrial undertaking from urban area or any other area to
a Speciat Economic Zone broadly on the lines of existing section 54G ef the Income.
taxAct, 1964. हैं

(7) ॥ is also proposed to altow deductions in Fespect of profits and gain by an

undertaking or enterprise en, gaged in development ofa Speciat Eeonomic Zone Broadly ©

जा the tines of existing section 80-1 A ofthe Tncome-tax Act, 1961,

(Git isalso proposed to allow deduction in respect of certain incomes of Offshare
Banking Units and International Financial Services Center broadly on the fines af
existing section 20-1A of the income-tax Act, 1961,

(8) Itis also proposed io make provision in ihe Income-tax Act, 196 | ic provide
that no tax on distributed. profits shat! be chargeable in respeet ofthe total income of an
Undertaking or entierprise engaged in developing or de veloping and operating or
developing, operating anit maintsining 4 Special Economie Zone for any assessment
Year cn any aniount declared, distributed ar paid by such Developer or enterprise, by
Way of dividends (whether interim or otherwise) on or after the ist day of Aprit, 2005
out of is current income either in the hands of Developer or enterprise or the persost
roceiving such dividend nor falling under section 19 of the Income-tax Act, 1961

(0 Iratso proposed to provide that the Provisions of section 11518 of the Tncome-
tax Act, 1961 shalt not apply to the income accmed Or arising from any business carried
‘on, or services rendered, byan entreprencur ar Developer, ia Unit or Special Zeonotnis.
Zone.

Clause 28.— This cleuse rptates 10 duration of gods in Special Economic Zones,

The Central Government may specify, by niles made by if, the period during which any
goods brought into, or services provided in, any Unit without payment of taxes, duties,
levies or cess, shall remain or continue to be provided in such Unit or Special Economic
Zone. :

Clause 29.— This clause relates to transfer of ownership and removal of. gocds,

The transfer of ‘owaership in any goods brought into, of produced ar manufactured in,
any Unit or Special Sconomic Zone or romoval thereof fon such Unit or Zone shall be
allowed, subject to such terms and conditions as the Central Government May specify by
Tules made by il, .

Clause 30.— This cluise relates to domestic ciearanve by Units.

This clanee provides that (a) थाए goods removed front a Special Economic Zone the
Domestic Tariff Area shall be chargeable to duties of customs including a:ti-dumping,



43

“countervailing and safeguard duties under the Customs Vari Act, 1975, where apoticable, as
viable on such goods when imported; and (bh) the rate of duty and tariff vetuatino, iF any,
applicable to goods admitted to or removed from, a Special Economic Zone stall be at tie
“sate and tariff valuation in foree ae on the date of such removal, and where such date is not
ascertainable, on the date of payment of duty.

Clause 31.-~ This clause celates to constitution af Authority.

This clause provides that the Central Goverment shall, on every appuinted day,
constitute, for cvery Special Economic Zone established before commencement of the
proposed legislation oc which may he established after such commencement by the Central
Government, an Authority to discharge the functions. assigacd to il undet proposed
legislation. The head office of every Authority shail be at such place as the Central Government
emay specify. The Authority may, with the previous approval of the Central Government,
establish bravich offices at other places in india. This clause, inter atia, also contains
provisions for the composition of the Authority, temis of office of the meinbers, manner of

filling of vacancies , allowances or fees of members and such rules of Procedure in regard to
the transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum at such micetings) of the
५ Authority, ete,

Clause 32.— This clause relates to officers of. ‘Authority and other staff.

This clause provides that every Devalopment Commissioner of the Speciat Economic
Zone for which he is appointed us such shall be the chief executive of the Authority concerned
and exercise Such powers and perform such functions as may be spevitied by rules made by
the Central Government. This clause also contains provisions relating to methad of
appointment, the conditions of service and the scales of pay and allowances of such other
officers and employees of the Authority.

Clause 33.— This clause retates to special provision for transfer of employees to
Authority,

This clause coniains provisions for, tansfer by the Central Government of certain
officers or employees ta each Acthority, scale of pay of such officers and employees and
other terms and conditions of service of such employees and officers,

Clanse 34— This clause relates to functions of Authority.

‘This clause iemposesa duty upon the Authority (constituted for every Special Economic
2000) to undertake such nieasuces as it thinks tit for the development, operation and
management of the Special Economic. Zone for which it is constituted. Such measures are
(०) the development of infrastructure in the Special Economic Zone; (8) promoting exports
from the Special Economie Zone; (९) reviewing the functioning and performance of the
Special Economic Zone; (4) levy user or service chatges or fees or rent for the use of
properties belonging to the Authority; (०) performing such other functions as may be
Prescribed,

Clouse 35. --- This clause relates to grants and loans by the Central Government.

This clause provides that the Ceniral Government may, after due appropriation made
by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to every Autharity by way of grants and foans such
Sums of money as that Government may think fit for beiitg utilised for the purpuses of the
proposed legislation.

Clause 36.—Phis clause relates to constitution of Fund and its application.

This clause pravides for establishment of Fund. There shall be credited to the Fund
(a) ali sums of money, which the Central Government Tuay, aftér due appropriation made by
Parliargent by law in this behaif, provide to the Authority; (6) all grants or loans that muy be
made to the Authority ander the proposed tegislation; (८) all sums received on uccount of
user or service charges or fees or rent for the use of properties belonging to the Authority;
(4) all sums received by the Authority from such other sources as may be decided upon by
the Centrat Government. हु



44

Rt further provides that the Fund shall be applied for meeting (a) the salaries, allowances
and other remuneration of the members, officers and other employees of the Authority; (2)
the exptnses of the Authority in the discharge of its functions under clause 34; (०) repayment
of any loan; (@} the expenses un objects and for purposes authorised by the proposed
legiskstion and (e) meeting any other administrative expenses of the Authority,

Clause 37,— This clause relates to accounts and audit.

This clause provides that every Authority of the Special Bcanemic Zone set up by the
Central Government shall maintain Proper accounts and other relevant records and Prepare
an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be specified by-nules made by the
Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. Tho
accounts of every Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India at such intervals a8 may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection
with such acdit shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroiler and Auditor-General of
india. The Comptroller atid Auditor-General of India or any person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority shall have the same tights and

privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor. -

General generally has in connection with the audit of the Government accounis and, in
particular, shall have the right to demand the Production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and Papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Authority
The accounts of every Authority as certified by the Comptroiler and Auditor-General of India
or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon
shalt be forwarded annually to the Central Government and the Central Government shall
cause the same.to be Isid before each House of Parliament.

Clause 33,—This clause confers Power upon the Cenivat Goverment to give directions,

This clause provides that every Authority of the. Special Beonnmic Zone set up by the
Central Government shail be hound to carry out such directions as may be issued to it from
time to. time by the Central Government for the efficient administration of the Proposed
legislation. . :

Clause 39.—This clause relates to retums and reports.

This clause provides that every Authority of the Special Economic Zone set up by the
Central Government stall furnish 10 the Central Government such returns and statements
ad such particulars in regard to the Promotion and development of exports and the operation
and maintenaitce of the Special Economic Zone and Units as that Goverment Thay, from time
to time, require, 1६ farther provides that every Authority shali, as soon as possible, after the
end of each financial year, submit to the Central Government a report in such form and before
such date, as may 08 specitied by rules made by the Central Government, giving a true and
full account of its activities, policy and programmes during the previous financial yeac. A
copy of every such report received shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is received, before
each House of Parliament.

Clause 40.— This clause relates. to Power to supersede Authority.

This clause provides that ifat any time the Centra! Government is. of the Opinion that
an Authority is unable ta perform, dr has persistently made default in the performance of,
the duty imposed on it by or under the Proposed Ingislation or has exceeded or abused its
Powers, or has wilfully or without sufficient cause, failed to compiy with any direction issued
by the Central Government under clause 38, the Central Government may, by notification
supersede that Authority for such puriod not exceeding six months, as ciay be specified in
the notification. Hdwever before issuing 8४ notification under this sub-clause, the Central
Government stall give reasonable time ta that Authority to show cause why jt should not be
superseded and shall consider the explanation, if any, of the Authority. It further provides
that upon the pubjication ef the notification Soperseding the Authority, (a) all the Members
of the Authority shalt, notwithstanding that their term of office hes not expired as from the
date of supersession, vacate their offices as such Members; (6) ail the powers, functions and



45

४: duties which may, by or under the provisions of the proposed legistation, be exercised or-
7. discharged by ar on bebalf of the Authority shall, during the period af supersessian, be
exercised and performed by such person or persons as the Central Government may direct,
(०) all property vested in the Authority shail, during the period of supersession, vest in the
Central Government, It also provides that on the expiration of the period of supersession
specified tn the notification [58006 ander sub-clause (7), the Central Government Tray extend
the period of supersession for such further period not exceeding six months or reconstitute
the Authority in the manner provided in clause 31 of the Bill,

Clause 41.—- This clause provides that Members, officers and other employees of
every Authority to be public servants, -

It provides that alt Members, officers and other employees of every Authority, shall,
22... when acting ar purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of the proposed
00, legislation or any rule made thereunder, be deemed to be public servants within the meaning
ofsection 21 of the Indian Penal Code, * |

Clause 42,— This clause relates to reference of dispute.

This clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any other jaw for the 1
time being in farce, (०) any dispute of civil nature arises among twa or more entrepreneurs 1
or hwo or more Developers or between the entrepreneur and Developer in the Speciat Economic
Zone; and (6) the court or the courts to try suits in respect of such dispute had not been
designated under sub-clause (/) of clause 23, such dispute shall be referred to arbitration,
However no dispute shall be teferred to the arbitration on or after the date of the designation
of court or courts under sub-clause (/) of clause 23. It further provides that where a dispute
has been referred to arbitration, the same shall be settled or decided by the arbitrator to be
appointed by the Central Government, It also provides that, the provisions of the Achitration
and Cuncitiation Act, £996 shall apply to all arbitration under the proposed legislation as if
the proceeding for arbitration were referred in settlement or decision under the provisions of
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.

Clause 43.— This clause relates to limitation.

. ‘This clause provides that the periad of limitation in the case of any dispute which is
required to be referred (० arbitration shail be regulated by the provisions of the Limitation
Act, 1963, as if the dispute was a suit and the arbitrator is civil court. It further provides that
the arbitrator may admit; a dispute after the expiry of the period of limitation, if the applicant
satisfies the arbitrator that he had sufficient cause for not referring the dispute within such
period, हु

Clause 44,— This clause relates to applicability of provision of the proposed legislation
to the existing Special Economic Zones,

This clause provides that all the provisions of the Proposed tegislation (except
provisions contained in clauses 3 and 4) shall, as far as may be apply, to every existing
Special Economic Zones,

Clause 45.—This clause relates to person to whom a communication may be sent
under the proposed legislation.

This clause provides that a communication by any competent authority or person
under the proposed fegislation may be sent to the Person who has the ultimate control over
the affairs of the Special Economic Zone or Unit or where the said affairs are é6ntrusted to a
manager, director, chairperson, or managing director, or to any other officer, by whatever
name called, such coramunication may be sent fo such manager, director, chairperson, or
Managing director or any othe; officer,

Clause 46.--This clause relates to identity card.

This clause provides that every person whether employed or residing or required to
be present in a Special Economic Zone shall be provided an identity card by every



~ before each House of Parliament. The notification shall not be issued or, as the case may be,

46

Develupment Commissioner in such form and containing such particulars as may be specified
by rules made by the Central Government.

Clause 47.—This clause relates to authorities responsible for administration:

This clause provides that any authority which, has been conferred upon any power or,
is, required to discharge any function under any Central or State Act, may, subject to the
provisions of the proposed legislation, exercise such powers or discharge such fuactions in
any Special Economic Zone under that Act.

Clause 48.—This clause relates to protection of action taken in‘good faith.

It provides that no suit, prosecution or other ‘egal proceeding shall lie against the
Central Government or any Chairperson, Member, officer or ather employce of the Board of
Approval, Approval Committee, the Authority or Development Commissioner for anything
done or intended to be done in good faith under the proposed legislation.

Clause 49.—This clause relates to power to modify provisions of the proposed
legislation or other enactments in relation to Special Economic Zones,

This clause provides that the Central Government may, by notification in the (118
Gazette, direct that any of the provision of thé proposed legislation of any other Central Act,
any cules or regulations made thereunder or atyy notification or order issued or direction
given thereunder (other than the provisions relating to making of the rules or regulations)
Specified in the notification (०) shall not apply ta a Special Economic Zane ar a class of
Special Economic Zanes or al] Special Economic Zones; or (0) shall apply to a Speciat
Economic Zone or 8 class of Special Ecanomic Zones or all Special Economic Zanes anly
with such exceptions, modification and adaptation, as may be specified in the nntification. A
copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub-clause (7), shal] be [aid in draft

shail be issucd only in such modified form as may be agreed upon by bath the Houses.
Clause 58.—This clause retates to the pawer of State Government ta grant exemptions. 14
2८

This clause confers power ७७00 the State Government to notify policics for Developurs
and Units and to take suitable steps for enactment of any taw {a} granting exemption from the:
State taxes, levies and duties to the Developer or the entrepreneur; (0) directing that any of:
the provisions of any State Act relating to trade anions, industrial and labour disputes;
welfare of labour including conditions of work, provident funds, employers liability, workmen
compensation, invalidity,and old age pensions and malernity benefits or any other activity:
relating to the Special Economic Zones shall nat upply or shal] apply, with such exceptions,
modifications and adoptions as may be notified 10 the notifications, to a Special Economy
Zone or aclass of Special Economic Zones or all Special Reonomic Zones, and (८) delegath
the powers conferred upon any person or authority under any State Act to the Developme!
Commissioner in relation to the Developer of the entrepreneur. .

Clause 5?.—This clause relates to the proposcd legistation to have overriding eff

This clause provides that the provisions of the proposed Icgislution shail have efft
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than the propa
fegislation. :

Clause 52.— This clause relates to certain provisions not to apply.

This clause, infer afia, provides that the Chapter X-A of the Customs Act, 1962!
the Special Economic Zones Rutes, 2003 and the Special Economic Zones (0०४

Procedure) Regulations, 2003 made thereunder shall nat apply to the Special Econo) ४८६६ of
Zones, 1 further provides that all offences committed, under any provisions of the 07४2 5106 Drona
Act, 1962 and the Special Economic Zones Rules, 2003 and the Special Economic Pany, insiy
(Customs Procedure} Regulations, 2003 made thereunder, bvtore the coming into force: estion (2),

SS defitie

proposed legislation shall continue to be governed by the said Acts or miles.
2018, moj
5,



|

AT

Clause 53.-—Special Feonomic Zones to

be ports, airports, inland container depots,
land stations, in certain cases.

This clause provides that a Special Econ
s deemed ta bea territory outside the Customs ce:
the authorised operations,

Omnic¢ Zone, onand Irom the appointed day, be
Tritory of India for the purpose ofundertaking

» 1 further provides that a Special Economic Zone’ shall, with effect ftom Such date as
the Central Gavernment may notify, be deemed tw be a Port, airport, infand container depat,
jand station and land customs stations under section 7 of the Customs Act, 1962, Tie

Central Government has been conferred Power to notify different dates under this clause for
different Special Economic Zones,

Clause 54,— This clause relates to amendment to the First Schedule.

This clause provides that the Central Government may, having regard to the objects of
the proposed legislation and if it considers necessary or expedient so to do, by notification
add to, or as the case may be, amit from the First Schedute any entry relating to any Central
Act, A copy of every notification Proposed to be issued shall be laid in draft befare each H
House of Parliament, The notification shel] nat be issued or, as the case may be, shall be
5. Assued only in such modified form as 019) be agreed upon by bath the Houses of Parliament

Clause 55.— This clause relates to power to make rules,

‘This clause confers power upon the Central Government to muke rules in respect of ।
matters specified in the said clause. The rules made by the Centcal Government shall be
pablisbed in the Official Gazette and be laid before cach House of Parliament.

Clause 56. -- This clause relates ta Power to remove difficulties,

This clause empawers the Central Goverment to remove difficulties in giving effect to
the provisions of the proposed legislation, by an order published in.the Official Guzette, to
make such provisinas which are not inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed }
legislation as may be necessary or expedient for removing the diffictities, No such order

shall be made under this clause after the expiration af twa years from the date of commencement
of the proposed legisiation,

Clause 57 —This clause relates to Smendnient of certain enactments.

‘This clause provides that the enactments Specified in the Thitd Schedule shatl be +
amended in the manner specified therein, These enactments proposed to be amended are the |
Insurance ‘Act, 1938, the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and the Indian Stamp Act, 1899,
These amendments shall take ctfect with effect fram such date as the Central Government
May, by notification appoint. However different dates may be Appointed on which the
2 * amendments specified in the Third Schedite shal] apply.

It is proposed to insert the thire Provision in sub-section (4) of section 20 of the i
Insurance Act, 1938 so as to provide that an insurer betng an Indian Insurance Company,
insurance Co-operative society or a body corporate referred to in ct

13058 (¢) of this sub.
on the business of insurance may carty on any business oF insurance in “

(2a) of section 2 of the Special Beonomie
ew section 2CA in the aforesaid Act so as
Government to direct that any of the provisions ofthe said

indian Insurance Company, insurance co-
Operative society or a body corporate referred.to in clause (c) of this sub-section, carrying on

the business of insurance, in any Special Ecunomic Zone as defined in clause (za) of clause
4 2 of the proposed Legislation; or (6) shalt apply to any insurer being an Indian Tnsurance
Company, insurance co-pperative society ora body cotporate referred to in clause (c) af said
sub-section (/) of section 2C, carrying on the business of insurance, in any Spevial Economic
Zone as defined in clause (za) of clause 2 of the Propased legislation only with such
¢xceptiuns, modifications and adaptations as may be specified in the aotification



48

It is further proposed to amend section 53 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 so as
to extend the scope of exemption to the banking company oF institution 07 (० any class of
banking companies or any of their branches functioning or lucated in any Special Ecunomic
Zone established under the proposed Legislation.

It is also proposed to insert paragraph (3) in the proviso of section 3 of the Indian
Stamp Act, 1899 so as to include within the scope of said provision any instrument executed
by, ar on behalf of, or in favour of the Developer, ot Units or in connection with the carrying
out of purposes of the Special Economic Zone as refered to in clause (za) of clause 2 of the
proposed Legistat ion.

Clause. 58, — This clause relates to savings.

३ made of purporting to have been made ar all
notifications issued ar purporting to have been issued under any Central Acts relating to
Special Economic Zone shall, in'so far as they relate to matters for which provision is made
in the proposed legislation and are not inconsistent therewith, be deemed to have been made
or issued under the proposed legislation as if the proposed fegislation had been in force on
the date on which such rules were made or notifications were issued and shail continue to be
jn force unless and until they are superseded by any rules made or notifications issued under

the proposed tegislation.

This clause provides that वो] rule:



FINANCIAL. MEMORANDUM

Clause 11. of the Bitl provides for appointment af Development Commissioner and
other officers and employees (० assist the Development Commissioner in the performance of
his functions. The Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce) presently
niects such expenditure. Further, Clause 35 of the Bill provides for grants and loans by the
Central Government to the authority in respect of the Special Economic Zones set up by the
Centra] Government far being utilised for carrying out its functions, Since at present Special
Econamic Zones are functioning as subordinate offices of the Ministry of Commerce and
Industry (Department of Commerce) and their administrative expenditure is being met from
the budget of Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce}, there is no
likelihood of additional expenditure on account of grants and loans by the Central Governnient
to the Authority. Hence, at this stage, no additional recurring or non-recurring expenditure
is involved in the administration of the proposed fegislation.

49


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 49 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to modify provisions of the
proposed legislation or other enactments in relation to Special Economic Zones, Sub-clause
(2) of this clause provides that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, direct that any of the pravision of the proposed iegistation {other than clauses 54 to
56) or any other Centrat Act, any rules or regulutions made thercunder or any notification or

order issued or direction given thereunder (otber than the provisions relating to making of

the rules or regulations) specified in the notification (०) shall not apply toa Special Economic
Zone of aclass of Special Economic Zones or all Special Economic Zones; or (6) shail apply
toa Special Economic Zone or a class of Speciat Economic Zones or all Special Eeonomic
Zones only with such exceptions, modification and adaptation, as may be specified in the
notification,

. 2. Clause $4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make amendment to the
First Schedule to the 9111, Sub-clause (7) of this clause provides that the Central Government
may, having regard to the objects of the proposed iegislation, and if it considers necessary
or expedient so 10 do, by notification add to, of as the casé may be, omit from the First
Schedule any entry relating to any Contral Act specified therein,

3. Acopy of every notification proposed to be issued under clauses 49 and $4, shall be
laid in draft before cach House of | Parliament, while it is in session, for atotal period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session of in [9० of more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately foitowing the sessivn or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses
agree in making any moditication in the notification, the notification shall not be issued Or, as
the case may he, shatl be, issued only in such modified form as may be agreed upon by both
the Houses,

4, Clause 55 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules, by adtification,
to carry out the provisions of the proposed, Jegislation. The matters in respect of which such
rules may be made are specified therein, These matters relate, inter afia, to provide for (da)
the infrastructure facilities decessary for the devclapment of the Special Economic Zone
under clause (7) and services in the Special Economic Zone under clause (z) of section 2; (A)
the period within which the person concerned shall obtain the concutrence of the State
Government under sub-section (7) of acetion 3; (०) the form and the manner in which proposal
may be ovade and the particulars to be contained thercin under sub-section (5) of section 3;
(०) the period within which the State Government may forward the proposal together with its
recommendation under sub-section (6) of section 3; {e) the requirements subject to which
the Board may approve, modify or Feject-the proposal under sub-section (8) of section A
the period within which a letter of approval ar rejection shall be communicated to the State
Government or Developer or entrepreneur under sub-section {/8) of section 3; (2) the other
requirements for nolifying the specifically identified area in a State as a Special Economic
Zone under, sub-section (4) of section 4; (#) the terms, conditions.and limitations subject to
which the goods or services exported out of, or imported into, or procured from the Domestic
‘Tariff Area to, a Spcciat Economic Zone, be exempt from payment of taxes, duties or cess
under section 7; (7) the procedure for transfer of letter of. approval ia case of suspension of
letter of approval of a Developer under clause (a) of sub-section (9) of section 10; (/) the form
aud the manner in which a Proposal may be submitted and the particulars to be contained
therein under sub-section (/) of section 1 5;(4) time within which a person aggrieved by the
order of (he Approval Committee may prefer an appeal under sub-section (4) of section ! 5:10)
the form in which the appeal shall be made and thc fees for making appeal under sub-section
(6) of section 15, (n) the procedure tor.disposing of an appeal under sub-section (7) of
section 15; (#) the requircments subject to which the proposal may be approved, modified
or rejected under clause (a) of sub-section (8) of section 15; (2) the tens and conditions,
obligations and entitlements for the Unit subjecl to which it shall undertake authorised
operations under ctause (4) af sub-section (8) of section 15; (2) time within which a person

50



51

aggrieved by the order of the Approval Committee may prefer an appcul under sub-section
(4) of section 16; (q} the farm in which the appeal shall be made and the fees for making
appeal under sub-section (6) of section 16; (7} the procedure for disposing of un appeal
under sub-section (7) of section 16; (5) the form and the manner in which an application
may be made for setting up of un Offshoré Banking Unit in a Special Economic Zone under
sub-section (7) of scction 17; #) the requirements for setting up und operation of the
International Financial Services Centre ina Special Economic Zone under sub-section (7) of
section 18; (४) the terms and cunditions subject to which a Unit in the Intern: alional Financial
Services Centre may be set up and operated in Special Economic Zone under sub-section-(2)
of section 18, (v) the form of single application for obtaining any licence, permission or
registration oF approval under clause (a) of section 19; (४) the form of single return or
* Gnformation lo be furnished by un entrepreneur or Developer under clause (०) of section 19;
(x) the manner in which and the terms and conditions subject to which the exemptions
concessions and drawback or other benefits shall be granted to every Developer and
entrepreneur under sub-section (2) of section 26; (9) the period during which any goods
brought into, or services provided in, any Special Economic Zone shail rernain of continue
to be provided in such Unit or Special Economic Zone under section 28; (2) the conditions
subject to which transfer of ownership of any goads brought into, or produced or

allowed under section 29;- (za) the conditions subject to which the Units shall be entitled
to sell the gouds manufactured in a Special Economic Zane to the Domestic Tariff Area
under section 30; (26) the terms of office of the Members, other than ex officio Members,
of every Authority and the manner of filling of vacancies under sub-section (6) of section
31; (८) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which and the purposes for
-which any person may be associated under sub-section (7) of section 31; (2d) the dines and
the places of meetings and the procedure to be followed in the transaction of business
meuting under sub-section (40) of section 31; (ze) the powers and the functions of every
Development Commissioner under sub-section (2) of section 32; (zf) the method of
appointment of officers and जाल employees of every Authority, conditions of their service
and the scale of pay and allowances under sub-section (3) of section 32, (zg) the functions
to be performed by the Authority under clause (९) of sub-section (2) of section 34; (zh) the
form in which the accounts and other relevant records of every Authority shall be maintained
and annuat statement of accounts shall be prepared under sub-section (7) of section 37; (zi)
the farm and the manner in which and the time at which every Authority shall furnish returns
and statements and other particulars (0 the Central Government under sub-section (/) of
section 39; (z/) the form in which and the date before which every Authority shall furnish
to the Central Government the report of its activities, policy and programmes under sub-
scetion (2) of section 39; (ck) the form in which and the particulars to be contained in the
identity cards under section 46; and (z/) any other matter which is to be, or may be,
prescribed.

5, The rules made by the Central Government shall be laid, us soon as may be after
they are made, before each House of Parliament.

6, ‘The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made are generally
matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in
the Bill itself. ‘The delegation af legislative power involved is of a normal character.

manufactured in, a Special Economic Zone, or removal thereof from the Zone, shall be



Deduction in
respeet of.
certain
incomes of
Offshore
Banking
Units.

ANNEXURE,
LScTRACTS PROM THE INCOM TAX ACT, 1961

(43 of 1961)

‘ a « a ©

* a ¥ a «

(230) any income by way of dividends other than dividends referred to in section 11 5-

©, interest or [ong-term capital gains of an infrastructure capital filnd'or an infrastructure
eapital company or a co-operative bank from investments made on or after the 1st day af
June, 1998 by way of shares or fong-term finance in any enterprise or undertaking wholly
engaged in the business referred to in sub-section (7) of séction 80-10 or a housing project
referted to in sub-section (10) of section 80-18 or a hotel project or a hospital project and
which has.been approved by the Centra] Government on an application made by it in
accordance with the rules made io this behalf and which satistics the prescribed conditions,

* ’ « * ’

(34) any income by way of dividends referred to in section 115g;
* ) * * *
8B8LA.(/) Where the gross total income of an assessee,—

(2) being a scheduled bank (not being a bank incorporated by or under the laws

-of a country outside India);

(éi} owning an Offshore Banking Unit in a Special Economic Zone, inchides any
income referred to in sub-section (2), there shall be allowed, in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of this section, a deduction from such income, of an amount
equal to—

(a) one hundred per cent of such income for three consecutive assessment
years beginning with the assessment year relevant to the previous year in which
the pecmission, under clause (a) of sub-section (7) of section 23 of the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949 was obtained, and thereafter;

(७) fifty per cent of such income for bvo cunsecutive asessment years.

(2) The income referred to in sub-section (/) shall be the intome—

(a) from an Offshore BankingUnit in a Special Economic Zone,

(0) from the business, referred to in sub-section (1) of section 6 of the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949 with an undertaking located in a special economic zone 07 any
other undertaking which develops, develops and operates or operates and maintains
a Special Economie Zone;

{ce} received in ‘convertible foreign exchange, in accordance with the regulations

* made under the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999,

(3) No deduction under this section shall be allowed unless the asscssee furnishes

along with the return-of income,—

(7) in the prescribed form, the report. of an accountant as defined in the
Explanation below sub-section (2) of section 288, certifying that the deduction has
been correctly claimed in accordance with the provisions of this section; and

_ (i) 8 copy of the permission obtained under clause {a} of sub-section () of
section:23 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949,

Explanation —Fot the purposes of this section, —

*- (g)Sconyertible foreign exchange” shall have the same meaning assigned to it in
clause (०) of the Explanation below sub-section (4C) of section 80HHC;

2

10 of प्र

10 of 19

42 af 1S

10 of ]



33

(6) “Offshore Banking Unit” Means a branch of a bank in India focated in the
Special Economic Zone and has obtained the permission under clause (०) of sub-
section (7) of section 23 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949,

(०) “scheduled bank” shall have the same meaning assigned to it in clause (९) of
section 2 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934;

(४) “special economic zone” shall have the sarne meaning assigned to it in clause
{viii} of the Explanation 2 to section 10A.

+ * * . *



EXTRACT FROM THE Insuance Ac, 1938

(4.08 1938)

« * % * ry
PARTIE
PRovisivNy APPLICABLE TO INSURERS

Prohibition 2C. (1) Save as hereinafter provided, to person shall, after the cammencement of the
of . Jnsurance (Amendment) Act, 1950, begin to carry on any class of insurance business in
मिशन India and no insurer carrying on any class of insurance business in India shalt after the
business by expiry of one year from such commencement, continue to carry on any such business unless
certain he is—
persons,

(a) a public company, or

(हि) a society registered under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912, or under
any other taw for the time being in force in any State relating to co-operative societies,

or

(4) 8 body corporate incorporated under the law of any country outside India
not being of the nature of a private company:

Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazctte,
exempt from the operation of this section to such extent for such period and subject to such
conditions as it may specify, arly person or insurer for the purpose of carrying on the
business of granting superannuation allowances und annuities of the nature specified in
sub-clause fe} of clause (77) of section 2 or for the purpose of carrying on any general
insurance business:

पु 1 हि ही . A

Provided further that in the ease of an insurer carrying on any general ‘insurance

business 00 such notification shgl be issued having effect for more than three years at any
one time:

Provided also that no insurer other than an indian insurance company shall begin to
carry on any class of insurance business in India under this Act on or after the commencement
of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999.

* के . * *

EXTRACT FROM THE BANKING RuGuiation Act, 1949

{10 oF 1949)
’ * * रा *
Power ta 53, The Central Gavernment may, ou the recommendation of the Reserve Bank, declare,
exempt in by notification in the Official Gazette, that any or all of the provisions of this Act shal! not

certain-en5e5, " 99170 any banking company or institution or to any class of banking companies either
generally or tor such period as may be specified.
के * * रू *

EXTRACT FROM tHE INDIAN Stamp Act, 1899.

“(2.08 1899}
* ’ * हि . *
* + * डर *

Re



CHAPTER TI
STAmP-DUTIES
A,—Of the liability of instruments to duty

3. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the exemptions contained in Schedule I,

the following instruments shail be chargeable with duty of the amount indicated in that
Schedule as the proper duty therefor, respectively, that is (0 say—

fa} every instrument mentioned in that Schedule which, not having been

previously executed by any person, is executed in India on or after the firstday of July,
1899;

(5) every bill of exchange payable atherwise than on demand or promissory
note drawn or made out of India on or after that day and accepted or paid, or presented

for acceptance or payment, or endorsed, transferred ar otherwise hegotiated, in India;
and

(6) every instrument (other than a bill of exchange, or promissory note) mentioned
in that Schedule, which, not having been previously executed by any person, is executed

out of India on or after. that day, relates to any property situate, or to any matter dr
thing done or to be done, in India and [४ received in India:

Provided that no duty shalt be chargeable in respect of —

(7) any jrstrument executed by, or on behalf of, or in favour of, the
Government in cases where, but for this exemption, the Government would be
liable to pay the duty chargeable in respect of such instrument;

(2) any instrument for the sale, transfer or other disposition, cither
absolutely or by way of mortyage or otherwise, of any ship or vessel, or any
part, lnterest, share or property of or in any ship or vessel registered under the
Merchant Shipping Act, 1894, or under Act £9 of 1838, or the Indian Registration
of Ships Act, 1841, as amended by subsequent Acts,

के * * * *

Instruments
chargeuble
with duty.



LOK SABRA

A
BILL

to provide for the establishment, development and management of the Special Economic
Zones for the promotion of exports and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto,

(Shri Kamat Nath, Minister of Conmmerce and Industry)

MGIPMRND—838L S(S3}6-05-2005.