5

THE MOST BACKWARD CLASSES
TION IN SERVICES AND EDUCATII

22 nov

‘As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 69 of 2002

(PROPORTIONAL, REPRESENTA-

ONAL INSTITUTIONS) BILL, 2002

By

Suri BRAHMANANI

9 Manpal, M.P.

A
BILL

to provide for resei

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fi
follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called

tion in Services and Fducational Institutions) Act,

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(@ “appropriate Governmient” m
ment, as the case may be;

rvation for most backward classes
institutions under the State.

the Most Backward Classes (Proportional Repre

in services and educational

pifty-third Year of the Republic of India as

senta-

2002.

te as the Central Government may, by notifica-

(3) It shall come into force on such dat
tion in the Official Gazette, appoint,
2. in this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

neans the Central Government ora State Govern-

Short title,
extent and
commence~
ment.

Definitions,


Publication of
list of names
of most
backward
classes.

Reservation
in services for
the most
backward
classes.

Reservation
in educational
institutions
for most
backward
classes.

Act to have
over-riding
effect.

Rower to
make rules.

Bi

(b) “backward classes” has the same meaning as is assigned to it under clause
(a) of section 2 of the National Commission for Backward Classes Act, 1993;

(c) “educational institutions” includes professional colleges, owned by the
appropriate Government or receiving aid from the appropriate Government; and

(६) “most backward classes” means classes or castes from amongst backward
classes which are deemed to be most backward classes by the appropriate Government
by notification under section 3.

3. The appropriate Government shall within six months from the coming into
force of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, publish a list containing the
names of most backward classes from amongst the backward classes in that State or
Union territory, as the case may be.

4. (a) There shall be reservation of appointments for posts for most backward classes
in the services under the appropriate Government.

(8) Tue number of appointments or posts reserved under sub-section (7) for the most
backward classes shall, in the case of appointments or posts in services under the Central
Government, be in the proportion of the ratio their respective population bears to the total
population of the country and, in the case of appointments or posts in services under the
State Government, in the proportion of the ratio their respective population bears to the
total population of that State:

Provided that the number of appointments or posts reserved for the most backward
classes shall be readjusted in accordance with the ratio of the proportion of their respective
population bears to the total population of the Country or of a State, as the case may be, as
ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published:

Provided further that the if no suitable candidates belonging to the most backward
classes are available to fill the appointments or posts reserved for them, such appointments
or posts shall be carried forward to subsequent years and shall be filled up by candidates
belonging to the most backward classes only.

Explanation.—In this section, the expression “reservation in appointments or posts
in services” means reservation in initial recruitment and includes reservation in promotions
at all levels in all services.

5. (1) There shall be reservation of seats for the most backward classes in all educa-
tional institutions under the appropriate Government.

(2) The number of seats reserved in any educational institutions in a Union territory
orina State for the most backward classes, as the case may be, shall bear the same proportion
to the total number of seats in that educational institution as the respective population of
the most backward classes bears to the total population of that Union territory or of that
State, as the case may be.

6. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or anything contained in
any judgment of any court of law contrary to it including judgment regarding ceiling on
reservation,

7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

27 1993.

20

25

30

35.

40


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Tt is an accepted fact that the quantum of reservation is fixed on the basis of the
population of the class for which reservation has been made. The backward classes form.
54 percent of the population of the country. In view of the judgment of the Hen’ble

_ Supreme Court, that the total reservation should not exceed 50 percent. the reservation for
packward classes has been fixed at 27 percent. The most backward classes constitute
34 percent. of the population and hence the most backward classes are entitled to 17
percent. reservation out of the reservation quota fixed for the backward classes.

Reservation in matters of appointments or posts ig not an insidious and invidious
discrimination butis a benign, positive acceptable and necessary discrimination to tilt the
balance in favour of hitherto historically deprived, oppressed and repressed classes of
Indian society.

When there was no reservation in appointments or posts, all appuintments or posts
used to he usurped by the upper castes. This has been out historical experience.

‘Again when reservation in appointments or posts was made for the backward classes,
the dominant classes or castes among the backward classes are grabbing and bagging all
such appointments or posts and the most backward classes are left high and dry.

Hence it has become essential that special provisions be made for the reservation of
appointments or posts exclusively for most backward classes.

Hence this Bill.

New Dau; मु BRAHMANAND MANDAL
July 14, 2002


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for preparation and publication of list of most
backward classes by the appropriate Government. As far as expenditure on this relating to
Union tertitories is concerned, it will be met out of consolidated fund of India. The
respective State Governments will mect expenditure relating to their States. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would inyolve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. Itis
estimated that an expenditure to the tune of rupees twenty-five crore is likely to be.
involved.

ity


\TED LEGISLATION

MEMORANDUM REGARDING

Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules to be made will be administrative detail only, the

delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA.

A
BILL

in services and educational institu-

to provide for reservation for most backward clas:
tions under the State.

(Shri Brahmanand Mandal, M.P.)

MGIPMRND-—3621LS—?-11-2002.