As INTRODUCED In Lok SABHA

03 DFC mre

Bill No. 38 of 2004

THE AGRICULTURAL WORKERS (EMPLOYMENT, CONDITIONS OF
SERVICE AND WELFARE) BILL, 2004
By
Suri R. Sampasiva Rao, M.P.
A
BILL
(0 protect the interests of agricultural workers and to provide for their welfare.
Be itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Agricultural Workers (Employment, Conditions of
Service and Welfare) Act, 2004.

(2) It extends to the whole of India,
(3) It shall come into force at once.

2. The Central Government shalll establish an Agricultural Workers Welfare Board
(hereinafter referred to as 'Board’) to protect the interests of agricultural workers in the
country,

3. (7) The Board shall consist of a Chairman and twenty other members.

(2) The Chairman of the Board shall be elected by the members of the Board.

(3) The members of the Board shall be elected by agricultural workers in such
manner as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.

Short title,
extent and
‘commencement

Establishment
of Agricultural
Workers

Welfare Board.

Chairman and
other
members of
Board,


डे

(4) The Chairman and other members of the Board shall hold office for a period
of five years.
(5) The headquarters of the Board shall be at New Delhi.
Functions of 4, The Board shall perform the following functions:—
Rone, (i) to provide employment to agricultural workers during off season period or
natural calamities with such wages as may be prescribed;
(ii) to provide assistance to agricultural workers if employment is not provided
to them.
(iii) to establish a Board at State level to monitor the implementation of rules
and regulations made by the Board for welfare of agricultural workers.

Power tomake —_§. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
rules, carrying out the purposes of the Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS,

There are about 320 million workers in the country, out of whom 20 million are agricultural
ers. Floods and droughts play havoc in the lives of agricultural workers. The use of
ides and chemical fertilizers also cause serious health hazards to the agricultural workers.
ir jobs are at the mercy of the land owners and there is no security of employment. It is,

fore, necessary that the agricultural workers are fully protected and the benefits available
industrial workers in the country are also provided to agricultural labourers.

Hence this Bill.

‘New Dewi; R.SAMBASIVA RAO.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for establishment of Agricultural Workers Welfare Board to
protect the interests of agricultural workers in the country. Clause 4 of the Bill provides for
employment and assistance to agricultural workers during off season period. The Bill, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve.
an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees three hundred crore from the Consolidated
Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out the
Purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
to protect the interests of agricultural workers and tc provide for their welfare.

(Shri R. Sambasiva Rao, M.P.)

MGIPMRNO—1215LS—13.07.2004.