LCI( 
SABHA 
CGRRIGE 
"[)A 
to 
THE 
PREVENTIl.N 
L.F 
BLAr:l(1~ARKETn'(; 
NlD 
"APlTENP,"rE 
CF 
SUPPLIES 
l.F 
ESSENTIAL 
C\.."'~ 
LDITIES 
PILL 
1980 
(TO 
!?~.tl\_s_i~1F~9!-1~2_ 
in_ 
1-_<?!2.a.t'ha) 
1. 
Page 
4, 
in 
the 
marginal 
heading 
to 
clause 
8,-
for 
"t.:::ders" 
Ef§9 
"0 
rde 
r" 
2. 
Page 
5, 
in 
the 
marcinal 
heading 
to 
clause 
fur 
"Prvcedure 
z" 
NE~I 
DELHI; 
January 
22 
1980 
f.""agna-
2~-1~1\Saka} 
read 
"Prl.cedure" 
11,-

Bill No. • of 1180 
THE PREVENTION OF BLACKMARKETING AND MAINTENANCE 
OF SUPPLIES OF ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES BILL, 1980 
A 
BILL 
to provide for detention in certa.in cases for the purpose of prevention 
of blackmarketing and maintenance of suppliea Of commodities es-
sential to the community and for matters con~d therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
:1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Blackmarketing Short 
and Maintenance of Supplies Of Essential Commodities Act, 1980. title, extent 
$ (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammll ~ci =. 
Xashmir. minOt-
(I> It ahall be deemed to have come into toroe em the Dtb dq of 
October, 1878. 
2. In thia Ad, linless the:! c~ntext oth~rwise requites,-
to (a) "appropriate Government" means, as respects a dc!talUort 
order made by the Central Government or by an officer of the Cen-
tral Government or a person detained under such order, the Central 
Government, and as respects a detention order made by a Stat.! 
I 
men', 
beflni; 
tion.; 

Power to 
.... 
enter. 
..... "., 
.naJD 
••• aDI 
Government or by an officer of a State Government or as respecta 
a person detained under such order, the State Government; 
(b) "detention order" means an order made under section 3; 
(c) "State Government", in relation to a Union territory, means 
the administrator thereof. S 
3. (1) The Central Government or a State Government or any officer 
of the Central Government, not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to 
that Government specially empowered for the purposes of this section 
by that Government, or any officer of a State Government, not below the 
rank of a Secretary to that Government specially empowered for the 10 
purposes of this section by that Government, may, if satisfied, with 
respect to any person that with a view to preventing him from acting 
in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies of commodi-
ties essential to the community it is necessary liO to do, make an order 
directing that such person be detained. IS 
Explanation..-Fol' the purposes of this sub-section, the expresltion 
"acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of liupplieli of 
commodities essential to the comm'Unity". mean&-
(a) committing or instigating any person to commit any offence 
punishable under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, or under 20 lOot 1956. 
any other law for the time being in force relating to the control of 
the production, supply or distribution of, or trade and commerce in, 
any commodity essential to the community; or 
(b) dealing in any commodity-
(i) which is an essential commodity as defined in the Essen- 25 
tial Commoditieli Act, 1955, or 10 of IHI. 
(ii) with respect to which provisions have been made in 
any such other law as iii referred to in clause (a), 
with a view to making gain in any manner whieh may directly or 
irutirectly defeat or tend to defeat the provilion. of t~t Act or other 30 
law atoreeaid.. 
(.I) -'».1 of the followini officer., namely:-
(a) diatrict magiatrateJ; 
• 
(b) CommiJsionen of Police, whe~ver they have been appointed. 
may also, if satisfied as provided in sub-section (1) J exercise the 3$ 
power. conferred by the said sub-tection. 
<,> Wh8ll any order u made under thf ... etion by an omcer men-
U_ad in 81lb-acti0il (~), he shall forthwith report the fact to the State 
Government to which he is S'Ubordinate together with the grounds on 
which the order has been made and such other particulars as in his 40 
opinion have a bearing on the matter, and no such order shall "main 
in force for more than twelve days after the making thereof unlen in 
the m..mme it hai been approved by the State Government; 
Provided that where under section a the grounds of detention are 
~ommanicatsd by the authority making the order after five day. but 4S 

J of 1974. 
• 
not later than ten days from the date of detention, this sub-sectiOD shall 
apply subject to the modification Uu:.t for the words "twelve days", the 
words "fifteen· d~ys" shall be substituted. 
(4) When any order is made or approved by the State GOvernment 
s 'Under this section or when any order is made under thi.· section by an 
officer of the State Government not below the rank of Seeretary to that 
Government specially empowered under sub-section (1), the State Gov-
ernment shall, within seven days, report the fact to the Central Govern-
ment together with the grounds on which the order has been made and 
10 such other particulars as, in the opinion of the State Government, have 
a bearing on the necessity for the order. 
4. A detention order may be executed at any place in India in the 
manner provided !or the execution of warrants of arrest under the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
J 5 5. Every person in respect of whom a detention order has been. made 
shall be liable-
(a) to be detained in IRIch place and under IlUCh condltioAl, •• 
cluding conditions as to maintenance, discipline aDd puBis""t for 
breaches of discipline, as the appropriate Governmeat may by 
20 ,eneral or apeeiaJ order, specify;. and 
(b) to be removed from one place of detention to another place 
of detention, whether within the same State or in anotber State, by 
order of the appropriate Government: 
Execut.ion 
ofde~ 
:L. 
Power to 
ftIUlate 
place in« 
conditions 
of deten-
tiaa. 
Provided that no order shall be made by a State Government under • 
2S clause (b) for the removal of a person from one State to another State 
except with the consent of the Government of that other State. 
6. No detention order shall be invalid or inoperative merely by 
reaaon-
(4) that the person to be detained thereunder is outalde the 
30 limits of the territorial jurisdiction of the Government or officer 
making the order, or 
(b) that the place of detention of such person is outside the said 
limits. 
7. (1) If appropriate Government has reason to believe that a penJOn 
3S in respect of whom a detention order has been made has absconded or 
is concealing himself so that the order cannot be executed, that Go.,.· 
ernment may-
(a) make a report in writing of the fact to a Metropolitan Magil-
trate or a Judicial Magiatrate of the first class having jurisdiction 
40 in the place where the said person ordinarily resides; and thereupon 
the provisions of sections 82, 83, 84 and 85 of the Code of Criminal 
Deten-
tioa 
order8 
Dot to 
be invalid 
er In-
'opera-
tive on 
eertain 
ll'Oundl. 
Powen 
I. rela-
tten te 
abecond. 
iIItr person •. 
2 of 1974. Procedure, 1973, shall apply in respect of the said person and hb 
property as if the order directing that he be detained were a warrant 
iswed by the Magistrate; 
45 (b) by order notified in the Oftlcial Gazette direct the said per. 
Ion to appear before such officer, at such place and within such 
period as may be specified in the order; and if the said person fails 
to comply with such eirection he shall, unless he proves that it was 
not possihle for him to comply therewith and that lie had, within 
50 the period specified in the order, informed the omcer mentioned in 

CkoundJ 
of order 
of deten-
tioa to be 
disclosed 
to person 
atrected 
by the 
orderi. . J 
COIlIIUtu-
tioa 01 
Adviaory 
BoardJ. 
Reference 
to Advi-
~ 
Boardl. 
the order of the reason which rendered compliance therewith im-
possible and of his whereabouts, be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to one year or with fine or with both. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, every offence under clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall 5 "Of 19'16-
. be cognizable. 
8. (1) When a person is detained in pursuance of a ~letention order, 
the authority making the order shall, as soon as may be, but ordinarilY 
not later than five days and in exceptional circumstances and for reasons 
to be recorded in writing, not later than ten days from the date of de ten- 10 
tion, communicate to him the grounds on which the order has been made 
and shall afford him the earliest opportunity of making a representation 
against the order to the appropriate Government. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (l) shall require the authority to disclose 
facts which it considers to be against the public interest to disclole. IS 
9. (1) The Central Government and each State Government shaU, 
whenever necessary, constitute one or more Advisory Boards for the 
purposes of this Act. 
(2) The constitution of every such Board shall be in accordance with 
the recommendations of the Chief Justice of the appropriate High CO".1rt. 20 
(3) Every such Board shall consist of a Chairman and not less than 
two other members, and the Chairman shall be a serving Judge of the 
appropriate High Court and the other members shall be serving or re-
tired Judges of any High Court. 
Explanation.-In this section "appropriate High Court" means- 25 
(a) in the case of the detention of a person in pursuance of an 
order of detention made by the Central Government or an officer of 
the Central Government or the administrator of the Union terri-
tory of Delhi or an officer subordinate to such administrator, the 
High Court for the Union territory of Delhi; 30 
(b) in the case of the detention of a per,son in pursuance of an 
order of detention made by any State Government (other than the 
administrator of a Union territory) or an officer of such State Gov-
ernment, the High Court for that State; and 
(c) in the case of the detention of a person in pursuance of an 35 
order of detention made by the administrator ot a Union territory 
(other than the Union territory of Delhi) or an officer subordinate 
to such administrator, such High Court as the Central Government 
may, by order published in the Official Gazette, specify with respect 
to such Union territory. 40 
10. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, in every case 
where a detention order has been made under this Act, the appropriate 
Government shall, within three weeks from the date of detention of a 
person under the order, place before the Advisory Board constituted by 
it under section 9, the grounds on which the order has been made and 45 
the representation, if any, made by the person affected by the order, 
and in case where the order has been made Uy an officer referred to in 
sub-section (2) of section 3, also the report by such officer under sub~ 
Retion (3) of that section, 

10 of 1897. 
s 
11. (1) The Advisory Board shall, after considering the materials 
placed before it and, after calling for such further information as it may 
deem necessary from the appropriate Government or from any person 
called for the purpose through the appropriate Government or from the 
5 person concerned, and if, in any particular case, it considers it essential 
so to do or if the person concerned desires to be heard, after hearing him 
in person, submit its report to the appropriate Government within seven 
weeks from the date of detention of the person concerned. 
10 (Z) The report of the Advisory Board shall specify in a separate part 
thereof the opinion of the Advisory Board as to whether or not there is 
wfticient cause for the detention of the person concerned. 
(3) When there is a difference of opinion among the members form. 
ing the Advisory Board, the opinion of the majority of such members 
shall be deemed to be the opinion of the Board. 
IS (4) Nothing in this section shall entitle ally persell agaiftst W •• M 
a detention order has been made to appear by any legal practitioner in 
any matter connected with the reference to the Advisory Board, and the 
proceedings of the Advisory Board, and its report, excepting that part 
of the report in which the opinion of the Advisory Board is specified, 
20 shall be confidential. . 
12. (1) In any case where the Advisory Boara has reported that there 
is in its opinion sufficient cause for the detention of e person, the appro-
priate Government may confirm the detention order and continue the 
detention of the person concerned for such period as it thinks ftt. 
25 (Z) In any case where the Advisory Board has reported that there is 
in its opinion no sufficient cause for the detention of the person con-
cerned, the appropriate Government shall revoke the detention order ana 
cause the person to be released forthwith. 
13. The maximum period for which any person may be detained in 
30 pursuance of any detention order which has been confirmed under 
section 12, shall be six months from the date of detention: 
35 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall affect the 
power of the appropriate Government to revoke or modify the detention 
order at any earlier time. 
14. (1) WithO'Ut prejudice to the provisions of section !1 .f tlte 
General Clauses Act, 1897, a detention 'order may, at any time, be 
revoked or modified-
(a) notwithstandin~ t .... llt the .rder has beea made hy all .mcer 
of a State Government, by that State Government or by the Central 
Government; 
(b) notwithstanding that the order has been made by an Om~f''' 
of the Central Government or by a State Government, by the Central 
Government. 'I 
(2) The revocation or expiry of a detention order shall not bar the 
45 making of a fresh detention order under section 3 against the same peT-
son in any case where fresh facts have arisen after the date of revocation 
or expiry on which the Central Government or a State Government or 
Procedurez 
Of 
Advisory 
Boarct.. 
Action 
upOIl 
tile report 
of Ad"ri-
I!ICtI'y • 
Board. 
Maximum 
period of 
deten-
tiOJl. 
Kevoca-
tion of 
detea-
... 
.-den. 

Te'IQpOoo 
ral)Y 
releue 
of 
person. 
detained. 
Proteo. 
tion of 
actiOl\ 
taken 
1a JOOd 
t-itIL 
...,. 
aIId. 
law... 
'. ; T 
, 
"an officer, as the case may be, is satisfied that 8Uch an order should be 
made. 
15. (1) The appropriate Government may, at any time, direct that 
any person detained in pursuance of a detention order may be reIeoed 
for an~ specifted period either without conditions or upon such conditions S 
specified in the direction as that person accepts, and may, at any time, 
cancel his release. 
(Z) In directing the release of any person under sub .. section (1), the 
appropriate Government may require him to enter into a bond with or 
wlthotit 8'Ilreties for the due observance of the conditions specified in the 10 
direction. 
(3) Any person released under sub-section (1) shall surrender him-
self at the time and place, and to t'he authority, specified in the order 
directing hia release or cancelling his release, as the cUe may be. 
(4) If any penon fails without sufficient cause to surrender himself IS 
in the manner specified in sub-section (3), he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment' for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, ar 
with both. I • • 
(5) If any person released under sub-section (1) fai1e to fu.lftl any of 
the conditions imposed. upon him under the said sub-section or in the 20 
bond entered into by him, the bond shall be declared to be forfeited and 
any person bound thereby shall be liable to pay the penalty thereof. 
1.. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
Government or a state Government, and no suit, prosecution or other 
legal proceeding shall lie against any person, for anything in good faith 25 
done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act. 
IT. (1) The Prevention of Blaekmarketing and Maintenanee of 
Supplies of Essential Commodities Ordinance, 1979, is hereby repealed. 10 of \979. 
(Z) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any aetion taken 
under the OI'tiinance so repealed shall be deemed to have been done or 30 
taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
~rhe Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of 
Essential ConlInodities Ordinance, 1979 was promulgated, on the 5th 
October, 1979 to deal effectively with malpractices like bL1ckmarketing, 
hoarding, profiteering, and to arrest the unjustified rise in prices of es-
sential conunodities by providing for the preventive detention of persons 
likely to indulge in such practices. Although the Essential Com-
modities Act, 1955 made comprehensive provisiona for the regulation of 
prodUction, sUW1y, distribution, prices and trade and commerce in com-
modities declared essential 1D1der the Act and although the penal provi-
sions in the Act were made more stringent jn accordance with the re-
commendations of the Law Commission in their FortY-ieventh Report, it 
waa found not adequate to deal with the situation. 
2. The Ordinance rccogni3ed preventive detention as a necessary evil 
and accordingly &ought to provide tor various safeguards to avoid .c:cope 
for possible abuse of powers thereunder. The ground on which a person 
could be detained under the Ordinance was defined specifically. It pro-
vided that an order directing the detention of a !;)e1'1ion could be made 
thereunder only with a view to preventing sueh person from acting in 
any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies of commoditiellil 
essential to the community and it also defined the expression "acting in 
any Jll8.IlDer prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies of commodiUes 
essential to the community". The Ordinance made provisions to ensure 
that the composition of the Advisory Boards thereunder was in accor-
dance with the amendments proposed to article 22 o£ the Constitution by 
section 3 of the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978. It 
also made the necessary ","ovisiona for ensming, in accordance with the 
said amendments, that a peI'5on is not detained for a period longer than 
two months without the approval of an Advisory Board. Unlike the 
earlier laws as to preventive detention, the Ordinance limited the 
maximum period of detention to six montha. 
i. The proviliona of the Ordinance are useful u a deterrent measure 
to- combat malpractlC88 like blackmarketing, hoardilli, and proflteer:tna. 
4. The Bill .. b to replace the .aid OI'dinanoe. 
NEW Dl:LHIj PRANAB MUKHERJEE. 
The 18th JanU41'J/, 1980. 

rINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
trnder clause 5(a) of the Bill, the Central Government has power td 
regulate the conditions of detention of persons detained in pursuance of 
an order of the Central Government or an officer of the Central Govern-
ment. Clause 9(1) of the Bill provides inteT alia for the constitution of 
Advisory Boards by the Central ~vernment. 
2. An administrative cell consisting of a Joint Secretary and necessary 
complement of staff has already been created in the Department of· Civil 
Supplies for processing all matters connected with the implementation 
of the Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of 
Essential Commodities Ordinance. Some expenditure of a recurring 
nature from out of the Consolidated Fund of India will be involved with 
respect to the facilities which will have to be provided in accordance with 
the conditions of detention envisaged by clause 5(a) of the Bill to persons 
detained in Union territories which do not have their own Consolidated 
Funds. But the quantum of this ex~nditure cannot be estimated as 
that will depend upon the number of persons who may be so detained 
from time to time. Some expenditure of a recurring nature will have to 
be incurred in connection with the Advisory Boards also and it is not 
possible at this stage to make an accurate estimate of the expenditure 
which may be involved. It is, however, estimated that the recurring 
expenditure on the administrative cell, the proVision of facilities afore-
mentioned and in connection with the Advisory Boards is not likely to 
exceed Rs. 2.50 lakhs per year. The non-recurring exPenditure on ac-
count of office equipment of the administrative cell referred to above is 
not likely to exceed Ra. 0.50 lakhs. 
3. The provisio!l'S o~ the Bill do not involve any other expenditure of a 
recurring or non-recurring nature. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5(.) of the Bill provides that every person in respect of whoa 
a detention order has been made shall be liable to be detained in such. 
plaee and under such conditions, including conditions as to maintenanee, 
diseipline and punishment for breaches of discipline, as the appropriate 
Government may, by general or special order, speeify. 
The matters to be specified in such orders are matters of detail and 
it t. not practicable to provide for them in the Bill. The dal.pti.. fill 
l.,wative power is. therefore. of a normal .barutao . 
• 
,'- .,. -
. -,~ 
I' • _, ...... • I'· ~ . ~ .r.' ,.' 
9 

LOK 5ABB.A 
BILL 
to provide for detention in eertain eases for the purpose ot prevention 
of blaekmarkf'ting and maintenance at supplies of commodities 
.-ntial to the community and for matters connected therewith. 
, '~'" 
(Shri PNMb Mukhe"';ee, Minu-te1' of Commet'ce.) 