8m N.o. «' of 1'55. 
THE ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES BILL, 1955 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide, in the interests of the general public, for the control of 
the production, supply and distribution of, and trade and com-
merce in, certain commodities. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Essential Commodities Act, Shd0rt title 
1955. • an extent. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu , 
and Kashmir. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Definitions. 
(a) 'essential commodity' means any of the following 
classes of commodities:-
(i) cattle fodder, including oilcakes and other concen- 10 
trates; 
(ii) coal, including coke and other derivatives; 
(iii) component parts and accessories of automobiles; 
(iv) cotton and woollen textiles; 
(v) foodstuffs, including edible oil seeds and oils; 
(m) iron Mnd steel, including manufactured products of 
iron and steel; 
(vii) paper, including newsprint, paperboard and straw 
board; 
(viii) petroleum and petroleum products; 
15 
20 

10 
2 
(ix) raw cotton, whether ginned or unginned, and cotton 
seed; 
(x) raw jute; 
(xi) any other class of commodity which the Central 
Government may, by notified order, declare to be an essen-
tial commodity for the purposes of this Act, being a com-
modity with respect to which Parliament has power to make 
laws by virtue of entry 33 in List III in the Seventh 
Schedule to the Constitution; 
(b) 'food-crops' include crops of sugarcane; 
(c) 'notified order' means an order notified in the Official 
Gazette; 
(d) 'State Government' in relation to a Part C State means 
the Lieutenant Governor or the Chief Commissioner, as the case 
may be. 
Powel'l to 3. (1) If the Central Government is of opinion that it is neces-
~nt!01 pro- sary or expedient so to do for maintaining or increasing supplies of 
p~~~~':e any essential commodity or for securing their equitable distribution 
tion, ~i' of and availability at fair prices, it may, by order, provide for regulat-
20 ::ditiea. ing or prohibiting the production, supply and distribution thereof 
and trade and commerce therein. 
(2) Without' prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred 
by sub-section (1), an order made thereunder may provide-
(a) for regulating by licences, permits or otherwise the 
production OJ' manufacture of any essential commodity; 
(b) for bringing under cultivation any waste or arable land, 
whether appurtenant to a building or not, for the growing there-
on of food-crops generally or of specified food-crops, and for 
otherwise maintaining or increasing the cultivation of food-crops 
generally, or of specified food-crops; 
(c) for cont.rolling the price at which any essential com-
'modity may be bought or sold; 
(d) for regulating by licences, permits or otherwise the 
storage, transport, distribution, disposal, acquisition, use or con-
sumption of, any essential commodity; 
(e) for prohibiting the withholding from sale of any essen-
tial commodity ordinarily kept for sale; 

3 
(f) for requiring any person holding in stock any essential 
commodity to sell the whole or a specified part of the stock. to 
such person or class of persons and in such circumstances as 
may be specified in the order; 
(g) for regulating or prohibiting any class of commercial 
or financial transactions relating to foodstuffs or cotton textiles 
which, in the opinion of the authority making the order are, or, 
if ullregulated, are likely to be, detrimental to the public 
interest; 
(h) for collecting any information or statistics with a view 
to regulating or prohibiting any of the aforesaid matters; 
(i) for requiring persons engaged in the production, supply 
or distribution of, or trade and commerce in, any essential 
commodity to maintain and produce for inspection such books, 
accounts and records relating to their business and to furnish 
such information relating thereto, as may be specified in the 
order; 
(;) for any incidental and supplementary matters, including 
in particular the entering and search of premises, vehicles, 
vessels and aircraft, the seizure by a person authorised to make 
such'search Qf any articles in respect of which such person has 
reason to believe that a contravention of the order has been, is 
being or is about to be committed, the grant or issue of licences, 
permit~ or other documents, and the charging of fees therefor. 
(3) Where any person sells any essential commodity in com-
pliance with an order made with reference to clause (f) of sub-
section (2), there shall be paid to him the price therefor as herein-
after provided:-
(a) where the price can, consistently with the controlled 
price, if any, fixed under this section, be agreed upon, the agreed 
price; 
(b) where no such agreement can be reached, the price 
calculated with reference to the controlled price, if any; 
(c) where neither clause (a) nor clause (b) applies, the 
price calculated at the market rate prevailing in the locality at 
the date of sale: 
(4) If the Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary 
so to do for maintaining or increasing the production and supply of 
. an essential commodity, it may, by order, authorise any person (here-
inafter referred to as an authorised controller) to exercise, with 
respect to the whole or any part of any such undertaking engaged 
in the production and supply of the commodity as may be specified 
5 
10 
IS 
20 
3S 

10 
IS 
20 
25 
.. 
in the order such functions of control as may be provided therein 
and so long as such order is in force with respect to any undertaking 
or part thereof,-
(a) the authorised controller shall exercise his functions in 
accordance with any instructions given to him by the Central 
Government, so however, that he shall not have any power to 
give any direction inconsistent with the provisions of any en-
actment or any instrument determining the functions of the 
persons in charge of the management of the underta~g, except 
in so far as may be specifically provided by the order; and 
(b) the undertaking or part shall be carried on in accord-
ance with any directions given by the authorised controller 
under the provisions of the order, and any person having any 
functions of management in relation to the undertaking or part 
shall comply with any such directions. 
(5) An order made under this section shall,-
(a) in the case of an order of a general nature or affecting 
a class of persons, be notified in the Official Gazette; and 
(b) in the case of an order directed to a specified indivi-
dual be served on such individual-
(i) by delivering or tendering it to that individual, or 
(ii) if it cannot be so delivered or tendered, by affixing 
it on the outer door or some other conspicuous part of the 
'premises in which that individual lives, and a written report 
thereof shall be prepared and witnessed by two persons living 
in the neighbourhood. 
Im~ion 4. An order made under section 3 may confer powers and impose 
~~~taeGo~ duties upon the Central Government or the State Government or 
crnments. officers and authorities of the Central Government or State Govern-
30 etc. ment, and may contain directions to any State Government or to 
officers and authorities thereof as to the exercise of any such pQwers 
or the discharge of any such duties. 
DelcptioD 5. The Central Government may, by notified order, direct that 
of poRr.. the power to make orders under section 3 shall, in relation to such 
3S matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified 
in the direction, be exercisable aiso by-
(a) such officer or authority subordinate to the Central 
Government, or 
(b) such State Government or such officer or authority sub-
ordinate to a State Government, 
as may be specified in the direction. 

$ 
8. Any order made under section 3 shall have effect notwith- Effect, ot 
t d' th" 't t th 'th ta' d' orders lucan-S an mg any mg mconslS en erewl con me In any enactment sialent with 
other than this Act or any instrument having effect by virtue of other enac (' menta. any enactment other than this Act. 
7. (1) If any person contravenes any order made under Penalties. S 
section 3-
(a) he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine: 
Provided that if the court is of opinion that a sentence of 
fine only will meet the ends of justice, it may, for reasons to be 
recorded, refrain from imposing a sentence of imprison-
ment; and 
(b) any property in respect of which the order has been 
contravened or such part thereof as to the court may seem fit 
shall be forfeited to the Government: 
Provided that if the court is of opinion that it is not neces-
sary to direct forfeiture in respect of the whole or, as the case 
may be, any part of the property, it may, for reasons to be re-
corded, refrain from doing so. 
(2) If any person to whom a direction is given under sub-section 
(4) of section 3 fails to comply with the direction he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years, or with fine, or with both, 
8. If any person,- False state-
, menta. 
(i) when required by any order made under' section 3 to 
make any statement or furnish any information, makes any 
statement or furnishes any information which is false in any 
material particular and which he knows or has reasonable 
cause to believe to be false, or does not believe to be true, or 
(ii) makes any such statement as aforesaid in any book, 
account, r~ord, decl.aralion, return or other document which 
he is required by any such order to maintain or furnish, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
fO 
IS 
20 
30 
9. (1) If the person contravening an order made under section Offences by 35 
3 is a company, every person who, at the time the' contravention companies. 
was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the 
company for the conduct of the business of the company as well 
8S the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 40 
ac("'Ordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render 
any such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the 

s 
10 
IS 
6 
centravention took place without his knowledge or that he 
exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in su'b-section (1), 
where an offence under this Act has been committecf'by a company 
and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the 
part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the 
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall 
also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to 
be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) 'company' means any body corporate, and includes a 
firm or other association of individuals; and 
(:b) 'director' in relation to a firm means a partner in the 
firm. 
Cognizance 
of offences. 10. No court shall take congnizance of any offence punishable 
under this Act except on a report in writjng of the facts consti-
tuting such offence made by a person who is a public servant as XLV af 
defined in section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 1860. 
20 ~ ~:: 11. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 32 of the 
diD&' fine. Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, it shall be lawful for any magis- V or 1891. 
trate of the first class specially empowered by the State Government 
25 
3S 
in this behalf and for any presidency magistrate to pass a sentence 
of fine exceeding one thousand rupees on any person convicted 
of contravening any order made under section 3. 
Presumption 12. Where an order purports to have been made and signed 
as to orders. by an authority in exercise of any power conferred by or under 
this Act, a court shall presume that such order was so made by 
that authority within the the meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 
1872. I of 1872 
Burden of 13. Where a person is prosecuted for contravening any order 
p~( in cor- made under section 3 which prohibits him from doing any act 
tam c:uee. or being in possession oof a thing without lawful authority or 
Protection 
of action 
taken under 
AJ;t. 
without a permit, licence or other document, the burden of prov-
ing that he has such authority. permit, licence or other document 
shall be on him. 
14. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against any person for anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done in ptirsuance of any order made under 
section 
0 
3. 

7 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Government for any damage caused or likely to be caused by 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
in pursuance of any order made under section 3. 
15. (1) The following laws are hereby repealed:-
Ca) the Essential Commodities Ordinance. 1955; 
(b) any other law in force in any State immediately 
before the commencement 'of this Act in so far as such law 
controls or authorises the control of the production, supply 
and distribution of, and trade and commerce in, any essential 
commodity. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, any order made or deemed 
to be made by any authority whatsoever, under any law repealed 
hereby and in force immediately before the commencement of 
this Act, shall, in so far as such order may be made under this 
Act, be deemed to be made under this Act and continue in force, 
and accordingly any appointment made, licence or permit granted 
or direction issued under any such order and in force immediately 
before such commencement shall continue in force until and 
unless it is superseded by any appointment made, licence or 
permit granted or direction issued under this Act. 
(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall be without prejudice 
Repeals and , 
savinp. 
I of 1955. 
10 
IS 
20 
to the provisions contained in section 6 of the General Clauses Act, X of 1897. 
1897, which shall also apply to the repeal of the Ordinance or 
other law referred to in sub-section (1) as if such Ordinance or 
other law had been an enactment. 

8 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under article 369 of the Constitution, Parliament had power 
during a period of five years from the commencement thereof to 
make laws with respect to trade and commerce in, and the produc-
tion, supply and distribution of, certain essential commodities. 
The life of the Essential Supplies (Temporary Powers) Act, 1946, 
was therefore limited to the 26th January, 1955. The essential 
commodities to which that Act applied fell into two broad cate-
gories, viz.,-
(a) coal, textiles, iron and steel, paper, etc., which are 
products of industries under Union control; and 
(b) food-stuffs, cattle fodder, etc., which are not products 
of such industries. 
As public interest required that the Centre should continue to 
have even after the 26th January, 1955, the same legislative powers 8S 
it had under article 369 of the Constitution, a Bill providing for the 
necessary amendment of entry 33 of List III in the Seventh Schedule 
to the Constitution was passed by both Houses of ?arliament in 
September last year. This amendment has now become law, having 
been ratified by the requisite number of States. 
The Constitution (Third Amendment) Act, however, had not 
become law when the Essential Supplies (Temporary Powers) Act, 
1946, expired, and therefore an Ordinance was promulgated to take 
effect on the 26th day of January, 1955, which provided for the 
regulation of trade and commerce in and the production, supply 
and distribution of commodities which fell within the first cate-
gory referred to in the preceding paragraph. Under entry 42 of 
the Union List, Parliament has power to regulate inter-State trade 
and commerce in all commodities and the Ordinance also provided 
"""" for such regulation in section 4 thereof, but the application of that 
.. , ~lf' was limited in the first instance to wheat, raw cotton and 
s~~ane. 
Pending the passing of a Central law providing for control in 
respect of all essential commodities now falling within entry 33 of 
the Concurrent List, certain State Governments have promulgated 
Ordinances or taken other legal action open to them for continuing 
controls in respect of such commodities as could not be included 
in the Central Ordinance. 
The present Bill seeks to replace the Central Ordinance and at 
the same time incltiaes within the definition of "essential commodi-
ties" those commodities which had to be left out by reason of lack 

9 
of legislative power. To a very large extent, the Bill follows the 
provisions contained in the Essential Supplies (Temporary Powers) 
Act, 1946, but the penalty clause has been simplified and a few 
other provisions have been omitted as unnecessary. 
D. P. KARMARKAR. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 25th February, 1955. 

10 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clase 3 of the Bill, which is closely modelled on section 3 of the 
Essential Supplies (Temporary Powers) Act, 1946, delegates to the 
Central Government power to make statutory orders wherever 
necessary for the purpose of maintaining or increasing the supply of 
any essential commodity or for securing their equitable distribution 
and availability at fair prices. The matters in respect of which 
orders may be made are specified in sub-clause (2) of that clause. 
2. The subject-matter of this Bill would necessarily require that 
extensive powers should be vested in the authority p.mpowered to 
make orders. The making of the orders will depend upon the 
exigencies of the situation obtaining in any particular State or area, 
and orders may vary from place to place and from commodity to 
commodity. It is also necessary that the Central Government 
should be empowered to delegate the powers given by it to State 
Governments or to officers of Government. Otherwise the powers 
will not be effective in an emergency. 
3. Having regard to the object of the Bill, the delegation cannot 
be said to be of an exceptional character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide, in the interests of the general public, for the control 
of the production, supply and distributio~ of, and trade and 
commerce in, certain commodities. 
(Shri D. P. KarmarkBr, 
Minister oj Commerce) 
GIPD-LAD-1535 LS-I-3-5s-r150 