43 ot 1951. 
AJ!J LmlODtl'CED IN l"olt SABRA ON 
Bill No. 6 of 1_ 
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1985 
( 
BILL 
further 10 amend the Representation of the People Act, 19S1. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirt*fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as foll~ws:-
1. (1) 'rhis Act may be called the Rel¥'esentation of the People 
(Amendment) Act, 1985. .' 
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 20th day of 
Short 
title aad 
commen-
cement. 
10 
November, 1984. 
2. In the Representation of the People Act;, 1951 (herejnafter referred Insertion· 
tl) as the principal Act), after lection 73, the following section shall be of DeW 
inserted, namely~- 8ection 
7lA. 
"73A. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 73 or in 
any other provision of this Act, with respect to the general electioR 
for the purpo~ of constituting a new House of the People upon the 
expiry of the term of the House of the People in existence on the 
commencement of the Representation of the People (Amendment) 
ActJ 1965,-
(a) the notification under section 73 may be issued without 
takin, into account the Parliamentary constituencies in the 
Special 
prevision 
as to 
certain 
elections. 

State of Assam and the Parliamentary constituencies in the 
State of PEujab; and 
(b) the Election Commission may take the steps in relation 
to elections from the Parliamentary constituencies in the State 
of Assam and the Parliamentary constituencies in the State of 5 
Punjab separately and in such manner and on suc\1 dates as it 
may deem appropriate.", 
ll .. ' and :t (1) The Representation of the People (Amendment) Ordinance, 
savina. 1984, is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal. anything done or any action taken 10 
,under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinanc.,~all be deem-
ed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended 
by tbi8 Act. . 
U of 198 ... 

STA'l'EMENT.OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Sub-section ( 2 ) of· section 14 of the Representation of the People 
Act, 195 1 enable.~ the President to call upon, by one or more notifications ' 
published in the Gazette of India on such date or dates as may be 
recommelld~d by the Election Commission, all parliamentary constie 
tuendes to elect ml'mbcrs. in accordance with the provisions of the said 
Act and (-1 th2 rules and orders made thereunder. for the purpose of 
consbtutirlg a new House of the People on the expiration of the duration 
of the ex:illting House or on its dissolution. 
2. In respect of the general election for constituting the Eighth Lok 
Sabha, tne Elect:on Commission had recommended that the' presidential 
notification under section 14(2) of the Representation ot the People 
Am, 1~1 might be issued on the 20th November, 1984 callina 
upon all parliamentary constituencies other than those within the 
States of Assam anq Punjab to elect members in accordance with the 
provisions of that Ad and of the rules and orders made thereunder. In 
the case of Assam, the Commission felt that the revision of the electoral 
rolls which it had undertaken in pursuance of the undertaking given 
by it to the Supreme Court would take time and that the question of 
holding eiections from the parliamentary constituencies in Assam could 
be taken up only after the completion of such revision. In the case of 
Punjab, the Co~missj:ln was satisfied on the basis of the r.eport of the 
Chief Electora1 Officer, Punjab and also the State Government regard-
ing the existing law and order situation in that State that elections 
from the c,mstituencies in that State could not be held with the rest 
of the country. The Commission accordingly decided to fix a separate 
programme in due course with respect to the elections from the parlia-
mentary constituendes in Assam and Punjllb ·and recommended that 
suitable provisions might,be made in the Representation of the People 
Act, 1951 ~o provide the legal cover with regard· to the postponing ot 
the elections from the parliamentary constituencies in the States of 
Assam and Punjab. The Representation of the People (Amendment) 
Ordinance, 1984 was accordingly promulgated by the President on the 
20th November, 1984. 
3. The \:liJl secks to replace the atoresaid Ordinance. 
NEW DlILHI; A. K. BEN. 
T~ 15th January, 1985 . 
. , 
3 

A 
BILL 
fQrtber to amend ~he Reprelentation of the Pegple Act, 1951. 
~ • • I 
(Shri AMok Sen. 
(MJnisl'r of Law and lustke) 