As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA ON
५ JAN १७११
3

Bill No. 6 of 1991

THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR CRIMINAL LAW AMENDMENT
(AMENDING) BILL, 1991

A
BILL
| to amend the Jammu and Kashmir Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1983.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of. the Republic of
India as follows: —

1. (1) This Act may be called the Jammu and Kashmir Criminal Law Short title
Amendment (Amending) Act, 1991. and

onypence
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 17th day of ment.
December, 1990.

2. In the Jammu and Kashmir Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1983 Amend:
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 4, in sub-section (3), ment of
for the words “six months”, the words “one year” shall be substituted. neg
No. X of
1983,
10. ३. (1) The Jammu and Kashmir Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance, Repeal
1990 is hereby repealed. ae
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under

the principal Act, as amended by tie said Ordinance, shall be deemed to

been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Government of Jammu and Kashmir had declared in 1990 certain
organisations and associations as unlawful under the provisions of the Jammu
and Kashmir Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1983 for the persistent activities
of the members of these organisations in inciting and instigating violence,
secessionism and disruption of public order and harmony.

2 The State Criminal Law prescribes that the declaration of the State
Government in notifying the organisations as unlawful is to be referred to
a Tribunal constituted under the said law, which will decide and make an
order either confirming or cancelling the declaration so made by the State
Government within a period of six months from the date on which a reference
is received by the Tribunal. The statutory limit available to the Tribunal
for adjudicating the matter would have expired on 18th December, 1990.
In view of the disturbed conditions in the Valley and also due to dislocation
of office work by the strike of the State Government employees, the Tribunal
could not proceed substantially in the matter of conducting inquiry.

3. Since the State of Jammu and Kashmir is under President's rule and
Parliament was not in session, the Governor promulgated the Jammu and
Kashmir Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance, 1990 on the 17th Decem-
ber, 1990 for extending the period of six months to one year to enable the
Tribunal to complete its proceedings in relation to such declarations.

4. The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance.

New Dewy; SUBODH KANT SAHAY.
The 8th January, 1991.


ANNEXURE

ExTRACT FROM THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR CRIMINAL LAW AMENDMENT
Act, 1983

(X oF 1983)

* * * * *

4() + + के + +

(3) After considering the cause, if any, shown by the association or
office-bearers or members thereof, (he Tribunal shall hold an inquiry in the
Manner specified in section 9 and after calling for such further information
as it may consider necessary from the Government or from any office-bearer
or member of the association, it shull decide whether or not there is sufficient
cause for declaring the association as unlawful and make as expeditiously as
possible and in any case within a period of six months from the date of receipt
of reference under section 4 such order as it may deem fit either confirming
the declaration made in the notification or cancelling the same.

* * * * *

Reference
to Tribunal,


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Jammu and Kashmir Criminal Law
(Amendment) Act, 1983.

(Shri Subodh Kant Sahay, Minister of State in the Ministry
of Home Affairs)