10K SABRA 
- • 
CORRIGENIA 
'1M 
'j 
THE GA.NESH Ii'LOUR M1:LLb COMPANY LL'1ITED (AC~ISITION AND 
T"~;I.NS~ OF,UNDBRTA.KINCE) ""'ILL, 1984 
(To ~,~/.As introduced in 10k Sabha) 
1. Fa gE) (i), line 13,-
.M II FLOOR " ~.' "FLOUR " 
2. P'i?O 2, lir!r: '3,-
ib.l: "owenn II read "owned" 
3. Page 1+. in the m9.rginal heading to clause 5',-
a.m.1.t.. "t he" 
~. page~, line 12,-
!ol:. "Custodj,an .~" .r.e~d "(,'u~t0di ::i.fls of" 
5. page 9, line 3~,-
~ "on" ~ "an" 
'. Page 1 0, line. . 6,.-
W. 1'as" r.&d "in :, 
7. Page 1 0 ~ line 21, -
il:ft~r "wi thh01d s " ;tnsert "such" 
8. P a. p.: e' 1 , , lint: 8,-
tl.t.er_ "i n wlli ('1J " insert. "alJ(] II 
NEW MIlil; 
Feb I:uarY2..1, __ 19.8.L __ _ 
l'halguna 4, 1905 (Saka) 

As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
'l 8 fEB ,~6~iII No.6 0( 1984 
THE GANESH FLOUR MILLS COMP~Y LIMITED 
(ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) 
BILL, 1984 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF GANESH FLOOR MILLS 
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of Ganesh Flour 
Mi!lls . . 
4. General effect of vesting. 
S. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of Ganesh Flour 
Mills in a Government company. 
6. The Company to be liable for certain prior liabilitiea. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNT 
7. Payment of amount. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC.,. OF OANESH FLOUR MILLS 
8. Management, etc., of Ganesh Flour Mills. 
9. Duty of persons in charge of management ·of Ganesh Flour MUI$ to 
deliver assets, etc. 
10. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc. 
11. Duty of the Company to furnish particulars. 
CHAPTER V 
PROVlSIONS RELATING TO EMPl.OYEES OF OANESH FLOUR MILLS 
12. Continuance of employees. 
13. Provident fund aDd other funds. 

(ii) 
CHAPTER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
CLAUSES 
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments. 
15. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner. 
16. Priorities of claims. 
17. Claims to be made to the Commissioner. 
18. Proof Qf claims. 
19. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants. 
20. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general 
revenue account. 
CHAPTER VII 
MI9cELLANEOtis 
21. Act to have overriding effect. 
22. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Gov-
ernment or Government company. 
23. Penalties. 
24. Offences by companies. 
25. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
26. Delegation of powers. 
27. Power to make rules. 
28. Power to remove difficulties. 
29. Repeal and saving. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

',. 
. ..". 
.,,~. 
8W No.6 of 1984 
t , 
.. 
THE GANESH FLOUR l\fILLS COMPANY LIMITED 
(ACQUISITION AND .TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) 
BILL, 1984 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the right. title and intere!lt df certdiirl 
undertaklng~ of the GlJJ'Iesh Flour Mills Company Limited w~th CJ view f(," 
sustaining and strengthening the nucleuS' of public owned or controlled &I1I;t3 
required for ensuring supply Of whole-some vanaspali and refined edible '{JiJs 
nutriticus foods and other consumer commoditieS', to the public at reason .. 1 
able prices and thereby to give effect to t~ policy of the State towart4s! 
securing the principles specified in clauses (b) and (c) of article{ 
39 oJ the Constituoon. r i 
WHllREAS the Ganesh Flour Mills Company Umited has throup the Ganesh 
Flour MiHs been engaged mainly in the manufacture and produOtion of certain 
commoditi~s, namely. vanaspati, refined edible oils, various types of nutritious 
fOOds and other consumer commodities which are essential to the n~ds of the 
5 community; 
AND WHEREAS the management of the Ganesh Flour Mills was taken 
over by the Central Government u~der the IndllStries (Development ane' 
Iloplation) Act. 19S1; 

Short title 
aad com-
JIlalCOm.at. 
Definitions. 
2 
AND WHE~EAS it is necessary to acquire the undertakings of the Ganesh 
Flour Mills Company Umited in relation to the Ganesh Flour Mills for sustain-
ing and strengthening the nucleus of public owend or controlled units required 
for ensuring supply of wholesome van asp ati , refined edible oils, various types 
of nutritious foods and other consumer commodities to the public at reasonable 5 
prices; 
AND WHEREAS such acquisition is for giving effect to the policy of the State 
towards securing the principles specified in clauses (b) and (c) of article 39 
of the Constitution; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fifth Year of the RepUblic of India 
81 follows:- 10 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Ganesh Flour Mills Company Limited 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertaking.c;) Act, 1984. 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come fnto force on the 28th day of January, 
1984. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed day" means the 28th day of January, 1984; 
(b) "Conlmissioner" meanli the Commissioner of Payments appointed 20 
under section 14; 
(c) "Company" means the Ganesh Flour Mills Company Limited, 
Delhi, a company within the meaning of the Companies Act, 1956. and 
having its legi~tered office nt Subzi Mandi, Delhi; 
(d) "date of taking over" meens the date on which tile management of 25 
the Ganesh Flour Mills of the Company was taken over by the Board of 
Management by virtue of the Order of the Government of India in the late 
Miuistry of Industrial Development No. S.O. 69S(E)J18AAIIDRAI72, 
dated the 3rd November, 1972 made under sub-section (1) of section 
1 of 19S{i. 
18AA of the Industries (Development end Regulation) Act, 1951; 30 65 of 1951. 
(e) "Ganesh Flour Mill5" means-
(i) the Delhi Vanaspati Factory, Delhi; 
(ii) the Hindustan Breakfast Food Manufacturing Factory, New 
Delhi, including the Ganesh Electrical Factory, New Delhi which is 
ititerlinked with it by rOOf\on of its location, common services and in-
frastructure; '" 35 
(iii) the Kanpur Vanaspati Factory, Kanpur; and 
(iv) the Solvent Extraction Plant, Bombay; 
(I) "notification" means a notification published in 
8aDtt.; 
the Offieial 
..,0 

l.f 1'''. 
3 
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed. by· rules made under this Act, 
(h) "specified date" in relation to any provision of this Act, 
means such dete as the Central Government may, by notification, specify, 
for the purpose of that prOVision and different dates may be specified for 
5 different provisions of tbis Act; . 
10 
(i) "the Government con:lpany" means the Government company in 
which the Ganesh flour Mills are directed to vest under sub-section (Z) of 
!-ection 5, 
(j) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in 
the Companies Act, 1956, have the meanings, respectively, assigned to 
them in that Act. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQlIlSITION AND TRANSFER OF GANESH FLOUR MILLS 
3. On .be appointed clay, the GaResh FIoa MiBs aad the rip', title .... Transfer to. 
15 in.erest of lie Company,. in reiadOD to the Ganesh Flour Mills, sW, by virtue ~ad vestin, 
of this Act, .,. transferred to, and shaB vest in, the Central Government. 1ft, the Cen-tral·· Gover .. 
ment of 
Gancsh 
Flour Milia. 
4. (1) The Gooesh Flour Mills shall be deemed to include all assets, rights, General 
lease-holds, powers, authorities and privileges, and all property, mQvable aDd e.~ of 
immovable, induding lands, buildings, workshops, stores, instruments, machinery vest n,. 
20 and equipment, cash balances, cash on hand, reserve funds, investments and book 
debts pertaining to the Ganesh Flour Mills and all ~her rights and interests in, 
or arising out of, such property as were immediately before the appointed day in 
the ownership, possession, power or control of the Company in r~latiul1 to the 
Ganesh FloW MiDs, whether within or outside India, and all books of account, 
25 registers and other dQCuments of whatever nature relating thereto. 
(2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Governmen~ 
under section 3 shall, by force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from an!)" 
trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lieD and all other incumbrances affecting them, 
and any attachment, injunction or decree or order !;., any caurt or o:her authority, 
30 restricting the use of such properties in any manner or appointing any receiver in 
respect of the whole or any 'Part of such properties shall be deemed to have been 
withdrawn. 
(3) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Act 
in the Central Government and every person holding any charge, lien or other 
35 ~nterest in, or in relation to, any such propeny shall give, within such time and in 
such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the Commissioner of such 
mQrtgage, charge, lien or other interest. 
(4) For the removal of doubts, it.is hereby declared that the mortgagee on 
any property referred to in sub·section (3) or any other person holding any 
40 ch~ge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such property shall be 
entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and interests, payment of the 
~ort~e money or other dues, in whole or in part, out of the amounts specified 
1Q section 7, but no such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest shall be enforce-
able against any property which has vested in the Central Government. 

4 
(5) Any licence or other instrument granted to the Company in relation to 
the Oanesh Flour Mills which has vested in the Central Government under section 
3 at any time before the appointed day and in force immediately before that day 
shall CQotinue to be in force on and after such day in accordance with its tenOr 
in relation to, and for the purposes of the Ganesh Flour Mills and on and from 5 
the date of vesting of the Ganesh Flour Mills under section 5 in a Government 
company, that Government company shall be deemed tQ be substituted in such 
lkence or other instrument as if such licence or other instrument had been granted 
to that Government company and that Government company shall hold it for the 
remainder of the period fQr which the Company to which it was granted would 10 
'have held it under the terms thereof. 
(6) If on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of what-
ever nature instituted or preferred by or against the Company, in relation to 
the Ganesh Flour Mills, is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued 
or be, in any way, prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the Ganesh 15 
Flour Mills or of anything contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or 
other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced by or against the 
Central Government or, where the Ganesh Flour Mills vest in a Governmen, 
company under section 5, by or agajnst the Government company, 
Power of 5, (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, the Central 20 
Central Gov- Government may, if it is satisfied that a Government company is willing to comply, 
e~nment to or has complied, with sucb terms and conditions as that Government may think 
direct ftIt,;. . ' ifi' h G h Fl M'll d th 'ght , f the fit to Impose, direct, by not catIOn, tnat t e anos OUr I sane fl, 
tng 0 ., ~ h Fl M'll h' h Gaoesh title and interest of the Company III relatIon to the Ganes our 1 S w IC 
Flour Mills have vested in the Central Govewmcnt under section 3, shall, instead of conti- g5 
in a Govern nuing to vest in the Central Government, vest in that Government company 
men! eom- either on the date of the notification or on such earlier or later date (not being 
pany, a date earlier than the appointed day) as may be specified in the notification, 
(2) Where the right, title and interest in relation to the Ganesh Flour Mills 
vest in a Government company under sub-section (1), the Government com- 30 
pany shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become 
the owner of the 9anesh Flour Mills and all the rights and liabilities of the 
Central Government in relation to the Ganesh Flour Mills shall, 0'11 and from 
the date of such vesting, be deemed to have been the rights and liabilities, res- 35 
pectively of the Government company, 
The Com- 6. (1) Every liability, other than, the liability specified under sub-section 
~allY to be (2), of the Company in relation to tbe Ganesh Flour Mills in respect of any 
liable for 'd' h 'd d h 11 ' ., ' 
t ' , peno prIor to t e appolDle ay s a be the habillty of the Company and eer aln prtor , , 
liabilities, shall be enforce~ble agamst It and not against the Central Government or, 
where the Ganesh Fl~ur Mills vest in a Government company, against the Gov- 40 
eromen! company, 
(2) Any liability i~ respe~t of the amount advanced, after the date of taking 
over, to the Company lD,relauon to the Ganesh F10ur Mills, together with interest 
due thereon and. the, wages, salaries and other dues of persons employed in the 
Ganesh Flour Mills 10, respect of any period after the date of taking <wer shan 
on and from the appoInted day, be the liability of the Central Government and 45 
shall be discbarged .by the Central Government or. for and on behalf of that 
Government, hy the Government company as and when repayment of such 
amOilOt becomes due or as and when such wages, lialaries and other dues became 
due and payable. 50 
.. 

(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that,-
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this section or in any other 
section of this Act, no liability, other than the liability specified in 
sub-section (2), of the Company in relation to the Ganesh Flour Mills, in 
5 respect of a period prior to the appointed day shall be enforceable against 
the Central Government or the Government company. as the case may be; 
(b) no award, decree .or order of any court. tribunal or other authority 
in relation to the Ganesh Flour Mills. passed after the appointed day. in 
respect of any matter, claim or dispute in relation to any matter, not being 
10 a matter referred to in sub-section (2), which arose before that day shall be 
enforceable against the Central Government or the Government company. 
,as the case may be; 
(c) no liabiiity incurred by the Company before the appointed day, 
for the contravention, in relation to the Ganesh Flour Mills. of any pro-
15 vision of law for the time being in force. shall be enforceable agai,lst the 
Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be. 
CHAP11ER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNT 
7, (1) For the transfer to. and vesting in. the Central Government, under Payment of 
20 .dian 3, of the Ganem Flour MiII~ and die right, tide and iaterest of the amount. 
Com,..y in reIatiou to the Genesh Flour Mils, there shall be givCft by the 
Central Government to the Compa.,y in c~ and in the m81t1k.'f' specified in 
Chapter VI. nn amount equal to R sum of one crore, fifty-seven laklls and 
dxty-e1gbt tbouuDd nrpet'S. 
25 (2) In addition to the amount specified in sub-..~on (1). there shall also be 
given to the Company by the Central Government an a.mount calculated at the 
rate of ten thousand rupees per annum for the deprivation of the Company of 
the management of the Ganesh FlQur M'dJs for the period commenclng on t1Je 
date of takiDa over a·nd endiI12 with the appointed day. 
30 (3) The amount specified in sub-section (1) and the amount calculated in 
35 
accordance with the provisions of sulJ.sedion (2) shall cany liimple interest at 
the rate of four per cent. per Bnnum for the period commendng on the appoint-
ed day mel ending on the date on which payment of' such alRonnf 'is made by 
the Central Government to tbe Commissioner. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF GANES" FLOUR MILLS 
8. (1) On the appointed day, the general superintendence, direction, con- Manale-
trol and management of the t1fh!rs and business of the Ganesh Flour Mills shall,- ment. 
etc, of 
(a) where a direction has been· made by the Central Governme~t Ganesh 
under sub-section (1) of section 5, vest in the Government company SpeCl- Flour Mills, 
fied in such direction; or 
(b) where no such direction has been made by the Central Govt'rn-
ment, vest in one or more CUl'todians appointed by the Central Govern-
ment under sub-section (2) • 

Duty of 
persons in 
charge of 
mana,ement 
of Ganesb 
Flour Mills 
to deliver 
assets, eli:. 
Duty of 
perso8S to 
account for 
assets, etc. 
8 
aod thereupon the Government company so specified or the Custodian or Custo-
dians so appointed, as the case may be, shall be entitled to exercise, to the 
exclusion of aU other persons, all such powers and do all such things as the 
Company is authorised to exercise and do in relation to the Ganesh Flour Mills. 
(2) The Central Government may appoint one or more individuals or a 5 
Government company as the Custodian or Custodians of the Ganesh Flour Mills 
in relation to which no direction has been made by it under sub-section (1) of 
section S. 
(3) The Custodian or CustrKiiens so appointed shall receive, from the funds 
of tbe Ganesh l<10ur Mills such remuneration as the Central Government may 10 
fix and shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government. 
( 4) The Custodian or Custodian of the Ganesh Flour Mills shall maintain 
an account of the Gancsh Flour MiJJ~ in such form and manner and under such 
conditions as may be prescribed and the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956, 1 .f 1'56. 
shell apply to the audit of tbe accounts so maintained as they apply to the audit 15 
of the accounts of a company. 
9. On the vesting in the Central Government or a Government company 
of the Ganesh FlOUr Mill~, all persons in charge of the management of the 
Ganesh Flour Mills immediately before the date of such vesting, shall be bound 
to deliver to the Central Government or the Government company or to such 20 
perSon or body of persons as the Central Government or the Government com-
pany may specify in this behalf, all assets, books of account, registers or other 
docunlents in their custody relating to the Ganesh Flour Mills. 
10. (1) Every person who has, on the appointed day, in his possession or 
under his control any assets, books, documents or other papers relstin~ to tbe 25 
Ganesh Flour Mills which has vested in the ('-entral Government or '1 Govern-
ment company under this Act, and which belon~ to the Company or 
would have so belon~ed if the Ganesb Flour Mills had not vested in the Cen. 
tral Government or -the Government company, shall be liable to account for .... 
the said a!lsets, books, documents and other papers to the Central -Oovernmerit 30 
or the Government company, as the case may be, and shall de'iver them up to 
the Central Government or the Government company or to such l'~r'lon or body 
of persons as the Central Government or the Government company may c;peclfy 
in this behalf. 
(2) The Central Government may take or cause to be taken all necessary 35 
steps for securing possession of the Ganesh Flour Mills which has vested in it 
under section 3. 
Duty of the 
Company to 
furnfab 
particulars. 
11. The Company shall. within such period as the Central Government 
may allow in this behalf. furnish to that Government a complete inventory 01 
all its properties and assets as on the appointed day, pertaining to the Ganesli 40 
Flour Mills which has vested in the Central Government under scctio'1 3, and 
for thi!'; purpose, the Central Government or the Government comp:my 8hall 
afford the Company all reasonable facilities. 
Continu-
ance 
of em-
ployees. 
.. 
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPI.OYEES OF GANESH FLOUR Mn.LS 45 
12. (1) Every person who has been. immediately before the appointed day. 
employed by the Company in connection with the Gane!\h Flour Mill" shall 
become.-
(0) on and from the flpJ'lointed day. an employee of the ('enfra] 
Government: and 50 
• 

(b) where the Ganesh Flour Mills is directed, under sub~sectjon (1) 
of section 5, ~o vest in a Government coPJpany, an employee of that com-
pany on and from the date of such vesting, 
and shall hold office or service under the Central Government or the Govern-
5 ment company, as the case may be, with the same rights and privileges as to 
pension, gratuity and other like matters as would have been admissible to him 
if there had been no sueh vesting and shall continue to do so unless and until 
his employment under the Central Governmegt or the Government company, 
as the case may be, is duly terminated or until his remuneration or other condi-
10 lions of service are duly altered by the Central Governm::nt or the Govern~ 
ment company, as the case may be. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indus~rial Disputes Act, 
.4.,1'47. 1947, or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services 
of any officer or other person employed in connection with the GJnesh Flour 
15 Mills to the Central Government or the Government company shall not entitlo 
such officer or other employee to any compensation under this Act or 
any other law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained 
by any court, tribunal or other authority. 
13. (1) Where the Company has established a provident fund, superanl1ua-
:20 .tion fund, welfare fund or other fund for the benofit of persons employed in 
the Company, the monies relatable to the otJicers and other employees, whose 
services have become transferred by or under this Act to the Central 
Government or the Government company shall, out of the monies standing, on 
the appointed day, to the credit of such provident fund, superannuation fund, 
25 w.lfare fund or other fund, stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central 
Government or the Government company, as the case may be. 
(2) The monies which stand transferred under sub-section (1) to the 
Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be, shall be 
dealt with by that Government or the Government company in such manner 
30 as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
Provident 
fund and 
other funds 
14. (1) The Ce .. kal Guvernment shan, for the purpose of di!lbursiOC the Appoint-
8AIOlInts payable under sectio.lJ 7 to the Company. by notificatlon, appoint a men! of 
35 Ccmmissioner of Paymen.... Commis-
sioner of 
(2) The Central Govemmen. may appoint such other penon..4i l1S it may 
think fit to assist the CommiSSioner and thereupon the Commissioner may autho-
rise olJle or more such persons also to exercise all or any of the power'S exercisable 
by him under this Act, aDd different persons may be authorised to exercise! 
40 dHlerent powers. 
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of the 
powers exercisable by the Commissioner may exercise those powers in the 
same manner and with the same effect as if they have been conferred on that 
person directly by this Act and not by way of authorisation. 
45 (4) The salaries and allowances of the CcmnHssioner and other persolL" 
appeinted UDder this sectiOD Shall be defrayed out of die Consolidated Fund of 
India. 
Payments. 

8 
Payment by 15. (l) The Central Government shall, within thirty eays from the speci-
the Central fled date, pay, in cash, to the Commissioner, for payment to the Company an 
Government 
to the Com- amount equal to the amounts specified in section 7. 
mis~ioner. 
(2) A deposit account shail be opened by the Central Governml!nt ill favour 
of the Commissioner in the Public Account of India, 'lind every am()unt paid 5 
under this Act to the Commissioner shall be deposi:ed by him to the 
credit of the said deposit account, and thereafter the said deposit account shall 
be operated by the Commissioner. 
(3) Interest accruing on the amount standing to the credit of the deposit 
account referred to in sub-section (2) shall enure to the benefit of the Company. 10 
Priorities 16. The claims arising out of matters specified in the Schedule shall have 
of claims. priorities in accordance with the following principles. namely:-
':Iaims to 
he made to 
the Com-
missioner. 
Proof of 
claims. 
(a) Category I shall have precedence over all other categories and 
Category II shall have precedence over Category III and so on; 
(b)' the claims specified in each of the categories, shall rank equally 15 
and be paid i:n full, but, if the amount is insufficient to meet such claims in 
full, they shall abate in equal proponions and be paid accordingly; and 
(c) tbe question of discharging any liability with regard to a matter 
specified in a lower catL:gory shall arise only if a surplus is ldt after meet-
ing all the liabilities specified in the immediately higher category. 
17. Every person having a claim against the Company in relation to the 
Guncsh Flour Mills with regard to any of the matters specified in the Schedule 
shall prefer such claim b\!fore thc Commissioner within thirty days from the 
spe..'ified date: 
20 
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented 25 
by sufficient cause from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days, 
he may entertain the claim within a furthcr period of thirty days, but not thereafter. 
18. (1) 1be Commissioner shaH fix a datc on or before which every claimant 
shall file the proof of his claim failing which he will be cxcluded from the benefit 
of the disburc;ements made by the Commissioner. 30 
(2) Not less than fourteen days' notice of the date so fixed shall be given by 
advertisement in one issue of any daily newspaper in the English language havma 
circulation in the major part of the country and in one issue of any daily ne\W-
paper in sueh regional language as the Commissioner may consider suitable. and 
every such notice shall call upon the claimant to file the proor of his claim with 35 
the CommiSGioner within the period specified in the advertisement. 
~3) Every claimant .w~o fails to file the proof or" his claim within the period 
specified by the Commlsstoner shall be excluded from the disbursements mad~ 
by the Commissioner. 
(4) The Commissioner shall. after such investigation as may . hi .. 
b d · . ,m s OplDlOD, 
· e nccesc;ary an after glvmg the Company an opportunity of ref ti' the l' 40 
df " hI' ung clWll an a ter gmng t e calmant a reasonable opportunity of bein h r d b · 'r d' . h " gear y order III wn IRg, a mIt or reject t e claim 10 whole or in part. ' , 
· (5) The Co?,~issioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure 
ID aU matters. arlsmg ~t of the discharge of his functions. including the place or 
plac:, at .whl.eh he will hold his sittings and shaJl, for the purpose of making 45 
any IllvestJgat10n under this Act, have the "'arne powers .. as are vested in a 

J of 1908. 
45 of 1[(60. 
2 of 1974. 
9 l 
civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. while trying a suit, in respeQt 
of the following matters. namely:-
5 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and 
examining him on oath; 
(b) the discov\!ry and production of any do:::umcnt or other material 
object producible as 'evidence; 
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses. 
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a 
iO judicial proceeding wi~hin the meaning of sections ] 93 and 228 of the Indian 
Penal Code and the Commissioner sball be deemed to be a eivilcourt for the 
purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 
(7) A claimant. who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner, 
Ismay prefer an appeal against the deci03ion to the principal civil court of original 
jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the registered office of the 
Company is situated: 
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is appointed 
to be the Commissioner. such appeal shaH lie to the High CoW1 of Delhi and 
20 such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not less than two Judges of that 
Hi~h Court. 
19. (1) After admitting a claim under this Act, the amount due in Disburse-
rc~pect of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or persons ment of 
to whom such amount is due and on such payment. the liability of the Company :on~y c 
25 in rl!spect of such claim ~ hall !';tand discharged. n~s!i:nerom-
to claimants. 
(2) If. out of the monies paid to him in relation to the Ganesh Flour Mills. 
there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities as specified in 
the Schedule. the Commissioner shall disburse such balance ,to the Company. 
20. Any money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or un-
30 claimed on the d'ate immediately preceding the date on which the office of the 
Commissioner is finally wound uP. shall be paid by the Commissioner, before his 
office is finally wound up. to the general rcvenue account of the C.entruJ Gov-
ernment~ but a claim to any money so transferred may be preferred to the Central 
(l0vernmcnt by the !,erson entitled to such payment aDd shall be dealt with as 
35 if !'uch transfer had not been made, and the order. if any, for payment of the 
claim being treated as on order for the refund of the revenue. 
CHAPTER VII 
M1SCELI.ANEOUS 
21. The prOVISions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any-
40 thing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force 
Or i~ any instrument havinlZ effect by virtue of any law, other thall tllis Act, 
Or in any decree or order of atiy court, tribunal or.other .authority. 
Undisbursed 
or unclaimed 
amount to be 
deposited to 
the general 
revenue 
account. 
Act 
to have over. 
ridina effect. 

Contracts 
to cease to 
have effect 
unless 
ratified by 
the Central 
Govern-
ment or 
Govern-
ment com-
pany. 
Penalties. 
Offences by 
companies. 
10 
22. Every contract, entered into by the Company in relation to the Ganesh 
Flour Mills which has vested in the Central Government under section 3, for any 
~e:"Vice, sale or supply and in force immediately before the appointed day. shall, 
on and from the r.xpiry of a period of thirty days from the appointed day, cease 
to have effect un1e~s I'ueh contract is, before the expiry of that period,mtified, ill 5 
writing. by the Central Government or the Government company and as ratifying 
such contract the Central Government Or the Government company may make 
~uch ~lteration Or modification therein 9S it may think fit: 
Provided that the Central Government Or the Government company shall not 
Clmit to ratify a contract and shaH not make any altemtion or modific,ation ~n"1 10 
contract- , I:) 
(Q) unless it i" satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous or has 
been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental to the interests of the Centra~ 
Government or the Government company; and 
(b) except lfter givil'l(!: the parties to the contract a reasonable oppor- 15 
tunity of being heard e:nd cxcept after recording in writing its rea~ons .for 
refusal to r;{tify the contrect or for making any alteration or modtficatton 
therein. 
.23. Any person who,-
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property;o 
forming part of the Ganesh Flour' Mills. wrongfully withholds property 
from the Central Government or the Government company; or 
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property form-
ing part of the Ganesh FlOUr Mills; or 
(c) wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Government 25 
or the Government company or any person Or body of persons specified 
by that Government or the Government company, as the case may be, 
any document re1ating to the Ganec;h Flonr Mills which may be in hig 
possession. custody or control; Or 
(d) wilfully rails to delivcr to the Central Government any inventory 30 
of property and assets forming part of the Ganesh Flour Mitis; or 
(e) fails to deliver to the Central G<YVernment or the Government 
company or any person or body of persons specified by that Government 
Or the Government company, any assets, books of account, registers or 
other documents in his possession, custody Or control relating to the 35 
Ganesh Flour Mi1Js; Or 
(f) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part of the 
Gancsh Flour Mills or prefcrs any claim under this Act which he 
knows or has reason to believe to be false or grossly inaccurate, 
:;hall be r~nishable w.ith imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 40 
years. or WIth fine whIch may extend to ten thousand rupees, Or with both. 
24. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed· by a 
company, evcry person who, at the time the offence was committed wa . h . , S 10. 
C arge of, and was responSIble to the company fot the conduct of the business 
ut. thc company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guiltv of the 4 
'1ffcnce and shaH be liable to be proceeded against and punished acco~dil)g1:v: 5 
Pro~iped that nothi~g contained in this sub-section shall renda any slIch 
pe~son ltable to any pUnIshmeQt, if he proves that the offence was committed 

• 11 
without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the 
commis~ion of such offence. 
(2) Notwith~tanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any 
offence under thts Act has been committed by a company and it is proved 
5 tltat the offence has been committed with the consent or connivan~e of, or is attri· 
butable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
olicer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be 
.comed to be gUilty of that offeace aad shall be liable to be proc~eded against 
10 
aad punished accordingly. . 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other 
association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
2!. (1) No liuit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the! 
J 5 Central Government or any officer or other employee of that Gowrnment or the 
Custodian or the Government company or any person authorised by that Govern-
ment or the Custodian or the Government company for anything which is in good 
faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
(2) No suit, prosecution or other Ieial proceeding shall lie against the ('~A-
20 tra] Government or any ollicer or other employee of that Government or th. 
Cust,odian or the Government company or any person authorised by that Govern-
ment or the Custodia a or Government company for any damage c,lUsed or Iike]y 
to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be don. 
under this Act. 
PrGtection 
of action 
leken in 
lood faith. 
25 26. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all or any Dele,alion 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the powers con- of powers. 
ferred by this section, sections 27 and 2!, may also be exercised by such person 
or pers<ms as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub--section (1), the 
30 person to whom such power has been delegated shall act under the direction, wn-
tro] and supervision ot the Central Government. 
Power to 27. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carry- make rules. 
ing out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
35 p(~wer, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, any intimatioq 
referred to in sub-section (3) of section 4 shall be given; 
(b) the form and manner in which, and the conditions under which, the 
Custodian or Custodians shall maintain accounts as required by sub-section 
U) of section 8: 
(c) the manner in which the monies in any provident fund or other fund, 
referred to in sub-section (2) of section t 3 shall be dealt with; 
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall 
45 be laid, as soon as may be after it is made. before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, fora total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
~ess.iop' il1]me~ja!~'y following the session or the succer,sive session!! aforesaid, 

Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
Repeal aDd 
savina· 
12 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houaes agree 
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter havo effect only in 'Iuch 
modified form or be of no effect. as the case may Pe; so. however, that any lucb 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done \;nder that rule. 5 
28. If any difficulty arises in giving effe·:;t tn the prov-..ions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by order. not inconsistent with the provisiona of 
this Act, remove the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two 
years from the appointed day. 10 
29. (1) The Ganesh Flour Mills Company Limited (Acquisition and Trans-
fer of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1984, is hereby repe:l~ed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under 
the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the cor-
responding provisions of this Act. 15 
THE SCHEDULE 
[See sections 16, 17 and 19 (2)] 
ORDER, PI' PRIORITIES FOR THE DlSC!HARGF. OF LIABILITIES OF THE COMPANY 
Category 1-
(a) Wages, ~"laries and other dues payable to the employees ('f the 20 
Company. 
(b) . Deductions made from the salaries and wages of the employees 
for provident fund, Employees State Insurance Fund, contribution pre-
m.ium relating to Life Insurance C"''Poration of India or for any other 
purposes. 
Cctegory 1/-
Secured loans. 
Category 111-
25 
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other dues to the Central Government, 30 
a State Government, a local mahority or a Stoate Electricity Board. 
Category IV-
Any ether loans or ducs. 
2 of 1984. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Ganesh Flour Mills Company Limited is a public limited com-
pany incorporated in 1891. The Company was not being managed in a 
manner befitting its size and position. This led to gross mismanage-
ment and grave financial irregularities in its working. As a result, the 
Ganesh Flour Mills Company Lim:ted remained closed. The manage-
ment of the Ganesh Flour Mills Company Limited was, therefore, taken 
over on the 3rd November, 1972, under section 18AA of ~he Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951. 
2. Certain units of the aforesaid Company, namely:-
(i) The Delhi Vanaspati Factory, Delhi; 
(ii) The Hindustan Breakfast Food Manufacturing Factory, 
New Delhi, including the Ganesh Electrical Factory, New Delhi, 
which is interlinked with it by reason of its location, common ser-
vices nnd infrastructure; 
(iii) The Kanpur Vanaspati Factory, Kanpur; and 
(iv) The Solvent Extraction Plant, Bombay 
(hereinafter referred to as the Ganesh Flour Mills) being managed by 
the Central Government under section 18AA of the Industries (Develop-
ment and Regulation) Act, 1951, have been refining crude rapeseed oil 
imported from abroad for supply to the public d!stribution system all 
over the country. It has also been producing wholesome vanaspati for 
sale at reasonable prices in the open market. The Ganesh Flour Mills 
has, thus, been playing an important role in the supply of commodit~es 
essen~ial to the needs of the common man. It is intended further to 
extend the role of the Ganesh 'Flour Mills by means of expansion o~ its 
production capacity and diversification of its production function as a 
part of the nucleus of the instrumentalities under the public sector so as 
to provide Government a commanding role in the regulation of the 
edible oil economy. Certain schemes for this purpose are under pre~ara­
tion. 
3. The Ganesh Flour Mills Company Limited had a negative net-
worth at the time of its take-over in. November 1972 and on its own it 
was not in a posit~on to raise th~ necessary funds and provide the 
managerial inputs to ·bring it back to running condition. Under the 
;nanage~en! of the Government, financial loan was provided by the 

t4 
, 
industrial Reconstruction Corporation of India. Besides this, consi; 
derable managerial and technical inputs have been provided to bring the 
Ganesh Flour Mills to its current healthy situation. In order to enable 
it to play the role envisaged for it 'under Government's policy for reiUlat-
ing the edible oil economy, it is necessary to make further investments 
for modernisa~ion of its mach:nery and diversification of its activities. It 
was felt that further investments for such purposes should be preceded 
by some arrangement which ensures continuity of. management of the 
Ganesh Flour Mil~s under the Central Government. The Ganesh Flour 
Mills Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakines) 
Ordinance, 198. was accordingly promulgated on the 28th January, 198 •. 
4. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance. 
Naw O-.m; BHAGWAT JHA AZAD. 
The 17th February, 1984. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the transfer to and vesting in the 
Central Government of the Ganesh Flour Mills. Sub-clause (1) of 
clause 7 provides for the payment in cash and in the manner specified 
in Chapter VI of the Bill of an amount of Rs. 1,57,68,000 (Rupees one 
ClOre fifty-seven lakhs and sixty--eight thousand only) for vesting in the 
Central Government the right, title and interest of the Ganesh Flour 
Mills Company Limited in relation to the Ganesh Flour Mills. 
2. Sub-clause (2) of clause 7 0' the Bill provides for payment of a 
further amount in cash, in consideration for the deprivation of the 
Ganesh Flour Mills Company Limited of the management of the Ganesh 
Flour Mills calculated at the rate of Rs. 10,000 (Rupees ten thousand 
only) per annum, for the period commencing on the date on which the 
management of the Ganesh Flour Mills was taken over by the Central 
Government and ending on the appointed day. It is estimated that this 
amount will be of the order of Rs. 1,20,000 (Rupees one lakh and twenty 
thousand only). 
3. Sub-clause (3) of clause 7 of the Bill provides for payment of 
simple interest at the rate of o4r per cent. per annum in respect ot the 
amounts payable under sub-clauses (1) and (2) of clause 7, for the 
period commencing on the appointed day and ending on the date on 
which the payment of the amount is made by the Central Government 
to the Commissioner of Payments. It is estimated that this amount is 
likely to be of thE order of Rs. 52,960 (Rupees fifty-two thousand nine 
hundred and sixty only) per month. 
4. Clause 14 of the Bill provides· for the appointment of a Commis-
sioner of Payments by the Central Government with adequate staft to 
assist him for the purpose of disbursing the amounts payable to the 
Ganesh Flour Mills Company Limited. The salary and allowances of 
the Commissioner of Payments and his staft and the expenditure on office 
and establishment will be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of 
India. The estimated expenditure on this account is likely to be of the 
order of Rs. 20,000 (Rupees twenty thousand only) per month. 
5. The Bill, if enacted, is not likely to involve any other recurring or 
non-recurrine expenditure. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 27 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to carry out the provisions of the Act. The matters in respect of 
which rules may be made, inte-r alia, relate to the -time within which 
and the manner in which any intimation regarding any mortgage, charge, 
lien, etc., on the property which has vested in the Central Government 
may be given to the Commissioner of Payments, the form ana manner 
in which the conditions under which accounts shall be maintained by the 
cdstodian and such other matters as are required to be specified by rules. 
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters 
of procedure or administrative detail. The delegation of legislative 
power, is, thus, normal in character . 
• i 

LOK MBHA 
A " ,. 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the right, ,title and interest 
of certain undertakings of the Ganesh Flour Mills Company Limited 
with a view to sustaining and strengthening the nucleus of pubUc 
owned or controlled units required for ensuring supply of wholesome 
vanaspati and refined edible oils, nutritious foods and other consumer 
commodities to the public at reasonable prices and thereby to give 
effect to the policy of the State towards securing the principles 
specified in clauses (b) and (c) of article 39 of the Constitution, 
~ 
(Shri Bhagwat Jha AZCltl, 
Minister of State of the 
Ministry of Food and 
Civil Supplies.) 