To BE INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA

Bill No. 6 of 2006

THE TAILORING WORKERS (WELFARE) BILL, 2006

By
Suri P. KARUNAKARAN, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for certain welfare measures for tailoring workers and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Tailoring Workers (Welfare) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
5 (3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) "Fund" means the Tailoring Workers Welfare Fund constituted under section
3 of this Act;

(8) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and

10 (©) “tailoring workers" means any person engaged in any activity connected

Short title,
extent and
commencement.

Definitions.


Setting up of
Tailoring
Workers
Welfare Fund.

Administration
of Tailoring
Workers
Welfare Fund.

Utilisation of
Fund.

Power to
make rules.

Zz

with cutting and stitching of clothes, embroidery and includes self-employed or persons
working on salary or commission or on contract basis.

3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a fund to be known as the Tailoring
Workers Welfare Fund for the welfare of tailoring workers in the country.

(2) The Central Government and every State Government/Union territory
Administration shall contribute to the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.

(3) The owners of textile mills and showrooms where readymade garments are sold and
exporters of readymade garments shall also contribute to the Fund in such proportion as may
be prescribed by the Central Government.

4, The Fund shall be administered by a Committee consisting of:—
(i) a Chairman who shall be appointed by the Central Government;

(ii) one member to represent the Central Government who shall be designated
as the member secretary;

(iii) two representatives representing the tailoring workers; and

(iv) one representative each from all States/Union territories who shall be
nominated by the respective State Government/Union territory Administration.

5. The Fund shall be used for the following purposes, namely:—

(i) to pay unemployment/subsistence allowance to tailoring workers during off
season period;

(ii) to provide free health facilities for the workers and their families;
(iii) to provide free educational facilities to the children of the workers;

(iv) to pay compensation to workers who are injured during the course of their
work;

(v) to pay compensation to the next of the kin of workers who die in harness;

(vi) to pay disability allowance to workers who are injured in accidents or contract
ailments during the course of their work and are not able to work;

(vii) to pay old age pension to those workers who have attained the age of sixty
years; and

(viii) to pay family pension.

6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.

15


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS,

Lakhs of workers are engaged in the work related to embroidery, cutting and stitching
of clothes throughout the country but they are not covered under any labour laws. Many of
them are self employed or working in the commercial establishments and also in textile
industry. Their living condition is extremely bad. The nature of their work is such that they
are prone to severe ailments such as tuberculosis, etc. In case of ill health or old age, there is
no social security provision for them. It is therefore, necessary to give social security to
tailoring workers and their dependents.

Hence this Bill.

‘New DEL; है P.KARUNAKARAN
December 9,2005.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of the Tailoring Workers Welfare Fund
for the welfare of tailoring werkers in the country. It further provides that Central Government
shall also contribute to the fund. Clause 4 provides for the setting up of a Committee for
administration of the Fund. The Bill, therefore, if ‘enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve arecurring expenditure of about rupees one
hundred crore per annum. A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is
also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for certain welfare measures for tailoring workers and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri P. Karunakaran, MP.)

MGIPMRND—5148LS(S1}—08-02-2006.