1
Short title.
Bill No. 6 of  2016
5
THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA (ESTABLISHMENT OF A
PERMANENT BENCH AT GUNTUR) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI JAYADEV GALLA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the
Supreme Court of India at Guntur.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Supreme Court of India (Establishment of a Permanent
Bench at Guntur) Act, 2016.
2. There shall be established a permanent Bench of the Supreme Court of India
at Guntur and such Judges of the Supreme Court, being not less than five in number,
as the Chief Justice of India may from time to time nominate, shall sit at Guntur in
order to exercise the jurisdiction and power for the time being vested in the Supreme Court
Establishment
of a Permanent
Bench of
Supreme Court
at Guntur.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
in respect of cases arising in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Tamil Nadu,
Karnataka, Kerala, Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, the Union territories of
Puducherry, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Lakshadweep and Andaman and Nicobar Islands and
such other territories as may be notified by the Central Government with the approval of the
Chief Justice of India from time to time.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Demands for Supreme Court Benches to quicken the process of Justice and reduce
the burden on the Apex Court which is now bogged down by 70,000 cases have been going
on for many years. Secondly, distance of the Apex Court in the National Capital from other
parts of the country coupled with high travel expenses and cost of litigation were coming in
the way of citizens from the far-flung areas to approach the top court of the land, which
otherwise is also burdened with large-scale of pendency of cases.
A Five-Judges Bench of the Supreme Court in Bihar Legal Support Society Vs. Chief
Justice of India and Another, in 1986, found the desirability to establish the Supreme Court
Benches in North, South, East and Western India and said that the present Apex Court
should only entertain cases involving questions of constitutional and public law.
The Law Commission of India in its 125th Report, 1998 titled "The Supreme Court a
Fresh Look" had stated, "the Supreme Court sits in Delhi alone. The Government of India,
on a couple of occasions, sought the opinion of the Supreme Court of India for setting up
of a Bench in the South. This proposal did not find favour with the Supreme Court. The
result is that those coming from distant places like Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Tamil Nadu,
etc., in South have to spend huge amount on travel to reach the Supreme Court...."
The Law Commission in its 229th Report, 2009 had reiterated that Benches be set up
each in the Northern, Southern, Western and Eastern parts of the country to deal with all
appellate work arising out of orders/judgments of the State High Courts.
Before the reorganisation of the State of Andhra Pradesh, between 1953 and 1956, the
Andhra High Court used to function from Guntur. But, after formation of Andhra Pradesh
State, as part of the States’ reorganisation process in 1956, the Andhra High Court was
merged with Andhra Pradesh High Court and was shifted to Hyderabad.
After bifurcation of the State of Andhra Pradesh in 2014, Guntur has finally been
selected as the new capital of Andhra Pradesh and the process of constructing a new
capital is on its wings. The inauguration of construction of capital was also made on
22nd October, 2015. The capital is going to be a world-class one with most modern and
latest facilities. As Guntur is centrally located and easily accessible to all Southern States,
the Bill, therefore, proposes to have a Bench of the Supreme Court in Guntur to help the
crore of people residing in Southern States to get legal remedy without going to the National
Capital of Delhi at their doorsteps.
The Bill aims to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; JAYADEV GALLA
November 13, 2015.
————
THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA (ESTABLISHMENT OF A  PERMANENT BENCH
AT GUNTUR) BILL, 2016 BY SHRI JAYADEV GALLA, M.P.
[Copy of letter No. K-15019/15/2015-US.1 dated 14 January, 2016 from Shri D.V.
Sadananda Gowda, Minister of Law and Justice to the Secretary General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Supreme Court of
India (Establishment of a Permanent Bench at Guntur) Bill, 2016 by Shri Jayadev Galla,
M.P ., recommends the introduction of the Bill under article 117(1) and consideration
under article 117(3) of the Constitution in Lok Sabha.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the
Supreme Court of India at Guntur. The Bill, therefore, if enacted and brought into operation,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a
recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is likely to be involved per annum for
the purpose of payment of allowance to the Judges of the Bench and payment of salaries
to the Court servants.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore may be involved
for the construction of building of the Court, etc. and appointment of staff members.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the Supreme Court at Guntur.
————
(Shri Jayadev Galla, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4190LS(S3)—12-02-2016.