     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 6 of 2022
THE MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT (ADOPTION OF
SPORTSPERSONS) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI PARVESH SAHIB SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for adoption of two sportspersons by every Member of Parliament from
his constituency or State and provide such sportspersons with necessary
training and sports equipments and other sports related facilities
 in order to enable them to participate and win medals in
international sports events.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-Third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Members of Parliament (Adoption of
Sportspersons) Act, 2022.
Short title and
commencement.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Every Member of Parliament shall adopt two sportspersons, one male and one
female, from amongst sportspersons having represented at State or higher level
residing in his constituency and provide the sportsperson so adopted appropriate
training, food supplements, practice and such other sports related facilities, as may
be necessary, during his term as such member:
         Provided that in case there is no sportsperson, having participated in State
level competition in any sport, available in the constituency the Member of Parliament
concerned may adopt any sportsperson from any other part of the State in
consultation with the Sports Authority in the State.
3. No sportsperson shall be eligible for adoption for the second time:
    Provided that where the duration of adoption of a sportsperson falls less
than five years, such sportsperson may be adopted for the second and subsequent
term subject to the condition that total duration of adoption shall not exceed five
years due to death or resignation of the member concerned or due to any other
reason.
4. The Central Government shall—
(a) allocate a fund of rupees one crore to each Member of Parliament for the
purpose of sports training, buying of sports equipments, food supplements and for
any other sports related need of sportsperson adopted under section 2; and
(b) provide adequate funds for creating basic infrastructure for development
of sports in every parliamentary constituency with adequate sports facilities to meet
the needs of talented sportspersons.
5. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
6. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the
difficulty:
           Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of
two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
2
Members of
Parliament to
adopt two
sportspersons
from his
constituency
or State.
Restriction on
adoption of
Sportsperson
for second
time.
Central
Government
to allocate
funds to each
Member of
Parliament.
Act to have
Overriding
effect.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
      More than sixty-six per cent. of Indian population is under the age of
thirty-five years. With such a youthful demography, India must be naturally poised to
be a world leader in the field of sports and athletics. Though India has given many
legendary sportspersons and athletes to the world, we are still long behind realizing
our true potential.
India has no dearth of talented sportspersons who, if given proper training
and resources, can be world champions in sports. What they need is institutional
training, guidance and support of resources. There is a need to put an obligation on
the elected and nominated Members of Parliament to adopt sportspersons from their
constituency and State and to nurture them to achieve excel in sports activities at
International level.
The present Bill seeks to provide for adoption of two sportspersons (one
male and one female) by each Member of Parliament from Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha
from his constituency or State during the term of his membership with all type of
sports facilities to such talented sportspersons. Within this period, all the requirements
of the adopted sportspersons with regard to training, food supplement and sports
equipment shall be taken care of by the respective Member of Parliament. It is also
proposed to allocate a fund of rupees one crore every year to each Member of
Parliament exclusively for the purpose of training and other facilities to be provided
to adopted sportspersons. Such a step will prepare around fifteen hundred world
class sportspersons every five years who would be trained to compete with world
class players and athletes in all mega sports events of the world.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;                              PARVESH SAHIB SINGH
10 July, 2021.
—————
PRESIDENT’S  RECOMMENDA TION  UNDER  ARTICLE 117(3) OF THE CONSTITUTION
[Copy of  D.O. Letter No. H-11018/4/2021-SP.V dated 11 January, 2022 from
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur, Minister of Information and Broadcasting and Youth Affairs
and Sports to the Secretary General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Members
of Parliament (Adoption of Sportspersons) Bill, 2021* by Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh,
Member of Parliament, recommends the consideration of the Bill in Lok Sabha under
article 117(3) of the Constitution.
[*As the Bill has been tabled in the year 2021, the requisite recommendation of the President
had been conveyed in the year 2022. However, the Bill becomes due for introduction in the
year 2022. Accordingly, the year of the title of the Bill and enacting formula thereto has been
changed to the year 2022 and ‘Seventy-third year of Republic of India’, respectively.]

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the  Central Government shall allocate
rupees one crore to each Member of Parliament for the purpose of  training, buying
sports equipments and other needs related to sports activities of sportspersons
adopted by such member. It also provides for development of sports related
infrastructure in every parliamentary constituency to meet the needs of talented
sportspersons. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about
rupees one hundred and sixty crores will be involved per annum from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of
detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for adoption of two sportspersons by every Member of Parliament from
his constituency or State and provide such sportspersons with necessary
training and sports equipments and other sports related facilities
 in order to enable them to participate and win medals
 in international sports events.
.
————
 (Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh,  M.P .)