As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

५ 0 Aue |

Bill No. 6 of 2001

‘THE PREVENTION OF SEXUAL ABUSE OF WOMEN AT
WORK-PLACE BILL, 2001
By
‘Surmari Renuka Cuowprury, M.P.
A
BILL

provide for prevention of sexual abuse of women workers at their work-place by
employers or colleagues and for matters connected therewith.

‘Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (0) This Act may be called the Prevention of Sexual Abuse of Women at Work- Place
Act, 2001.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force immediately.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “appropriate Government” means in relation to a State, the State Government
and in relation to Union territories, the Central Government,

(b) “employer” means and includes,—

(@inrelation to private domestic employment, the head of family and other
adult members of the family;

Short title, ex-
tent and com-
mencement.

Definitions.


2

(ii) in relation to a private establishment, the head of the establishment
and other senior workers and colleagues and partners of firm;

(iif) in relation to a Government establishment, the head of the depart-
ment, immediate supervisor and senior colleagues;

(iv) in any other case, the person who or the authority which has the
control over the affairs of the establishment or the house; and where such affairs
are entrusted to any other person, whether designated as Manager, Managing
Director, Director or by any other name, such person;

(c) “sexual harassment” means and includes any unsavoury and undesirable
verbal remark, gesture or act pertaining to sex, or sexual advances, sexually explicit and
indecent statements, avoidable physical contacts, suggestive remarks and obscene
jokes including suggestive songs intentionally sung to the hearing of the person
intended to be harassed, demands or invitations seeking sexual favours, and other
outrageous acts constituting molestation or teasing of women employees committed
with a view to violating their modesty;

(4) “sexual abuse” means and includes sexual assault, rape, attempts to rape. and
acts outraging the modesty of women and girls;

(e)";women" means and includes a woman ora girl employed, whether directly or
through any agency, for wages or other consideration in any establishment, industry
or household and includes domestic help;

(f)“work-place” means and includes, —
(@ a domestic establishment or household;
(ii) a shop or business establishment;
(iii) an agricultural farm or field;
(iv) a construction site;
(v) abrick kiln and its premises;
(vi) a factory and its premises;
(vii) amine and areas comprising the mine;
(viii) a banking establishment;

(ix) acompany and its premises, including its branches; guest houses and
any other premises based or owned by the company, including hotel premises
hired by it;

(x) premises ofa Government, semi Government, or public sector offices or
departments including telegraph office, post offices, telephone exchange, etc.;

(xi) a private house premises where the woman is employed to work;

(xii) any school, college, university or other such institutions and premises
thereof;

(xiii) any establishment wherein persons are employed for any work;

(xiv) any such other place where women are employed for any work,

whatsoever.
Penalty for 3. Whoever, being an employer or a fellow worker, commits the offence of sexual
sexual harassment ona woman worker at the work-place shall be punished with rigorous

harassment. imprisonment of not less than six months besides any other action under the relevant

conditions of service governing the appointment of such employer or fellow workers:


3

Provided that where the accused is an employer, he shall also be subjected to a fine of
Jess than rupees twenty five thousand and damages of equal amount payable to. the
हे
4, Whoever, being an employer or a fellow worker, commits the offence of sexual abuse
‘ona woman worker at the work-place, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of not
less than three years:

Provided that where the offence is rape or an attempt to rape or outraging the modesty
or attempt to outrage the modesty ‘of the woman worker, the punishment shall be in accordance
with the provisions of the Indian Penal Code:

Provided further that where the accused is an employer, he shall also be subjected to
afing of not less than one lakh rupees and damages of equal amount payable to the victim.

5. Notwithstanding any other law for the time being in force, the onus of proving
innocence shall be on the accused.

6. The appropriate Government shall establish special courts for the trial of offenses
under this Act consisting of female judges as far as practicable and trial of offences under
this Act shall be heldin camera.

«The appropriate Government shal make provisions forthe rehabilitation ofthe
rape victims, in such manner as may be prescribed

8. The appropriate Government shall besides immediately notifying i the Offics}
Gazette also publicise the provisions of this Act through electronic and print media for
effective enforcement thereof.

9. The provisions of this Act and rules, if any, made thereunder, shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force and the provisions of this Act and rules, if any, made thereunder, shall be in
madition to and not in derogation of any other law for the time being in force.

10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes: of this Act.

Penalty for
sexual abuse.

Onus for
proving.
innocence.

Special court
for trial of
offences.

Provisions for
rehabilitation
measures.

Publicity of
provisions of
Act

Provisions
not to be in
derogation of
other laws.

Power to
make mules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The problem of sexual harassement of working women and girls in industralised soci-
eties has acquired menacing proportions. A report of the International Labour Organisation
has lately estimated that one third of the women in industralised societies are sexually
harassed at work-place and revealed that it has become a global issue.

In India, however, till a few years ago the concept of sexual harassment was unrecog-
nised. Very few women would admit sexual harassment and exploitation by colleagues at
work and even less would make a complaint. But it does not mean that sexual harassment,
abuse and exploitation of women at work-place did not exist. While many suffered it silently,
the others gave up their jobs and most of the victims dismissed it as a necessary evil of
working in male dominated environment.

In recent years, however, a spate of sexual harassment and abuse cases have come to
light in India. This indicated that Indian women would no longer suffer it silently.

On August 13, 1997, the Supreme Court in a land-mark judgment directed, It shall be
the duty of the employer or others responsible persons in work-places or other institutions
to prevent or deter the commission of acts of sexual harassment and provide the procedures
for prosecution of acts of sexual harassment by making all steps required. The Apex Court
further directed that where conduct of a worker, amounts to a specific offence under the
Indian Penal Code, or under any other law, the employer shall initiate appropriate action in
accordance with the law by making a complaint with the appropriate authority; adding that
“In particular, it should ensure that victims or witnesses are not victimised or discriminated
against......”. The victims should have the option to seek transfer; and where such conduct
amounted to misconduct under relevant service rules, appropriate action should be initiated
by the employer.

Among other guidelines of the Apex Court are creation of a complaining mechanism in
every organisation, ensuring time bound treatment of complaints enabling employees to
Taise issues of sexual harassment at workers’ meeting and other fora and creation of awareness
of the rights of women employees by prominently notifying the guidelines.

‘The Supreme Court also directed the Union and State Governments to consider adopting
suitable measures, including legislations, to ensure observance of these guidelines by the
employers both public and private sectors.

Despite these elaborate directions and guidelines no action worth the name has so far
been taken by the Central or State Governments or by any public or private sector employers.

It would, therefore, be in fitness of things to provide for an elaborate system involving
proper deterrents against sexual harassment and sexual abuse at place of work.

To maintain the dignity of women in the present day male dominated society and to
prevent harassment of women it has become necessary to enact a suitable legislation.

Hence this Bill.

NEWDELHI, RENUKA CHOWDHURY
February 5, 2001


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Special Courts consisting of
‘Women Judges for trial of offences under this Act. Clause 7 of the Bill provides for the
rehabilitation of rape victims. Clause 8 provides for publicity of the provisions of the Act for
effective enforcement. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore per
annum.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be incurred.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying |
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for prevention of sexual abuse of women workers at their work place by
employers or colleagues and for matters connected therewith.

(Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—6353LS—15-02-2001.