1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 6 of  2012
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE CITIZENSHIP (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
By
SHRI KABINDRA PURKAY ASTHA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Citizenship Act,1955.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 5 of the Citizenship Act, 1955, in sub-section (1),—
(i) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(bb) a person of Indian origin who has migrated or migrates to India on
account of religious persecution or civil disturbance or fear of such persecution
or disturbance from the territories now constituting Pakistan and Bangladesh;".
Amendment
of section 5.
557 of 1955.

2
5
(ii) after Explanation 1, the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—
"Explanation 1A. For the purposes of clause ( bb)—
(i) a person shall be deemed to be of Indian origin if he or either of
his ancestors in maternal or paternal line was born in undivided India; and
(ii) a person of Indian origin who has migrated or migrates to India
shall not be treated as an illegal migrant or a foreigner under this Act or
under any other law for the time being in force.".

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The proposed amendment in the Citizenship Act, 1955 has become necessary, after the
insertion of section 6A by the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985 (Act 65 of 1985)
incorporating "Special provisions as to Citizenship of persons covered by Assam Accord"
because of the fact that certain category of persons have been identified as "D" voters in the
Electoral Rolls of Assam.
India was partitioned in 1947 forming two countries, namely, India and Pakistan
(including East Pakistan, now Bangladesh). But with the outbreak of riots in Pakistan,
immediately after partition, huge number of people belonging to minority community had to
flee to India owing to religious persecution, fear of such persecution, civil disturbance and
the fear of civil disturbance in that country. At that time Government of India and the national
leaders including the then Prime Minister, assured the people fleeing from Pakistan and
Bangladesh due to religious persecution and civil disturbance full protection with dignity,
honour and citizenship of India.
The proposed amendment in the Citizenship Act, 1955 (as amended till date) is required
to protect the rights of the refugees from Bangladesh and Pakistan who had to leave their
homeland owing to religious persecution or fear of such persecution or fear of civil disturbances
and also to honour the solemn assurance given by the Government of India.
N
EW DELHI; KABINDRA PURKAYASTHA
November 15, 2011.
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CITIZENSHIP ACT, 1955
(ACT NO. 57 OF 1955)
* * * * *
5. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section and such other conditions and restrictions
as may be prescribed, the Central Government may, on an application made in this behalf,
register as a citizen of India any person not being an illegal migrant who is not already such
citizen by virtue of the Constitution or of any other provision of this Act if he belongs to any
of the following categories, namely:—
(a) ****
(b) a person of Indian origin who is ordinarily resident in any country or place
outside undivided India;
* * * * *
Explanation 1.— For the purposes of clauses (a) and (c), an applicant shall be
deemed to be ordinarily resident in India if—
(i) he has resided in India throughout the period of twelve months
immediately before making an application for registration; and
(ii) he has resided in India during the eight years immediately preceding
the said period of twelve months for a period of not less than six years.
* * * * *
Citizenship by
registration.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955.
————
(Shri Kabindra Purkayastha, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4066LS(S3)—03.03.2012.