1
Short title,
extent,
commence-
ment and
application.
THE SELF-FINANCING PROFESSIONAL EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS (CONTROL AND REGULATION)
BILL,  2018
By
DR. RAMESH POKHRIYAL 'NISHANK', M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for proper planning and co-ordinated development of Self-financing professional
educational institutions throughout the country by regulating the admission of
students and prescribing fee structure in such Self-financing Institution
including prevention of commercialisation of professional
education and prohibition of capitation fees
and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
WHEREAS it is necessary to provide for proper planning and co-ordinated
development of Self-financing Institutions throughout the country by prohibiting
collection of capitation fees, preventing commercialisation of professional education,
regulating admission procedure and prescribing fees structure and other matters
incidental thereto;
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Self-financing Professional Educational Institutions
(Control and Regulation) Act, 2018.
(2)  It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Bill  No. 6 of  2018
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
(3) It shall come into force at once.
(4) It shall apply to all Self-financing Institutions in the country.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "advisory body" means a body consisting of parents and teacher's
representatives, student representatives, elected Member of Parliament and Member
of Legislative Assembly from the area, President of District Panchayat and two
representatives of the Management;
(b) “appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "capitation fee" means any amount by whatever name called whether in cash
or in kind, paid or collected or received directly or indirectly by the Management or
Governing Body or any member of the Management or Governing Body or staff of any
Self-financing Professional Educational Institution, including his/their relative or any
person associated in any manner whatsoever in the management of the said institution,
in addition to the fees prescribed or determined under section 5 from or in relation to
any candidates or student in consideration of his admission or continuance of any
course of study or his promotion to a higher class in such college or institution under
such management;
(d) "common entrance examination" means the entrance examination conducted
either by the Government or any other agency wholly controlled by the Government
for admission to the professional educational institution;
(e) "free seat" means any seat in a Self-financing Professional Educational
Institution against which the fee collected shall be the same as that prevailing for the
corresponding course in Government colleges;
(f) "management" means any trust, Co-operative society, Company registered
under the Companies Act, 2013 and such other similar association of persons, under
whose control or administration any Self-financing Professional Educational Institution
is functioning;
(g) 'minority' means a community belonging to a religious minority as may be
notified by the Government;
(h) ' minority institutions' means any private professional educational institute
established and administered by minority and being conferred minority status by the
National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions;
(i) "parents representative" means, a legal guardian of any student elected by
the parent-teachers association of the respective college;
(j) "payment seat" means any seat against which the management is permitted to
collect the fees prescribed under section 5(1)(b);
(k) "prescribed" means prescribed by this Act or rule made under the Act; and
(l) "Self-financing Professional Educational Institution" includes any College,
University, Deemed University, institution established, administrated or maintained
by any trust, Co-operative Society, Company registered under the Companies
Act, 2013 and such other similar association of persons, affiliated to or recognized by
a University or Government Agency and not receiving any financial assistance from
Government and conducting course in any of the disciplines like Engineering and
Technology, Medicine, Dentistry, Pharmacy, Ayurveda, Homoeopathy, Siddha, Nursing
and Law etc.;
(m) "statutory auditors" means a group of auditors appointed by the Government
to audit Self-financing Institution collectively as item of not less than three auditors;
and
Definitions.
18 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(n) "student representative" means a student elected by the students of a Self
Financing Professional Educational Institution through direct election.
CHAPTER II
ADMISSION AND FEES IN SELF FINANCING PROFESSIONAL EDUCA TIONAL INSTITUTION
3. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to Self-financing Professional
Educational Institution established or administered by the minority communities.
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force or in
any judgment, decree or order of any court or any other authority or in any agreement, the
admission of students to a Self Financing Professional Educational Institution shall be made
only on the basis of the merit list prepared through a common entrance examination.
(2) In every Self-financing Professional Educational Institution seventy five per cent.
of the total seats shall be free seats and the remaining twenty five per cent. shall be payment
seats.
(3) Every free seat shall be filled up on the basis of the rank in the common entrance
examination following the principles of reservation as determined by the Government from
time to time, to ensure free ships and scholarship to the candidates hailing from backward
areas and weaker section of society.
(4) Every payment seat shall be filled up from the list prepared on the basis of common
entrance examination from among those students, who indicate their preference for being
allotted such seats:
Provided that the management shall ensure inter-se  merit among the students opting
for a particular institution, and lower rank holders will be eligible for the seat, only if the
higher rank holder relinquishes his or her claim through a written communication.
(5) Educational qualification for admission in the Self-financing Professional
Educational Institution shall be such as may be notified by the Government, from time to
time.
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force or in
any judgment, decree or order of any court or any other authority or any committee or any
agreement,—
(a) the fees charged by any Self-financing institution for free seats shall be the
same as that charged by Government professional institutions for the corresponding
course.
(b) the fees charged for payment seats shall be prescribed by the Government on
the basis of the recommendation of an expert Committee constituted in this behalf by
the Government.
(2) The fee structure determined by the Expert Committee shall be revised every five
years.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall constitute an Expert Committee to determine
the fee structure for payment seats in the Self-financing Professional Educational Institutions.
(2) the Expert Committee shall consist of:—
(i) a retired Judge of the Supreme Court or the High Court, who shall be the
Chairman of the Committee;
(ii) two experts in the relevant field of professional education;
(iii) two representatives of the appropriate Government;
(iv) three representatives of the management of the Self-financing Professional
Educational Institutions; and
(v) two experts in the field of accountancy, cost audit or management.
Applicability.
Procedure for
admission.
Fee Structure.
Constitution
of Expert
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and members of the Expert Committee, shall be such, as may be
prescribed by the Government.
7. The statutory auditors shall audit all the Self-financing Professional Educational
Institutes at least once in every year and submit their report to the Government.
8. (1) Every Self-financing Professional Educational Institution shall establish an
advisory body to advise on framing policies for ensuring quality of education.
(2) The advisory body shall meet at least once in three months and shall have powers
to verify any record.
9. If any management of a Self-financing Professional Educational Institute contravenes
any of the provisions of this Act, the Government may temporarily take over the management
of the Self Financing Professional Educational Institution and administer the same in larger
public interest:
Provided that such take over and administration shall not exceed period of five years.
CHAPTER III
S
PECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO MINORITY SELF FINANCING PROFESSIONAL
EDUCA TIONAL INSTITUTION
10. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply only to Self-financing Professional
Educational institution established or administered by the minority communities.
11. (1) The admission of students to a Self-financing Professional Educational institution
shall be made only on the basis of merit.
(2) In every Self-financing Professional Educational Institution sixty per cent. of the
total seats shall be free seats and the remaining forty per cent. shall be payment seats.
(3) Every free seat shall be filled up on the basis of the rank obtained in the Common
Entrance Examination following the principles of reservation as determined by the Government
from time to time; and also reserve freeships and scholarships to the candidates hailing from
backward areas and weaker sections.
(4) Every payment seat shall be filled up from the merit list prepared on the basis of
Common Entrance Examination from among those students who indicate their preference for
being allotted such seats:
Provided that a fixed percentage of the payment seats may be reserved for the community
which establishes or administers the institution as may be prescribed.
12. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force or in
any judgment, decree or order of any court or any other authority or any committee or any
agreement,—
(a) the fees charged by any minority Self-financing Professional Educational
Institution for free seats shall be the same as that charged by Government professional
Educational Institution for the corresponding course.
(b) the fees charged for payment seats shall be prescribed by the management
on the basis of recommendation of an Expert Committee constituted in this behalf by
the Government.
(2) The fee structure determined by the Expert Committee shall be revised every five
years.
13. (1) The appropriate Government shall constitute an Expert Committee to
recommend the fee structure for payment seats in the minority Self-financing Professional
Educational Institutions.
Auditing.
Advisory Body.
The powers
of the
Government
to take over.
Applicability.
Procedure for
Admission.
Fee Structure
in Minority
Self Financing
Professional
Education
Institution.
Expert
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(2) The Expert Committee shall consist of—
(i) a retired Judge of the Surpeme Court or the High Court who shall be the
Chairperson of the Committee;
(ii) two experts in the relevant field of professional education, of which one may
be the nominee of the management;
(iii) one representative of the appropriate Government;
(iv) three representatives of the management; and
(v) two experts in the field of Accountancy, Cost Audit or Management.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and members of the Expert Committee, shall be such, as may be
prescribed, by the Government.
CHAPTER IV
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
14. No capitation fee shall be collected by or on behalf of any Self-financing Professional
Educational Institution or by any person who is incharge of the affairs of the institution from
any candidate in considering his admission to or continuance in any course of study under
the management.
15. No Self-financing Professional Educational Institution shall collect fees for more
than the current semester at a time.
16. (1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder
shall, be punishable with simple imprisonment upto six month or with fine which may extend
upto fifty lakh rupees but not less than twenty lakh rupees or with both.
(2) A penalty under this sections may be imposed without prejudice to the penalty
specified in any other law for the time being in force.
17. No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act except
upon a written complaint, made by the person or student from whom the capitation fee is
alleged to have been demanded.
18. No suit prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any member of the
advisory body or any officer of the Government for anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done under this Act.
19. The Central Government may, in public interest, exempt any Self-financing
Professional Educational Institution from the applicability of this Act.
20. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of,
any other law for the time being in force, and nothing contained herein shall exempt any
Self-financing institution from any proceeding which might, apart from this Act, have been
instituted against it.
CHAPTER V
M
ISCELLANEOUS
21. (1) The appropriate Government may by notification in the Gazette, make rules not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of
this Act within three months from the date of commencement of the Act.
Prohibition of
capitation fee.
Collection of
Fees.
Penalties.
Cognizance of
offence.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Exemption to
Self-financing
Professional
Educational
Institutions.
Act to be in
addition to
any other
Law.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Power to
make rules.

6
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing rule making power, such rules
may provide for all or any of the following matters viz.:—
(i) fixation of fee structure;
(ii) procedure to be followed by the expert committee for determining and fixing
fees;
(iii) the matters to be taken into account while fixing fees;
(iv) ensuring that no profiteering is carried on and to reserve freeships and
scholarships to the candidates hailing from backward areas and weaker sections of the
society.
(3) Every rule made under his Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before
each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under such rule.
(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 39 of the Constitution of India mandates that the State shall direct its policy
towards securing the ownership and control of the material resources of the community are
so distributed as best to subserve the common good and that the operation of the economic
system does not result in the concentration of wealth and means of production to the
common detriment. The opening up of the professional education sector and establishment
of Self-financing Institutions have resulted in the need for a comprehensive law regulating
various aspects of the establishment and conduct of such institutions including right to
establish and administer educational institutions of their choice by minorities in the light of
principles enunciated and directions issued by the Supreme Court of India in various decisions
especially in the areas of admission of students and the fee-structure etc. The Supreme Court
had issued the directions invoking its plenary powers under article 142 which are to remain
in force till appropriate legislation is enacted by the Parliament. The Bill seeks to achieve the
object of regulating the admission of students and fees structure etc. of Self-financing
Professional Education Institutions, in the light of the principles enshrined in the Constitution
of India especially, article 39 thereof.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMESH  POKHRIY AL  'NISHANK'
January 2, 2018.
7

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the constitution of an Expert Committee by the Central
and State Governments to determine and fix fee structure in the Self-financing Professional
Institutions. Clause 13 provides for constitution of an Expert Committee to determine and fix
fee structure in the Self-financing Professional Educational Institutions with reference to the
minority-run educational institutions. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. The recurring and non-recurring expenditure on this
count cannot be estimated at this stage, but has to be worked out at later stage by the
appropriate authority while implementing the provisions of the Act.
8

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 21 of Bill empowers to the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
9

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for proper planning and co-ordinated development of Self-financing professional
educational institutions throughout the country by regulating the admission of
students and prescribing fee structure in such Self-financing Institution
including prevention of commercialisation of professional
education and prohibition of capitation fees
and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal ‘Nishank’, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3602LS(S3)—17-01-2018.