THE BANKING COMPANIES (ACQUisITION AND 
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 1969 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
Plul:l:.D.nNARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER U 
TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS 01" BXIB'!'IMO BANKS 
3. Establishment of corresponding new banks and business thereof. 
4. Undertaking of existing banks to vest in corresponding new banks. 
5. General effect of vesting. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT AND DETERMINATION or COMPI:N8NrION 
6. Payment of compensation. 
'i Constitution of the Tribunal. 
8. Tribunal to have powers of a Civil Court. 
9. Procedure of the Tribunal. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT OF CORUSPONDING lOW BANKS 
10. Head office and branches. 
11. Corresponding new bank to be guided by the directions of the 
Central Government. 
12. Advisory Board to aid and advise the Custojian. 
13. Power of Central Government to make scheme. 

CLAUSES 
( ii ) 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
14. Closer of accounts and disposal of prollts. 
15. Removal from offlceof directors, etc. 
16. Obligations as to fidelity and secrecy· 
17. Custodian to be public servant. 
18. Certain defects not to invalidate acts or proceedings. 
19. Indemnity. 
20. References to existing banks on and from the commencement of 
this Act. 
21. Dissolution. 
22. Power to make rules. 
23. Rules and schemes to be laid before Parliament. 
24. Power to make regulations. 
25. Amendment of certain enactments. 
26. Removal of difficulties. 
27. Repeal and saving. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. 

1 of 1918. 
As Dn'RODtJCJ:D IN LOK SABHA 
2 5 JUll969 
BJU No. 70 or 1969 
THE BANKING COMPANIES (AC9UISITION AND 
TRANSFER OF UND.ERTAKINCJ'S) BILL. I969 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition. and traMfer of the undertakings of certain 
banking companies in order to serve bette'r the needs of development 
of the economy in. con.formity with national policy and objectives and 
for matters connected therewith or incidemClI thC1'eto. 
BE it en~cte'd by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the Republic of 
India as foIlows:- . 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Banking Companies (Acquisition Short title 
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1969. :~mence. 
10 
Mento 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 19th day of July, 
1969. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "banking company" does not include a foreign company 
within the mean1ns of ~ttOD "1 of the COlDpanies Act. 1956, 
De1fnitionll. 

J:stabllilh-
ment of 
correa-
pondlnj( 
n~ 
banks 
and 
business 
thereof. 
2 
(b) "existing bank" means a banking company specified in 
column 1 of the First Schedule, being a company the deposits of 
which, as shown in the return as on the last Friday of June, 1969, 
furnished to the Reserve Bank under section 27 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949, were not less than rupees fifty crores; S HI ef 1M •. 
(c) "corresponding new bank", in relation to an existing bank, 
means the body corporate specified against such bank in column 2 
of the First Schedule; 
(d) "Custodian" means the person who becomes, or is appointed, 
a Custodian under section 10; 10 
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(f) "Tribunal" means the Tribunal constituted under section 7; 
(g) words and expressions used herein and not defined but 
defined in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, have the meanings IS 
respectively assigned to them in that Act. I. of IM9. 
CHAPTER II 
TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF EXISTING BANKS 
3. (l) On the commencement of this Act, there shall be constituted 
such corresponding new banks as are specified in the First Schedule. 20 
(2) The paid-up capital of every corresponding new bank constituted 
under sub-section (1) shall, until any provision is made in this behalf 
in any scheme made under section 13, be equal to the paid-up capital 
of the existing bank in relation to· which it is the corresponding new 
bank. 25 
(3) The entire capital of each corresponding new bank shall stand 
vested in and allotted to the Central Government. 
(4) Every ~orresponding new bank shall be a body corporate with 
perpetual succession and a common seal and shall sue and be sued in 
its name. 
(5) Every corresponding new bank shall carryon anj transact the 
business of banking as defined in clause (b) of section 5 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949, and may engage in one or more forms of business 
30 
specified in sub-section (1) of section 6 of that Act, and shall have power 10 of 1949. 
to acquire and hold property, whether novabIe- 01' immovable, for the 3S 
purposes of its business and to di3pose of the same. 
(6) Every corresponding new bank shall establish a reserve fund to 
which shall be transferred the share premiums and the balance, if any, 
standing to the credit of the existing bank in relation to which it is the 
corresponjing new bank, and such further sums, if any, as may be 
transferred in accordance with the proviJions ·of section 17 ·of the Bank- r:40 
ing Regulation Act, 1949. 18 of 1949 

3 
4. On the commencement of this Act, the undertaking of every existing Under-
bank shall be transferred to, and shaUvest in, the eorrespondiDg aew .. tfaki~g . 
b--1.. 0 eXISting 
-. banks to vest in 
corres-pondlnr 
new 
bank •. 
5. (1) The undertaking of each existing bank shall be deemed to G3n~ralf 
5 include all assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all ~e~k.~ 
property, movable and immovable, cash balances, reserve funds, invest-
ments and all other rights and interests arising out of such property as 
were immediately before the commencement of this Act in the 
ownership, possession, power or control of the existing bank in relation 
10 to the undertaking, whether within or without India, and all books of 
accounts, registers, records and all other documents of whatever nature 
relating thereto and shall also be deemed to include all borrowings, 
liabilities and obligations of whatever kind then subsisting of the 
existing bank in relation to the undertaking. 
]5 (2) If, according to the laws of any country outside India, the provi-
sions of this Act by themselves are not effective to transfer or 
vest ·any asset or liability situated in that country which fotIns part of 
the undertaking of an existing bank to, or in, the corresponding new 
bank, the affairs of the existing bank in relation to such asset or liability 
:w shall, on and from the commencement of this Act, stand entrusted 
to the chief executive officer for the time being of the corresponding new 
bank, and the chief executive officer may exercise all powers and do all 
such acts and things as may be exercised or done by the (.xisting bank 
for the purpose of effectively winding up the affairs of that bank. 
(J) The chief executive officer of the corresponding new bank shall, 
in exercise of the powers conferred on him by sub-section (2), take all 
such steps as may be required by the laws of any such country outside 
India for the purpose of effecting such transfer or vesting, and in connec-
tion therewith may either himself or through any person authorised by 
30 him in this behalf realise any asset and discharge any liability of the 
existing bank. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), on thp. 
commencement of this Act, no person shall make any claim or 
demand or take any proceeding in India against any existing bank or 
35 any person acting fn fts name or on its behalf except in so far as may 
be necessary for enforcing the provisions of this section or except in so 
far as it relates to any offence committed by such person. 
(5) Unless otherwise expressly provided by this Act, all 
contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements. powers of attorney, grants of legal 
40·. representation and other instruments of whatever nature subsisting or 
having effect immediately before the commencement of this Act· 
and to which the existing bank is a party or which are in favour of the 
existing bank shall be of as full force and effect against or in favour of 
the corresponding new bank, and may be enforced or acted upon as 
45 fully and effectually as if in the place of the existing bank the corre,,-
ponding new bank had been a party thereto or as if they had been issued 
In flf,vpur of the corresponding new bank. 

Payment of com-penaation. 
Constitu-
tion of 
the 
Tnbunal. 
4 
(6) If, on the date of commencement of this Act, any suit, 
appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature is pending by or against 
the existing bank, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in ~y 
way, prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the undertaking 
of the existing bank or of anything contained in this Act, but the 5 
suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted and 
enforced by or against the corresponding new bank. 
(7) Nothing in this Act shall be construed as applying to the 
assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and property, movable 
and immovable, cash balances and investments in any country outside 10 
India (and other rights and interests arising out of such property) of any 
existing bank operating in that country if, under the laws in force in 
that country, it is not permis,ib1e for a banking company. owned or con-
trolled by Government, to carryon the business of banking there. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT AND DETERMINATION OF COMPENsATION 
6. (1) The Central Government shall give compensation to each 
existing bank for the acquisition of its undertakiDg and such compea-
saUon shall be detennlned in accordance with the principles speelfted 
IS 
In the Second Schedule and in the maDDer hereinafter set out, that is 20 
to 8&Y,-
(a) where the amount of compensation can be fixed by agree-
ment, It shall be detennlned in accordance with soch agreement; 
(b) where no such agreement can be reached, the Central Gov-
ernment shall refer the matter to the Tribunal within a !lerioc1 of 2.5 
three months from the date on which the Central Government and 
the existing bank taU to reach an !tgreement regarding the amount 
of compensation. 
(2) Notwithstanding that separate valuations are calculated under 
the principles specified in the Second Schedule in respect of the several 30 
matters referred to therein, the amount of compensation to be given 
shall be deemed to be a single compensation to be given for the under-
taking as a whole. 
(3) The amount of cOl11jpensation determined in aceoTdance with the 
foregoing provisions shall be paid to each existing bRnk in promissory 35 
notes or stock certificates of the Central Government, issued and repay-
able at par, and maturing at the end of ten years from the date on which 
the compensation is paid and carrying interest at the rate of four and 
• half per cent. per annum: 
Provided that where the amount of such compensation Is not a mnl- 40· 
tipJe of one hundred rupees, any excess over the highest such multiple 
shall be paid by a cheque drawn on the Reserve Bank. 
'7. (1) The Central Government may, for the purposes of this Aet. 
constitute a TrIbunal which $haiJ consist or a Chairman aud two other ., 
memben. 

(a) The Chairman of the Tribunal shall be a person who is, Or hac.: 
been, a Judge of a High Court or of the Supreme Court, and, of the two 
other members of the Tribunal, one shall be a person who, in the opinion 
of the Central Government, has had experience of banking and the other 
5 shall be a person who is a Chartered Accountant within the meaning of 
88 of 1941. the Chartered Accountants' Act, 1949. 
(3) If, for any reason, a vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairman, 
or any other member of the Tribunal, the Central Government may 
fill the vacancy by appointing another person thereto in accordance with 
10 the provisions of su.b-section (2) and any proceeding may be continued 
before the Tribunal so constituted from the stage at which the vacancy 
had occurred. 
(4) The Tribunal may for the purpose of determining any com-
pensation payable under this Act, choose one or more persons 
IS having special knowledge or experience of any relevant matter to assist 
it in the determination of such compensation. 
B. The Tribunal shall have the powers of a Civil Court, while trying Tribunal 
5 of 1801. a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 19'08, in respect of the follow- ~::.~ 
ing matters, namely:- of a CivU 
Court. 
20 (a) summoning and enforCing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of docu.ments; 
(c) receiving evidence on ailidavits; 
(8) issuing commissions for the examination 01 witnesses or 
2S documents. 
t. (1) The Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own procedure. Procedure of the 
(2) The Tribunal may hold the whole or any part of its inquiry in Tribunal. 
camera. 
(3) Any arithmetical or clerical error in any order of the Tribunal 
30 or any error arising therein from an accidental slip or omission may. at 
any time, be corrected by the Tribunal either of its own motion or on 
the application of any of the parties. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT OF CORRESl'QNDING NEW BANKS 
3' 10. (1) The head office of each corresponding new bank shall be at H= d 
such pl-ace as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official ~aneh~. 
Gazette, specify in this behalf, and, until any such place is so specified, 
.hall be at the place at which the head office of the existing bank, in re-
_ Iation to which it is the corresponding new bank, is on the date of the com-
40.m.encement of this Act, located. 
(2) The general superintendence and direction of the affairs and 
business of a corresponding new bank shall. until any provision to the 
contrary is made under any scheme made under section 13, vest in 
a Custodian, who shall be the chief executive officer of that bank and 
4S may exercise all powers and do all acts and things as may be exercised 
or done by that bank. 

COrrel-
ponding 
new bank 
to be guided by 
the direc-tions of 
the Cen-
tral Gov-ernment. 
Advisory 
Board 
(J) The Chairman of the existing bank holding oftlce a. such im .. 
mediately before the commencement of this Act, S?all be the 
Custodian of the corresponding new bank and shall recelve the same 
emoluments as he was receiving immediately before such commence-
m~: S 
Provided that the Central Government may, if it is oi opinion that it 
is necessary so to do, appoint any other person as the Custodian of a 
corresponding new bank and the Custodian so appointed shall receive 
such emoluments as the Central Government may specify in this behalf. 
(.of) The Custodian shall hold office during the pleasure of the CentralIa 
Government. 
11. (1) Every corresponding new bank shall, in the discharge of its 
function, be guided by such direction in regard to matters of policy 
involving public interest as the Central Government may, after consul-
tation with the Governor of the Reserve Bank, give. IS 
(2) If any question arises whether a direction relates to a matter of 
policy involving public interest, it shall be referred to the Central 
Government and the decision of the Central Government thereon .hall be 
final 
12. (1) There shall be an Advisory Board to aid and advise the 20 
Custodian in the discharge of his duties: to aid 
and ad-
ere c!fe Provided that the Advisory Board shall be dissolved on the constitu-
uat Ian .. tion of a Board of Directors in pursuance of a .scheme made under 
clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 13: 
Power 
of Cen-
tral Gov-
ernment 
to make 
ICbem4. 
Provided further that the Central Government may, if it io of opinion 2S 
that it is necessary so to do, dissolve the Advisory Board at any other 
. time. 
(2) The Advisory Board shall consist of such persons as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
13. (1) The Central Government may, after consultation with the 30 
Reserve Bank, make a scheme for carrying out the provisions' of· . tbis 
Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, the said scheme may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:- 35 
(a) the capital structure of the corresponding new bank, 80 
however that the paid-up capital of any such bank shall not .be in 
excess of rupees fifteen crores; . 
(b) the constitution of the Board of Directors, by whatever name 
called, of the corresponding new bank and all such matters in eon- 40 
nection therewith or incidental thereto as the Central Government: 
may consider to be necessary or expedient; 
(c) such inCidental, consequential and supplemental matters as 
may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(3) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Reserve 4S 
Bank, make a scheme to amend or vary the scheme made under lub-
section (1). 

,:."'11 .' ') 
CIUP'l'£R V 
M. ~l) !very corresponding new bank shall· enie iti Dooki to be CIOlUN 
cloaed a:'ld balazreed on the 31st d.y ot Decembt!r of e.ch. year dUd'IbaU of ac-
S appomt, with· the prev10ua approval Gf the Reael'ft Bank, auc:Utors tor :!rtl 
the audit fIf itt aeeounts. :JlP08al 
profits. 
(2) !J\'ery auditor of a correspOiiding new bank shall be a persoii who 
Is quallfied to act as an auditor of a company tiiic1er scclipIi226 . of Uie 
1 of 1858. CompanIes Act, 1956, and shall receive such refuunera'tlon as the Reserve 
10 Bank may fix in consultation with the Central Government. 
(,). Bwry auciitor shaD he supplied with a copy of the anDuaI balince-
a_Ulci.profit a~ 10. accoullt tnd a list of all books kept hy t~ emfts-
ponding new bank, and it shall be the duty ot tlt~ 8uCiHtbr to e_1i1iile tile 
balance-sheet an:1 pro~t and loss account w~th the accounts a~4 vouchers 
IS relating thereto, and m the performance at his duties, the auditor-
(~) ,hall have. at aU reasenable times, aeeess to the books, 
accounts and oUler dcilcwnent& of the corresponding new bank, 
(11), m.ay, at tl1eexpeqe of the corresponding new barak employ 
aCQO~ or o~he,. peJSOIl,I to ..."t him in inv_~ wcb 
accounts, and 
ao (IC) may. in relation to suoa 8C8OI1IK'~ _DiiDe the Qlltodian or 
1G6'. ~ of the Alivisory BotIrd or any ofticer or empioreeof the 
QPITeIilJOllldiac aew bank. 
(4) Every auditor of a corresponding new bank shali make a report 
.. tile' Omtral Ofrvel"ftlIled upeft tbe aftftual balance-sheet· a!id accountl 
as IIAd in e~. luch repon mall st ....... 
(d) whether, in hiS opinioil, the Dalahce-sheet is .. tun" ind' lair 
balance-sheet containing all the necessary pal'ttcullr. ati8!is; pta· 
perl,. dl'MvA(,up-tO'alt tI& edllit " tNt!·IilM-·felr VIe., Ofithe affairs 
of the corresponding new bank, and in c_ IVa ha& ~ f&r any 
e:q»lmation or information, w~ether it has been siven 8Ild whether 
it is IBtlSfactory; 
(b) whether or not the transactions of the correspon.<fins new 
bImk, ~hbve'ceme tt; 1M notfet, haw beeft· Wftl\Iil:tbe powers 
at that &'ant; 
:HI (u)'i ~ 01' l10t the' MturaS'. recet"ed from t_ omce.. cd 
4P 
... __ of; tile eGft'eBJRJAdiag. new baBk' have bemfouncr adtHliJate 
:fer' tile! . plIDpOIe cst· hi. audit; 
(d) whether the profit and loss account shows a· tn,ae.-balaftee of 
profit or loss for the period covered by such account; and 
(e)" any othl!r matter wblcll' he con!llders should be broup,t to 
tHe" notk:e" of the Central Government 
I ~. (S)' The report of the audltbt· 811a11 be ve~e'd, s~M' aU6 tr.~tted 
'. to tile central'Government' iIi deb I11I~ei' alll'lay tie p~~ 

Removal 
from 
offtce of 
directors, 
etc. 
8 
(6) The auditor shall also forward a copy of the audit report to 
the corresponding new bank and to the Reserve Bank. 
(7) After making provision for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation 
in assets, contributions to staff and superannuation funds and all other 
matters for which provision is necessary under any law, or which are S 
usually provided for by banking companies, a corresponding new bank 
shall transfer the balance of profits to the Central Government 
15. (1) Every person holding office as Chairman, managing or other 
director of an existing bank shall, on the commencement of this -Act, 
be deemed to have vacated office: 10 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shan be construed as pre-
venting any existing bank. from constituting a Board of Directors or 
appointing any managing or other director with a view to transacting the 
following business, namely:-
(a) registration of the transfer or transmission of shares; IS 
(b) arriving at an agreement about the amount of compensation 
payable under this Act or appearing before the Tribunal for obtaining 
a determination as to the amount of compensation; 
(c) distribution to each shareholder of the amount of compen-
sation receivej by it under this Act lor the acquisition of its under- 20 
taking; 
(d) carrying on the business of banking in any country outside 
India if under the law in force in that country any bank, owned or 
controlled by Government, is prohibited from carrying on the busi-
ness of banking there; :2 S 
(e) carrying on any business other than the business of banking: 
Provided further that such Board of Directors or managing or other' 
director may be appointed at a meeting of the shareholders of the exist-
ing bank convened-
(i) in accordance with the prOvisions of section 169 of the Com- 30 
-pam' es Act 1956 or 1 of 11118. , , 
(ii) by the Central Government, where the shareholders of the-
existing bank have not convened such meeting. 
(2) The Central Government may, if it is of the opinion that it is 
necessary so to do, authorise an existing bank to bear such reasonable 3S 
expenditure for discharging any of the functions referred to in clause 
(a), (b) or (c) of the proviso to sub-section (1) and may. further autho-
rise the corresponding new bank to advance any amount in connection 
therewith to the existing bank and any amount so advanced. shall be 
recouped from out of the compensation payable to the existing bank 40 
under this Act. 
- (3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (1), all officers and 
other employees of an existing bank shall become, on the commence .... 
ment of this Act, officers and employees of the corresponding new bank: 
and shall -hold their offices . or services in that bank on the same terms 45 
and conditions and with the same ,rights to penSion, gratuity and other 

14 of 
194'1. 
45 ot 
186:> 
matters as would have been admissible to them if the undertaking of 
the existing bank had not been transferred to and vested in the corres-
ponding new bank and continue to do so unless and until their employ-
ment in the corresponding new bank is terminated or until their remu-
S neration, terms or conditlons are duly altered by the corresponding 
new bank. 
(4) For the persons who immediately before the commencement of 
this Act were the trustees for any pengion, provident, gratuity or other 
like fund constituted for the officers or other employees of an existing 
10 bank, there shall be substituted as trustees such persons as the Central 
Government may, by general or special order. specify. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 19'47, or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer 
of the services of any officer or other employee from an existing hank 
IS to a corresponding n~ bank shall not entitle such officer or nny other 
employee to any compensation under this Act or any other law for the 
time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, 
tribunal or other authority. 
16. (1)' Every corresponding new bank shall observe, except as Obligations 
20 otherwise required by law, the practices and usages customary' among as t'? 
bankers, and, in particular, it shall not divulge any information relating :n~1ity 
to or to the affairs of its constituents except in circumstances in which ,ecrecy: 
it is, in accordance with law or practice and usage customary among 
bankers, necessary or appropriate for the corresponding new bank to 
25 divulge such information. 
(2) Every director, member of a local board or a committee, or 
auditor, adviser, officer or other employee of a corresponding new bank 
shall. before entering upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity 
and secrecy in the form set out in the Third Schedule. 
30 (3) Every Custodian of a corresponding new bank shall, as soon as 
possible. make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out 
in the Third Schedule. 
1'7. Every Custodian of a corresponding new bank shall be deem¢ to .. 
be a public servant for the purposes of Chapter IX of the Indian Penal fous~odian 
35 Code. public 
servant. 
18. (1) All acts done by the Custodian, acting in good faith, shall, Cert . 
notwithstanding any defect in his appointment or in the procedure, be dele:: 
valid. not to 
!invalidate 
acts or 
(2) No act or proceeding of any Board of Directors or a local board proceedinp 
40 or committee of a corresponding new bank shall be invalid merely on 
the ground of the existence of any vacancy, or defect in the constitution 
of~ such board or committee, as the case may be. 
(3) All acts done by a person acting in good faith as a director or 
member of a local board or committee of a corresponding new' bank 
45 shall be valid, notwithstanding that it may afterwards be discovered 
that his appointment was invalid by reason of any defect or dil'qualiti-
cation or had terminated by virtue of any provision contained in any 
law for the time being in force: 

~ 
Provided, that nothing in this ~ ahaU ~ cWeJtled to give wU.ifB 
to an)' act cione by a director or membe:r of··' 8,1o.cal aopd oreoiMJUUee 
01'. corresponding new bank after his appomtm~t bas been· s~·to 
.e corresponding new bank to be invalid or to h.ve 1iel'm,inated. 
Indemnity. 19. (1) Every Custodian of a corresponding new bank "nd' every S 
officer of the Central Government and of the Reserve Bank shall'be 
~d:@~¥ by such bank against all losses and ex~' 2nS.es incQrr,.d by 
~,in. o~ in relation ·to the discharge of bis duties exceJ;lt sucb IS hav.e 
b.ee!D: ""w;e<i by his OWll wilful act or ~~ult, 
(2) A director or member of a local board or cOJ'Qmittee of a corres- II) 
ponding new bank:' shall not be responsible for any loss or expe11lJe 
~ to. such baDk by the i~ciency: or deficiency of. the val~ of, 
~ ~. to, anywoper,ty or securit)'. acquireri Of taken .. on lJehalf of .~ 
~SPOr¥iiog new bank, or· .1;Iy t1;l.e iJlSOlv~ or wrongful 3.ct Q{, aQY 
~~ or debter, or by any:thiug dG~. ill. or. in relatiQll. to. the execu- 15 
~ ~of t:he du,ties ~. his offie.e, unlesa su.cb.~. expen$~. ins1)Jficie.nc:y 9r 
~~y w.s c:l~ to.a,ny· wiUul act. or 4efault on the pad of S\l,e.b 
director or member. 
=r. .. knvteierence to any ·existi»l· bank in ":1". 'N'~.. 1Iban this 
.- Ad, or· iD . any contract or other iltlttlHnem' shall he-. , ...... ~ .• ' a ao 
and ., ljI'INIac&. to.tM con_poDding new bDk i. releMoa-J;,) it. tile •. 
rom"""'" mento! 
tbisAct. 
DlIIoJu-
tlon. 
Zl. (1)' Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for th.e 
time being in force, an existing bank shall, on such date as the Central 
Govei1imlllt may, by notiftcration in the OfItati' GazetR., .speeify ilnthis 
~" S1aDd dissolved. :as 
(2) No provisiQQ. of-l~, ~latini to willding .qp ot CQrppr,ij()JlS ~J11 
apply to a corresponding new bank and no correspontiing new bank shall 
be tn'aced in. 'itQ,uidationsave by order of the Cl!ntral Goverri1!lt!'nt Bad in 
sucbrnanner as' it may direct. .• 
•• . ~:c (I) Tp~ C~ntTal Government may, by notification in the Official 30 
,~~~, .majte su~h niles as it,,~ay think 'fit to clrry Out-tbe'pl'ovimons 
of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
macters, DaJllely:- 35 
(a) the manner in which the business of the Advisory a-o.l'd 
shall be transacted and the procedure to be followed at the meettnP 
~~reo~; 
(b) fetes and; IIllowanees wbieh"maybe><p&i,d to'm~,of~ u.e 
AdvitlJry. Board<~orattenciing ·any··meeti.()I{'itherBfl8'd!i)J\,of" AllY 40 
Committee that may ,be· eonatitut.ed by .the; BeuI!i;. 
(c) ·the formation of any Committee whether"of the' 'AdWlilory 
.BOI/M or' of· 'the eonellPond~g: ne,w bank, ~d the, ~~ .. of 
powen ancihfuDCtions ,tosuahCommitt.ees; . 
'('Oi"'tUhother~,~te;·,\Vhkh4,~ tQ. be. Ofr mBJ· ~ 45 
pracribec1. 

tl 
••• 4f1')' rule and every scheme made by the Central Gov.ernment B=t, 
...... ta6s Aet Bball be laid, as BOOn as may be, after it .. made, :'lald 
before each House of Parliament while it is in session fora total period ~r:-
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive mEllt. 
S Sessions, and 1~ before the expiry of the session in which it is 10 laid 
or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any 
mo'difiC'ation in the rule or scheme or both Houses agree that theru'le or 
sdleme'Skoald ngt be made, the rule 01' scheme shaU·thereafter ha'Ve e1fect 
om,' in 1Alc:.'b· medtfted form or be of no effect, 88' tIle' <OYe may be; 80, 
10' ~vel"j that tmy such modifieation or 'annulment shaH be withdttt pre-
judice to the vaf!i~ty of m;thi1'l.g previously done under that ruht or 
scheme, -88 the case Blay be. 
U. (1) The Board of Directors of a corrcspotkiing new ba* may, after Power 
OQ1'I'I'tatign witA·, tbc Reserve Bank and w:th the previous sanction of to ~ti ' rea,""" ons. 
IS iju, Central Qovemment, make regulatio0'5, not inconsistent with the 
pl'1WWoRa of this Act and any rule or scheme made thereunder, to pro-
vide for, . .an matters for, giving effect to the provisions of thjs act. 
~) In particular and wit1lout prejudice to the generality' of thtf fore-
going power, the regulations may provide for all or any of the following 
30' matters, namely:-
(4) the powers, functions and duties of local boa\'ldsantf t"e8fric-
tions, conditions or limitations, if any, subject to which they may 
be exercised or performed, the formation and constitution of local 
. commi ..... ,·aml' 'CcmIm*ee .. 11floca1 board (including the number of 
25 ' • ..ez:e'·of"uy 'SUeIJ eomnmtee), thepeWer6, -functions· and:duties 
aftm& <."'CIIirnittees,· th~, holding -ef meetings of . local committees and 
cc:a.aittilell 'oflocta.l :boardsastd, the ,conduct of buainessthereat; 
30' 
35 . 
40 
4S 
(b) the manner in which the business of the local board!lshall 
b.rtr8lDllCted ,-and ,·the IpPOeedure in cormection therewith; 
(e)th'ede~gittion of'pbwers and' functions ot the board,()f'direc-
tors of' a corresponding new bRnk to ·the general nlaRag&. cMrectOl", 
'ofIlber or ot1ier employee of' that·, bank; 
(d) the conditions or limitations subject to which the eGt'res-
'Pmuting-.new ·-bIIDk ·may· appoint officers, advisers .and .other emplo--
ywes.rand'·lfjx! tileir.-retaUftel'a'ion and· other, terms and ·con.jitions of 
..-...toe; 
(e) the dtlt:es aJlld' C!O!Iduct"of Ofticers, adVisers and· &iller em-
pld~of 'the eorrespondii1g new 'bar*; 
(1) the establishment and ma;ntenance of superannuation, pen-
.. siODJ 'Pft)vige!ltror-~oijaer' ftnlda for· the ,benefit -of officers or employees 
!oi.rthe.'~l'Ile!lpQtl.ding~new-rbank or of th~ dependants of such omcez:s 
or~mp1oyees' and •. thegranting of ·suoerannuation allowances, annuI-
. til!8)lnd ... ,enaieutpaYable out of·sucb·,funds; 
(g) the conduct and d~ttee ;df':legal -proceeB.ing,s"by 'Or .~~ 
.. the coR'espQ.DJing new bank and the manner of s:gnlJ~g pleadIngs, 
(h) the provision of'a seal ftjrl the' ICOt'fe6pondill'g . '!lew .,k .ruI 
the. manner ofewett of llts 'uSE'; 
it>' 111e- fOrm1111R,r ItIRd:meriJ1"whieh' 'contraet6 biRding·.o1l th~ 
corresponding new b~ may be executed; 

Amend-
ment 
of 
certain 
enact-
ments. 
, ., ...... ' : .. ~ 12. 
(;) the conditions and the requirements subject to which loans 
or advances may be made or bills may be d:scounted or purchased 
by the correspon.:Hng new hank; 
(k) the persons or authorities who shall administer any pension, 
provident or other fund constituted for the benefit of officers or em- 5 
ployees of the corresponding new bank or their dependants; 
(I) the preparation and submission of statements of programmes 
of activities and financial statements of the corresponding new bank. 
and the )'eriod for which and the time within which such statements 
and estimates are to be prepared and submitted; and 10 
(m) generally for the efficient conduct of the affairs of the 
corresponding new bank. 
(3) Until any regulation is made und .... r sub-section (1), the articles of 
association of the existing bank and every regulation, rule, bye-law 
Or order made by the exi~ting bank shall, if in force at the commence- 15 
ment of this Act, be deemed to be the regulations made under sub-
section (1) and shall have effect accordingly and any referenCe therein 
to any authority of the ex:sting ba,u shall be deemed to be a reference 
to the corresponding authority of the corresponding new bank. 
15. (1) In the Banking Regulation Act, 1949,- 2.0 10 of IM9. 
(a) in section MA, in sub-section (3), for the words "and any 
subsidiary bank", the words, figures and brackets "a corresponding 
new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1969, and any 
subsidiary bank" shall be substituted; 2' 
(b) in section 36AD, in sub-section (3), for the words "and any 
subsidiary bank", the words, figures and brackets "a corresponding 
new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Ae-
quisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1969, anti Gny subSidiary 
bank" shall be substituted; 30 
(e) in section 51, for the words "or any other banking institu-
tion notified by the Central Government in this behalf', the words, 
figures and brackets uor any corresponding new bank constituted 
under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer 
of Undertakings) Act, 1969, or anv other banking institution notified 35 
by the Central Government in this behalf" shall be substituted. 
(2) In the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, in section 2, in clause (bb) , 
for the words "and any subsidiary bank" the words, figures and brackets 
"a corresponding new bank constituted undeI' section 3 of the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1969, and 
any subsidiary bank" shall be substituted. 40 
(3) In the Banking Companies (Legal Practitioners' Clients' Accounts) 
Act. 1949, in section 2, in clause (a). for the words uand any subsidiary 
bank", the words, figures lind bracket<; "a corresponding new bank consti-
tuted under section 3 of the Banking Companiec; (AcquiRition and Trans-
fer of Undertakings) Act, 1969, and any subsidiary bank" shall be substi- 45 
tuted. 
14 of 1947. 
411 of 1949. 

aof W69. 
s 
218. If any diftlculty arises in giving e1fect to the provisions of this Act, Removal of 
the Central Government may make such order, not inconsistent with the cWllculUee. 
provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary for the purpose 
of removing the diftlculty: 
Provided that no such power shall be exercised after the expiry of a 
period of two years from the commencement of this Act. 
m. (1) The Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Under-Reoeal 
takings) Ordinance, 1969, is hereby repealed. and savina. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken, 
10 meluding any order made, notification issued or direction given, under 
the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done, taken, made, 
issued or given, as the case may be, under the corresponding provision 
of this" Act. 

THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See sections 2, 3 and 4) 
C_ .• = 
Column 1 
--------.----------------------~----~~----,~--
~~.l BaM' GI' IlMiia ~e4. Cltotil"1I1 J3uk, 0I18tU. 
Bank of India Limited. Bank 61 India. 
Punjab National Bank Limited; Punjab National Bank. 
Bank of Baroda Limited. Bank of Baroda. 
United Commercial Bank Limited. United Commercial Bank. 
Canara Bank. Limited. Canara Bank. 
United Bank of India Limited. United Bank of India. 
Dena Bank Limited. Dena Bank. ," ~'" 
Syndicate Bank Limited. Syndicate Bank. 
Union Bank of India Limited. Union Bank of India. 
Allahabad Bank Limited. Allahabad Bank. 
Indian Bank LImited. Indian Bank. 
Bank of Maharashtra Limited. Bank of Maharashtra. 
Indian Overseas Bank Limited. Indian Overseas Bank. 
14 

tHE SECOr.lD SCHEDULE 
(See section 6) 
PRINCIPLES OF COMp.~NSATION 
1 The compensation to be paid by the Central Government to each 
existing bank in respect of the acquisition cf the undertaking thereof 
shall bean amount equal to the sum-total of the value of the assets of 
the eXisting bank as On the commencement of this Act, calculatea 
in accordance with the provisions of Part I, le.s the sum total of the 
liabilities computed and obligations of the existing bank calculated in 
accordance with the provisions of Part II. 
Part I.-Assets 
For the purposes of this Part, "assets" means the total of the fe How-
ing: -
(a) the amount of cash in hand and with the Reserve Bank and 
the State Bank of India (including foreign currency nptes which 
shall be converted at the market rate of exchange); 
(b) the amount of balances with any bank. whether on deposit 
or current account, and money at call and short notice, balances 
held outside India being converted at the market rate of exchange: 
Provided that any balap.ces which are not realisable in full shall 
be deemed to be debts and valued accordingly; 
(c) the market' value, as on the day immediately before the 
commencement of this Act, of any securities, shares, deben-
tures, bonds and other investments, held by the bank concerned. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause-
(i) securities of the Central and State Governments [other than 
the securities specified in clauses (ii) and (iii) of this Explana.-
tion] maturing for redemption within five years from the commence-
ment of this Act shall be valued at the face value or the 
market value, whichever is higher; 
(ii) securities of the Central Government, such as Post Office 
Certificates and Treasury Savings D:po~it Certificates and any other 
securities or certificates issued or to be issued under the Small 
Savings Schemes of the Central Go',ernment, shall be valued at their 
face value or the encashable value as on the day immediately before 
the commencement of this Act, whichever is higher; 
(iii) where the market value uf any Govemment security such 
as the zamindari abolition bond or other simUar'8eCurities in re61pect 
of which the principal is payable in instalments, is not ascertainabk 
or is, for any reason. not considered as refiecting the fair valuti 
thereof or as otherwise appropriate, the securities shall be valued at 
such an amount as js considered reasonable having regard to thE" 
instalments of principal and intl~re~t remaining to be paid, th~ 
period during which such instalmt'nts at'p payable, the yield of any 
15 

iA 
securitY, issued by the Government to which the security pet'taifis 
and having the same or approximately the same maturity, and other 
relevant factors; 
. (iv) where the market value of any security, share. debenture, 
borid or other investment is not cO:1sidered reasonable by reason of 
its having been affected by abnormal factors, the investment inay 
be valued on the ba!';is of its average market value ovef any reasdti-
abie period: . . 
tv) whete tHe market vallie of arty security, !ihare, debenture, 
bond or other irtvestment is not ascertainablel only such value, 
If any. shall be taken into accoUnt a;:; is considered reasonable havin~ 
tegard to the financial position of the issuing ccncern, the dividend 
paid by it during the preceding !ive years and other relevant factors; 
(d) the amount of advances (indllding loans. cash credits, over-
drafts, bills purchased and disco'Jo!cd) and other dt'hts. whc1hf'r 
secured or unsecured, to the extent to which they are reasonably con-
sidered recoverable, having regard to the value of the security, if any. 
the operation on the account, the reported worth and respectability 
of the borrower. the prospects of rpalisation and other relevant 
considerations; 
(e) the market value of any land or buildings; 
(f) the total amount of the premia paid, in respect of all leas('-
hold properties, reduced in the case of each such premium by an 
amount which bears to such premium the same proportion as the 
expired term of the lease in respect of which such premium shall 
have been paid bears to the total tenn of the lease; 
(g) the written down value as per books, or the realisable value, 
as may be considered reasonable, of all furniture, fixtures and 
fittings; 
(h) the market or realisable valuE', as may be appropriate, of 
other assets appearing on the books of the bank, no value being allow-
ed for capitalised expenses, such as share selling commission, organi-
sational expenses and brokl:'rage, losses incurred and similar other 
items. 
Part Il.-LiabHities 
For the purposes of this Part, "liabilities" means the total amount 
of all outside liabilities existing at the commencement of this Act, 
and all contingent liabilities which the corresponding new bank may 
reasonably be expected to be required to meet out of its own resources 
on or after the date of commencement of this Act. 
CERTAIN DIVIDENDS NOT TO BE TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT 
2. No sepa:rate compensation shall be payable for any dividend in 
dividend in respect of any period immediately preceding the commence-
ment of this Act: 
Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall preclude the payment 
of any dividend which was declared before such commencement . 
• 

THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 16) 
DECLARATION OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY 
1. ...................................... , do hereby declare that I will 
fa ithfully, truely and to the best of my skill and ability execute anj per-
form the duties required of me as Custodian, Director, member of Local 
Board, member of Local Committee, auditor, adviser, officer or other c>m· 
ployee (as the case may be) (jf the >I< 
and which properly relate to the office or position in the said· held by me. 
I further declare that I will not communicate or -allow to be communi-
cated to any person not legally entitled thereto any information relating 
to the affairs of the • or to the affairs of any person 
having any ~ealing with the • ; nor wi11 I allow ary such 
person to inspect or heve access to any books or documents belonging to 
or in the possession of the • and relating to the busi-
ness of the • or to the business of any person 
having any dealing with the •. 
• Name of corresoondinll new bank to be filled in. 
17 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bill seeks to replace the Banking Companies (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1969. 
2. The banking system touches the lives of millions and has to be 
inspired by a larger social purpose and has to subserve national priorities 
and t'bjectives, such as rapid growth in agriculture, small industries and 
exports, raising of employment levels, encouragement of new enterpl"e-
neurs and the development of backward areas. For this purpose, it is 
necessary for Government to take direct retponsibility for the extension 
and diversification of banking services and for the working of a substan-
tial part of the banking system. Accordingly, the' Bill seeks to nationalise 
14 major Indian scheduled banks with deposits of Rs. 50 crores or more. 
3. The provisions of the Bill are explained in detail in the notes on 
~l1Ses. 
NEw DILHli 
The 23rd July, 1M. P. GOVINDA· MENON. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F4(43)-BC/67 dated the 23rd July, 1969, from 
Shri P. Govinda Menon. Minister of Law to the Secretary, Lok Sahha.] 
• • • * * 
The Chief Justice of India (Shri M. Hidayatullah) discharging the 
functions of the President having been informed of the subject matter of 
the proposed Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Under-
takings) Bill, 1969, recommends the introduction of the Bill in the Lok 
Sabha under Clause (1) of Article 117 and its consideration under Clause 
(3) of Article 117 of the Con~titution . 
• • • '" '" 
r ... ·.-~· ., t, .... , ..... ~ . .,... "; 18 ......... 

Notes on dawes 
Clause 2 seeks to insert definitions of certain new expresllions in the 
Act. The proposed definitions are self-explanatory. 
Clause 3 seeks to provide for the constitution of 14 new banks with the 
share capital of each bank being allotted to the Central Government. Each 
ne,q bank shall be a body corporate and shall carry on the business of 
banking. 
Claw:'~ 4 seeks to provide for the transfer and ve!Iltmg of 1" existing 
banks, as mentioned in the First Schedule, in the corresponding new 
banks. 
Clause 5 clarifies the general effect of vesting so that the business of 
each new bank continues uninterrupted. 
Cl.a1Lse 6 seeks to provide for the payment of compensation to each 
existing bank for the acquisition of the undertaking in accordance with 
the principles specified in the Second Schedule. Such compensation will 
be paid in the Central Government promissory notes or stock certiftcates 
at par of e maturity of 10 years at 4~ per cent. interest. If no agree-
ment is reached with the bank regarding the quantum of compensation, 
the clause provides for the reference of the question to the Tribunal. 
Clause 7 seeks to provide for the constitution of a Tribltnal consisting 
of a Chairman and two other Members. 
Clause 8 seeks to confer the powers of a Civil Court on the Tribunal. 
Clause 9 seeks to confer on the Tribunal the power to regulate its own 
procedure. 
Clause 10 seeks to specify the head office of each bank and to provide 
for thl! appointment of the Chairman of an existin~ bank as the Custo~ 
dian for the new bank until the constitution of Board of Directors in 
terms of the scheme that may be framed by the Centrnl Government 
under section 13 of the Act. It also seeks to empower the Central Gov-
ernment to appoint any other person as a Custodian of the new bank, if 
the Centra] Government so considers it necessary. 
Cl.atlse 11 seeks to provide for the issue of directions by the Central 
Government. in regard to matters of policy involving public interest. 
Clawle 12 seeks to provide for the constitution of an Advisory Board 
pending the constitution of a Board of Directors in pursuance of a scheme 
that may be framed under section 13 of the Act. 
C/·ause 13 empowers the Central Government to make a scheme for 
the capital structure of each bank and for the constitution of the Board 
of Directors for the new bank and all other matters which are necessary 
for carrying out the provisions of the Act. 
ClaH.'ie 14 contains provisions regarding accounts and audit of each 
bank. 
19 

20 
Clause 15 provides for the vacation of oftice of the existing directors of 
each bank, but allows it to constitute a Board of Directors for the transac-
tion of certain speCified types of business. The morc important of which 
are the distribution to each shareholder of the amount of compensation 
received by it and for carrying on the busine&s of banking in any country 
outside India if under the law of that country the transfer of business 
to a bank owned by the government :s1l0~ permissible. 
Clause 16 seeks to place an obligation on every new bank aD to the 
fidelity and secrecy relating to accounts of ,the individual constituents of 
every b:mk. 
Clause 17 seeks to make every Custodian 'of new bank a public servant 
for the purposes of Chapter IX of the Indian Penal Code. 
Clause 18 seeks to provide protection for anything done in good faith 
to the Custodian/Board of Directors for any aeticn irrespective of any 
defect in their appointment. 
Clause 19 seeks to provi'de indemnity to every Custodian of the bank 
and officer of the Central Government or the Reserve Bank against all 
losses not wilfully caused. 
Clause 20 provides for the construction of references. 
Clause 21 provides for the dissolution o~ existing bank. 
Clauses 22 to 24 provide for the rule and regulation making power 
of the Central Government. 
Clause 25 provides for the application of certain enactments to the 
new banks. 
Clause 26 empowers the Central Government to make orders to remove 
any difficulties in the application of the Act. 
Clause 27 provides for the repeal of the Ol'dmancc. 

Clauses 4 and 6 provide for the acquisition of the undt!rtaking of the 
exist1n& banks and the payment of compensation on the basis of the 
market value of the assets less the outside liabilities in accordanc~ with 
the principlel!l set out in the Second Schedule. The compensation is pay· 
able in the form of marketable Central Government securities to be issu-
ed at par. Clause 7 provides for the constitution of a Tribune.l, consisting 
of a chairman and two other members to determine the compensation 
payable in the case of any existing bank if the amount arrived at ill ac-
cordance with the provisions in the Second Schedule and offered by the 
Central Government is not acceptable to that bank. 
2. The compensation will be payable with reference to the actual assets 
and liabilities of the existing banks as on the date of the commenC1ment 
of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Ordinance, 1969. The value of these assets and the extent of the liabilities 
will have to be ascertained after an investigation I£md scrutiny of the re-
cords of the existing banks and may also have to be settled by the Tri-
bunal if a reference is made to the Tribunal under clause 7 of the Bill. It 
is not possible at this stage to in'dicate the precise -amount of the com-
pensation, which will be payable by the Central Government but it is esti-
mated that having regard to the total amount of the assets and liabilities 
of the fourteen existing banks, the compensation payoable for the acqui-
sition of their undertakings may be about Rs. 75 crores. This amount may 
have to be paid by the Cent,'aJ Government over a period of two to three 
years but it is not possible t.J indicate at this stage the exact quantum of 
compensation tbat may have to be disbursed in the current or the follow-
ing financial years. 
3. As regards recurring expenditure, this will arise nut of interest on 
Government securities paid for compensation. The rate of interest speci-
fied in the Bill is 4.50 per cent. for a maturity of ten years. On this basis 
the amount of the interest liability every year will be Rs. 3.375 crores. 
4. As regards the expenditure on the setting up of a Tribunal, this is 
likely to be incurred only if such a Tribunal is set up in the event of an 
agreement not being reached with any of the existing banks. If a Tribu-
nal is set up, recurring expenditure at the rate of about Rs. 3 lakhs per 
annum maybe incurred during the period for which it continues to func-
tion. The non-recurring expenditure is not likely to exceed Rs. 50,000. 
21 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
ClaUSe 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make a 
scheme in consultation with the Reserve Bank forcarryiDg ,out the pro:vj-
sionsof the Act. The scheme will inter alia provide fO'l" mattersl'E!1ating 
to capital structure of the corresponding new bank, the conmtuuon of the 
Board of Directors oan such incl'dental or consequential matters u may be 
Board of Directors and such incidental or consequential matters as may be 
fore both Houses of Parliament and every such scheme be subject to 
modification or annulment by Parliament. 
Clause 14 empowers the Central Government to prescribe the iIlBDD.cr 
of verification and transmission of the rep;>rt of the auditor. 
Clause 22 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules 
to carry out the purposes of the Act. The mattel'S in respect of which 
such rules may be made, inter alia, relate to the manner in whichtbe 
busilreas of the Advisory Board shall be transacted, fees an'd allowaaoes 
etc. which may be paid to the members of the Advisory Bcoard, the for-
mation of any committee of the Advisory Board or of the correspGDding 
new bank and for similar matters. Every rule made by the Central Gov-
ernment shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament an'd shall be sub-
ject to modification or annulment by Parliament. 
Clause 24 empowE:rs the Board of Directors of a new bank to frame re-
gulations (for the transaction of its business) in consultation with the 
Reserve Bank and with the previous sanction of the Central Govern-
ment. Such regulations shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of 
the Act or the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of the 
Act. 
The moatters in respect of which allY scheme, rule and regulaticn may 
be made ere generally matters of procedure and administrative tletall 
and it is not practicable to provide for them. in the Bill itself. The dele-
gation of legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character. 
22 
i . ., 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE BANKING REGULATION 
(10 OF 1949) 
• • .. .. 
PART II 
BUSINESS OF B.\NKING COMPANIES 
• • • • 
MA. (1) • .. • 
ACT, 1949 
.. 
• 
.. 
Produc-tionof 
(3) For the purposes of this section, "banking company" includes the documents · S B k of con1l-Industrial Development Bank of IndIa, the Reserve Bank, the tate an dential 
of India and any subsidiary bank. nature. 
• .. • • • 
PART 1m 
PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN ACTIVITIES IN RELATION TO BANKING COMPANIES 
36AD. (1) .. .. .. • Punish-ments for 
(3) For the purposes of this section, "banking company" includes the ce~ 
Reserve Bank, the Industrial Development Bank of India, the State Bank f::e"t~~~n 
of Intlia, and any subsidiary bank. ~ bank-lDgcom-
>I< .. 
.. .. 
.. 
PART IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
• 
.. • panies. 
• • 
51. Without prejudice to the provisions of the State Bank of India 4pplica-
23 of 19515. Act, 1955, or any other enactment, the provisions of section 10, 13 to 15, !o::a~ 
17, 19 to 21, 23 to 28. 29 (excluding sub-section (3) ). 31, 34, 35, 35A, 36 provi-
(excluding clause (d) of sub-section (1», 46 to 48, 50, 52 and 53 shall :A~n~t~e 
also apply, so far as may be, to and in relation to the State Bank of B8ll;k of 
India or any other banking institution notified by the Central Govern- I~~la and 
ment in this behalf as they apply to and in relation to banking com- ~ot~~ed 
panies: banks. 
Provided that-
(a) nothing contained in clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 
10 shall apply to the chairman of the State Bank of India or to a 
general manager of any subsidiary bank in so far as the said clause 
precludes him from being a director of, or holding an office in, any 
institution approved by the Reserve Bank; 
(b) nothing contained in section HI ~hall apply to the holding 
by the State Bank of India. of shares in the capital of any such 
subsidiary bank; and 
(c) nothing contained in section 46 or in section 47A shall apply 
to any officer of the Central Government or the Reserve Bank or 
the State Bank of India, nominated or appointed as director of the 
State Bank of India, or any such subsidiary bank cr any other bank-
ing institution notified by the Central Government under this 
section . 
• .. • • • 
23 

Defini-tions. 
• 
• 
24 
EXTRAC'l'S FROM THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947 
(14 OF 1947) 
• 
• 
• 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context,-
• • • • • 
(bb) "banking company" means a banking company as' defined in 
section 5 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949, having branches or 10 of 1949. 
other establishments in more than one State, and includes the Indus-
trial Development Bank of India, the Reserve Bank of India, the State 
Bank of India and any subsidiary bank as defined in the State Bank 
of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959; 38 of 1959. 
• • • • • 
ExTRAcTs FROM THE BANKING COMPANIES (LEGAL PRACTITIONERS' CLIENTS' 
ACCOUNTS) ACT, 1949 
(46 OF 1949) 
• • • • • 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context.-
(A) "banking company" means any banking company as defined 
in section 5 of the Banking Companies Act. 1949, and includes the 10 of 1949. 
State Bank of India and any subsidiary bank as defined in the State 
Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959; 38 of 1959. 
(b) "legal practitioner" has the same meaning as in the Legal 
Practitioners Act, 1879. 18 of 1879. 
• • • • 

LOK SABHA 
.. 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings 
of certain Banking Companies in order to serve better the 
needs of development of the economy in conformity with 
national policy and objectives and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Sh1'i P. Govinda Menon, Minister of Law and Social Welfare) 
I 