As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA ON 
.3 JUN 1971 
'. I . 
THE BENGAL iFINANCB (SALES TAX) (DELHl VALIDA-
TION OF APPOINTMENTS : AND PROCEEDINGS) 
BILL, I971. 
A 
BILL 
I.' 'to .," • I • 
~o validate apPointments of certain officers 'Il:n4er the Bengal ~nance 
(Sales Tax) Act, 1941, as in force in the Union territory of Delhi and 
to validate proceedings taken by such ofJicers under that Act and 
the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. ' 
.;. ~ it (macted by Parliament in the Twenty-second Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1, This Act may be called the Bengal.Finance (Sales Tax) (Delhi Short title. 
5 
Validation of Appointments and Proceedings) Act, 1971. 
2. In this Act,-
, ' (a). "Ad~inis4"at9r~~ means the. a<ilninistrator of the Union 
te,J:"r~tory ~f Delhi appointed by the President under article 239 'C1f the 
Constitution; , 1 
(b) "appointment" means appointment as-
10 (a) Commissioner of Sales Tax; or 
. ( ~ 
(b) Additional Commissioner of Sales Tax; or 
Deflni-
tion& 

Validation 
of 
certain 
appoint-
ments 
assess-
ments 
etc. 
2 
(c) Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax; or 
(d) Assistant Commissioner of Sales Taxi or 
(e) Sales Tax Oftlcer; or 
(f) Assistant Sales Tax Ofticer; or 
(g) Inspector. 
3. jNotwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or 
Ordert,of any court, tribunal or other authority.-
(a) no appointment of any person made or purporting to have 
been made under or for the purposes of the Bengal Finance (Sales 
s 
Tax) Act, 1941, as in force in the Union telTitory of Delhi (herein- IO Bengal Act 
after refelTed to as the principal Act) before the commencement of VI of IIM1. 
this Act shall be deemed to be illegal or invalid or ever to have 
been illegal or invalid merely on the ground that such appointment 
was not made in accordance with the provisions of section 3 of the 
principal Act or on the ground that such appointment was not made 15 
under that section or on both those grounds; and 
(b) no assessment, re-assessment, levy or collection of any tax 
made or purporting to have been made under the principal Act or 
under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, as the case may be, before the 74 of 1956. 
commencement of this Act and no jurisdiction exercised, no order 20 
made and no other act or proceeding or thing done or taken by, 
or before, a person referred to in clause Ca) in relation to such 
assessment, re-assessment, levy or collection shall be deemed to be 
illegal or invalid or ever to have been illegal or invalid merely on 
the ground that such jurisdiction was exercis'ed or such order had 25 
been made or such other act or proceeding or thing had been done 
or taken by, or before, a person whose appointment was not made 
in accordance with or under the proviSions of section 3 of the prin-
cipal Act. and accordingly-
(i) all appointments made or purporting to have been made 30 
under or for the purposes of the principal Act before the com-
mencement of this Act shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be, 
and to have been made in accordance with law; 
(ii) the jurisdiction exercised, orders made and all other 
acts, proceedings or things done or taken by the Administrator 35 
or by a person whose appointment had been made as aforesaid 
or by any other officer of Government or by any tribunal or 
other authority in connection with. the said appointments or in 
connection with the assessm'ent, re-assessment, levy or collection 
of tax under the principal Act or under the Central Sales Tax 40 
Act, 1956, as the case may be, shall, for all purposes, be deemed '74 of IN8. 
to be and to have been exercised, made, done or taken in accord-
ance with law; and 
(1.ii) no suit or other proceedings shall be maintained or con-
tinuedin any court or before any trIbunal or other authority 45 
whataoever on the ground that any such appointment was illegal 

8 
or invalid or any. such jurisdiction, order or other act, proceed-
ing or thing was not exercised, made, done or taken in accord-
ance with law . 
•. (1) The Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) (Delhi Validation of Appoint- Repeal and 
7 of 1971. S ments and Proceedings) Ordinance, 1971, is hereby repealed. savin,. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the said Ordinance shall be deemed· to have been done or taken 
under this Act, as if this Act had commenced on the 18th day of May. 
1971. 
" 

Section 3 of the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) ':Aet,"!1kl ' as : in force in 
!,be Unio~ terri,t~ry of ~lhi, .f~ui.r.~~ _ ~hat fq~, ca~~~, out ~~~ purposes 
'af'" Mt. 'UUf'Lt. 'Go~riIor's1Wl'appoint a Comnnssioner of Sales Tax, 
together with 'such oilier persons 'to 'aSsist 'him, as lhe it.' Governor 
thinks \8t. However, ''ieveial''oflcers'fbr '8li8fBtirig :the 'C!btrlit1~sicM.er of 
Sales ,Tax were-ilppointed not'tJ.ftder the said ~tlbn ~'but witlt!r'the 
ServiceRales. -Though these o.ers ~re 'lnlbl~UentlY"ppdfnted 'With 
retrospective effect by the L t. Governor under section 3 their a~btt­
ments are not in accordance with that section as it does not permit any 
appointment with retrospective effect. 
2. In a writ petition filed before the Delhi High Court, the Delhi 
Woollen Mills challenged one such appointment together with the action 
taken by the officer so appointed. The petition is now pending before 
the High Court. The Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) (Delhi Validation of 
Appointments and Proceedings) Ordinance, 1971, was, therefore promul-
gated by the President on the 18th May, 1971, to validate the appoint-
ments of the affected officers aad the proceedings taken by such oftlcers 
under the aforesaid Bengal Act and the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. 
3. This Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance by an Act of 
Parliament. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 24th May, 1971. 
K. R. GANESH. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 274 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No'. 2614171-ST, dated the 27th May, 1971 from Shri 
K. R. Ganesh, Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance (Vitta 
Mantralaya men Rajya Mantri) to the Secretary, Lok Sabha,] 
The President, having been apprised of the subject matter of the 
Bengal FinanCe (Sales Tax) (Delhi Validation of Appointments and 
Proceedings) Bill, 1971, has been pleased to recommend, in pursuance of 
clllute (1) of article 117 and clause (1) o~ article 2.74 of the Constitution 
of India, the introduction of the Bill in the Lok Sabha. 
4 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to validate appoinunents of certain officers under the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 
1941, as in force in the Union torritol'Y of Delhi and to validate proceedings taken 
by such officers under that Act and the Central Sales Tax Act, 196(;. 
[Sltr; K. R. Ganesh, 
Minister of State in the 
Ministry of Finance (Vitla 
Mantralaya men RCZJya Manlri.)] 