AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

19 we 1998

BE Ne 70 ०1००8
| MUNICIPAL CORPORATION LAW (EXTENSION TO CHANDIGARH)
AMENDMENT BILL, 1998
By
Suri Satya Pat Jain, M.P.
हे
BILL
to amend the Punjab Municipal Corporation Law (Extension to Chandigarh) Act,

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
8:--

1, This act may be called the Punjab Municipal Corporation Law (Extension to Short title
iigarh) Amendment Act, 1998.

2. In the Schedule to the Punjab Municipal Corporation Law (Extension to Amendment of

ligarh) Act, 1994, for the entry relating to section 5, the following entry shal! be _ the Schedule.
101९0, namely:—

‘Section 5.-
(a) in sub-section (2),—
(@ in the first proviso, for
“forty and more than fifty”,

substitute “twenty”;
(ii) omit second proviso;

(6) in sub-section (5) and the Explanations thereto, for “Punjab Legislative Assembly”,
fitute “the House of the People”.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘There is no legislative assembly in Chandigarh. Chandigarh is a Union terri-
tory and does not elect any representative for Punjab Legislative Assembly. The
Constitution of India provides that the member of Lok Sabha representing the
constituency which comprises a Municipal Corporation shall be nominated as an
associate councillor of that Corporation. The Bill seeks to extend this provision
to Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh.

Hence this Bill,

New Deut, SATYA PAL
May 14, 1998.



ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PUNJAB MuniciPAL Corporation Act, 1976

. * * * * *

5. Elected Councillors, moder of election and associated councillors—{/) Elected
“councillors shall be chosen by direct election on the basis of adult suffrage from various
_ wards into which the City shall be divided in accordance with the provisions of this Act.

* * * * *

(5) Every member of the Punjab Legislative Assembly representing the constituency
which the City or any part thereof is situate shall be an associate councillor:

Provided that an associate councillor shall not be entitled to vote all, but shall,
subject to the other provisions of this Act, have the right to speak in and otherwise
take part in the proceedings of, and meeting of the Corporation or its committee of
which he may be a member.

Explanation 1. If the constituency of a member of the Punjab Legislative Assembly com-
1565 more than one City, he shall be an associate member in respect of the Corporation of
th such city.

Janation 2. If any City falls in more than one constituency the members representing
॥ such constituency shall be the associate members of the Corporation of such city.

Janation 3. A person who is elected as member of a Corporation shall not be considered
be an associate member if he is a member of Punjab Legislative Assembly at the time of
election or becomes such member at any time thereafter and such person shall have all
rights and be subject to all the liabilities of an elected member.

* * + * *


LOK SABHA 1

A
BILL
to amend the Punjab Municipal Corporation Law (Extension to Chandigarh) Act, 1

(Shri Satya Pal Jain, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1006LS—-27.6.98