3)1 
~ 8 MAY tS8l 
BiD No. 70 of '1981.' 
_ .... _-... ----. 
THE EXPORT-IMPORT BANK OF INDIA Bn,L,· ' i981 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSFB 
CHAPI'ER I 
Pal:lauNARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISJPPNT OF THE ExFORT-IMPORT BANK OF INDIA ANn 
INCORPORATION THEREOF 
3. Establishment and incOl'J.'Ol'ation of ExporWmport Bank of 
India. 
4. Authorised capital. 
CHAPTER III 
MANAGEMENT 01' THE EXIM BANK 
5. Management. 
6. Constitution of Board. 
'1. Committees. 
8. Fees and allowances of directors and members of Com-
mittees. " -, 
9. Disquali~cations. 
CHAPTER IV 
BUSINESS OF THE EXIM BANK 
10-.. BW\iness"of Exim Bank. 
CHAPTER V 
RESOURCES OF THE ExIM BANK 
11. Loans by Central Government. 
12. Borrowings and acceptance of deposits by Ex;i~ B~Dk. 
13. Loans in foreign currency. 
14. Grants, donations, etc., to Exim Bank. 
CHAPI'ER VI 
ExPoRT DEVELOPMENT FuND 
15. Export Development Fund. 

(H) 
CLAUSES 
16. Credits to Export Development Fund. 
17. Utilisation of Export Development Fund. 
18. Debits to Export Development Fund. 
19. Accounts and audit of Export Development Fund. 
20. Liquidation of Export Development Fund. 
CHAPI'ER VII 
GENERAL FUND, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
21. General Fund. 
22. Preparation of accounts and balance-sheet. 
23. Disposal of profits accruing to General Fund. 
24. Audit. 
25. Saving. 
CHAPTER VIII 
TRANSFER OF PART OF BUS!NFSS OF DEvELoPMJ:NT BANK 
26. Transfer of part of business of Development Bank. 
CHAPTER IX 
MISCELLANEOUS 
27. Staff of Exim Bank. 
28. Delegation of powers. 
29. Returns. 
30. Obligation as to fidelity and secrecy. 
31. Defects in appointments not to invalidate acts, etc. 
32. Arrangement with Exim Bank on appointment of directon 
to prevail. 
33. Indemnity of directors. 
34. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
35. Act 18 of 1891 to apply in relation to Exim Bank. 
36. Section 34A and section 36AD only of Act 10 of 1949 to 
apply to Exim Bank. 
37. Act 43 of 1961 and Act 7 of 1964 not to apply to Exim Bank. 
38. Liquidation of Exim Bank. 
39. Power to make regulations. 
40. Amendment Of certain enactments. 
41. Power to remove difficulty. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 

10K SABRA 
CORRIGEJlJDA 
to 
THE EXE?,ORT-IMPORT BA[K OF I~DIA BILL, 1981 
(To belAs introduced in Ipk Sabha) 
1. Page 5, line 33;-
ru "trat" ~ "that" 
2. Page 13, lines 23 and 24,-
.fQ.r "finaning" na.d "financing" 
. 
3. Page 18, line 32, in column (I),-, 
for "clause, ( viii)" ~ "clause (byiii)" 
4. Page 19, line 5, in columri (.I)1-
for "( 4)" ~ II( 4.J) " 
5. Page 19, in co lumn (2),-
against line 29,-.. 
in se r t "Ib • ." 
'. Page 19, lj.ne 31, in column (I),-
omit "full" 
? Page 2-, line 8 from bo t tom, - , 
!Q..!: "ctivi ties" ~ "act;i..vi ties 1f 
8. Page 2', line ? from bo t tom,-
nu: "0 grant" .nt.a.f1 lito grant" 
9. P ag'e 30, line 10 from bo ttom,-
,.fQ.r. "and" ~ "anY" 
NEW DEllII; 
May 4, 1981 
Vaisakha14, 1903,( Saka) 

Bill No. 70 of 1981 
THE EXPORT-IMPORT BANK OF INDIA BILL, 1981 
A 
BILL 
to establish a corporation to be known as the Export-Import 
Bank of India for providing financial assistance to exporte'J's 
and importers, and for functioning as the principal finan-
cial institution for co-ordinating the working of institution.! 
engaged in financing export and import of goods and ser-
tlices with a view to promoting the country's international 
trade and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 
BE H enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-second Year of 
the Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPI'ER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Export-Import Bank of 
India Act, 1981. 
'(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
Short title, 
extent and 
colQDlencelDlint. 
..!! ~ 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central ;-., '. 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, 
f 0 and different dates may be appoillt~d for di~erent proVisloM 
of this Act. 

...... u ...... t 
and IDeorpora.. 
tlao of I:qIort.. 
Import Bank 
of IIuUa. 
2 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Board l ' means the Board cif. Directors of the Exim 
Bank referred tQ in section 6; 
(b) "Development Bank" means the Industrial 
Development Bank of India established under the Indus- S 
trial Development Bank of India Act, 1964; 18 of 19M. 
(c) "Exim Bank" means the Export-Import Bank of 
India established under section 3; 
(d) "export" and "import" mean, respectively, export 
from or import into India or any other country of goods or 10 
services, or both; 
(f» "goods" includes all materials, commodities and 
articles in a solid, liquid or gaseO'Us state and all fonns of 
energy; 
(f) "notification" means a notification published in I, 
the Official Gazette; 
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by regulations 
made under this Act; 
(h) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of IncUa 
constituted under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 
(i) "scheduled bank" means a bank, for the time 
20 2 of 193 •• 
~ 
being, included in the Second Schedule to the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934; 
. (j) "services" includes,-
(1) providing personnel (including skiUe<l or un- 25 
skilled workmen and persons for rendering technical or ~ 
other services) for the purposes of any work or pro-
ject (by whatever name called ') or any activity; 
·(11) transferring of technology, including transfer-
ring, or securing the transfer of ri~ht8, knowhow. ex- 30 
pertises or other skill with respect· to any patent, 
invention, model, design. secret formula or process or 
similar property; 
(III) furnishing any information, blueprints, plans, 
or advice with respect to any matter; and 
(IV) making availabl~ any other resources. 
CHAPTER n 
ESTABLISHMENT 0" THE Exl'ORT-IMPORT BANK 0" lIrolA AND 
INCORPORATION mEREOF 
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Govern-
ment may. by notification. appoint. there shall be established 40' 
for ,the purposeR of this Act a corporation to be known as the 
~rt"fmport Bank of India. . 
: (2.)'l'he Exim Bank shall be a· body corpora~.\\dth 'tbe 
name a!orE'!said bavinli{ l)erpetual succession an,d ,8 . ~Q~on 4S 
,.ealwi*. ~~f. subject to the F()yi~Q~S of thil A~, . \Q' 
2 of 1934. 

acqtiffe~ I ht)ld 'aiitl atij,* tit property and to cotttract, and may, 
. ,bf~.t.~"sue)or,.he. sued.. 
: 'r (~). _The~~a.4 oftice of the Exim Bank shall be at Bombay 
, ,O.f,,~t~ such, otper .~~ce as th~ Central Government IIUly, by 
5 Jl9.Wication, .specify. 
(4) The Exim Bank may establish ~ces, branches or 
,)Ieen,;ies .at N.ch places in or. outside India as it may consider 
necessary . 
. ' 4 . ..(1) ,The authodsed tapital of the Exim Bank shall be two Authorised 
. 10 huDdred crores of rupees: capital. 
.PJ:ovided that the Central Government may, by notification, 
inerease the said eapital up to five hundred crores of rupees. 
(2) The'ris.ued capital of the Exim Bank shall be wholly 
~rlHd by, the Central Government. 
15 CHAPI'ER III 
MANAGEMENT OF THE EXIM BANK 
5: (1) 'Thegelleral SlIlperintendenoe, direction and manage- Management. 
mentof, the affain: and business of the Exim Bank shall vest 
in the Board, wfi.ieh may exercise all powers and do all acts 
~o and things which may be exercised or done by the Exim Bank 
,(2) : Save as Qtherwise provided in the regulations made 
under this Act,-
(a) the chairman, if he is a whole-time director or if 
he is holding offices both as the chairman and the manag-
ing 'director, or 
(b) the man~ging director, if the chairman is not a 
whole-tilIle director, or, if the chairman being a whole-
time <Urector, is absent, 
shall· also have. powers of general superintendence, direction 
30 and management of the affairs and business of the Exim Bank 
and may also exercise all powers and do all acts and things 
'wliteh tnay be exercised or done by the Exim Bank. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board in 
discharging its functions shall act on business principles with 
3S ·d·.te regard to public. interest. 
(4) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the 
Exim Bank shall be guided by such directions in matters of 
poUcyrinvolvingpublic interest as the Central Government 
~y give to it in writing. 
40 6. (1) The Board of Directors of the Exim Bank shall consist Constitution 
of ,the following, ,namely: _ of Board. 
(a) a r.hairman and a managing director appointed by 
the Central Government: 
I' r : '. 
"'ProWded'thatthe".same petsonmay,,1DeappointeG ,to 
fS fwmiQIJ. ~Qth ~s chairman llnd as ma-na~ng directorj 

4 
(b) one director nominated by the Reeerve B~;, 
(c) one director nominated by the Development Bank; 
(d) one director nominated by the Export Credit and 
Guarantee Corporation Limited, being a Government 
Company within the meaning of section 617 of the COm- 5 
panies Act, 1956; 1 Of 1958. 
(e) not more than twelve directors nominated by the 
Central Government of whom-
(i) five directors shall be officials of the Centrpl 
Government; 10 
(ii) not more than three directors shall be from 
the sch€'duled banks; 
(iii) not more than four directors shall be persons 
who have special knowledge of, or professional experi-
ence in, export or import or financing thereof. J 5 
(2) The chairman and the managing director shan hold 
office for such term, not exceeding three years, as the Central 
Government may specify in this behalf ana any person so 
appointed shall he eligible for re-appointment. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 20 
the Central Government shall have the right to terminate the 
term of office of the chairman or the managing director, as the 
case may be, at any time before the expiry of the term specf-
fied 'Under sub-section (2). by giving him notice of not less 
than three months in writing or three months' salary and 25 
allowances jn lie'll thereof, and the chairman or the managing 
director. ae; the case may be, shall alRo have the right to 
relinquish hie: rtffice at any time hefore the expiry of the term 
sperified under sub-se'!tinn (2) bv {!iving to the Central Gov-
ernment notice of not less than three months in writing or 3lJ 
three month,,' sabry and allowances in lieu thereof. 
(4) The chairman and the mana~ng director shall receive 
such salary and allowances as may be determined by the Cen-
tral Government 
(5) The Central Government may, at any time, remove 35 
the chairman or the managing director, as the case may bf, 
from office: 
Providerl that no ner!'lon shall be removed from his ofrlce 
under this sub-section unless he has been given an opportunity 
of showin£r cause against his removal. 40 
(6) Any director nominated under sub-clause (iii) 0'1 clause 
(e) of sub-section (1) shall hold office for a period of two 
years. 
(7) Any other director nominated under this section shall 
hold office during the pl~sqre of the authority nominating 45 
~. . . 

5 
(8) The Board shall meet at such times and placeS and shall 
obsel'Yesuch rules of procedure in regard to the transaction 
of business at its meetings as may be prescribed. 
(9) The chairman or, if for any reason he is unable to 
'5 attend a meeting of the Board, the managing directOr or, in 
the event of both the chairman and the managing director 
being unable to attend a meeting, any other director nominat-
ed by the chairman in this behalf and in the absence of such 
nomination any director elected by the directors present !from 
10 among themselves, shall preside at the meeting. . 
(10) All questions which come up before any meeting of 
the Board shall be decided by a majority of votes of the direc-
tors present and voting, and in the event of an equality of 
votes, the chairman, or in his absence, the managing director, 
15 or in the absence of both the chairman and the managing 
director, the person presiding, shall have and exercise a second 
or casting vote. 
(11) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (10), every 
director of the Board shall have one vote, 
20 7. (1) The Board may constitute such Committees whether Q>nunitteee, 
consisting wholly of directors or wholly of other persons or 
partly of directors and partly of other Qersons for such pur-
pose or purposes as it may think fit. 
(2) Any Committee constituted under sub-section (1) shall 
25 meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meet-
ings as may be prescribed. 
8. The directors and the members of a Committee shall be 
paid such fees and allowances as may be prescribed for attend-
30 ing the meetings of the Board or of any Committee constituted 
in pursuance of this Act and for attending to any other work 
of the Exim Bank: 
Provided trat no fees shall be payable to the chairman, if 
he is appointed as a whole-time chairman, or to the managing 
3S director or to any other director or member who is an oftlcial 
of the Government, the Reserve Bank or the Development 
Bank. 
Fees and 
allowances C1I. 
directors and 
members of 
Conunitteea, 
9. No person shall be a director of the Board constituted Diaqualiftca-
tiOna. under this Act, who-
40 (a) is, or at any time has been, adjudged insolvent, or 
45 
(b) is of unsound mind and has been so declared by a 
competent court, or 
(c) is, or has been, convicted of an offence which, in the 
o~on of the Central Government, involves moral tur-
·pitude, or 

Business of 
Exim Bank 
6 
(4):Ats, in, the,·opiItiGA of tDe ,cBattal;QoUeIllftl~ so 
; ~wseG' hia~posi1ton ,as a direetor, as tto :nmdert Iaia,.nms.' 
nuance ani, tbe Bouddetrimental totbe iatsestaol· . iha 
general public, or 
(e) has been, for any reaSOft, removed,fromtbe Board; 5 
CHAPTER IV 
BUSINESS OF THE EXIM BA"HI!: 
19, (1) The Exim Bank may grant in or outside India 
IQansand advances by itself or in participation with 8IlybaDk. 
OJ: financial institution whether in or outside India for ~ pul'_ 10 
poses of export or import and shall also function as the principal 
financial institution for co-ordinating the working of institu-
tions engaged in financing of the export and import in such 
manner as it may deem apprDl;lriate. 
(2) The Exim Bank may also carryon and transact all or J 5 
any of the following kinds of business, namely:-
(a) granting loans and advances to a scheduled bank 
or any other bank or financial institution notified in the 
Official Gazette by the Central Government in this behalf 
by way of refinance of loans and advances granted by it for 20 
purposes of export or import; 
(b) underwriting the issue of stocks, shares, bonds or 
debentures of any company engaged in export or import; 
(c) issuing bid bonds or guarantees in or outside India 
by itself or in participation with any government, bank or 25 
financial institution in or outside India; 
(d) accepting, collecting, discounting, re-discounting, 
purchasing, selling or negotiating in or outside India, 
bills of exchange or promissory notes arising out of trlilllS-
actions relating to export or import and granting of loans 30 
and advances in or outside India against ~h bills ,or pro-
missory notes; 
(e) granting, opening, isswng, confu:ming or .endoraing 
letters of credit and negotiating or collecting bills ,aild 
other documents drawn thereunc;ler; 35 
(f> undertaking any transaction involviag' ·acomblna .. 
tion of government to government and commercial cl*ltt: 
for purposes of export or import; 
(g) granting lines of credit to the' govQl'DID8Dt'lOf lilY 
foreign State or any financial institution :Qr penaOlllOuJIkie,40 
India for purposes of export or import; 
(h) granting loans and advances 'outside India for any 
In?ian ,joint venture; 
(i) granting loans and advances.Ao,aJlf·PQnIa~a.dia 
in connection with his equity contribution in any joint 45 
", l:vetUul'e in any country .outside Jndia;·' . 
(;) financing ~xport or ~ Of: 'm'at:~"'and 
equipment on lease basis; ',() , . ," ,.: 

5 
10 
7 
(Ie) subicribiDg to, or investing in, or purchasing of, 
stocks, shares, bonda or debentures of any development 
bank or Export-Import Bank of any country outside !Della; 
'(I) buying or selling of, or entering into such other 
dealings in, foreign exchange, as may be necessary for the 
discharge of its functions; 
(m) q:,eniilg of any account in any bank in or outside 
India or the making of any agency arrangement with, or 
aeting 8S an agent or correspondent of, any bank or other 
inStitution 1n or outside India; 
(n) transferring, for consideration, any instrument 
Nlatin'g to loans and advances granted by it; 
(0) iSsuing participation certificates; 
(P) subscribing to, or investing in, or purchasini of 
J 5 stocks, shares, bonds or debentures to the extent necessary 
for the enforcement of a lien, pledge or other contractual 
right; 
(q) undertaking and financing of research, surveys, 
techno-economic or any other study in connection with 
120 the promotion and development of international trade; 
go 
35 
(r) providing technical, a:dministrative and financial 
assistance of any kind for export or import; 
(s) planning, promoting, developing and financing 
export-oriented concerns; 
(t) forming or conducting SUbsldiarieS for carrying out 
ita fuDctiODSi 
(1.£) acting as agent of the Central Government, any 
State Government, the Reserve Bank, the Development 
Bank or any other person as the Central Government may 
authorise; 
(v) collecting, compiling and disseminating market 
and ereciit mformation in respect of international tl"ade; 
(1.0) doing any other kind of business which the 
Central Government may authorise; 
(~ generally doing such other acts and things as may 
be tncMental to, or consequential upon, the exercise of its 
powers or the discharge of its duties under this Act or any 
other law for the time being in force, including sale or 
transfer of any of its assets. 
to c..' (3) The Exim Bank may receive in co~deration of any o'f 
the service. mentioned in sub-sections (1) and (2) such com-
IIliIIHn. bJ.lOkerase, interest, remuneration or fees u may be 
aiNId upoa. .. . ~ 
(~) Tb~ ~ Baak shall not grant any loan or advance 
45 or other fbi8nclal accommodation on. the security of i_ cnna 
bonds or debentures. 

Loans by 
Central 
Govern-
menl 
'Borrow-
ings and 
acceptance 
ofd.eposits 
byExim. 
Bank. 
9 
CHAPTER V 
REsOURCES OF THE E:xIK BAmt 
lL The Central Government may, after due appropriation 
made by Parliament by law in this hehalf l advance to the 
Exim Bank-. ••• 5 
~ 
(a) a loan of twenty crores of rupees at a rate of 
interest of five and a quarter per cent. per annum repay-
able in fifteen equal annual instalments, commencm. on 
the expiry of a period of fifteen years from the date of 
receipt of the loan; and 10 
(b) such further sums of money by way of loan on 
such terms and conditions as may be agreed upo .. : 
Provided that the Central Governmont may, on a 
request being made to it by the Exim Bank, increase the 
number of instalments or alter the amount of any instal- 15 
ment or vary the date 011 which any instalment is payable 
under dause (a). 
12. (1) The Exim Bank may, for the purposes of carrying 
out its functions under this Act,-
(a) issue and sell bonds and debentures with or with- 20 
out the guarantee of the Central Government; 
(b) borrow money from the Reserve Bank-
(i) repayable on demand or on the expiry of 
fixed periods not exceeding ninety days from the date 
on which the money is so borrowed against the secu- 25 
rity of stocks, funds and securities (other than immo-
vable property) in which a trustee is authorised to 
invest trust money by any law for the time being in 
force in India; 
(ii) against bills of exchange or promissory notes 30 
arising out of bona fide commercial or trade transac-
tions and bearing two or more good signatures and 
maturing within five years from the date of the borrow-
ing; 
(iii) out of the National Industrial Credit (Long Ss 
Term OperatiOns) Fund established under section 46C 
of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 for any of the 2 of 193'-
purposes specified in that section; 
(c) borrow money from such other authority, orga-
nisation or institution in India as may generally or ape- 40 
dally be approved by the Central Government; 
(d) accept deposttsrepayable 'after tbeeXplry:of •. : 
period which shall not be less than twelve monthl iNm· 
the date of the making Of the deposit on. such ~,as 
·'may generally or special1ybe 'approved bytbe :a~~rveAS 
B8Dk; ". ' , ('.' 
, ~ . \ 

46 of 1973. 
9 
~) The Central Government may, on a reqaett bein, made 
. U; :it;hY the Exim Bank, guarantee the bonds and debentures 
Issued ~ that Bank as to the repayment of prIaelpaI ad the 
"JJayment of interest at such rate as may be ked by that 
S Government. 
13. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Foreign 
Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 or in any other law for the 
time being in force relating to foreign exchange, the Exim 
Bank may, for the purpose of granting loans and advanees 
10' under this Act, borrow, with the previous consent of the 
Central Government, foreign currency from any foreign State 
or from any bank or financial institution in any foreign coun-
try or otherwise. 
14. The Exim Bank may receive gifts, grants, donations or 
IS benefactions from Government or any other source in or out-
side India. ... 
CHAPTER VI 
EXPORT DEVELOPMENT FUND 
15. With effect from such date as the Central Government 
~o may, by notification, appoint, the Exim Bank shall estabUsb a 
spedal fund to be called the Export Development Fund. 
16. To the Export Development Fund shall be credited-
(a) all amounts received for the purposes of that 
Fund by way of loans, gifts, grants, donations or benefac-
tions from Government or any other source in or outside 
India; 
(b) repayments or recoveries in respect of loans, ad-
vances or other facilities granted from the Fund; 
(c) income or profits from investments made from the 
30 F'und; and I 
'(d) income accruing or arising to the Fund by way of 
interest or otherwise, on account of the application of the 
Fund in accordance with the provisions of section 17. 
17. (1) Where the Exim Bank considers it necessary or 
35 desirable so to do, it may, subject to the provisions of sub-
sections '(2) and (3), disburse or spend from the Export Deve-
lopment Fund any amount on account or in consequence of 
the grant of any loan or advance, or on account or in conse-
que~e of entering into any arrangement under sub-section (1) 
40 or clause (0) or clause (c) or clause (d) or clause(q) or 
clause (r) or clause (8) or clause (w) or clause (x) of sUD-
section (2) of section 10: 
°Providttd that before granting any such loan or advanee or 
ent~ngfn10 any such arrangement, the Exim Bank sliaD olj-
4S tain the: prior approvlll of the Central Go~mment 
Loansln 
foreiln 
currency. 
Grants, 
donations, 
-m:., to 
Exim 
Bank. 
Export 
Develop. 
ment 
Fund. 
Credits to 
Export 
Develop-
ment 
Fund. 
Utilisa. 
tion of 
EXpOrt 
Develop-
ment 
Fund. 

Debit. 
to Export 
Develop-
ment 
Fund. 
Accounts 
and audit 
ofEzport 
Develop.. 
ment 
Fund. 
10 
(2) . BefQre seeking the approval of the Central ~t 
UDder ,su~tion (1). the Exim Bank .ban aatiafJa j 1~:t1aat 
banking or .other ftnaD0ial instJ.tou.tions orothe.:. .,.. .... 
not likely to .grant such loan or advance, or to enter, mto,IQJ 
such arrangement in the ordinary course of bl1s1~UL 5 
(3) The Central Government shall, before giving its appr0-
val, satisfy itself that such loan, advance or arrangem$DtJa 
necessary as a matter of priority in the interests of the inter-
national trade of the country. 
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declarecltbat 10 
nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to preela4e 
the Exim Bank from granting any loan or advance or from 
entering into any arrangement under sub-section (1) or elaUle 
(~) or clause (c) or clause (d) or clause (q) or clause (t') 
or clause (s) or clause (w) or clause (x) of sub-section (2) I, 
of section 10 without the approval of the Central Government. 
if no amount in respect thereof is to be disbursed or spent 
from the Export Development Fund. 
18. (1) To the Export Development Fund shall be deblted-
(a) such amounts as may 'from time to time be dil- 20 
bursed or spent under sub-section (1) of section 17; 
'(b) such amounts as may be required for discharg.lng 
the liabilities in respect of loans received for the pur-
poses of that Fund; 
(c) any loss arising on accO'Unt of investment made IS 
out of that Fund; and 
(d) such expenditure arising out of, or in connection 
with, the administration and application of the Fund .. 
may be determined by the Board. 
(2) No amount shall be debited to the Export Development go 
Fund e~ept as provided for in sub-seetlon (1). 
19. (1) The balance-sheet and accounts of the Export,Deve-
lopment Fund shall be prepared in such form and manner 
as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Board shall cause· the books and accouuts .of the !IS 
Export Development Fund to be closed and balanced as on 
the 31st day of December each year. 
(3) The ..Export Development F\md shall be audited by one 
or more auditors (\ppcnnted by the Central Gov.ernment tUlcler 
sec:U.9n 24 .who shall make a separate report themoll. 40 
(4) The provisions of sub-sections (2), (8), (4) and (8) 
of section 24 shall, so far as may be. apply in relation to the 
audit of the Export Development Fund. 
(5) The Exim Bank shall furnish to the Central Govern-
ment, withiu four mcmthl-from the date., OIl -wbich the ~tII 45 
of the Export Development Fund. are clotedand baJanoad. .. a 
~py of the ba~anc~sh~t~nd ~C~1Dlts. t~~er wit~ ~ .. ;,. 

1 Qf 1956. 
11 
OIrthe-::lWlitara' report and a report on·the operation 'of the 
'~d,·.4"'agdberelevaat year 8Dd the 'CeDtNl Go~t 
abIdl, 8Br'JIOODq 'may be after they are received by it, C811Ie 
the IMIDe' to be laid before each HOUle of Parliament. 
S zo.' The ElC:port Development Fund shall not be closed or 
wound up save by order of the Central Government and in 
such manner as that Government may direct. 
CHAPTER VII 
GENERAL FUND, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
10 11. All receipts O'f the Exim Bank other than those which 
are to 'be -credited to the Export Development Fund under'this 
Act shall be 'Credited to a Fund to be called the General Fund 
and all payments by the Exim Bank, other than those which 
are to be debited to the Export Development Fund, shall be 
r S made out of the General Fund. 
22. (1) The balance-sheet and accounts of the Exim Bank 
shall be prepared in such form and manner as may be pres-
cribed. 
(2) The Board shall cause the bonks and accounts of the 
gO Ex:im Bank to be closed and balanced as on the 31st day of 
December eaeh year. 
23. (1) The Exim Bank may establish a reserve Fund to 
which may be transferred mlch sums as that Bank may deem 
fit out of the annual profits accruing to the General "Fund. 
25 (2) Mter making provision for bad and doubtful debts, 
depreciation of assets and for all other matters for which pro-
vision is necessary or expedient or which is usually provided 
for by bankers and for the reserve Fund referred to in sub-
section (1), the Exim Bank shall transfer the balance of the 
30 net profits to the Central Government. 
24:. (1) The account~ of the Exim Bank shall be audited by 
auditors duly q'llalified to act as auditors under sub-section (1) 
at section 226 of the Companies Act, 19::'16, who shall be ap-
pointed by the Central Government for such term and on 
3S such remuneration as the Central Government may fix. 
(2) The auditors shall be supplied with a copy of the 
anD1Ill'balance-sheet"of the Exim Bank and it shall be tbefr 
duty. to examme it together with the accounts and vouchen 
r~~tiJlg . thereto and they shall have a list delivered to them 
40 of all. boolcs' kept ,by the Exfm Bank and shaD at all ~a8o~­
ab~ ,tiJn~, have access to the books, accounts, vouchers and 
oUter. cic)cuments fif the Exim Bank, 
(a)' 'fhe 8'I1ditors may, in relation to such accounts,exa-
mme any director or any ,oftlcer or other employee . of the 
4S Exfm Bank and shall be efttitled 'to require from t}W!:1!oard 
or· . .,.. '4)1'. other employee· of the Exim Bank· su~b. informa-
tion ,and. explanation as they may thmk necessary for the per-
fwm.~n(!~ CJ1 tp'~ir ~uij~~. 
Liquida-
tion of 
Export 
Develop-
ment 
Fund. 
General 
Fund. 
Prepara.-
tion of 
accounts 
and 
balance-
sheet. 
Disposal 
of profits 
accruing 
to General 
Fund. 
Audit. 

Saving. 
Transfer 
of part 
of bus i-
neBB of 
Develop-
mentBank. 
12 
(4) The auditors shall make a report to the Bdm Bank 
upon the annual balance-sheet and accounts examined bytbem 
and in every such report they shall state whether in 'th8ir 
opinion the balance-sheet is a full and fair balaDCe-lheet COIl-
taining all necessary particulars and properly drawn up 10 as 5 
to exhibit a true and fair view of the state cif aftairs of the 
Exim Bank and in case they had called for any explanation 
or information from the Board or any officer or other em-
ployee of the Exim Bank whether it has been given and whe-
ther it is satisfactory. 10 
(5) Thp. Exim Bank shall furnish to the Central Govern-
ment within four months from the date on which its accounts 
are closed and balanced, a copy of its balance-sheet and 
accounts together with a copy of the auditors' report and a 
report of the working of the Exim Bank during the relevant J 5 
year, and the Central Government shall, as soon as may be 
after they are received by it, cause the same to be laid before 
each House of Parliament. 
(6) Without prejudice to anything contained in the pre-
ceding sub-sections, the Central Government may, at any time, 20 
appoint the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India to exa-
mine and report upon the accounts of the Exim Bank and any 
expenditure incurred by him in connection with such examina-
tion and report shall be payable by the Exim Bank to the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 25 
25. Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (4) of section 
19, nothing contained in this Chapter shall apply to tbe Export 
Development Fund. 
CHAPTER VIII 
TRANS Jon OF PART OF BUSINESS OF DEvELoPMENT BANK 30 
26. (1) On such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification, appoint, all business, property, assets and liabilities, 
rights, interest, privileges and obligations of whatever nature 
of the Development Bank in so far as they relate to the export 
financing functions of that Bank shall stand transferred to, and 35 
vest in, the Exim B!lIlk. 
(2) For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Exim Bank under 
sub-section (1), the Exim Bank shall pay to the Development 
Bank such amount in such manner and in such number of 
instalments as may be determined by the Central Governmenl 40 
(3) All contracts, deeds, bonns, agreements, powers-of-
attorney, grants of legal representation and other instruments 
of whatever nature of the Development Bank which relate to 
the export financing functions of that Bank and which are 
subeisUng or having effect immediately before the date refer- 4S 
red to in sub-section (1) and to which the said Bank is a party 
or which are in fevour of that Bank shall,-
(0) if they relate exclusively to the export :financing 
functions of that Bank, be of full force ana eRect against 

7 
of 1964. 
or in favour vf the Exim Bank, as the case may be, and 
may be enforced and acted upon as fully and effectively as 
if instead of the Development Bank the Exim Bank. had 
been a party thereto or as if they had been issued in favour 
5 of the Exim Bank; and 
(b) if they relate not only to the export financing 
functions of the Development Bank but also to any of the 
other functions of that Bank, be of full force and effect 
against or in favour of both the Development Bank and the 
10 Exim Bank and may be enforced or acted upon as fully and 
effectively as if in addition to the Development Bank the 
Exim. Bank had also been a party thereto or as if they had 
been issued in favour of the Development Bank and also 
the Exim Bank. 
IS (4) If, on the date referred to in sub-section (1), any suit, 
appeal or other legal proceeding of whatever nature relating 
to the export financing functions of the Development Bank is 
pslding, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be in any 
way prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer to the E:xim 
20 Bank of the business of the Development Bank or of anything 
contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding 
may,,,-
(a) where it relates exclusively to the export finan-
ing functions of the Development Bank, be continued, prose-
cuted and enforced by or against the Exim Bank; and 
(b) where it relates not only to the export financing 
functions of the Development Bank but also to any of the 
other functions of that Bank, be continued, prosecuted and 
enforced by or against the Development Bank and the 
Exim Bank or, if the Central Government by s~ order 
in writing so directs, by or against such one of the said 
two Benks, as may be specified in such order. 
(5) If any question arises as to whether any eontraat, deed, 
bond, agreement, powers-of-attomey, grant of legal represen-
S5 taticmor other instrument referred to in w.b-section (3) or any 
5Uit, appeal or other legal proceeding referred to in sub-section 
(.) relates or relates exclusively to the export financing 
functions of the Development Bank, it shall be referred to the 
Central Government for decision and the decision of the Cen-
40 tra! Government thereon shall be final. 
45 
(6) The provisions of this section shall have effect notwith-
stllllding anything eontalned in the Industrial Development 
Bank of India Act, 19M or any other law or any fnstrum.ent 
havmgtorce by virtue Of the said Act or other law. 
CHAPTER IX 
MIscI:LLANIlot1 
2'1. (1o)The.Exim Bank may appoint such number of ofIlcerI 
and· other employees 88 it aoDSiders llIICeaury or dlsirable fOl' 
the eftlclent performance of if8 funct10na and cletermIne the 
50 terms and concliti0D8 of their appOintment and .-vice. 

Dele~ 
Uon of 
powers. 
Returns. 
Obligation 
.. tollde-
lit,. and 
secrecy. 
Defects 
In appo-
Intments 
DOl to 
mvalidate 
ada, ate. 
l' 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-secUon(l), 
it shall be lawful for the EXim Bank to utWle, and for'the 
DeYelopment Bank: to make available the sel"V'icea of. I\Ich 
std Of the Development Bank having expetieace re1a'tIh, to 
export financing functions on such terms and condfttons as may S 
be agreed upon between the Exim Bank and the Development 
B~. I 
(3) The dlolties and conduct, terms and conditions of 8III'¥1ce 
and the establishment and maintenance of a provident Fum! or 
any other Fund for .the benefit of the officers and other emplo- 10 
yeea of the Exim. Bank shall be such as may be prelCribed. 
ZI. The Board may, by general or special order, delegate to 
any direeror or any of.fh::er or other employee of the Exim Bank, 
subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be 
specified in the order, such of its powers and functions UDC\er IS 
this Act e.s it may deem necessary. 
29. The Exim Bank shall furnish, from time to time, to the 
Central Government such returns as the Central GoV'el'DJ!lelDt 
may require. 
30. (1) The Exim Bank shall not, except as otherwise reo- 20 
quired by this Act or any other law, divulge any information 
relating to, or to the affairs of, its constituents except in cir-
cumstances in which it is, in accordance with the law or prac-
tice and usage customary among bankers, necell8al'y or appr0-
priate for the Exim Bank to divulge such information. 25 
(2) The Exim Bank may, for the purpose of effiCient discharge 
of its functions under this Act, collect from, or furnish to, the 
Central Government, the Development Bank or any scheduled 
bank. or such other financial institution, as may be notified in 
the Official Gazette by the Central Government in this behalf,3 0 
credit information or other information as it may cODsider use-
ful for the purpose, in such manner anel at such tlmes, as it 
may think fit • 
. ~NWion.-For the purpose of this 8Ub-eecttoo, tIle_· 
pr~ "credit information" shall have the same men., .35 
in clauIe (c) of section 45A of the Reserve Bank of ImIIaAct, 
1934, sub~ to the roodificatioa that "banking compaay:"'" 2 of 19M. 
ferrec! to therein shall mean the Development Bmt,any ..... 
duled bank or other financial institution as afereaaid. 
(3) Every director, member of a committee, auditor or am· 40 
cer 0, ot~r ~ployee of the l:xim Bank or cd the ~PJIMIIM 
Bank whose services are utilised by the him Bank ~ tM 
provisions of this Act, shall, beforee~ upoJl hie-...... 
make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out 
in the First Schedule. 45 
31. (1) No act or proceediIlg Of .the Board or of any c0m-
mittee of the him Bank shatt be questioned on the ground 
mQily of tbe «x!istenee of an,- VaeIIlOY, til, or4t6et ~ tile 
conMttutioe 01,' .the Boud'or t_COIIIIDIttee;'sstlle< __ ·~'" 

J of 1956. 
" 
1& 
(2) No act done by any person acting in , good ~th as a 
director shall be deemed to be invalid merely on the groUlld 
that he was disqualified to be a director or that there was any 
other defect in his appointment. 
5 32. (1) Where any arrangement entered into by the Exim 
Bank with a company provides for the appointment by the 
Exim Bank of one or more directors of such company, such 
provision and any 'appointment of directors made in pursuance 
thereof shall be valid and effective notwithstanding anything to 
10 the contrary contained in the Compan ie03 Act. 1956, or in any 
other law for the time being in force or in the memorandum, 
articles of association or any other instrument relating to the 
company, and any provision regarding share qualification, age-
limit, number of directorships, removal from office of directors 
I" and such like conditions contained in any such law or instru-
- ment aforesaid, shall not apply to any director appointed. by 
the Exim Bank in pursuance of the arrangement as aforesaid. 
20 
(2) Any director appointed as aforesaid shall-
(a) hold office during the pleasure of the Exim Bank 
and may be removed or substituted by any person by order 
in writing of the Exim Bank; 
(b) not incur any obligation or liability by reason only 
of his being a d.irector Or for anything done or omitted to be 
done in good faith in the discharge of his duties as a direc-
tor or anything in relation thereto; 
(c) not be liable to retirement by rotation and shall 
not be taken into account for computing the number ot 
directol'6 liable to such retirement. 
33. (1) Every director shall be indemnified by the Exim 
Bank against all losses and expenses incurred by him, in, or in 
30 relation to, the discharge of his duties, except such as are caused 
by his own wilful act or default. 
(2) A director shall not be responsible for any other direc-
tor or for any officer or other employee of the Exim Bank or 
tor any 1088 or expenses resulting to the Exim Bank from the 
35 insufficiency or deficiency of the value of, or title to, ~ pro-
perty or security acquired or tak.~ on behalf of the Exim Bank 
or the insolvency or wrongfUl act of any debtor or any per80Il 
under obUgation to the Exim Bank or anything done in IOOd 
40 faith tn the execution of the duties of his office or in relation 
thereto. ." 
ArraDle-
mentwith 
Exim 
Bank on 
appoint-
ment of 
directors 
to prevail 
IndeOUlity 
of direc-
tors. 

Protec-
tion of 
action 
taken in 
iood 
faith. 
Act 18 Of 
1891 to' 
apply.tll 
relatiOn 
toExim 
Bank. 
Section 
34A and 
section 
36ADonly 
of Act 10 
of 1919 
to apply 
toExlm 
Bank. 
Act 43 of 
1981 and 
Act 7 of 
1964 not 
to apply 
toExbn 
Bank. 
Liquida-
tion of 
Exim 
Bank. 
Power to 
makere-
platton •. 
16 
-,,~llJfo stiit· or' other legal proceeding mal1lle agaBiIt the 
. 'film :Bailk oranydireetol' or any oflk!er or Mher.iMnplOyWiof 
"the'mnn'Bank:orany 'other person aut~ by'. Ddfn 
Bank to discharge any functions' under this Actl 'fOrDy kII8 'or 
damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in 5 
good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this 
Aict'Ol" any other law or provision having the force of law • 
.., 'The Bankers' Books Evidence Act, IS!}! shall apply in 
relM10n to the Exim Bank as if it were a Bank as defined in 
seetion2 of that Act. 10 
38: Nothing' contained in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, 
except, 'section 34A and section 36AD thereof, shall apply to 
the Exim Bank. 
37. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax 
Act, 1961, or the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act. 1964 or any T 5 
othec enactment for the time being in force rehiting to tax on 
income, profits or gains, the Exim Bank shall not be liable to 
pay income-tax, surtax or any other tax in respect of-.... 
-.. 
(~ .• , income, profits or gains accruing to the Export 
Dewls>pment Fuftd or any amount received to the credit 20 
of that Fund; and 
(b) any income, profits or gains derived, or any amount 
. recmved,' by 'the ~m Bank. 
38: No provision of any law relating to the winding up of com-
panies or corporations shall apply to the Exim Bank and' the 25 
Exim Bank shall not be placed in liquidation save by an order of 
the Central Government and in such manner as it may direct. 
at!, (:1) The ,Board may, with the previous approval of the 
0Ml*'al'~' mab re,ulations not inccmsia4iebt with 
tMa Aetto'pMYtde 'fot 'aU matters for . which provision ....... 
.atty,~, ~Ilt for the purpose of giving e1fecttothe, provi_ go 
... ·of/th!a·~ 
, f. 
j"'(Jflti partittilar aildwitbout ~udiceto:tM:I,eRertttilt; .. ' 
,dae foregoing power, such regulations may provide for~ . 
" j 

5 
10 
(a) the times and placeso!> the-meetings of the Board 
or of any committee constituted under this Act and the 
procedure to be followed at such meetinga including the 
quorum necessary for the transaction of business; 
(b) the fees and allowances that maybe paid 'td 'the 
dtreetors and the members of 'a committee; , . 
(c) the form and man.m.er in which·tlu! ~~ 
and the account of the Export DevelopmeRt F~ ~DCil- tlJe 
Exim Bank shall be prepared; 
(d) the duties and conduct, and the terms and condi-
tions of ~ervice of the officers and other employees of t~ 
Exim Bank; 
(e) the establishment and matnteaance of pr.oVldent 
fund or any othel- fund for the benefit of the ofIleen·tiftd 
other employees d the Exim Bank; and 
(f) any other matter which is to be, or may be, 
preserihed. 
(3) Every regulation made by the Board under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after H is made, before each 
20 House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two 
or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the ,successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifiea-
25 tion in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation 
should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modifted form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that regulation. 
30 
·40. Thf! (>nactments specified in the Second Schedule shall 
be amended 'in the manner directed in the first column thereof 
and such amendments shall take effect on the dates s}>elCiftecl in 
the second column of that Schedule. 
41. If any difficulty arises in .giving. etfectto the PJ'pv*ns 
3S of this Act, the Central Government may, by or"" dedytJling, 
not inconSistent with such provisions, for the purpoJe of re-
moving the difBculty: 
Provided that no aueh,orde,r .ball bem_IIftett"the' URIra-
40 tion of three years from the date of commencemert-'df tIiW}\qt. 
Amend. 
mentor 
certain 
enact. 
ments. 
Power to 
remove 
dlftlculty. 

~T 18 
·rHE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 30 (3) ] 
DECLARATION OF FIDELITY AND smcRECY 
I .......................... , do hereby declare that I will 
faithfully, truly and to the best of my skill and ability execute S 
and perform the duties required of me as director, member of 
.............. " ...... committee, auditor, officer or other em-
ployee (as the case may be) of the Export-Import Bank of India 
and which properly relate to the office or position held by me 
in or in relation to the said Exim Bank. 10 
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to 
be communicated to any person not legally entitled thereto 
any information relating to the affairs of the Export-Import 
Bank of India or to the affairs Of any person having any dealing 
with the said Exim Bank, nor will I allow any such person to 1 S 
inspect or have access to any books or documents belonging to 
or in the possession of the said Exim Bank and relating to the 
business of the said Exim Bank or the business of any person 
having any dealing with the said Exim Bank. 
Signed before me. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 40) 
Amendments of certain mactments 
PART I 
(Signature) 
AMENDMENTS TO THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934 
Amendments Date on which amend-
20 
ments shall take 30 
effect 
(I) 
1. In section2, after clause (viii), insert the 
following clause, namely:-
'(b"iiia) "Exim Bank" means the Export-Import 
Bank of India established under the Export-Im-
port Bank of India Act, 1981. ' 
2. In section 1,,-
(a) in clause (4G), after the words "the 
Deve1~ ment Bank", insert the words "or 
the Exim Bank"; 
(b) in clause (4-1), after the words" 
Development Bank", insert the words "the 
Exim Bank"; 
(c) aner clause (I-I), insert the following 
~UIIC, ~ly:_ 
The date of cstab-
lishment of the Exim 
Bank. 
Do. 
35 
45 

5 
10 
20 
Amendmenta 
(I) 
Date on which 
amendments shall 
take effect 
'(4) the making to the Exim Bank The date of estab-
of loans and advances- lishment of the 
Exim Bank. 
(II) repayable on demand or 
on the expiry of a fixed period not 
exceeding ninety days, from the 
date of such loan or advance against 
the security of stocks, funds and 
securities (other than immovable 
property) in which a trustee is autho-
rised to invest trust money by any 
law for the time being in force in 
India; or 
(b) against the security of bills 
of exchange or promissory notes, 
arising out of bona fide commercial 
or trade transactions bearing two 
or more good signatures and 
maturing within five years from 
the date of such loan or 
advance, 
(d) in clause (12B), after the words "the 
Devdopment Bank" insert the words 
"the Exim Bank", 
3. In section 42, in sub-clause (e) of the Explana-
tion under the proviso to su bose ction (1), after the 
words "or from the full Development Bank", 
30 insert the words or from 'be Exim Bank". 
35 
45 
4. In section 46 C, in sub-section (2), after clause 
(b), insert the following clauses. namely:-
ec(e) the makingto the Exim Bank of 
loans and advances for the purposes of any 
business of the Exim Bank ; 
(d) the purchas~ of bonds and deben-
tures issued by the Exim Bank.", 
PART II 
Do. 
AMENDMENT TO THE INDUSTRIAL DlsPUT1!.8 Am', 1947 
(140' 1947) 
Amendment Date on which 
amendment shaU 
take effect 
In section !Z, in clause ebb), after the words The date of estab-
"and includes". insert the words "the Export-1m- lishment of the 
port Bank of India.". Emn Bank. 

2.0 
PART III 
AMENDMBWrSTO THE BANKING REOULATION AOT, rS49· 
(10 of 19-4-9) 
Amendments 
(J) 
---.-----
1. In section 18, in the ExplaTUllion, in clause 
(6), after the words "the lttd' __ Dewlopment 
Bank of India", insert the·weids ''or from the 
Export.-Import Bank ofIndia tl, 
Il. In section 3¢. inll,U~tioll (J). ~ 
the word "includes" ~.t._ .t4C' woidi c~tJu: 
Export- Import Bank oJ~". 
3. In section 36AD. ill' ailb-JCctioo (3), 
after the word "inc1uda" insert the .words 
"the Export-Import Bank of India,". 
4. In section 56, in clause.(,b) aCtac EliPlIIna-
tion under clause (j) after t.beiWDrda "dle.Iadumial 
Development Bank of India, n , :imlcrt the . ....m. 
"the Export. Import Bank ()f India,". 
Date on which 
amendments .~ 
take effect 
(2) 
The date of estal>-
tilitment of the 
:Eaim Bank. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
5 
10 
15 
ll" 

~D' 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
.'J1IteIIBtll ''See1M' i tb 'pl'a.lde-for 'the establiShment of .. ~rpo­
ration to be known as the Export-Import Bd,ofllldla"to 
strengthen and broad-base the existing institutional arrange-
m~s(.'to'rrt~t' the'i-~utterrt~nts of internatl0l1al trac.fe which 
'is-~~ to gtoW'ft1i't1il!r'as the country's economy m~s 
rurthet'1ptOgte~8. 
2. ~'s&l'tffit!featur~!of the '}iJill-are-
(i) the Export-Import Bank.will functien as -the princi-
pal 'financial instit~tion for' financing, India,'s internatio,nal 
'. trade and' for coordinating the working of si.InRar institu-
tions and' will also undertake limited development and 
merchant banking ~nctions in relation to export oriented 
fndastrif!l! ; 
{ii) the Export-Import Bank of Iniia will be a statu-
tory corporation fully owned by Central Government; aDd 
(iii) its resources wil mainly comprise of contributions 
from G6vemment in the form of grants and loans, JDBket 
borroWings, deposits of long term duration from the p1IIllic 
aric;l short~terrn and long-term funds of the Reserve Bank 
of lildia., 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. Notes on 
.UIH -apfiellilllld,to -the- BiU explain in detail thevariO\lspro-
visions ,of tbe Bill. 
·ltIIw~ 
'1#~''21tn April/' 1981. 
I. 
21 

Notes on dames 
Clause I.-This clause deals with the extent and commence-
ment of the Act. 
Clawe 2.-This clause seeks to define certain expressions in 
the Bill. Special mention may be made about the deftnition of 
the expressions "export" and "import". The said expressions 
have been defined in a comprehensive manner so as to cover 
all types of export and import of goods of all description turn-
liey projects and construction contracts as well as all kinds of 
serviCes, including consultancy services. Further, these ex-
pressions would also cover the activities of export or import 
not only from and into India but also the third countries in 
connection with the project exports. 
Clause 3.-This clause seeks to provide for the establish-
ment of the Export-Import Bank of India with headquarters at 
Bombay and also for the establishment of its offices and 
branches in or outside India. 
Clawe 4.-This clause deals with the share capital and the 
ownership of the Export-Import Bank. It provides for an 
authorised capital of two hundred crores of rupees which may 
be increased by the Central Government to five hundred crores. 
Further, the issued capital shall be wholly subscribed by the 
Central Government. 
Clauses 5 and 6.-These two clauses intl!r alia provide for 
the mana.~t!ment of the Export-Import Bank and tor the vesting 
of the aif&irs and business of that Bank in a Board of Directors 
whose strength has been fixed at the maximwn of sixteen or 
seventeen, depending on the circwnstances as to whether the 
same person is appointed to function both as Chairman and 
Managing Director or two persons are to be appointed separate-
ly in respect of the two aforesaid posts. It may also be men-
tioned that provision has been made for the representation of 
the exporting community on the Board. 
Clause 7.-This clause empowers the Board to constitute 
committees for such purposes as it may think fit. 
Clauses 8 and 9.-While clause 8 seeks to provide for the 
payment of fees and allowances to directors and members of 
the committee, clause 9 provides for the disqualifications of a 
rlirector. 
Clause lO.-This clause gives details of the functions which 
can be undertaken by the Export-Import Bank of India. 
Apart {rom the normal banking functions connected with 
the export and import of goods, such as grant of loans and 

~O) 
advances, ISSue of guarantees anti participation certi1icates etc., 
a Dumber of other functions are proposed to be entrusted to 
tlWl~Inipott Bank,'iIi k~ping with the iyn~ JOle·it 
hIIti 1!d play in the 'field of expor't'financing.Suehfwi.cUou 
iri~' 
!) .; . I ( 
(a) ~g of expor~ from and importa~toDDi onq' 
India, but also third countries of goods and serviCes; . , ... , 
'(b) financing of joint ventures in foreign countries~ 
(c) financing· of export and import of mac~ '~aiul 
equipment on lease basis; and . 
(d) providing loans to an Indian party so as'to enable' 
'. tb4t party to contribute in the share cap~tal of a joptt 
v.~ture ~ a foreign country. 
Th~ ~port-Import Bank will also undertake limiter! merchant-
barkjng .functions such as under-writing of stocks, shares, bonds 
or ~ebentures of companies, engaged in the export or import 
and providing technical, administrative and financial assistariee 
to' parties in connection with export or import. The Export-
lDiport Bank can also undertake the developing and finan.ciD.i 
of export-oriented industries. It is also proposed to entrust 
~be Export-Import Bank with the task of 'Wldertaking trans-
actions LUvolving a combination of Government-to-Governinent 
and commercial credit for the purposes of export or import. 
The Bank will also give lines of credit to foreign Governments 
and foreign financial institutions. The Export-Import Bank is 
alsoi>eing permitted to collaborate with similar institutions in 
developing countries by enabling it to participate in the share 
capital of such institutions. In the role of the prinCipal financial 
institution in the field of finanCing exports, it will give re-
~ce to ~mmercial banks and financial institutions in 
respect of the loans and advances granted by them for the 
purpose of export and import. 
Claue8 11 and 12.-Clauses 11 and 12 respectively seek to 
provide fOl' loans by the Central Government and borrowinSB 
:ancl acceptance of deposits by the Export-Import Bank. The 
Central Government is being authorised to grant a soft-loan 
·of twenty crores af rupees to the Bank which will be repayable 
in Meen annual instalments after a moratorium of fifteen 
years, the rate of interest being five and a quarter per cent. It 
is expected that the issued capital and the soft-term loan placed 
"'8t~ disposal of the EXport-Import Bank would give it funds 
'.~quate· 'eD'ough to carry on its activities till such time as it is 
·\..,te tc{eam iru.ftlclent income for the purpose . 
. ;~·l(.r'''.'l .1 ':. 1 I . 
IlJ ;, Like otberfinancial institutions, the Export-Import ~ 
-'Woilltl alSo be able' to bOrrow' from the open rlU1rket thtoU.8h 
the issUe of bonds and debentures. Besides, 1t will also' en'joy 
'J'~:;~UW~~ .accom~odation f~om t~e Reserve ~ against 
.(~ ~W,'iti~s .. and )~~nt of bllls an.d pro~ nota 
,.~I~}~~¥ ~~. ~ ,COJllIJlercial . an4 other transacti~ 

Jt 
'IlL addition to the above, funds from the National mduSu-1a1 
Credit (Long-term Operations) }'und set up by the Reserve BaDk 
of India at the time of the establishment of the Industrial, 
Development Bank of India would also be available to the 
Export-Import 'Bank for the purpose of its business. 
Clauses 13 and 14.- While clause 13 enables the Export-
Import Bank to borrow foreign currency in or outside India for 
the purposes of its operations, clause 14 enables it to raise 
resources by acceptance of giits, grants, etc., either from Gov-
ernment <.ir any other sources. 
Clauses 15 to 20.-These cla".lses inter alia deal with the 
establishment of a special fund to be called the Export Develop-
ment Fund which would be utilised mainly for the purposes of 
research, training, survey, market intelligence etc., in connec-
tion with the country's international trade as well as for financ-
ing proposals which are unlikely to be supported by banks and 
other financial institutions. This is on the lines of the Develop-
ment Assistance Fund established by the Industrial Develop-
Inent Bank of India. The accounts of the Export Development 
Fund would be maintained separately and would also be audit-
ed by statutory auditors and an annual report on its operations 
would be submitted to the Central Government. 
CZa~e 21.-This clause seeks to provide for the maintenance 
of a General Fund to which all other income earned by the 
Export-Import Bank would be credited. The General Fund 
would be utilised by that Bank for its normal operations. 
1-
Claulte 22.-This clause provides for the preparation of 
balance-sheet and profit and loss aCC<7W1t of the Export-Import 
Bank and closure of books and accounts as on the 31st Decem-
ber each year as in the case of commercial banks. 
Clause :l3.-Clause 23 provides that the Export-Import Bank 
may establish a reserve fund to which may be transferred such 
sums as that Bank may deem fit from out of the annual profits 
occurring to the General F'und. It further provides that that 
Bank shall, after making provision for bad and doubtful debts, 
depreCiation of assets and for all other matters which are 
usually provided for by banks and for the reserve fund, transfer 
the balance of the net profits to the Central Government. 
Clause 24.-This clause inter alia provides for the account. 
of the Export-Import Bank being audited by auditors duly 
qualified to act as such under the Companies Act, 1966 to be 
appointed by the Central Government. The Central Govern-
ment may also, at any time, appoint the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General to examine and report upon the account. of 
the Export-Import Bank. 
Clause 25.- This clause makes a saving proviSion to eDIUI'e 
that nothing contained in Chapter VII except as otherwfst Fo-
vided for in 8ub-section (.) of aectlon l' shall apply 10 ttte 
Export Development Fund. 

Clause 26.- This clause provides for the transfer of the 
bwrineas of the Development Bank in so far as it relates to the 
export flnancing functions of that Bank to the Export-Import 
Bank. Such transfer will include all property, assets and 
liabilities. rights, interest, privileges and obligations of what-
'ever natl1r£.. The consideration for such transfer shall be paid 
by,the Export-Import Bank to the Industrial Development 
'Bank tn such manner and in such number of instalments as 
may be determined by the Central Government. Suitable pro-
vision hap also been made to cover cases of transfer to the 
Export-Import Bank of functions which relate not only to the 
export financing functions of the Development Bank but allb 
to any of the other functions of that Bank. It has also been 
made clear that in case, any question arises as to whether any 
contract, deed. bond, agreement, power of attorney, grant of 
legal repre!'lentation or other instrument referred to in sub-
clause (3) or any suit, appeal or other proceeding referred to 
in sub-clause (4) relates or relates exclusively to the export 
financing functions of the Development Bank, it shall be refer-
red to the Central Government whose decision thereon shall be 
final. 
Clause 27.-Clause 27 provides for the appointment of the 
staff by the Export-Import Bank for the efficient performance 
of its functions. It also ennbles the Export-Import Bank to 
utilise, iT'! consultation with the Industrial Development Bank, 
such of its staff as have expe:-ience in export financing. 
Clause 28.-This clause provides for the delegation of the 
powers and functions of the Board under the Act. 
Clause 29,-This clause makes it obligatory for the Export-
Import Bank to furnish from time to time returns to the 
Central GClVernment. 
Clawlf> 30.- This clause seeks to impose on the Export-
Import Bank the obligation not to divulge any information 
relating to or to the affairs of its constituents except in the 
circumstance~ stated in that clause. It also provides for a 
declaration of fidelity and secrecy by the director. member of 
a committee. auditor or officer or other employee of the Export-
Import Bank or of the Develpment Bank whose services are 
utillsed by the Export-Import Bank before entering upon his 
'd\1ties. 
Clause 31.-This clause is a usual provision to ensure defects 
.. in appointments etc. from invalidating the acts of the board or 
its committees. .-
Clause 32,-This clause enables the Export-Import B~nk to 
I appoint its nominees on the Board of Directors of the com-
. )lanies which are to be assisted by it. It is also provided that 
by'rea!!on f)f hf'fn~ th~ nnminee!l nf that Bank, the directors will 

26 
not i~cur any obligation or liability for anything done fit Omii-
fM'to"be done in good faith in the discharge of their dutftl u 
I " ' , ' 
such nominees. ' 
Clause 33.-This clause seeks to indemnify the direetol' of 
the Export-Import Bank against all losses and expenses 1I1cu.r-
red, by him in or in relation to the discharge of his duties other 
than those caused by his own wilful act or default. , 
Clcwae 34.--.,.Thio;: clause is the usual provision relatinG io 
protection of Rction taken in good faith. 
" " 
CLntBes 35 and 36.-Thc!'Ie twc clauses seek to regulate the 
application of the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891 and to a 
limited extent of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 to the Ex-
port-Import Bank. 
. Cl4me 37.-This clause pro'vides for the exemption of the 
Export-Import Bank from payment of income tax and 811 other 
taxes on income, profits or gains and is on the lines of similar 
exemption given to the Reserve Bank nf India and to the Indus-
trial Development Bank of India. 
ClaUle 38,-:-'nlis clause ensures that no provision of a law 
~e1~ting to thp wir,ding up of companies or corporationl1 shan 
apply to the Export-Import Bank which shall not be placed in 
Uquidation except by an order of the Central Government. 
ctawe 39.-Thie clause seeks tn empower the Board of 
Directors 0f the Export- Tmport Bank. with the previous approval 
of the Central Government to make regulations not inconsistent 
with the Act for the purpose of (!lying effect to the ~vislon6 
of the Act and in P8rti~u18r in respect of the matters speci1\ed 
in that clause. 
dame 40.-This clause !'lrovfdes for amendments to the 
Reserve Bank of India Act. 1934, the Industrial DisputeR Act, 
1947 and the Banking Regulation Ac:t, 1949. 
The amendments to the ReseJ've Bank of India Act are 
maf.nly consequential. This win enllhle the Reserve Bank to 
J;trant fluitabl .. accommodation t.n the F.xport-Tmport Bank from 
out of the National Industrial Credit (Lon~-term Oper.tions) 
Fund. The other amendment.s wiP f_nable the Reserve B_ ,to 
grant accommodation to tt>~ hport-Troport Bank agafn~t trustt"e 
seCtl!rlties. loanr. and advance!'.: and pnrch!'\se of foreign~hange 
ffom the ReserVe'B"n~t of IndIA f~~ the purpose'~f Ita ftnancl~ 
'ctivities. T"e Rec;pl'v~ Bnnk of TnClir is also betn~ernpbweled 
n r.rant shnrt;-tf"T'm 10fln!j, to the l;"Cnnrt-Tmport ~. 
Theamendmettt to the InrlustriaJ nisputes, Act, 1M7, is"to 
J clar.tfy :that the apprpnriat.e Go~r/lT'nent iurelatl(IQ to .• ny 
r }ndusUia.1 ,di..'u>ute ;'Wolvwg the. ~'"Iport.-Import Bank will be 
thE' Cf'ntral Govpmme"t. 
The ame!,<iment tr the Bankin fr Re!!ulatfon Act lR 101' the 
l'urpoge of extend1nr; tl') .tho:! Export-Tmpnrt Bank the protectJOI\ 
" I ' 

_oW 
against any demand by any tribunal or authority under the JD.. 
dustrial Disputes Act, 194'7 for disclosure of information regard-
ing its inner reserves. The other amendment prohibits the holcl-
ing of any agitation by the staff of the Export-Import Bank 
within its premises; . 
.. l.:La.UBe 41.-TIus clause is the usual provision rela~ns to .tbe 
making of an order by the Centn:! Government to re~o\;~ ~~y' 
dith4:Wty that may arise in giving effect to the provisions ot.~ 
Act and its o~ration i6 limited to a period ot three yearS liolll 
the date of commencement of the Act. . 

FINANCIAL ME:MORANDUM 
C~ause 4 (1) provides that the Export-Import Bank of India 
shall have an authorised capital uf two hundred crores Of rupees. 
pause 4 (2) provides that the bSlled capital of the Export-
JmP9rt Bank of India "hall be wholly subscribed by the Oewtral 
Government. .. 
It is proposed that a sum of fifty crores of rupees may be 
provided in the budget for 1981-82 for setting up the Export-
Import Bank of India. A sum of twenty-five crores (Jf rurees 
may have to be contributed by the Central Government annualJy 
from the years 1982-83 to 1987-8~ <:0 that the paid up capital is 
brought up to the hmit of the au1horised capital of two hundred 
crores of rupees. F'urther contributions may have to b~ made 
as and when the authorised cavils1 I!; increased bey~nd rLlpees 
two hundred crores by notification in the OtHcial Gazette as pro-
vif1ed for under this clause, but the quantum and I;lhasfng of such 
contributions cannot be anticipn1c:d Cit this stage. 
Clause 11 (a) provides for n loan of twenty crores of rupt>cs 
to the Export-Import Bank of Ir:dia from the Central Govern-
ment at a rate of i.nterest of five Dnd a quarter per cent. to be 
repaid in fifteen eQual annual inc;talments, the repayment CO:<1l-
mencing on the expiry of fifteen y('nr~ from the date of the re-
ceipt of the loan. This loan of 1wenty crores of rupees is pro-
posed to be given to the Export-Import Bank of India in 1981-82. 
Clause neb) provides for further sums of money by way 
of loans to the Export-Import Bank of India from the Cpntral 
Government on such terms and conditions as may be agreed 
upon. It may be necessary for that Government from the year 
]982-83 onwards to grant loans ranging from fifteen crores of 
rupees to twenty-five crores of rupees every year for a few 
years on such terms snd conditions as may be agreed upon 
Clause 12(2) read with clause 12(1) (a) provides th~t the 
Central Government may, on a request being made by tl]e 
Export-Import Bank of India, guarantee the bonds and deben-
tures issued by that Bank as to the repayment of orincipal 
and payment of interest at such rate as may be fixed by that 
Gcvernment. The extent of this contingent liabilltv wilt de-
pend upon the size of the market borrowings of the 'ExoOTt-
Import Bank of India the exact quantum of which would be 
known only after the bank has started functioning. 
Clause 14 provides that the Export-Import Bank of Indfa 
may receive gifts, grants, donations or any benefactions from 
the Central Government. It is not proposed at thts !ita1!e to 
28 

make any contribution to the Export-Import Bank of India 
under this provision . 
... Clause' 15 provides for the establishment of an.EqMitt 
Ot!veloPPlent F:!-md. Clause 16(a) provides that all olmounts 
by way of loans. gifts. grants, donations or benefactions' from 
Government' or any other source in India or elsewhere wOuld' 
be credited to the Export Development Fund. Even though 
no loans or grants are proposed to be given' by the Central 
Government to the Fund in the year 1981-82. loans and grants 
~re proposed to be provided to the Fund in later years d~d; 
ing upon the requirements of the Fund. 
No other provision of this Bill involves any other expCTIdi-
ture of a recurring or non-recurring nature from out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 

MBl'O~DUM REGAlWING DELEG4'fEP. L1f,GISLArJO~ 
plause 39 ot the,. Bill jlrovides that the Board of Directors 
of ~e ~rt-lmport Bank of India may, with the pRMous 
appJ;'oval of the Central Government, make regul.tions nat 
~CODai8tent with the Act for giving effect to the provisions of 
~ ¥t which inter alia relate to the following matters, 
~~:-
(a) the times and places of the meetings of the Board 
or of any committee constituted under the Act and the pro-
c~dure to be followed at such meetings, including the 
quorum necessary for the transaction of business; 
(b) the fees and allowances that may be paid to the 
directors and the members of a committee: 
(c) the form and manner in which the balance-sheets 
and the account of the Export Development Fund and the 
Export-Import Bank shall be prepared; 
(d) the duties and conduct and the terms and condi-
tions of service of officers and other employees of the 
Export-Import Bank: 
(e) the establishment and maintenance of provident 
fund or any other fund for the benefit of the officeTS and 
other employees of the Export-Import Bank. 
2. Clause 41 of the Bill empowers the Central Government 
to removp. by order and difficulty which may arise in giving 
effect to the provisions of the Act. This is by way of abundant 
caution and for covering difficulties which it is not practicable 
to visualise. 
3. As the matters with respect to which I:QBUlations may 
be made under clause 39 pertain to matters of procedure or 
detail and as the matters with respect to which orders may be 
made under clause 41 pertain to matters which it is not praeti-
cable to visualise at this stage, the delegation of legislative 
power is of normal chlilracter. 

• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRAC'l'I!! FROM THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA A'CT, 1934 
(2 OF 1934) 
• • • • • 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the 
subject or context,-
• 
(a) "agricultural operations" includes animal husban-
dry, dairy and poultry farming, pisciculture and other allied 
activities, whether or not undertaken jointly with agricul-
tural operations; 
• • • • • 
17. The Bank shall be authorised to carryon and transact 
the several kinds of business hereinafter specified, namely:-
• • • • • • 
(4G) the making of loans and advances to, and the pur-
chasing of bonds and debentures of, the Development B:mk 
out of the National Industrial Credit (Long Term Opera-
tions) Fund established under section 46C; 
• • • • • • 
• 
(4-1' the making to scheduled banks, the Development 
Bank, the Industrial Finance Corporat:on and any other 
financial institution as m,y, on the recommendation of the 
Bank, be approved in this behalf by the Central Government 
of loans and advances repayable on demand or otherwise 
and against such security and on such other terms and 
cond:tions as may be approved in this behalf by the Cen-
tral Board for the purpose of enabling such banks, or finan-
dal institution, as the case may be, to purchase foreign 
exchange from the Bank for the purpose Of financing the 
import of capital goods or for such other purposes as may 
be approved by the Central Government. 
• • • • • 
42. (1) Every bank included in the Second Schedule shall 
mainta:n with the Bank an average daily balance the amount 
of which shall not be less than three per cent. of the total of 
the demand and time liabilities in India 01 such bank as shown 
in the return referred to in sub-section (2): 
Provided that the Bank may, by notification in the Gazette 
of India increase the said rate to such higher rate as may be 
specified in the notification so however that the rate shall not 
be more than ftfteen per cent. of the total of the demand and 
time liabilities. 
E3lJ)1a.natiofl..-For the purposes of this section,-
.' . . . . 
(c) "liabilities" shall not include-
• • • • • • 
31 
Defini_ 
tions. 
Business 
which 
the Bank 
may 
transact. 
Cash re-
serves of 
scheduled 
'Janbto 
be kept 
with the 
Bank. 

National 
Industrial 
Credit 
(Lon, 
term 
Opera-
tions) 
Fund. 
Oefini-
tions, 
Cash 
reserve, 
• 
32 
(ii) the amount of any loan taken from the Bank 
or from the Development Bank or from the Agricul-
tural Refinance and Development Corporation, 
• • • • • 
46C. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The amount in the said fund shall be applied by the 
Bank only to the following objects, namely:-
• • • • • • 
(b) the purchasing of bonds and debentures issued by 
the Development Bank, 
• • • • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES A'eT, 1947 
(14 OF 1947) 
• • • • • • 
2. In this Act, unle~~ there is anything reP'llgnant in the 
subject or context.-
• • • • • • 
• 
(bb) "banking company" means a banking company as 
defined in section 5 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949, 
having branches or other e!'ltablishments in more than one 
State, and includes the Industrial Development Bank of 
India, the Reserve Bank o'f India, the State Bank of India, 
a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of 
the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1970, a corresponding new bank con-
sftuted under section 3 of the Banking Compani'es (Acqui-
sition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980, and any 
subsidiary bank as defined in the State Bank of India (Sub-
sidiary Banks) Act, 1959; 
• • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE BANKING REGULATION ACT, 1949 
(10 OF 1949) 
• • • • • 
• 
18, Every banking company, not being a scheduled bank, 
shall ma'ntain in India, by way of cash reserve with itself or 
'n current account opened With the Reserve Bank or the State 
Bank of India or any other bank notified by the Central Govern-
ment In this be-ulf or part~ in oash with ,itseU and partly 
in such account or accoWlts, a sum equivalent, to at least ,~hree 
per cent. of the total Of its time and demand liabilities in India, 
and shall submit to the Reset'\Ie Bank before the fifteenth day 
01 ~ry month a return .howing the amount so held on Friday 
• 
10 of 
5 of 
4 of 
3801 

26 of 1881. 
2 of 1334. 
3 of 1970. 
21 of 1976. 
40 of 1980. 
5 of 1970. 
21 of 1976. 
40 of 1980. 
33 413 
b~ each week of thepr~eding month with particulars Of Its 
time and 'demand liabilities in India on each such Friday or 
'f Fri ' , 1 any such 'day is a public holiday under the Negotiable 
Instruments Act, 1881, at the close of business on the preceding 
working day. 
Explanattion.-In this section and in section 24, "liabilities 
in India" shall not include-
•• • • • • • 
(b) any advance taken from the Reserve Bank or from 
the State Bank of India or from the' Industrial Develop-
ment Bank of India or from the Agricultural Refinance 
Corporation or from any bank notified by the Central 
Goverr.ment under clause (c) of the Explanation to sub-
sectbn (1) of section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 
1934. 
• • '" '" • • 
.MA. (1) '" '" • • 
(3) For the purposes of this section, "banking company" 
indudes the Industrial Development Bank of India, the 
Reserve Bank, the State Bank of India a corresponding new 
bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, a Regio-
nal Rural Bank established under section 3 of the Regional 
Rural Banks Act, 1976, a corresponding new bank constituted 
under ~ection 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980, and any subsidiary bank. 
'" '" '" 
... 
'" '" 
3HAD. (1) ... '" '" 
(3) For the purposes of this section "banking company" 
includes the Reserve Bank, the Industrial Development Bank 
of India, the Statc I3a;1k of India, a corresponding new bank 
constituted under '3ection 3 of the Banking Companie;; (Acqui-
sition and Tran~fer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, a Hegional 
Rural Bank established under section 3 of the Regional Rural 
Banks Act, 1976, a corresponding new bank constituted under 
section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer 
of Undertaking'3) Act, 1980, and any subsidiary bank. 
'" '" '" '" '" '" 
56. The provisions of this Act, as in force for the time being, 
shall apply to, or in relation to, co-operative societ~es as they 
apply to, or in relation to, banking companies subJect to the 
following modfications, namely:-
'" '" '" '" • '" 
(j) for section 18, the following section shall be sub-
stituted, namely:-
'18. Every co-operative bank, not being a State 
co-operative bank for the time being included in the 
Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 
Produc-
tIon of 
document. 
of confi-
dential 
nature. 
Punish-
m::'nts fOr 
certain 
activities 
in relation 
to bank-
ing com-
panies. 
Act to 
apply to 
co-opera-
tive so-
cietle, 
sub~~t to 
modifica-
tiona. 
Cash 
reserve.. 

34 
1934, shall maintain in India, by way of cash reserve 
with itself or in current account opened with the Re-
serve Bank or the State Bank of India or the State co-
operative bank of the State concerned Or with any 
other bank notified by the Central Government in this 
behalf or, in the case of a primary co-operative bank, 
with the central co-operative bank Of the d·strict con-
cernerl or partly in cash with itself and partly in such 
arcount or accounts, a sum eqUivalent to at least three 
per cent. of the total of its time and demand liabilities 
in India, and shall submit to the Reserve Bank before 
the 15th day of every month a return showing the 
amount so held on Friday of each week of the preced-
ing month with particulars of its time and demand 
liabilities in India on each such Friday, or, if any such 
Friday is a public holiday under the Negotiable 
Inc;truments Act, 1881, at the close of business on the 
preceding working day. 
Explanati.on.-In this section and section 24. "liabilities 
in India" ~hall not include,-
... ... oil ... ... ... 
• 
(b) any advance taken from a State Government, the 
Reserve Bank, the State Bank Of India, the Industrial Deve-
lopment Bank of India, the Agricultural Refinance Corpo-
ration or any bank notified by the Central Government 
under clause (c) of the Explanation to sub-section (1) of 
section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 
• ... ... • • 
2011tM, 
26 of 1881. 
2 of J 034 . 

LOK SABHA 
,. 
BILL 
to establish a corporation to be known as the Export-Import 
Bank of India for providing financial assistance to e:cporters 
and importers, and for functioning as the principal financial 
institution for co-ordinating the working of institutions 
engaged in financing erport and import of goods and ser-
vices '»ith a view to promoting the country's international 
trade and for matters connected the~with or incidental 
thereto. 
(Shri R. Venkataraman, 
Minister of Finance.) 