Bill No. 70 or. .• ~ "\~ 
..... -"\" ", .,..~ ~\ \... LJ /.'j' I! "' 
, . .-7 \1'-' ". { 
y' ...-;.'> 
I ,'t' ", f ~O ·'·;~'j";'I·'~)."'· .', .• Date ...... Y" . .,-
\-
THE STATE FINANCIAL CORPORA 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1961 
(To BB INTRODUCED IN LOK SAlmA) 

" of 19,1. 
ani No. 10 01 i,ft 
THE STATE PINANCIAL CORPORATIONS (AMEND-
MENT) BILL, 19<>1 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the State Financial Corporatiom Act, 1951. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republie 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the State Financial Corporations Short aide 
(Amendment) Act, 1961. ::'acc::..t. 
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazettt!, appoint. 
z. In section 2 of the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951 AmeDdJDent 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) ,_ of HCtioD a. 
(i) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, 
10 namely:-
'(c) "industrial concern" means any concern engaged 
or to be engaged in the manufacture, preservation or pre>-
cessing of goods or in mining or in the hotel industry or 
in the transport of passengers or goods by road or by water 
or in the generation or distribution of electricity or any 
other form of power or in the development of any contigu-
ous area of land as an industrial estate. 
E.rplanation~The expression ''processing 1M goods" 
includes any art or process for producing, preparing orr 

, 
\ 
t 
AmeodJDeat 
ofeection 
~A. 
:1 
making an article by subjecting any material to a manual, 
mechanical, chemical, electrical or any other like operation;'; 
(ii) for clause (I), the following clauses shaH be substi-
tuted, namely:-
'(if) "State co-operative bank" shall have the meaning S 
assigned to it in clause (f) of section 2 of the Reserve Bank 
of India Act, 1934; • of 1934· 
(fff) "State Government", in relation to a Union terri-
tory, means the Administrator thereof;'. 
3. In section 3A of the principal Act, in clause (b) of sub-section 10 
(2), after the word and figure "section. 7", the words and figure "or 
section 8" shall be inserted. 
Amendment 4. In section 4 of the principal Act, in. clause (c) of sUb-section 
of aec:tion 4. (3), after -the words "insurance companies", the following shall be 
inserted, namely:-':" IS 
"(including the Life Insurance Corporation of India estab-
lished under section 3 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 
1956) ". 31 or 1956• 
SubititudoD S. For sections 7 and 8 of the principal Act, the following 
of new ICIC- HCt10ns shall be substituted namely:-tiona for ICC- ' 
20 
tionl 7 and So 
Additionll 
c:apital. of 1he 
Fna.ciIl 
Cm...,raticID 
and ita 
bonowinS 
poWCI''' 
"7. (1) The Financial Corporation may, in consultation 
with the Reserve Bank, issue and sell bonds and debentures 
carrying Interest for the purpcse of increasing its working 
capital and such bonds and debentures shall be guaranteed by 
the State Government as to the repayment of the principal and 2S 
the payment of interest at such rate as the State Government 
may, on the recommendation of the Board and with the approval 
of the Central Government. fix at the time the bonds and deben-
tures are issued. 
(2) The Financial Corpcration may, for the purposes of 
carrying out its functions under this Act. borrow money from 30 
the Reserve Bank- -
(a) repayable on demand or on the expiry of a fixed 
period not exceeding ninety days from the date _ on which 
the money is so borrowed against the security of - 3S 
(i) stocks, funds and securities (other than irruno ... 
vable property) -in which a trustee is authorised to 
invest trust money by any law for. the time being in 
force in India, or 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
25 
35 
3 
(ii) such bi1ns of exchange and . promissory notes 
as are e1i~ble for purchase or rediscount by the 
Reserve Bank or as are fully guaranteed as to the re-
payment of the principal and payment of interest by a 
State Government: 
(b) repayable on the expiry of a fixed period not 
exceeding eighteen months from the date on which the 
money is so borrowed. against securities of the Central 
Government or of any State Government of any maturity. 
Or against bonds and debentures issued by the Financial 
Corporation and guaranteed by the State Government and 
maturing within a period not exceeding eighteen months 
from the date on which the money is so borrowed: 
Provided that the amount borrowed by the Financial 
Corporation under clause (b) shan not at any time exceed 
in the aggregate sixty per cent. of the paid-up share capital 
thereof. 
(3) The Financial Corporation may, for the purposes of C8t'-
rying out its functions under this Act, borr:ow money from the 
State Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank on such 
terms and conditions as may be agreed upon. 
(4) The Financial Corporation may, with the prior approval 
of the Reserve Bank. also borrow money from any financial insti-
tution notified in this behalf by the Central Government on such 
terms and conditions as may be agreed upon. 
(5) The total amount of bonds and debentures issued and 
outstanding. the amounts borrowed by the Financial Corporation 
under clause (b) of sub-section (2), sub-section (3) and sub-
section (4) and of the contingent liabilities of the Financial Cor-
poration in the form of guarantees given by it or underwritting 
agreements entered into by it shall not at any time exceed ten 
time~ the amount of the paid-up share capital and the reserve 
fund of the Financial Corporation. . 
8. (1) The Financial Corporation may accept from the D~~: 
State Government or, with the prior approval of the State F:nancial 
Government and the Reserve Bank. a local authority or any Corporation. 
other person deposits repayable after the expiry of a period 
which shall not be less than twelve mOnths from the date of 
the making of the deposit a.nd on such other terms as it thinks 
fit: 
. ·Provided that the. total amount of such deposits shall net at 
any time exceed the paid-up share capital of the financial 
Corporation. 

4 
(2) All deposits accepted under sub-section (1), other than 
the deposits from the State Government, shall be guaranteed 
by the State Government as to the repayment of. the principal 
and the payment of interest." . 
......... t t. In section 10 of .the principal Act,-.f IeItioD 10. 5 
(i) in clause (b), the words "the Central Board of" shall 
be omitted: 
(ii) in clause (c), the words "the Board of directors or' 
shall be omitted; 
(iii) for clause <1), the following clause shall be' substitu- 10 
ted, namely:-
"(f) a managing director appointed by the State 
Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank and, 
except in the case of first appointment, also with the 
Board;". I, 
~:::u.:n 7. For seetion 16 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
tioD for Iee- be substituted, namely:-
1ioD 16. 
Remunera-
tion of 
diNc:ton. 
"16. The directors other than the managing director and 
not being servants of the Government shall be paid such fees 
as may be prescribed for attending meetings of the Board and, 20 
if they are members of the Executive Committee, or any other 
committee appointed by the Financial Corporation, for attending 
meetings of such committee.". 
8. In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, 25 
name1!y:-
"(c) hold office for such term not exceeding four years 
8$ the State Government may specify and be eligible for 
reappointment;" ; 
(ii) in the proviso, the wo'rds "shaU hold oftlce for such 30 
~erm Il\d" shall be omitted. 
AmrdlMDt t. 'In aeetion 19 of the principal Act,-.r_doD I, 
(i) in sub-section (3A), for the words "the Central Board 
of the Reserve Bank or the Board of directors of the Industrial 
Finance Corporation of India", the words and figures "the 35 
Reserve Bank or the Industrial Finance Corporation of India 
established under the 1~\\stna1 Fin~c:e Corporation Act, 1948" 
Ihall be IU'bstitutedj l' of 1948 

15 of 19<48. 
10 
20 
~ 
(ii) for sub-section (4), the following sub-sections shall be 
substituted, namely:-
" (4) If for any reason a director nominated under 
clause (a) Qr clause (b) or clause (e) of section 10 who II 
a member of the Executive Committee or any other com-
mittee is unable to attend any meeting of the Executive 
Committee or other cc.mmittee. the State Government, the 
Reserve Bank Or the Industrial Finance Corporation estab-
lished under the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948, 
as the case may be, depute anv other person to attend the 
said meeting- and such person sha11, for the purposes of the 
said meeting, be deemed to be a member of such committee. 
(5) If for any reason the Chairman of the Board or the 
Chairman of the Executive Committee is unable to attend 
any meeting of the Board or. as the case may be, of the 
Executive Committee,-
(a) in the case of the meetinJt of the Board, 8 
director. net beine: the manae:ing director. authorised 
bv the Chairman of the Board in writin~ shall preside 
at such mePting. hut if t'hp director 80 authorised is 
absent or if no such authorisation has heen made. the 
Board may elect a director to preside at that meeting: 
and 
(b) in the casE' of the meeting of the Executive 
Committee. a member authorised in writinll by the 
Chairman of that Committee shall preside at that meet-
ing. but if the member so authorised is absent or if no 
such authorisation hM been made. the Committee may 
elect any of its members to preside at that meeting.". 
30 10. For section 25 of the principal Act, the following section shall ~~!tu~~ 
be substituted. namely:- tiOD for • 8ection. zS. 
''25. (1) The Financial Corporation may, subject to the pro- !h~hess 
visions of thi::; Act. carrv on and transpct any of the fol\>wing Financial 
kinds of business namely: _ Corporation . , maf tranl-
3S (a) ~aranteeing, on such terms and conditions as may act. 
be agreed upon.-
(i) loans raised by industrial concerns which are 
repayable within a peried not exceeding twenty years, 
and are floated in the public market; 
(ii) loans raised by industrial concerns from sche-
duled banks or State co-operative banks; 

6 
(b) guaranteeing, on such tenns and conditions as may 
be agreed upon, deferred payments due from any industrial 
eoncern in connection with its purchase of capital gocds 
within India: 
(c) underwriting of the issue of stock, shares, bonds or S 
debentures by industrial concerns; 
(d) acting as agent of the Central Government or the 
State Government or the Industrial Finance Corporation of 
India established under the Industrial FinanC'e Corporation 
Act, 1948, or any ather financial institution notified in this 10 IS of 1948. 
behalf by the Central Government in the transaction of any 
business with an industrial concern in respect of loans or 
advances granted, or debentures subscribed, by anyone of 
them; 
(e) receiving ~n consideration of the services mention- IS 
ed in the preceding clauses such commission as may be 
agreed upon; 
(1) retaining WI part of its assets any stock, shares, bonds 
or debentures of an industrial concern which it may have 
to take in fulfilment of its underwriting liabilities, so how- 20 
ever, that it dispC1les of the stock, shares, bonds or deben-
tures so acquired as early as practicable, but in no case the 
stock, shares, bonds or debentures so acquired shall be re-
tained beyond a period of seven years from the date of such 
acquisition, except with the prior permiSSion of the Reserve 25 
Bank: 
Provided that the Financial Corporation may subscribe 
to stock Or shares of the industrial concern if such concern 
increases its subscribed capital: by the issue of further stock 
or shares in accordance with, and subject to, the provisions 30 
of section 81 of the Ccmpanies Act, 1956, but the stock or I of 19S6. 
shares so subscribed shall not be retained after the stock 
9r shares of the industrial concern taken in fulfilment of 
its underwriting liabilities are disposed of; 
(g) granting loans or advances to, or subscribing to 35 
debentures of, an industrial concern, repayable within a 
period not exceeding twenty years from the date on which 
they are granted or subscribed to, as the case may be: 
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be 
deemed to preclude the Financial Corporation from grant- "0 
ing loans or advances to, or subscribing to debentures of, an 

.. • 
5 
10 
llf 19S6. 
15 
20 
30 
35 
1'''''''' . .. l L.. , 
industrial concern to wbich may be attached an option to 
convert such debentures or loans into stock or sbares of the 
industrial concern: 
Provided further that the Financial Corporation may. 
in the exercise of such option, convert such debentures or 
loans into stock or shares of the industrial ~oncern and 
may also subscribe to stock or shares of the industrial con-
cern if such concern increases its subscribed capital by the 
issue of further stock or shares in accordance with, &nd 
subject to, the provisions of section 81 of the Companies 
Act, 1956; 
(h) generally, the doing of such acts and things as 
may be incidental to, or consequential upon, the exercise of 
its powers or the discharge of its duties under this Act. 
(2) No accommodat~on shall be given under clauses (0), 
(b) and (g) of sub-section (1) unless it is sufficiently secured 
by a pledge, mortgage, hypothecation, or assignment of Govern-
ment or other securities, stock, shares, or secured debentures, 
bullion, movable or immovable property or other tangible assets 
in the manner prescribed by regulations or unless it is gua-
ranteed '3.S to the repayment of the principal and the payment 
of interest by the State Government, a scheduled bank or a 
State co-operative bank. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (5) of section 
7, the aggregate of contingent liabilities of the Financial Corpora-
tion under clauses (a), (b)and (c) of sub-section (1) shall not 
at any time exceed twice the paid-up share capital and reserve 
fund of the Corporation except with the prior approval of the 
State Government and in consultation with the Reserve Bank 
but in no case shall exceed thrice the paid-up share capital and 
reserve fund of the Corporation.". 
11. For section 26 of the principal Act, the 
shall be substituted, namely:-
• following section Subitituti<J" 
of new 
section for 
lCCtion 26. 
"26. The Financial Corporation shall not enter into any Limit of 
arrangements under clauses (a) 35 and (g) of sub-section (1) of ~od.­
section 25 with any industrial concern so that the total emount tion. 
outstanding against that concern in respect of all such arrange-
ments is more than-
(i) twenty lakhs of rupees in the case of a public 
limited company as defined in section 3 of the Companies 

Act, 1956 or a co-operative society registered under the I of lPS6. 
Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 or any other law relating 2 of 19l'.l, 
to co-operative societies for the time being in force; and 
(ii) ten lakhs of rupees in any other case:'. 
Amendment 12. In section 27 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the 5 
ofaection27. following shall be added at the end, namely:-
"and nothing in the said Act or in any such law or instru-
ment shall, in so far as it makes in relation to a director, any 
provision for the holding of any share qualification, age limit, 
restriction on the number of directorships, retirement by rota- Ie 
tion or removal from office, apply to any director appointed by 
the Financial Corporation in pursuance of this section.". 
Amendment 13. In section 28 of the principal Act, for clauses (a) and (b), 
of section 28' the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:-
Amendment 
of section 29. 
"(a) except as provided in section 8, accept deposits; 
(b) except as provided in clauses (f> and (g) of sub-
section (1) of section 25, subscribe to the shares or stock of any 
company;". 
14. In section 29 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (4), for the words "charges and expen- 20 
ses properly incurred", the words "charges and expenses which 
in the opinion of the Financial Corporation have been properly 
incurred" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (5), for the words "the owner of the 
concern", the words "the concern" shall be substituted. 25 
Am dm 15. In section 32 of the principal Act. for sub-section (11) the en ent 
ofiectioD32. following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
"(11) The functions of a district judge under this section 
. shall be exercisable-
(a> in a presidency town, where there IS a city civil 30 
court having jurisdiction, by a judge of that court and in 
the absence of such court, by the High Court; and 
(b) elsewhere, also by an additional district judge.". 
16. In section 32A of the principal Act, aLter sub-section Amendment 
of section the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
(2) , 
32A. 35 
"(3) Nothing in the Companies Act, 1956 or in any other I of 19S6. 
law for the time being in force or in any instrument relating to 
,. 

9 
the industrial concern shall, in so far as it makes in relation to 
a director, any provision for the holding of any share qualifica-
tion, age limit, restriction on the number of directorships, 
retirement by rotation or removal from office, apply to any 
5 director appointed by the Financial Corporation under this 
section.". 
17. In section 33 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the Amendment 
words "or with any agency .of the Reserve Bank other than a Gov- of section 
ernment treasury", the words, brackets and figures "or the State 33. 
10 Bank of India or a subsidiary bank as defined in the State Bank of 
38 of 1959. India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959" shall be substituted. 
18. In section 35 of the principal Act, in the proviso to sub-sec- Amendment 
tion (2), for the words brackets and figures "under any guarantee of section 
given in pursuance of sub-section (2) of section 7", the words ond 35· 
I, figures "section 7 or section 8" shall be substituted. . 
20 
19. After section 35 of the principal Act, the following 
shall be inserted, namely:-
section Insertion of 
new section 
3SA. 
"35A. (1) The Financial Corporation may establish a &pe- special 
cial reserve fund, to which shall be transferred such portion of reserve fund. 
the dividends accruing to the State Government and the 
Reserve Bank on the shares of the Financial Corporation as may 
be fixed by agreement between the State Government and the 
Reserve Bank: 
Provided that the total amount in the said fund shall at no 
time exceed ten per cent. of the paid-up share capital of the 
Financial Corporation. 
(2) No shareholder of the Financial Corporation, other 
than the State Government and the Reserve Bank, shall have 
any claim to the special reserve fund. 
(3) The amount standing to the credit of the special re-
serve fund may be utilised by the Financial Corporation for 
only such purposes as are approved by the State Government 
and the Reserve Bank.". 
20. In section 37 of the principal Act, in the proviso to sub- Amendment 
section (6), for the words, brackets and figures "sub-section (2) of ofaection 31· 
3S section 7", the words and figures "section 7 or section 8" shall be 
lubltituted. 

Insertion of 
new section 
4IA. 
Protection of 
tK:tion taken 
by persons 
appointed 
under sec-
tion 27 or 
section 32A. 
Amendment 
of section 43. 
Insertion of 
new section 
43A. 
Delegation 
ofpawers. 
10 
21. After section 41 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"41A. No suit, prosecution. or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against any person appointed. as director, administrator, 
managing agent or manager by the Financial Corporation in S 
pursuance of section 27 or section 32A for anything which is in 
good faith done orintended to be done by him as such director, 
administrator, managing agent or manager.". 
22. In section 43 of the principal Act,-
(i) in the first proviso,- 10 
(a) for the words, brackets and figures "under any 
guarantee given in pursuance of sub-section (2) of section 
7", the words and figures "section 7 or sectioD 8" shall be 
substituted; 
(b). for the words "or bonds", the words "bonds or IS 
deposits" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in the second proviso, for the words "declared to be 
income-tax free", the words "and the income-tax shall be pay-
able thereon as if it were the interest receivable on ally secu-
rity of a State Government issued ~ome-tax free" shall be 20 
substituted. 
23. After section 43 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"43A. The Board may, by general or special order, delegate 
to the managing director or to any other officer of the Financial 2~ 
Corporation subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, -
as may be specified in the order such of its powers and duties 
under this Act as it may deem necessary.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The working of the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951 since 
1956 when the Act was last amended has brought to light the need 
to amend it in certain respects. With the rising tempo of indus-
trialisation of the country it has also become necessary to enlarge 
the field of operations of the State Financial Corporations to serve 
the growing needs of industry. . 
2. Under the existing provisions of the Act the State Financial 
Corporations cannot prOVide financial assistance to the hotel or 
transport industry, nor can they help in the development of the 
industrial estates. It is proposed to amend the Act so as to enable 
the Corporations to render financml assistance for the hotel and 
transport industries and also in the developmeilt of industrial 
estates. 
3. To meet the growing needs of industry for financial assistance, 
it is necessary to augment their resources sufticiently. Consequent-
ly, the borrowing p~ers of the Corporations are proposed. to be 
increased. 
4. It is also proposed to amend the Act so as to enable a State 
Financial Corporation to transact the following kinds of new busi-
ness, namely, the guaranteeing of loans raised by industrial con-
cerns from scheduled banks or State co-operative banks, and the 
guaranteeing of deferred payments due from any industrial con-
cern in connection with its purchase of goods within India. Besides, 
the Corporations are also being enabled. to retain underwritten 
shares beyond seven years and to convert loans and debentures 
into share capiml. It is further proposed to enhance the limit of 
accommodation in the case of public limited companies and co-ope-
rative societies to twenty lakhs of rupees. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve these objects. Opportunity is also 
being taken to incorporate some other amendments which are found 
necessary for the smooth working of the Corporations and are of a 
consequential, clarificatory or procedural nature. The notes an 
c~auses appended to the Bill explain the provisions thereof. 
NEW DELHI; MORARJI R. DESAI. 
The 27th November. 1961. 
II 

Notes on clauses 
Clause 2.-This clause seeks to include industrial concerns en-
gaged or to be engaged in hotel industry or in the transport of 
passengers or goods by road or by water or in the development of 
any contiguous area of land as an industrial estate. 
Clause 3.-It is conseque'ntial to the amendment proposed to 
section 8 of the Act. 
Clause 4.-1t seeks to clarify that insurance companies include 
the Life Insurance Corporation of India. 
Clause 5.-This clause seeks to amend sections 7 and 8 of the 
Act. The amendment to section 7 enables a State Financial Cor-
poration to borrow money from the Reserve Bank of India repay-
able .on the expiry of fixed periods not exceeding eighteen months 
and also from the concerned State Government and notified finan-
cial institutions. The borrowing power has been enhanced from the 
existing multiple of five times to ten times the paid-up share capital 
and reserve fund of the Corporation. The amendment to section 
8 envisages a State Financial Corporation accepting deposits from 
the State Government concerned, the local authority or any person, 
repayable after the expiry of a period not less than twelve months 
instead of five years at present. It also envisages the State Govern-
ment guaranteeing repayment of deposits other than its own and 
payment of interest thereon. 
Clause 6.-This clause seeks to amend section 10 of the Act in 
order to remove certain difficulties experienced in the nomination 
of directors by the Reserve Bank of India and the Industr.il9.1 Fin-
ance Corporation of India and also provides for the appointment of 
the managing director in consultation with the Reserve Bank of 
India. 
Clause 7.-This clause enables the State Financie1 Corporation 
to pay fees to the directors for attending meetings of any Committee 
appointed by the Corporation. 
Clause 8.-This clause seeks to amend section 17 of the Act en-
abling the State Government to fix the term of office of a managing 
director for any period not exceeding four years. 
12 

13 
Clause 9.-This clause seeks to amend section 19 of the Act to 
remove the procedural difficulties in the nomination and attendance 
of directors at any meeting of the Board or the Executive Com-
mittee. 
Clause to.-This clause seeks to enlarge the scope of the businesses 
undertaken by the State Financial Corporations. The new businesses 
which are proposed to be undertaken by the Corporations include, 
inter alia, the guaranteeing of loans raised by industrial concerns 
from scheduled banks or State Co-operative banks, guaranteeing of 
deferred payments due from any industrial concern in connection 
with its purchase of capital goods within India, retention as part of 
their assets of stock, shares, bonds or debentures issued by any in-
dustrial concern and taken up by the Corporation in fulfilment of 
under-writing liabilities for a period exceeding seven years from 
the date of acquisition with the prior permission of the Reserve 
Bank of India and also subscription to rights smres and the con-
version of loans or advances or debentures into share capital of an in-
dustrial concern if the terms of the loans or advances provide for 
such conversion and also the power to subscribe to rights shares if 
such concern increases its subscribed capital. This clouse also pro-
vides for the functioning of a State Financial Corporation as an 
agent of any financial in3titution notified by the Central Govern-
ment. 
To ensure that a State Financial Corporation does not lock up 
its funds in the form of guarantees or in underwritten shares this 
clause further seeks to impose a limit on the aggregate of contin-
gent liabilities of the financial corporation in the form of guarantees 
given by it or underwriting agreements entered into by it at twice 
the paid-up share capital and reserve fund of the Corporation, which 
limit may be exceeded up to three times with the prior approval of 
the State Government and in consultation with the Reserve Bank 
of India. 
Clause H.-This clause seeks to enhance the limit of accommo-
dation to rupees twenty lakhs in the case of industrial concerns 
which are public limited companies or co-operative societies. 
Clause 13.-The amendment -to section 28 of the Act is conse-
quential to the amendments proposed to section 25 of the Act. 
Clause 14.-The amendment to section 29 is clarificatory in 
nature. 
Clause 17.-This clause seeks to amend section 33 of the Act en-
abling the financial corporations to deposit their monies in the State 

14 
Bank of India or in any subsidiary bank of the State Bank of India 
as defined in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959, 
without consulting the Reserve Bank of· India. 
Clause 18.-The proposed amendment to section 35 of the Act 
is consequential to the amendment to section 8 of the Act. 
Clause 19.-This clause seeks to provide for the establishment of 
a specit31 reserve fund to which the whole or a portion of the divi-
dends accruing to the State Government and the Reserve BaBk of 
India on the share capital held by them in a State Financial Cor-
poration shall be transferred by an agreement between the two. 
This amendment is with a view to augment the reserve funds of the 
Corporation and is similar to the provisions of section 32A of the 
Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948. 
Clause 20.-The amendment to section 37 is consequential to the 
amendment to st!ction 8 of the Act. 
Clause 22.-Tbe amendments to section 43 of the Act are of con-
sequential and clarificatory nature. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Centml Govern~nt will be liable to pay to a State Finan-
cial Corporation commission when the Corporation acts as an agent 
of the Central Government iR any transaction with an industrial 
concern in respect of any loans or advances granted or debentures 
subscribed. It is not possible to estimate at this s1Jf1ge the exact 
amount of this expenditure. 

[)eftnitiODl. 
BltabUlh-
meat of Joint 
PiDaDCial 
Corpora-
tiona. 
ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE STATE FINANCIAL CORPORATION ACT. 1951 
(63 OF 1951) 
• • • • • 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(c) "industrial concern" means any concern engaged or to 
be engaged in the manufacture, preservation or processing of 
goods or' in mining or in the generation or distribution of elec-
tricity or any other form of power; 
Explanation.-The expression "processing of goods" in-
cludes any art or process for producing, preparing or making 
an article by subjecting any material to a manual, mechanical, 
chemical, electrical or any other like operation; 
• • • • • 
(6) "State Government" in relation to a Part C State, 
means the Lieutenant-Governor, or as the case may be, the 
Chief Commissioner; 
• • • • • 
3A. 
• • • • • 
(2) An inter-State agreement under sub-section (1) among the 
participating States may-
• • • • • 
(b) provide or the sharing of the liability for the guarantee 
under section 6 or section 7; 
• • • • • 
4. 
• • • • • 
(3) The State Government shall, with the approval of the Cen-
tral Government, determine the number of shares which may, res-
pectively, be distributed among-
• • • • • 
16 '-

17 
(c) scheduled banks, insurance companies, investment 
trusts, co-operatlve banks or other financial institutions, and 
• • • • • 
7. (1) The Financial Corporation may, in consultation with the Mditioaal 
Reserve Bank, issue and sell bonds and debentures carrying interest ~;~ 
for the purpose of increasing. its working capital: corpozation. 
Provided that the total amount of bonds and debentures issued 
and outstanding and of the contingent liabilities of the Financial 
Corporation in the form of guarantees given by it or underwriting 
agreements entered into by it ,shall not at any time exceed. five times 
the amount of the paid-up share CBpital and the reserve fund of the 
Financial Corporation. 
(2) Bonds 6Ild debentures of the Financial Corporation shall be 
guaranteed by the State Government as to the repayment of the 
principal and the paYment of interest at such rate as the State 
Government may, on the recommendation of the Board and with the 
approval of the Central Government, fix at the time the bonds and 
debentures are issued. 
(3) The Financial Corporation may, for the purpose of carrying 
out its functions under this Act, borrow money from the Reserve 
Bank, repayable on demand or on the expiry of fixed periods not 
exceeding ninety days from the date on which the money is so 
borrowed, against securities of the Central Government or of any 
State Government. 
8. The Financiel Corporation may a~cept deposits from the pub- ~ 
lie repayable after the expiry of a period which shall not be less ptinanc~ . 
than five years from the date. of the making of the deposit, and on Corporation 
such other tenns as it thinks fl.t: 
Provided that the total amount of sw:h deposits shall not at any 
time exceed the paid-up capital of the Financial Corporation . 
• • • • • 
10. The Board of directors shall consist of the following namely: - Board of 
• • • • • directorl. 
(b) one director nominated by the Central Board of the 
Reserve Bank; 
(c) one directoJ:' nominated by the Board of directors of the 
industrial Finance Corporation of India established under the 
Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948 (15 of 1948); 
• • • • • • 
(I) one managing director appointed by the State Govern-
ment, in consultation with the Board except in the case of the 
ftrst appointment: 

Remunera· 
Cion of 
clirec:ton. 
~d' IrectOr. 
Medin .. 01 
the Board 
and Com· 
.JDiUec. 
18 
:Provided that on the first constitution of the Board the directors 
referred to in clauses (d) and (e) shall be nominated by the State 
Government and the directors so nominated shall, for the purposes 
of this Act, be deemed to be elected directora: 
Provided further that all directors of the Board first constituted 
other than the managing director shall retire at the end of the first 
year. 
• • • • • • 
16. The directors other than the managing director and not 
·being servants of the State Government shall be paid such fees for 
attending meetings of the Board and, if they are member. thereof 
of the Executive Committee, as may be prescribed. 
17. (1) The managing director shall-
• • • • • • 
(c) hold oftlce for four years and be eligible for reappoint-
ment; . 
(d) receive such salary and allowances as the Board, with 
the previous approval of the State Government, may deter-
mine: 
Provided that the ftrst managing director shall hold ofl\ce for 
such term and shall receive such . salary and allowanees RJ the 
State Government may fix. 
• ... • • • .., 
19. 
• • • • • • 
(3A) If, for any reason, a director nominated under clause 
(a) or clause (b) or clause (e) of section 10 is unable to attend any 
meeting of the Board, the State Government, the Central Board of 
the Reserve Bank or the Board of directors of the Industrial 
Finance Corporation of India, as the' case may be, may depute any 
other person to attend the said meeting and such person shall, for 
all purposes of the said meeting, be deemed to be a director nomina-
ted under clause (4) or clause (b) or clause (e), as the cue may be, 
of· the said section. 
(4) If for any reason the Chairman is unable tot. p~t. at • 
meeting-
(4) of the Board, a director other the the maDaglng dIrec-
tor, authoris~d by the Chairman in writing in thJa behalf, shall 
preside at that meeting, or 
(b) of the Executive· Committee, Ii member authorised in 
writing by the managing director shan preside .t that meeting. 
• • • • • • ••• 

19-
25. (1) The Financial Corporation may, subject to the provisions ~!~Cllp' w.--..· iDIDoo. 
of this Act, carry on and transact any of the following kinds of cial Corpo-
bwluieu, namely:- . ~Y 
(a) the guaranteeing on such terms and conditions as IDay 
be agreed upon of loans raised by industrial concerns which are 
repayable within a period not exceeding twenty years and are 
floated in the public market; 
(b) the underwriting of the issue of stocks, share&, bonds, 
or debentures by industrial concerns; 
ee) the receipt in consideration of the services mentioned, 
in clauses (a) and (b) of such commission as may be agreed 
. upon: 
(d) the retention as part of its assets of any stocks, shares, 
bonds, or debentures which it may have to take up in fulfilment 
of its underwriting liabilities: provided that it' disposes of the 
stocks, shares, bonds or debentures so ac:quired. as elrly as 
practicable and in any case within a period of seven years from 
the date of such aequisition; . . ", 
(e) the granting of loans or advances to, or the subscribing 
to' debentures of, industrial concerns, repayable within a period 
'not exceeding twenty years from the date on which they al'e 
granted or subscribed to, as the case may be; 
(ee) acting as an agent for the Central Government or the 
State Government or the Industrial Finance Corporation' of India 
established under the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, . 1948 
(15 of 1948), in the transaction of any business with an industri,:" 
al concern in respect of loans or advances granted, or debentures 
subscribed, by anyone of them; and 
(f) generally, the doing of all such acts and things as may 
be incidental to or consequential upon the exercise of its powers 
or the discharge of its duties under this Act. 
(2) No aceommodatioD shall be given under clauaes (a) and (e) 
ot'sub..section (1), unless it is sufticiently secured by a pledge, mo~ 
gap, bypothecation or assignment of Gbvemment or other aecuri-
tiel, stocb, .hares or secured debentures, bullion, movable or un. 
movable property or' other tangible anets in' the manner prescribed 
by regulations or 'unless it is guaranteed 88 to the repayment of 
principal and the payment of Interest by the State Government, a' 
acheduled bank or a State co-operative bank, 

20 1 
=oda- 26. The Financial Corporation shall not enter into any arrange-
tioD. ment under clauses (4) and (e) of sub-section (1) of sectioQ. 2& 
with a single industrial concern for an amount equivalent in the 
aggregate to more than ten per cent. of the paid-up share capital 
Power to 
impoIc ccm-
clition. for 
accommoda-
tion. 
Prohibited bulinen. 
ltipttof 
Piaanclal 
Corporation 
iDeate of 
default. 
of the Corporation, but in no case exceeding ten lakhs of rupees. 
27. 
• • • • • 
(2) Where one of the conditions imposed under sub-section (1) 
is that a director shall be appointed by the Financial Corporation 
on the Board of directors of the industrial concern to protect the 
interests of the Financial Corporation, such condition shall be a 
valid condition notwithstanding any thing contained in the Com-
panies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or in any other law for the time being 
in force or in any instrument relating to the industrial r.oncern. 
28. The Financial Corporation shall not-
(4) accept deposits, except as provided by this Act: 
(b) subscribe directly to the shares or stock of any com-
pany: 
Provided that nothing in clause (b) shall affect the right of 
the Financial Corporation to acquire any AAares, bonds or deben-
tures of a company in fulfilment of lElIly underwriting agreement 
entered into by the Financial Corporation; 
(c) grant any loan or advance on the security of its own 
shares. 
29. 
• • • • • 
(4) Where the management of an industrial concern is taken 
over by the Financial Corporation or any property is transferred and 
realised by it under the provisiOns of Sub-section (1), all costs, 
charges and expenses properly incurred by it as incidental to such 
management, or transfer and realisation shall be recoverable from 
the industrial concern and the money which is received by it from 
such management or transfer and realisation shall, in the absence 
of any contract to the contrary, be held by it in trust to be applied 
ftrstly, in payment of sUch costs, charges and expenses and, second-
ly, in discharge. of the debt due to the Financial Corporation, and 
the residue of the money 80 received shall be paid to the person 
entitled thereto. 

, 
(5) Where the Financml Corporation takes over the mana .... 
ment of an industrial concern under the provisions of sub-section 
(1), the Financial Corporation shall be deemed to be the owner of 
.uch concern, for the purposes of suits by or against the concern, 
and shall sue and be sued in the name of the owner of the concern . 
• • • .. • 
32. 
• • • • • 11 
Proc:eclare 
of diltricl' 
judie In ra-
(11) The functions of a district judge under this section shall, in :;:U:tiODI 
a presidency-town be exercised by the principal judge of the city under ~. 
civil court, if any, having jurisdicton or by the High Court. don 31 . 
• • • • • 
33. 
• • • • • 
(Z) All moneys belonging to the fund shall be' deposited til the 
Reserve Bank or with any agency of the Reserve Bank other than a 
Government treasury or, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, iTl 
a scheduled bank or a State co-operative bank. " 
• • • • 
, . ' .. 
Fundi olEbe 
Flnancfal 
Corporation. 
35. (1) The Financial Corporation shall establish a reserve fund. DIItXIIal f6 
pra!1I. 
(2) After making provision for bad and., doubtful debts, depre-
ciation of assets and all other matters which are usually provided 
for by banking companies, the Financial Corporation may out of its 
net annual profits declare a dividend: 
Provided that for so long as the reserve fund is tess than the paid-
up share capital of the Financial Corporation and until there has 
been repaid to the State Government such sum, if any, as that 
Government may have paid under guarantee given in pursuance of 
section 6, or under any guarantee given in pursuance of sub-section 
(2) of section 7, the rate of such dividend shan not exceed the rate 
guaranteed by the State Government under section 6 . 
• • .. • • 
37. 
• • .. • • 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preeeding sub-
sections, the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India may, either 
of his own motion or on a request received in this behalf from .. 

ProridoDl· 
_tiIll_: 
inc)ni.· .. 
MId II&per~. 
IU, .. 
D 
State· Govemment, undertake such audit and at such times as he 
',may eonsider necessary: 
, Provided that where the State Government is required to make 
lIllY payrDentoJl account of the guarantee giVeD by It under section 
8 or sub-section (2) of section 7 as the case may be such audit shall 
be undertaken by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India . 
• • • • • • 
43. :ror the purposes of the Indian Income-tax Act 1822 (11 of 
1922), the Financial Corporation shall be deemed to be a company 
within the meaning of that Act and shall be liable to income-tax 
and super-tax accordingly on, its income, profits and gains: 
Provided that any sum paid by the State Govemment under the 
guar8lltee given in pursuance of section 6 or under any guarantee 
",1;'.'·" given in pursuance of sub-section (2) of section 7 shWl not be treated 
.. the income, profits and gains of the Financial Corporation and 
any interest on debentures or bonds paid by the Financial Corpora-
,tion out of such sum shall not be t,reated as upenditul'e. mcurred 
by it: 
Provided further that in the case of any shareholder such portion 
.. of a dividend as has been paid out. of any such sum advanced by 
. :," , " the State Govemment shall be deemed to be his income from 
> • , "interest on securities" declared to be income-tax free within the 
meaning of section 8 of that Act. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
funher to amend the State Financial Corporations Act. 1951. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (1) and (3) of 
snicle II7 and clause (1) of atticle 274 of the Constitution 
of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the introduction 
and consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Morarji Desai, 
Minister of Fi1llJ1ll:l.) 