Bill No. 70 of 1953' 
THE DISPLACED PEltSONS (CLAIMS) SUPPLEMENTARY 
LULL, 195:~ 
(As INTRODUCF.D IN TilE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the continuance of certain proceedings pending undm' 
the Displaced Persons (Claims) Act, 1950, and for matters 
connected thterewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Short title and extent.-(l) This Acl may be called the Dis-
placed Persons (Claims) Supplementary Act, 195:( 
/ 
(2) It exter.ds to the whole of India except the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir. 'i 
2. Definitions.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise 
uires.-
af "appointed day" means the 17th day of May. 1953; 
b) "claim" means-
(i) any claim registered under the principal Act and (0 
nding on the appointed day; or 
(ii) any claim submitted to any authority under the 
pal Act by any penmn migrating to India from any tri-
rca and pending on the appointed day; 
s any application fHed on 0'1' bE'fore the 12th Dccem- I'; 
setting aside an ex parte order of a Claims Officer 
J' the principal Act and pending on the appointed 
application was not. on the date on which it was 
by limitation under the rules made under the 
Act; 20 

5 
10 
20 
25 
35 
2 ,. 
(d) "principal Act" means the Displaced 
Act, 1950 (XLIV of 1950); 
Persons (Claims) 
(e) "tribal areas" means the tribal areas of Tochi and 
Kurram an~ include:, such other tribal areas adjoining the North 
West FrontIer ProvInce as may be specified in this behalf by 
an order df the Central Government; 
(J) "verified claim" I1!cans any claim registered under the 
principal Act in respect of which <1 final order has been passed 
under that Act; 
(9) all words and expressions used but not defined in this 
Act and defined in the principal Act shall have the meanings 
assigned to them in that Act. 
3. AI)pointment of Chief Settlement Commissioner, etc.-( 1) The 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint a Chief Settlement Commissioner, a Joint Chief Settlement 
Commissioner, a Deputy Chief Settlement Commissioner and as many 
Settlement Commissioners, Add.tional Settlement Commissioners and 
Settlement Officers as may be necessary for the purpose of perform-
ing functions assigned to them by or under this Act and may, by 
general or special order. provide for the distribution or allocation of 
work to be performed by them under this Act. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Joint Chief Settle-
ment Comm 'ssioner, the Deputy Chief Settlement Commissioner and 
all Settlement Commissioners. Additional Settlement Commissioners 
and Settlement Officers shall perform the functions assigned to them 
by or under this Act under the general superintendence and control 
of the Chief Settlement Commissioner. 
4. Verification of claims.-(l) Subject to any rules that may be 
made under this Act. a Settlement Officer shall have Jurisdiction to 
decide such claims or such classes of claims as may, by 
special ordrr, be transferred to him by the Chief Settlem 
missioner. 
(2) A Settlement Officer sh111 hold a summary inquiry 
cases transferred to him and, after taking such evidence an 
ing such documents, as he may c?onsider necessary, pass 
as he thinks fit in relation to the verification of the c1 
valuation of such claim. 
(3) The decision of the Settlement Officer shall be 
Provided that the Ch:ef Settlement Commissione 
40 the record of any case which has been decided by t 
Ofl1cer and may make such order in the case as he th: 
order varying the decision of the Settlement Officer 
which prejudicially affects any person without givir 
tuni ty of being heard. 
r 

J 
5. Special power of revision in respect of cases decided under Act 
XLIV of 1950.-(1) Notwithstanding anything contained- in the princi-
pal Act, the Chief Settlement Commissioner-
(a) may, on an application for revision made to him within 
time by any perso~ aggrieved by the decision of the Claims Offi- S 
cer, call for the record of the case and make such order in the 
case as he thinks fit. 
Explana.tion.-For the purposes of this 'clause, an application 
for revision shall be deemed to be or to have been made within 
time, if- 10 
(i) such applicat:on was not barred by limitation on the 
apponted day under the rules made under the principal Act 
and is filed within one month from the commencement of this 
Act; or 
(ii) such application has been filed before the appointed 15 
day and was not, on the date on which it was filed, barred 
by limitation under the rules made under the principal Act; 
(b) may, on his own motion, but subject to any rules that may 
be made in this behalf, revise any verified claim and make such 
order in relation thereto as he thinks fit. 20 
(2) No order varying the decision of the Claims Officer or revising 
any '."erified claim shall be made which prejudicially aff('cts any per-
son 'Nithout giving the person concerned an opportunty of being 
hearJ. 
It Powers of Settlement Officers.-(1) The Chief Settlement Com- 25 
mLsioner. the Joint or Deputy Chief Settlement Commissioner or a 
St'ttlement Commissioner, an Additional Settlement Commissioner or 
a Settlement Officer shall have the .';ame powers as are vested in a 
Civil C(mrt under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908), 
wh<;>Q trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely: ~ 30 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person 
ining him on oath; 
requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
requisitioning any public record from any Court or office; 
issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses; 
appointing guardians or next friends of a person who is 
or of unsound mind; 
other matter which may be prescribed. 
t Officer may, if he so thinks fit, and shall. IT so 
Chief Settlement Commissioner, appoint one or more 
to advise him in any proceeding before him. 
7. Power transfer cases.-The Central Government or the Chid 
Settlement Commissioner may, by order in writing, at any stage 
transfer any case pending before a Settlement Officer to another 
35 
40 

S 
10 
I~ 
20 
2S 
30 
35 
4 
Settlement Officer and the Settlement Officer to whom the case is so 
transferred, may, subject to any special directions in the order of 
transfer, proceed from the stage at which it was transferred. 
8. Certain officers to be public servants.-The Chief Settlement 
Commissioner, the Joint or Deputy Chief Settlement Commissioner 
and all Settlement Commissioners, Additional Settlement Comm:s-
sioners and Settlement Officers appointed under this Act shall be 
deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860). 
9. Bar of jurisdiction of Civil Court.-No Civil Court shall have 
jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the Chief Settlement 
Commissioner or the Settlement Officer is .empowered by or under 
this Act to determine, and no injunction shall be granted by any 
Court or other authorlty in respect of any action taken or to be taken 
in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act. 
10. Delegation' of powers.-(1) The Central Government may, by 
general or special order, direct that any power exercisable by it under 
this Act shall. subject to .such conditions, if any, as may be spe~ified 
in the order, be exercisable also by the Chief Settlement Commis-
sioner. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made there-
under, the Chief Settlement Comm:ssioner may delegate all or any. 
of his powers under this Act to the Joint or Deputy Chief Settlement 
Commissioner or any Settlement Com.missioner or Additional Settle-
ment Commiss:oner as may be specified by the Chief Sett'tement 
Commissioner. 
11. Validation of certain proceedings.-All proceedings held or 
decisions made in relat:on to the verification of any claim Ol~ the 
valuation of ~uch claim of any person who has migrated to India from 
any tribal area purporting to have been held or made under th(: 
principal Act shall, notwithstanding anything therein contained" bl~ 
deemed for all purposes to have been validly made under the printtij 
pal Act as if that Act were applicable to such persons as it applie~, 
to displaced persons from West Pakistan. 
t 
12. Power to make rules.-The Central Government may, by noH~ 
fication in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out tht· . ,.~~ 
of this Act. .. ~ ~ 

5 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
For the registration and verification of claims of d:splaced persons 
in respect of immovable property :n West Pakistan, the Displaced 
Persons (Claims) Act, 1950, was enacted. On the expiry of the Act on 
the 17th May, 1953, a small number of claims and some revision peti-
tions were left undisposed of. The Bll enables disposal of such pend-
ing work, and alsd makes some incidental provisions regarding revi-
sion of orders already passed dr which may oe passed under the 
new law. 
2. A few hundred claims for immovable property left by persons 
who migrated from Tochi, Kurram and certain other tribal areas ad-
joining the North., West Frontier Province of Pakistan, not 
admissible under the expired Act, were nevertheless verified as 
if the provisions of the Act applied, as these persons migrated in the 
same circumstances as those from the provinces of West Pakistan. The 
Bill val "dates such verification and enables verification of any stIth 
claims which may have remained unverified. 
AJIT PRASAD JAIN. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 19th December, 1953. 

6 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the appointment of Chief Settle-
ment Commissioner, Settlement Commissioners. Settlement Officers 
etc., for discharging the duties imposed by or under the am. A 
few out of the Claims Officers and Claims Commissioners appointed 
under the expired Act were retained for departmental scrutiny of 
cases and their attestation, and will be now utilised for disposal of 
wdrk under the new Bill. An expenditure of about Rs. 2,00,000/-
will be incurred on such officers and the ancillary staff during the 
remaining months of the current financial year, and will be met out 
of the budget of the Ministry of Rehabilitation under Demand No. 
86 for Expenditure on Displaced Persons under Sub-head "B. 
Attached and Subordinate Offices", as already voted by the Parlia-
ment. 

nOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILI. 
to provide f()[ the continuance of certain procecdin~ pending 
under the Displaced Persons (Claims) Act, 1950, and for 
matters connected therewith. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 
117 of the Constitution of India, recommended to the House 
of the People the consideration of the Bill. 
(Shri Ajit Prasad Jain, 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary'. by 
Minister for Rehabilitation) 
GIPD -Lo'\D-892 PjS-22-:/"S3 -1.750 
~, 
I 