BUI No. 70 ef Ie 
THE ATOMIC ENERGY BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA 
ON 13TH AUGUST 1962) 
.J ARLIAMENT Uf;SKAtn 
110 .•..••..••••••••• ....-_ 
r)ate ••. ~1.:-1l;..~ 

THE ATOMIC ENERGY BILL, 1962 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSBS 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions and interpretation. 
3. General powers of the Central Government. 
4. Notification of discovery of uranium or thoriwn. 
5. Control over mining or concentration of substances contain-
ing uranium. 
6. Disposal of uranium. 
7. Power to obtain information regarding materials, plant 01' 
processes. 
8. Power of entry and inspection. 
9. Power to do work for discovering minerals. 
10. Compulsory acquisition of rights to work minerals. 
11. Compulsory acquisition of prescribed substances, minerals 
and plants. 
12. Compensation in case of compulsory acquisition of a mine. 
13. Novation of certain contracts. 
14. Control over production and use of atomic energy. 
15. Requisitioning of any substance for extracting uranium or • 
plutonium. 
16. Control over radioactive substances. 
17. Special provisions as to safety. 
18. Restriction on disclosure of information. 
19. Prevention of entry into prohibited areas. 
20. Special provdsions es to inventions. 
21. Principles relating to payment of compensation. 
22. Special provision as to electricity. 
23. Administration of Factories Act, 1948. 
24. Offences and penalties. 
25. Offences by companies. 
1347 (B) LS-I 

(Ii) 
CLAVSES 
26. Cognizance of offences. 
27. Delegation of powers. 
28. Effect of other laws. 
29. Protection of action taken in good fattII. 
30. Power to make rules. 
31. Act binding on Government. 
32. Repeal of Act 29 of 1948. 

BUI No. 70 01 186Z 
THE ATOMIC ENERGY BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
eo provide for the development, control and use of atomic energy 1M' 
the welfare of the people of India and for other peaceful purposes 
and for matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the ThirteeDJth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Atomic Energy Act, 1962. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
Short title. 
extent and 
commence-
ment. 
S (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
10 
IS 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Definitions 
and intcrprc-
(a) "aJtomic energy" means energy released from atomic tation. 
nuclei as a result of any process, including the fission and 
fusion processes; 
(b) "fissile material" means uranium 233, uranium 235, plu-
tonium or any ~terlal containing these substances or any other 
material that may be declared as such by notification by the 
Central Government; 
(c) "minerals" include all substances obtained or obtainable 
from the soll (including alluvium or rocIa) by underground or 
surface working; 

General 
powers of 
tbe CcDttaI 
Govern-
ment. 
.. 
2 
(d) "notification" means notifiOllltion published in the 0fIlct.l 
G~ette; 
(e) "plant" includes machinery, equipment or appliance, 
whether affixed to land or not; 
<f) "prescribed equipment" means any property which the 5 
Central Government may, by notification, prescribe, being a 
property which in its opinion is specially d.eslgned or adapted or 
which is used or intended to be used for the production or utili-
sation of eny prescribed substance, or for the production or utili-
sation of atomic energy, radioactive substances, or radiation, but 10 
does not include mining, milling, laboratory and other equip-
ment not so specially designed or adapted and not incorporated 
in equipment used or intended to be used for any of the purposes 
aforesaid; 
(g) "prescribed substJance" means any substance including 15 
any mineral which the Central Government may, by notification, 
prescribe, being a substance which in its opinion is or may be 
used for the production or use of atomic energy or research into 
matters connected therewith and includes uranium, plutonium, 
thonwn, beryllium, deuterium or any of their respective deriva- 20 
tives or compounds or any other materials containing tlDy of the 
aforesaid substances; 
(h) "radiation" means gamma rays, X-rays, and rays con-
sisting of alpha particles, beta particles, neutrons, protons and 
other nuclear and sub-atomic particles; but not sound or radio 2S 
waves, at visible, infrared or ultraviolet light; 
(i) "radioactive substance" or "radioactive material" means 
any su.betance or material which spontaneously emits radiation 
in excess of the levels prescribed by notifl~tion by the Central 
Government. 30 
(2) Any reference in this Act to the. working of minerals shall 
be construed 811 including a reference to the mining. getting, carry-
ing away, transporting, sorting, extracting or otherwise treating of 
minerals. 
(3) Any reference in this Act to the production or·use of atomic 3S 
energy shall ,be (ccmstrued as including a reference to the carrying 
out of any prQCefl, preparatory or ancillary to such production or use. 
3. Subject to the provisions of this Am, 'bhe Central Government 
shan have power-
<a) tG. pmiuce, develop, \lie and dispose of atomic energy 40 
and carry out research into any matters co~ed therewith; 

3 
(b) to manufacture or otherwise produce, buy or otherwise 
acquire, store and transport any prescribed or radioactive sub-
stance and any articles which in its opinion are, or are likely to 
be, required for or in connection with the production, develop-
ment or use of atomic energy or such research as aforesaid and 
to dispose of any articles manufactured or otherwise produced, 
bought or otherwise acquired by it; 
(c) to declare as "restricted information" any information 
not so far published or otherwise made public relating to-
10 (i) the location. quality and quantity of prescribed sub-
stances and transactions for their acquisition, whether by 
purchase, or otherwise, or disposal, . whether by sale or 
otherwise; 
(ii) the processing of prescribed substances and the 
15 extraction or production of fissile materials from them; 
(iii) the theory, design, construction and operation of 
plants' for the treatment and production of any of the pres-
cribed substances end for the separation of isotopes; 
(iv) the theory, design, construction and operation of 
20 nuclear reactors; 
(v) research and technological work on materials and 
processes involved in or derived from items (i) to (iv); 
(d) to declare as "prohibited area" any area or premises 
where work including research, design or development is carried 
25 on in respect of the production, treatment, use, application or 
disposal of atomic energy or of any presori-bed substance; 
(e) to provide for control over radioactive substances or 
radiation generating planrt: in order to-
(i) prevent radiation hazards; 
30 (ii) secure public IBfety and 'safety of persODS handling 
radioactive substances or radiation generating plant; and 
(iii) ensure safe disposal of rac:tioactive wastes; 
(f) to provide for t~e production and supply of electricity 
from atomic energy and for taking measures conducive to such 
3S production and supply and for all matters incidental thereto; and 
(g) to do all such things (including the erection of build-
ings and execution of works and the working of minerals) as 
the Central Government considers necessary or expedient fer 
the exereise of the foregoing powers. 

4 
~o~ion 4. (1) Every person who, whether before or after the commence-
~fU:::1/ ment of this Act, has discovered or discovers that uranium or 
or thorium. thorium occurs at any place in India shall, within three months after 
the date of commencement of this Act or e.fter the discovery, which-
ever is later, report the discovery in writing to the Central Govern,,:, S 
ment or to any person or authority authorised by the Central 
Government in this behalf. 
(2) Every person who has reason to believe that uranium or 
thorium occurs at any place in India shall, without delay, send inti-
mation of such belief end the reasons therefor to the Central Govern- 10 
ment or to any such person or authority as aforesaid. 
Control over 5. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that any person is 
::~~tr~~ mining or is about to Mine any substance from which, in the opinion 
don of aub- of the Central Government, uranium can be or may reasonably be 
ltaDceB ted b containing expec to e, isolated or extracted, or is engaged or is about to be IS 
uranium. engaged in treating or concentralting by any physical, chemical or 
metallurgical process any substance from which, in the opinion of the 
Central Government, uranium can be or may reasonably be expected 
to 'be, isolated or extracted, the Central Government may by notice 
in writing give to that person either- 20 
(a) require him in conducting the mining operations or in 
treating or concentrating the substance aforesaid to comply with 
such terms and conditions and adopt such processes as the Central 
Government may in the notice, or from time to time thereafter, 
think fit to specify, or 25 
(b) totally prohibit him from conducting the mining opera-
tions or treating or concentrating the substance aforesaid. 
(2) Where any terms and conditions are imposed on any person 
conducting any mining operations or treatm, or concentrating any 
substance under clause (a) of sub-section (1), the Central Govem- 30 
ment may, having regard to the nature of the terms and conditions, 
decide as to whether or not to pay any compensation to that person 
and the decision of the Central Govemment shall be final: 
Provided that where the Central Govemment decides not to pay 
any compensation, it shan record in writing a brief statement giving 35 
the reasons for such decision. ' 
(3) Where the Central Govemment decides to pay any compen-
sation under sub-section (2), the amount thereof shall be determined 
in accordance with section 21 but in calculating the compensation 
payable, no account shan be taken of the value of any uranium 40 
contained in the substance referred to in sub-sedion (1). 

:> 
(4) Where any mining op~ration or any process of treatment or 
concentration of any substanc~ is prohibited under clause (b) of sub-
section (1), the Central Government shall pay compensation to the 
person conducting the mining operations or using the process of 
~ treatment or concentration lind the amount of such compensation 
shall be determined in accordance with section 21 but in calculating 
the compensation payable, no account shan be taken of the value of 
any uranium contained il1 the substance. 
6. (1) No minerals, concentrates and other materials which con- Dis~osal of 
[0 tain urani}lm in its natural state in excess of such proportion as may uraruum. 
be prescribed by notification by the Central Government shall be 
disposed. of except with the previous permJssion in writing of the 
Central Government and in accordance with such terms tBnd condi-
tions as it may impose. 
'! (2) The Central Goverl1ment may serve notice on any person who 
has produced any mineral, concentrate or other material referred to 
in sub-section (1) that the Central Govemment proposes to acquire 
it and upon the service of the notice and the payment of compensa-
tion in accordance with section 21, the mineral, concentrate or other 
20 material shall become the property of the Central Govenunent and 
shall be delivered to the Central Government or as it may direct: 
Provided that in determining the compensatioll. regard shall be 
had to the cost of production of such mineral, concentrate or other 
material and such other factors as may be relevant, but no account 
25 shall be taken of the value of uranium in its natural state contained 
therein. I 
7. The Central Gowrnment may, by notice in writing served on Pow~ to 
any pe;son, require him to make such periodical and other retUl"D8, :::, infor-
or statements at such. times and containing such particulars and rep~iDg 
30 accompanied by such plans, drawings and other documents as may ~~' 
be specified in ,the notice relating to- processes. 
(a) any prescribed substance, speclfted in the notice, in his 
possession or under his control or present in or on any land or 
mine owned or occupied by him which in the opinion of the 
35 Centool Government }s or can be a source of any of the pres-
cribed substances, including returns in respect of any such land 
I or mine; 
(b) any plant in his possession or under his control designed 
for mining or processing of minerals so specifled, or adapted for 
40 the produ~t~on or use of atomic energy or research into matters 
connected therewith; 

Power of 
entry and 
inspection. 
Power to do 
work for 
dlSCOftring 
minerals. 
6 
(c) any contract entered into by him or any licence granted 
by or to him relating to prospecting or mining of minerals so 
specified or the production or use of atomic energy or research 
into matters connected therewith; 
(d) any other information in his possession relating to any 5 
work carried out by him or on his behalf or under his directions, 
in connection with prospecting or mining of materials so specified 
or the production or use of atomic energy or research into 
matters connected therewith. 
8. (1) Any person authorised by the Central Government may, on 10 
producing, if so required, a duly authenticated document showing 
his authority, enter any mine, premises or land-
(a) where he has reason to believe that work is being car-
ried out for the purpose of or in connection with production and 
processing of any prescribed substances or substances from which IS 
a prescribed substance can be obtained or production, develop-
ment or use of atomic energy or research into matters connected 
therewith, or 
(b) where any such plant as is mentioned in clause (b) of 
section 7 is situate. 20 
and may inspect the mine, premises or land and any articles 
contained therein. 
(2) The person carrying out the inspection may make copies of or 
extracts from any drawing, plan or other document found in the 
mine, premises or land and for the purpose of making such copies or 25 
extracts, may remove any such drawing. plan or other document 
after giving a duly signed receipt for the same and retain poueslion 
thereof for a period not exceeding seven days. 
t. (1) The Central Government may, subject to the prOvisions of 
this section, do on, over or below the surface of any land such work 30 
as it considers necessary for the purpose of discovering whether there 
is present In or on the land, either in a natural state or in a deposit of 
waste material obtained from any underground or surface working, 
any substance from which in Its opinion any of the prescribed .subs-
tances can be obtained, and the extent to which such SUbstance is so 3S 
present. 
(2) Before any powers are exercised under sub-section (1) in 
relation to any land, the Centra! Government shall serve on every 
owner, lessee and occupIer of the land a notic.e .in writing specifying 
the nature of the work proposed to be done and the extent of the land 40 
: affected, and the time, not being less than twenty-eight days. within . 
{which and the manner in which objections can be made thereto, and 

1 
no such powers shall be exercised otherwise than. in pursuance of the 
notice or before the expiration of the time specified therein for mak-
ing objections. 
(3) The Central Government may, after giving the person making 
5 the objection an opportunity of appearing before and being heard by 
a person appointed by the Central Government for the purpose, and 
after considering any such objection and the report Of the person so 
appointed, make such orders as it may deem proper but riot so as to 
increase the extent of the land affected. 
10 (4) Compensation shan be determined and paid in accordance 
with section ZI in respect of any diminution in the value of any land 
or property situate thereon resulting from the exercise of powers 
under this section. 
10. (1) Where it appears to the Central Government that any Compulsory 
IS minerals from which in its opinion any of the prescribed substances ~=::~: 
can be obtained are present in or on any land, either in a natural1n?rIt 
state or in a deposit of waste material obtained from any under- MlDcrals. 
ground or surface working, it may by order provide for compulsorily 
vesting in the Central Government the exclusive right, so long 88 the 
20 order remains in force, to work those minerals and any other miner-
als which it appears to the Central Government to be necessary to 
work with those minerals, and may also provide, by that order or a 
subsequent order, for compulsorily vesting in the Central Govern-
ment any other ancillary rights which appear to the Central Govern-
2.5 ment to be necessary for the purpose of working the minerals afore-
said including (without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
provisions) -
(a) rights to withdraw support; 
(b) righta necessary for the purpose of access to or convey-
30 anee of the minerals aforesaid or the ventilation or drainage of 
the working; 
(c) rights to use and occupy the surface of any land for the 
purpose of erecting any necessary buildings and installing any 
necessary plant in connection with the working of the minerals 
35 aforesaid; 
(d) rights to use and occupy for the p~se of working the 
minerals aforesaid any land forming part of or used in connec-
tion with an existing mine or quarry, and to use or acquire any 
plant used in connection with any such mine or quarry; and 
40 (e) rights to obtain a supply of water for any of the pur-
poses connected with the working of the minerals aforesaid, or 
1147(8) LS -·z 

I 
to dispose of water or other liquid matter obtained in conse-
quence of working such minerals. 
(2) Notice of any order proposed to be made under this section 
shall be served by the Central Government-
(a) on ~ll persons who, but for the order, would be entitled 5 
to work the minerals affected; and 
(b) on every owner, lessee and occupier (except tenants for 
a month or for less than a month) of any land in respect of which 
rights are proposed to be acquired under the order. 
(3) Compensation in respect of any right acquired ander this 10 
section shall be paid in accordance with section 21, but in calculating 
the compensation payable, no account shall be taken of the value of 
any minerals present in or on land aJlected by the order, being 
minerals specified in the order as those from which in the opinion of 
the Central Government uranium or any concentrate or derivative of I~ 
uranium can be obtained. -
;=~~:~~ry 11. (1) Save as otherwise provided in any other provision of this 
of prescribed Act, the Central Government may compulsorily acquire in accordance 
tubatanees, 'th th ' . f th' sect' alDerel. WI e prOVISIons 0 IS lon-
and plants, 
(a) any prescribed substance, 
(b) any minerals from which in the opinion of the Central 
Government any of the prescribed substances can be obtained; 
(c) any prescribed equipment; 
(d) any plant which is designed or adapted for the mining 
20 
or processing of any minerals referred to in clause (b) or subs- 25 
tances obtained therefrom or for the production or use of any 
prescribed substance or a radioactive substance or for the pro-
duction, use or disposal of such articles as are or arc likely to be 
required for or in connection with the production, use or dispo-
sal of atomic energy or for research into matt:::rs connected 30 
therewith. 
(2) Where the Central Government acquires any plant referred 
to in clause (d) of sub-section (1), it shall also have the right to 
acquire any bui.1dings; railway sidings, tramway lines, or aerial rope-
ways serving tluch plant. 35 
(3) Where the Central Government proposes to acquire any pro-
perty under sub-section (1), it shall serve upon the person appearing 
to be the owner thereof, a notice in writing specifying the property 

• 
to be acquired and requiring that person to make to the Central Gov-
ernment within the time specified in the notice a written declaration 
containing such particulars as may be so specified regarding the 
ownership of such property and any agreement or charge by virtue 
, of which any other person has an interest in such property. 
(4) Upon the service of a notice under sub-section (3), no pro-
perty to which the notice relates shall be disposed of without the pre· 
vious permission in writing of the Central Government. 
(5) If it appears to the Central Government in consequence of any 
10 written declaration made to it in pursuance of sub-section (3) that 
any person other than the person on whom the notice under sub-sec-
tion (3) was served is the owner of, or has any interest in, the pro-
perty to which the notice relates, the Central Government shall serve 
a copy of the notice on that other person. 
15 (6) A notice served under sub-section (3) shall contain a state· 
ment to the effect that an objection may be made thereto within such 
time and in such manner as may be specified, and if any such objec-
tion is duly made and not withdrawn, the Central Government shall 
afford an opportunity to the person making the objection of appear-
20 ing before and being heard by a person appointed by the Central 
Government for the purpose. 
(7) Mter considering any such objection, and the report of the 
person appointed by it under sub-section' (6), the Central Govern-
ment may serve on the persons upon whom the -notice under sub-
2S section (3) or a copy thereof was served a further notice in writing 
either withdrawing the notice of acquisition or confirming the said 
notice as respects the property to which it relates or such part of the 
property as may be specified. 
(8) Any property with respect to which a notice of acquisition is 
30 served under this section shall-
3S 
(a) if no objection is duly made to the notice, vest in the 
Central Government at the expiration of the time for making 
such objection; 
(b) if such an objection is duly made and the notice is con-
firmed as respects the whole or· any part of that property by a 
notice served under sub-section (7), vest accordingly in the Cen-
tral Government on the service of the last mentioned notice; 
and shall in either case vest free from all encumbrances. 
(9) Compensation in reaped of aequisition under this section shall 
40 be paid in accordance with section 21. 

1 
c 
c 
o 
C 
III 
C( 
ti 
It 
C( 
w 
10 
Compen .. - 12. Where the Central Government acquires, in accordance with 
lion in cate any law, any mine or part of a mine from whieh in the opinion of the 
:!r~o::~~_ Central Government any of the prescribed substaDceB un be obtain-
~ of a ed, compeuation in respect of such acquilitietb shall be paid in ae-
lDlne. cordance with section 21: 5 
Provided that in determining the amount of such compensation, 
no account shall be taken of the value of uranium which may be 
obtained from such mine or part of a mine. 
Novation of 13. (1) The Central Government may serve on the parties to a 
=:~ con- contract relating to prospecting or mining of any substance from 10 
which any of the prescribed substances can be obtained or to produc-
tion or use of atomic energy or to research into matters connected 
therewith, not being a contract for the rendering of personal services. 
a notice in writing stating that on such date as may be specified in 
the notice the rights and liabilities of any of the parties to the con- IS 
tract specified in the notice (hereinafter referred to as the specified 
party) will be transferred to the Central Government, and thereupon 
subject to any withdrawal of the notice under the following pro-
vfaiOIUl of this section, the contract shall, as regards any rights exer-
ciuble. or liabilities incurred, on or after the said date, have effect 20 
as If the Central Govenunent were a party to the contract 1IUItead of 
the specified party and as if for any reference in the contract to the 
specified party there were substituted a reference to the Central 
Government. 
(2) A notice served under sub-section (1) shall contain a state- 25 
ment to the dect that an objection may be made thereto within such 
time and in such manner as may be specified, and if any such objec-
tion is duly made and not withdrawn, the Central Government shall 
afford an opportunity to the person making the objection of appear-
ing before and being heard by a person appointed by the Central 30 
Government for the purpose. 
(3) After considering any such objection and the report of the 
person appointed by it under sub-section (2), the Central Govern-
ment may make such order as it may deem proper. 
(4) Where the rigbts and liabilities of a party to a COIltnct are 35 
transferred to the Central Government under tbis section, there shall 
he paid to tbat party sueh compensation In respect of any loss .der-
ed tty that party as may be agreed between him and the Central Gov-
enIIIIeet, and in default of sueh agreement, as may be determined by 
arbitration. 40 
Control over 14. (I) The Central Government may, subject to such rules as may 
production be made in this behalf, by order prohibit except under a lieence aduc of 
atomic granted by it-
cneray· 

s 
10 
II 
(i) the working of any mine or minerals specified in the 
order, being a mine or minerals from which in the opinion of the 
Central Government any of the prescribed substances can be 
obtained; 
(ii) the acquisition, production, possession, use, disposal, ex-
port or import-
(a) of any of the prescribed substances; or 
(b) of any minerals or other substances specified in the 
rules, from which in the opinion of the Central Government 
any of the prescribed substances can be obtained; or 
(c) of any plant designed or adapted or manufactured 
for the production, development and use of atomic energy or 
for research into matters connected therewith; or 
(d) of any prescribed eqUipment. 
IS (2) Nothing in this section shall affect the authority of the Central 
Government to refuse a licence for the purpose of this section or to 
include in a licence such conditions as the Central Government thinks 
fit or to revoke a licence and the Central Government may take any 
action as aforesaid. 
20 (3) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provI-
sions, the rules referred to in thik section may provide for-
(a) the extent to which information in the possession of, or 
which has been made available to, the person granted a licence 
for purposes of this section, should be regarded as restricted In-
2S formation; 
(b) the extent to which the area or premises under the COD-
trol of the person to whom a licence has been granted for purpos-
es of this section, should be regarded as a prohibited area; 
(c) the conditions and criteria for location of any installa-
30 tion or operation of any plant in respect of which a licence has 
been granted or is intended to be granted for the purposes ,of this 
section including those necessary for protection against radiation 
and safe disposal of harmful by-products or wastes; 
(d) the extent of the licensee's liability in respect of any 
35 hurt to any person or any damage to property caused by ionising 
radiations or any radioactive contamination either at the plant 
under licence or in the surrounding area; 
(e) provision by licensee either by insurance or by such 
other means as the Central Government may approve, of sufftci-
40 ent funds to be available at all times to ensure settlement of any 

". 
12 
claims in connection with the use of the site or the plant under 
licence which have been or may be duly established against the 
licensee in respect of any hurt to any person or any damage to 
any property caused by ionising radiations emitted at the plant 
under licence or radioactive contamination either at the plant 5 
under licence or in surrounding areas; 
<f) obligatory qualifications, security clearances, hours of 
employment, minimum leave-and periodical medical examination 
of the persons employed and any other requirement or restric-
tion or prohibition on the employer, employed persons and other 10 
persons; and 
(g) such other incidental and supplementary provisions in-
cluding provisions for inspection and also for the sealing of pre-
mises and seizure, retention and disposal of any article in respect 
of which there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that a con- J 5 
travention of the rules has been committed, as the Central Gov-
ernment considers necessary. 
. (4) The Central Government may also prescribe the fees payable 
for issue of licences under sub-section (1). 
Requisition- 15. (1) The Central Government shall have the right to require 20 
ing of any that any substance which, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
substance for t . , It' of th' 't h II be d I' extracting cen ams uranium, p u OMum or any elr ISO opes, s a e l-
or uranium vered to it and the Central Government may extract fronl that 
plutonium. substance the uranium, plutonium or any of their isotopes contained 
• 
therein and return the substance to the person concerned cn pay- 25 
ment of compensation which shall be determined ill accordance 
With section 21: ' 
Provided that such compensation shall not, in any ease, exceed the 
cost incurred by the person in the production, mining or irradiation 
of ·.the substance and in determining the same no account shall be 30 
taken of the value of the uranium, plutonium or any of their isotopes 
extracted from the substance. 
(2) Nothing in this section shall prevent the Central Government 
from permitting, subject to such conditions as it may deem fit to fm-
~se, the us~ of small quantities of natural uranium for the purpose 35 
I)f examination, test or analysis. 
Control over 14;. The Central Government may prohibit the manufacture, pos-
:~:c~~~ session, use, transfer by sale or otherwise, export and import and In 
an emergency, transport and disposal, of any radioactive substances 
wlihout its written consent, 40 

13 
17. (1) The Central Government may, as regards any class or Spe(:!a.1 
, 1 be' . I ' h' h prOVISlonS.9 description of prerruses or paces, mg prerruses or paces, m w lC to safety. 
radioactive substances are manufactured, produced, mined, treated, 
stored or used or any radiation generating plant, equipment or appli-
5 ance is used, make such provision by rules as appear to the Central 
Government to be necessary-
[0 
15 
(a) to prevent injury being caused to the health of persons 
employed at such premises or places or other persons either by 
radiations, or by the ingestion of any radioactive substance; 
(b) to secure tlmt any radioactive waste products resulting 
from such manufacture, production, mining, treatment, storage, 
or use as aforesaid are disposed of safely; 
(c) to prescribe qualifications of the persons for employ-
ment at such premises or places and the regulation of their hours 
of employment, minimum leave and periodical medical examina-
tion; 
and the rules may, in particular and without prejudice to the gene-
rality of this sub..seclion, provide for imposing requirements as to the 
erection or structural alterations of buildings or the carrying 'Out of 
20 works. 
(2) The Central Government may, as respects the transport of 
any radioactive substance or any prescribed substance specified by 
an order issued under this Act as being dangerous to health, make 
such rules as appear to be necessary to prevent injury being caused 
25 by such transport to the health of persons engaged therein and other 
persons, 
(3) Rules made under this section may provide for imposing 
requirements, prohibitions and restrictions on employers, employed 
persons and. other persons. 
30 (4) Any person authorised 'by the Cen.tral Government under 
this section, may, on producing, if so required, a duly authenticated 
document showing his authority, enter at all reasonable hours any 
premises, or any vehicle, vessel or aireraft for the purpose of ascer-
taining whether there has been committed, or is being committed, 
35 in or in connection with the premises, vehicle, vessel or aircraft, any 
contravention of the rules made under this section. 
(5) In the event of any contravention of the rules made under 
this section, the Central Government shall have the right to take 
such measures as it may deem necessary to prevent further injury 
40 to persons or damage 110 property arising from radiation or contami-
nation by radioactive subs1anoes, including, without prejudice to 

14 
the generaUty of the fOl'egoing provisions, and to the right to take 
further action for the enforcement of penalties Wlder section 24, 
the sealing of premises, vehicle, vessel, or aircraft, and the seizure 
of radioactive substances and contaminated equipment. 
Restriction 18. (1) The Centnl Government nay by order restrict the dis- 5 
on diBfo- closure of information, whether contained. in a document, drawing, 
r:;:~tiOD. photograph, plan, model, or in any other form whatsoever, which 
Prevention 
of~~lnto p ted 
1nII. 
relates to, represents or illustnltes--
(a) an existing or proposed plant used. or proposed to be 
used for the purpose of producing, developing or using atomic 10 
energy, or 
(b) the purpose or method of operation of any such existing 
or proposed. plant, ar 
(c) any process opel1tted or proposed to be operated in any 
such existing or proposed plant. IS 
(2) No person shall-
(a) disclose, or obtain or attempt to obtain any information 
relrtricted. under sub-eeetion (1), ar 
(b) disclose, without the authority of the Central Govern-
ment, any infonnation obtained in the diacbarge of ,any functions 20 
under this Act or in the performance of his oftlcial duties. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall epply-
(i) to the disclosUl'e of infomwrtion with respect to any 
plant of a type in use for purposes other than the production, 
development or use of atomic energy, unless ,the infonnation 25 
discloses that plant of that type is used or proposed to be used 
for the production, development or use of atomic energy or 
research into any matters connected therewith; or 
(ii) where any information has been made e.vailable to the 
general public otherwise than in contravention of'this section, 30 
to any subsequent disclosure of that information. 
19. The Central Government may by order prohibit-
(a) entry of any person, without obtaining permission, into 
a prohibited area, and 
(b) .king by any penon, without permission, of any photo- 35 
graph, sketch, pictures, drawing, map or other document from a 
prohibited area and any permiIIdoIl, If given to do these things, 
may he .ubject to atipulations which the Central Govemment 
may consider nece ... ry. 

of 1911. 
.Ift·· 
1& 
Zo. (1) As from the commencement of this Act, no patents shah speeial 
be granted for inventions which in the opi.nion of the Central ::!iaioDl 
Government are useful for or relate to the production, control, us.e inveDtiaa •• 
or disposal of atomic energy or the prospecting, mining. extraction, 
S production, physical and chemical treatment, fabrication, enrichment, 
canning or Use of any prescribed substance or radioactive substance 
or the ensuring of safety in atomic energy operations. 
(2) The prohibition u'nder sUlb-section (1) shall also epply to any 
invention of the nature specified in that su~on in respect of 
10 which an application for the grant of a patent has been. made to the 
Controller of Patents and Designs appointed under the Indian Patents 
and Designs Act, 1911, before the commencement of this Act and is 
pending with him at soUch commencement . 
.. ---(3) The Central Goverrunent shall have the power to inspect 6t 
15 any time any pending patent application and specification before its 
acceptance and if it considers tihat the invention relates to atomic 
energy, to issue directions to the Controller of Patents and Designs 
to refuse the application on that ground. 
(4) Any~, who has made an inven.tion which he has reason 
20 to believe relates to atomic enel"gy, shall communicate to the Central 
Government the natu're and description of the inven.tion. 
(5) Any ·person desiring to apply for a patent abroad for an 
invention resting to or which he has reason to ,believe relates to 
atomic energy shall obtain prior permission from the Central Govern-
25 ment ~fore making the application .abroad or communicating the 
invention to any person abroad, unless three months have elapsed 
since his request for pel"mission was made to the Centll81 Government 
and no reply w.u; received by him. 
(6) The Controller of Patents and Designs shall have the power 
30 to refer any application to the Central Government for direction as 
to whether the invention is one relating to atomic energy and the 
direction given by the Central Government shall be final. 
(7) Any invention in the field of atomic energy oonce1ved whe-
ther in establishments controlled by the Central Government or 
35 under any contl"8Ct, sub-contract, aI'l1lI1gement or other relationship . 
with the Centre! Government shall be deemed to have been made or 
conceived by the Central Government, irrespective of whether such 
contract, sub-oontract, a1rrangement or other relationship' involves 
financial participation of or assis1ance from the Central Government. 
40 (8) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Patents 
I of 1911. and Designs Act, 1911, the decision of the Central Government on 
" 
pointa' connected with or arising out of this section ahall be flnal. 
. 18f'l (B) LS-3. 

Principlet 
reJatiDa. ~o . 
payment'Of 
compen.ea· tion. .' 
ie 
2.1.(1) Save as otberwiseproV'ided in this Act, where by reason' 
of exerclse of any powers ~er tNs Act, tBlly compensation Is pay-
. able, the amount of such compensation shall be determined in the 
manner and in accorduce with the principles hereinafter set out, 
that is to say- 5 
(a) where the amount of compensation is fixed by agree-
ment, it shall be paid in accordance with such agreement; 
(b) where no sucll agreement is reached, the Central Gov-
ernment shall appoint as arbitrator a person having expert know-
ledge as to the nature of the righ~ aftected who shall determ:ne 10 
the amount of compensation payable. 
(2) In making his award, the arbitrator appointed under sub· 
section (1) shall have regard-
(a) in the case of any compensation payable under 
sectoio.u 9- I, 
(i) to the nature of the work done; 
(ii) the manner, e~tent Gnd dw-atoion of the exercise of 
any powers under that section; 
(iii) the diminution in the rent of the land and of t:1e 
property situated thereon, which might reasonably be 20 
expected over any period or diminut.ion .in the market value 
of the .land and property on the date when the exercise of 
powers comes to an end, fDd 
(iv) the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 23 of 
the Land AcqwsitU>n Act, 1894, in so far as such provisions 25 f 8 
be mad " bl ... 1.' 10 1 9·"· can e 8ipp!lca e to 'liue eXerelse of powers under 
section 9, and 
(b) in the case of any compensation payable under section 
11 or under Section 12, to the price which the owner might 
reasonably have been expected to obtain on a sale of the property 30 
effected by him immediately before the date of the acquisition. 
(3) An appeal shall lie to the High Court ag'3inst an award of 
the arbitrator except in cases where the amount claimed thereof ,dOel 
not exceed an amount prescribed in this behalf by the ~tJ!'al 
Government. 35 
(4) ,The C~tral Government may make rules prescribing the 
procedure to be followed in 8I'bitratiDil& under this Act and the 
principles to be followed in the eppGrtionment of the cost of pr,p-
ceedin:P be£Qre the arbitrator and ·on appeal. 

• 
(5) Save &I provided in this Act, nothing in any law far tbe time 
being in foree relating to 8l'Wtration shall apply to arbitrations 
under this Act. 
22'. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Electriclty Sp;CitIpro-
,. of 1948. S (Supply) Act, 1948, the Centrel Government shall have authority- :i:!:~ric~;~ 
9 of 1910. 
9 of 1910. 
54 of 1948• 
63 of 1948. 
(a) to develop a sound and adequate national policy in 
regard to atomic poower, to co-ordinate such polley with the 
Central Electricity Authority and the State Electricity Boards 
constlituted under sections 3 and 5 respectively of that Act and 
10 other similar statutory corporotions concerned with the control 
and utilisation of other power resources, to implement schemes 
for the generation of electricity in pursuance of such policy and 
to operate atomic power stations in the manner determined by 
it in -consultation with the Boards or Corporations concerned, 
IS with whom· it shall enter into agreement regarding the supply 
of electriCity so produced; 
as 
(b) to fix rates for and regule.te the supply of electricity 
from atomic power stations with the concurrence of the Central 
Electricity Authority; 
(c) to enter into arrangements with the Electricity Board 
of the State in which an atomic power station is situated, for 
the transmission of electricity to any other State: Provided 
that in case there is difference of opinion between the Central 
Government and any State Electricity Board in regard to the 
construction of necessary transmission lines, the matter shall be 
referred to the Centra1 Electricity Authority whose decision shall 
be binding on the parties concerned. 
(2) No provision of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910, or any rule 
made thereunder or of any instrument having effect by virtue of 
30 such law or rale shall have any effect so far as it is: inconsistent 
with any of the provisions of this Act. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of 
this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the Indian 
Electricity Act, 1910, and the Electricity (Supply) Act, IM8. 
3S 23. Notwithstanding allY thing eontained in the Factories Ad, 1948, ~dminjltl .. 
the authority to admillister the said Act and to do all things for the ~~~::iet 
enforcement of Its provisions, including the appointment of inspecting Act, 1948. 
staft -and the maldn, .f Ittles thereunder, shan vest In the Central 

( 
11 
C 
t 
I' 
e 
u 
18 
Governm_t in relation to any factory owned by the Ceatra! Govern-
ment and engaged in carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
24. (1) Wboever-
(a) contravenes any order made under section 14: or any 
condition subject to which a licence is granted under that $ 
section; or 
(b) contravenes any rule made under section 17 or any 
requirement, prohibition or restriction imposed under any such 
rule; or 
(c) obstructs any person authorised by the Central Govern- I. 
ment under sub-section (4) of section 17 in the exercise of 
powers under that sub-section; or 
(d) contravenes sub-section (2) of section 18, 
ahall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend, 
to five years, or with fine, or with both. IS 
(2) Whoever-
(a) fails to comply with any notice served on him under 
section 5 or with any terms and conditions that may be imposed 
on him under that section; or 
(b) fails to comply with any notice served on him under 20 
section 7 or knowingly makes any untrue statement in any 
return or statement mnde in pursuance of any such notice; or 
(c) obstructs any person or I\uthority in the exercise of 
powers under section 8 or 9; or 
(d) contravenes any other provision of this Act or any 2S 
order made thereunder; 
shall be pur.ishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
Offences by 25. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
c:ompanic.. company, every person who at the time the offence was committed 30 
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the con-
duct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be pro-
ceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render 3S 
any such person liable to any punlahment, if he proves that the 

1. 
6nce was committed without his knowledge or that he exereisecl 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
where any offence under this Act has been committed by a company 
5 and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the con-
sent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part 
of, any director, manager, secretary or other oftlcer of the company, 
such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed 
to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
10 and punished accordingly. 
Ezplan4tion.-For the purposes of this section-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a 
flrm and other association of individuals: and 
(b) "director" in rel&tlon to a ftrm, means a partner in the 
IS ftrm. 
26. (1) All offences under this Act shall be cognizable under C08llizance 
of 1898. the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, but no action shall be taken of offence .. 
In respect of any person for any offence under this Act except on 
the basis of a written complaint made-
zo (a) in respect of contravention of section 8, 14, or 17 or any 
rule or order made thereunder, by the person authorised to 
exercise powers of entry and inspection; 
(b) in respect of any other contravention, by a person duly 
authorised to make such complaints .by the Central Government. 
25 (2) Proceedings in respect of contravention of sectiOlll 18 shall 
not be instituted except with the consent of 1lhe Attorney General 
of India. 
27. The Central Government may, by order, direct that any power Deleptioll 
conferred or any duty imposed on it by this Act shall, in sucb cir- of powen. 
30 cumstances and subject to such conditions as may be specifted in the 
direction, be exercised, or discharged also by-
(a) such officer or authority subordinate to the· . Central 
Government, or 
(b) such State Government or such officer or authority 
35 subordinate to a State Government 8S may be specifted in the 
directIon. 

Meet of 
other IaWI. 
PlOtection 
oflCtion 
taten in 
. good faith. 
20 
as. The PtOvisions t)f this Ac:t shall have effect notwithltddina 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other 
than this Act or any other instrument having effect by virtue of any 
enactment other than this Act. 
29. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding sh:alilie against , 
the Government or any person or authority in respect of anything 
done by it or him in good faith in pursuance of this Act .or of ,any 
rule or order made thereunder. 
=rrul~~. 38. (1) The Centnll Government may, by notificaJtion, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 10 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing powers, wch rules may provide for-
(a) deelaring any information not so far published or other-
wise made public as '!'estricted information and preserlbing the 
measures to be taken to gu8l'd against unauthorised disse- IS 
mination or use thereof; 
(b) declaring any area or premises as prohibited area and 
prescrib~g the measures to be taken to provide against unautho-
rised entry into or departure from such prohibited area; 
(c) reporting of information relating to the discovery of 20 
uranium, thorium and other prescribed substances and for pay-
ment of rewards for such discoveries; 
(d) conltrol over mining or concentration of substances COD-
taining uranium; 
(e) regulating by licensing and encouraging by award of 2, 
concessions including rewards, floor prices and guarantees, min-
ing of and prospecting for other prescribed substances; 
<f) compulsory acquisition of prescribed substances. mine-
rals and plants; 
(g) regWaiing the production, import, export, transfer, 30 
refining, possession, ownership, sale, use or disposal of the pres-
cribed substances and any other articles that in the Gpinion of 
the Cen·tral Government may be used for, or may result as a 
consequence of, the production, use or application of atomic 
energy; 
(h) regulating the use of prescribed equipment; 
(i) regulatmg the mantif8eturi. custody, transport. transfer t 
sale, export, import, use or disposal of any radioactive subs-
tance; 
35 

ii 
(j) regulating tAle transport of such prescribed 911bstari.6ei 
as are declared dangerous to health under sub-section (2) of sec:-
tion 17; 
(k) developing, controlling, supervising and licensing the 
S production, application and use of atomic . energy; 
(i) fees for issue of licences under this Act; 
(m) the manner of serving notices under this Act; 
(n) generally promoting co-operation among perSODS, insti. 
tutions and countries in the production, use, application of ato-
10 mic energy and in research and investigations in that field. 
(3) Rules made under this Act may provide that Q contravention 
of the rules shall, save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, 
be punishable with fine which may eXJtend to five hundred rupees. 
(4) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may 
IS be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in 
session for Q total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the 
expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
20 or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the case may be; so however that any such modification Or annul-
ment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previous-
ly done under that rule. 
2S 31. The provisions of this Act shall be binding on 
ment. .. 
Govern- Act bindiq 
on Govern. 
ment. 
32. The Atomic Energy Act, 1948, is hereby repealed. Repeal or 
Act 39 0( 
1948• 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
At present control over the development of atomic energy and 
matters connected therewith is exercised under the Atomic Energy 
Act, 1948 (29 of 1948). Having regard to the developments in the 
field of atomic energy since the enactment of that legislation and 
with a view to the implementation of the future programme of 
expansion in this field, it has become necessary to revise that Act 
e~tensively. It is accordingly proposed to repeal the existing Act 
and to replace it by a comprehensive measure. The notes on 
clauses explain the important provisions of the Blll. 
NEW DELHI; JAWAHARLAL NEHRU. 
T1ue 3rd August. 1962. 
• 

Note. on ClG.ues 
Long title to th.e Bm.-This gives an indication of the pollcy ol 
the Government of India in regard to the development of atomic 
energy, namely, that it will be used for the welfare of' the. people 
of India and other peaceful purposes. 
Clause 4 makes it obligatory on persons diseovering uranium' or 
thorium to report their discovery to Government in view of .the 
importance of these substances to the atomic energy programme. 
Clause 5, inte1' alia, empowers the Central Government to impose 
certain terms and conditions on persons eniaged" in mining subs-
tances from which uranium can be isolated or extracted. 
Clause 6 permits the Central Government to prohibit the. dilpoial 
of substances' containing uranium in excess of prescribed perea_.-
without its prior permission. It also enables Government 'to 
acquire such substances on payment of compensation. 
Clause 12 empowers the Central Government to acquire any 
mine or part of a mine from which, in its opinion, any of the pres-
cribed substances can be obtained. on payment of compensation at 
provided in the Bill. 
Clause 15 vests the '"Central Government with the right to 
require that any substance containing uranium or plutonium· or 
any of their isotopes shall be delivered to Government. "'!'he 
intention is to extract uranium, plutonium or any of their isotopel 
from such substance and return the residue to the party concemed. 
Compensation will be paid for the substaJlces extracted. This is 
necessary not only because uranium, plutonium and their isotopes are 
essential to the atomic energy programme, but also because they are 
strategic materials which have military potentialities and which 
constitute a radiation hazard. 
C'lawe 16, for the same reason, prohibits the manufacture, 
possession. use. transfer by sale or otherwise, export, import, etc., 
of radioactive substances without the written consent of the Centnl 
Government. I 
Clause 11 enables the Central Government to make !Utes; to 
ensure .that safety measures are taken in handling radioactive 

24 
lubltances wherever they are manufactured, produced, mined treated, 
.tored, transported or used. 
Clause 20 contains provisions under which inventions relating to 
atomic energy will cease to be patentable in India. This is neces-
sary as the Central Government, which has assumed the sole 
responsibility for the development of atomic energy in the country, 
rhould for obvious reasons be free to develop its programme without 
being hampered by patent rights in respect of the inventions which 
involve the use of atomic energy. 
Clause 21. sets out the principles relating to the payment of 
compensation in those cases where it is payable under the Act. 
Clause 22 empowers the Central Government to develop a 
national policy in regard to atomic power, to co-ordinate such policy 
with the Central Electricity Authority, the State Electricity Boards 
and other similar statutory corporations concerned with the control 
and utilisation of other power resources, to implement schemes for 
the generation of electricity in pursuance of ·such policy and to 
operate such power stations. It also authorises the Central Gov-
ernment to fix rates for and to regulate the supply of electricity 
from the atomic power stations with the concurrence of the Central 
Electricity Authority. 
Since the Central Government has assumed the sole responsibility 
for the development of atomic energy in this country, it is necessary 
that it should have the necessary authority to formulate the policy 
in regard to the production and supply of electricity by utilisation of 
atomic energy and to implement the schemes in pursuance of that 
policy. 
Clause 23 vests in the Central Government the authority to 
administer the provisions of the Factories Act, 1948, and to enforce 
its provisions in the factories, workshops or other places of work 
owned by the Central Government, and engaged in carrying out the 
purposes of the Act. 
This provision is essential as radiation hazards require elaborate 
precautions which the Department of Atomic Energy is in the best 
position to prescribe and enforce. 
Clause 24 prescribes a penalty of imprisonment up to ftve years 
or ftne without limit or both for grave offences under the Act, and 
a penalty of imprisonment up to one year or fine without limit or 
both for less serious offences. 

25 
Clause 26 makes offences under the Act cognizable under the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. 
Clause 31 declares that the provisions of the Act shall be 
binding on Government. This provision is necessary to make the 
provisions of the Act applicable to State Governments. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The flnancial' effect of the Bill can be classified in two categorie&-
(i) expenditure arising directly from the application of the provi-
lions of the Bill, and (ii) expenditure incidental to the development 
oi atomic energy. The former category will include all expenditure 
incurred in setting up organisations (a) to carry out inspections in 
the interest of the health and safety of the personnel employed In 
the handling and transport of radioactive substances and those em-
ployed in the plants and workshops where work connected with 
atomic energy is being carried out or in mines where radioactive 
minerals are being mined, (b) to grant licences under the Act, and (c) 
to prohibit or restrict mining or other operations. The expenditure 
on (b) above can be offset by recoveries from licensing fees. The 
expenditure on account of the payment of compensation involved 
in (i) regulating mining operations (ii) acquisition of rights to work 
minerals (iii) compulsory acquiSition of prescribed substances, 
mineral's, plants, mines, etc., and (iv) transfer to Government of 
uranium, plutonium, etc., will fall in the second category. It is not 
possible to indicate with any degree of accuracy the expenditure to 
be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India as it would depend 
OIl the pace and extent of the programme for atomic energy deve-
lopment in the country and the extent to which the acquisition of 
certain rights or materials, plants etc., is necessary, depending upon 
this programme. The extent of compensation incidental' thereto 
cannot in the very nature of the case be estimated. 
2. The following clauses of the Bill have financial implications 
and the nature of the expenditure involved under each clause is 
explained below:-
Cl4t1.Be S.-With a view to ensuring an adequate supply of uranium 
and other atomic minerals required to support the development of 
atomic energy in this country, tQe Central Government may, under 
this clause, impose any terms and conditions for the conduct of 
mining operations or the treatment or concentration of substances 
containing uranium, or totally prohibit the conduct of mining opera-
tions or the treatment or concentration of such substances. Com-
pensation may have to be paid to the parties affected in such cases 
depet'diJl(( upon the nature of the conditions imposed. 

27 
C'latue 6.-The-. Central Government· may UDder ,thia claue 
acquire, on payment of compensation, minerals, .eonc:entNtea and 
other materials containing uranium. 
Clause 9.-This clause confers on the Central Government ·the 
right to undertake any work in connection with the discovery of 
minerals containing prescribed substances. Compensation is pay-
able in respect of any diminution iil the value of the land or propertY' 
situated thereon, resulting from the undertaking of such work. 
Clause lO.-This clause authorises the Central Government to 
assume the exclusive right to work minerals required in connection 
with the development of atomic energy and certain other ancillary 
rights which may be necessary for the purpose of working . such 
minerals. Compensation is payable in respect of rights acquired 
under this clause. 
Clause ll.-This dause empowers the Central Government to 
acquire, on payment of compensation, any prescribed substances and 
certain minerals and plants required in connection with the deve-
lopment of atomic energy. 
Clxluse 12.-This clause provides that compensation is payable 
for acquisition of any mine or part of a mine from which any of the 
prescribed substances can be obtained. 
Clause 13.-Under this clause, the Central Government may 
acquire the rights and liabilities of any part,- to a contract relating 
to prospecting or mining of any substance from which any of the 
prescribed substances can be obtained. Compensation will have to 
be paid to the party concerned in such cases. 
Clause l5.-Under this clause, the Central Government will have 
the right to require that any substance containing uranium, pluto-
nium, or any of their isotopes shall be delivered to it. Such 
substance, after extraction of plutonium, uranium or isotope, shall 
be returned to the party concerned. Compensation to the extent 
defined in this clause will have to be paid by the Government to 
the party. 
Clause 23.-Under this clause, the authority to administer the 
Factories Act, 1948. shall vest in the Central Government in relation 
to factories or workshops or other places of work owned by the 
Central Government Rnd engaged in carrying out the purposes of 
the Bill. This may require setting up of an organisation and 
employment of suitable staff, which would otherwise have to be 

.. 
as 
employed by the authorities responsible for the administration of 
the Factories Act, 1948. 
Clause 30.-The enforcement of the rules, which may be framed 
by the Central Government for carrying out the purposes of the 
Bill, will require the employment of suitable staff. 

MEMORANDuM REGARDING Dl!:LEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 30 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
ruJ'es for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The matters in 
respect of which rules may be ma~e relate, inter alia, to declaring 
any information as restricted information and prescribing precautions 
against unauthorised dissemination thereof, declaring any area as a 
prohibited area and providing against unauthorised entry into it, 
control over mining or concentration of substances containing 
uranium, compulsory acquisition of prescribed substances, minerals 
and plants, regulation of the grant of licences for the acquisition, 
possession etc., of prescribed substances and equipment, protection 
against radiation hazards and prescription of fees for the issue of 
l'icences. These are matters of procedure and detail incidentai to or 
consequential upon the other provisions of the Bill. The rule-making 
power is thus of a normal character. 
Power is also being conferred on the Central Government to 
issue notifications-
(a) prescribing the equipment and substances required in 
connection with the development of atomic energy [clause 2 (f) 
and (g)]; 
(b) prescribing the levels of the intensity of radiation of 
substances to be c!assifted as radioactive substances for the 
purposes of the Act [clause 2 (i)]; 
(e) prescribing the minimum uranium content in minerals 
which may not be disposed of except with the prior permission 
of the Central Government and laying down terms and condi-
tions for their dispos,aI [clause 6 (I)]. 
These powers are intended to facilitate the enforcement of the 
Act with due regard to the nature of the substancp or mineral 
concerned. 

, 
L()K SABlIA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the development, control and use of atomic 
energy for the welfare of the people of India and for 
other peaceful purposes and for mattl,;rs connected there-
wit~. 
The President bas, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok 
Sabha the consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri JQflJaharlal Nehru, 
Prime Minister, ) 