Bill No 70 of 1957 
THE DELHI DEVELOPMENT BILL, 1957 
( As BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ) 

CLAUSES 
'THE DELHI DEVELOPMENT BILL, 1957 
CONTENTS 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
THE DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY AND ITS OBJECTS 
3. The Delhi Development Authority. 
4. Staff of the Authority. 
5. Advisory Council. 
6. Objects of the Authority. 
CHAPTER III 
MASTER PLAN AND ZONAL DEVELOPMENT PLANS 
7. Civic Survey of, and master plan for Delhi. 
8. Zonal development plans. 
9. Submission of plans to the Central Government for approval. 
10. Date of operation of plans. 
CHAPTER IV 
DEVELOPMENT OF LANDS 
11. Declaration of development areas and development of land 
in those and other areas. 
12. Applicatiop. for permission. 
CHA~TER V 
ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF LAND 
1a. Compulsory acquis'ition of land. 
14. Compensation for com~ulsory acquisition of land. 
15. Appeal to the District Judge against decision of the Collector. 
16. Disputes as to apportionment of the compensation. 
17. Payment of compensation or deposit of the same in court. 

ii 
CLAUSES 
18. Investment of the amount of compensation deposited in court. 
19. Disposal of land by the Authority. 
20. Nazul lands. 
CHAPTER VI 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
21. Fund of the Authority. 
22. Budget of the Authority. 
23. Accounts and Audit. 
24, Annual report. 
25. Pension and provident fund. 
CHAPTER VII 
SUPPLEMENTAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
26. Powers of entry. 
27. Penalties. 
28. Order of demolition of building. 
29. Power of Authority to stop building openations. 
30. Offences by companies. 
31. Fines when realised to be paid to Authority. 
32. Composition of offences. 
33. Default powers of Authority. 
34. Power of Authority to require local authority to assume 
responsibility for amenities in certain cases. 
35. Power of Authority to levy betterment charges. 
36. Control by Central GoveI'll;ment. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
" 44. 
45. 
46. 
Returns and information. 
Service of notices, etc . . 
Public notice how to be made known. 
Notices, etc., to fix reasonable time. 
Authentication of orders Gnd documents of the Authority. 
Members and officers to be public servants. 
Jurisdiction of Courts. 
Sanction of prosecution. 
Magistrat~'s power to impose enhanced penalties. 
Protection of action taken in good faith. 

CLAUSES 
47. Power to delegate. 
48. Act to over-ride other laws. 
49. Savings. 
50. Plans to stand modified in certain roses. 
51. Power to make rules. 
52. Power to make regulations. 
53. Laying of rules and regulations before Parliament. 
54. Dissolution of the Authority. 
55. Repeal, etc., and savings. 

BUt No. 70 of 1957 
THE DELHI DEVELOPMENT BILL, 1957 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
fO provide for the development of Delhi according to plan and 10'f' 
matters ancillary thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eishth Year of the Republto 
Qf India aj; follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRILIMINARY 
s 1, (/) This Act may be called the Delhi Development Act, 1~57. Short title, 
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Delhi. :e-=-
(3) It shall come into force on such d~~e as the Central Govern- mont. 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
10 (a) "amenity" includes road, water supply, street .lighting, 
drainage, sewerage, public works and such other convenience as 
the Central Government may, by notification in the OfBclal 
Gazette, specify to be an amenity for the purposes of this Act; 
(b) "building" includes any structure or erection or part of 
I~ a structure or erection which is intended to be used for residen-
tial, industrial, commercial or other purposes, whether in actual 
use or not; 
(c) "building operations" includes rebuilding operations, 
structural alterations of or additions to buildings and other 
20 operations normally undertaken in connection with the con-
struction of buildings; 
Definitions. 

(d) "development" with its grammatical variations means 
the carrying out of building, engineering, mining or other opera-
tions in, on, over or under land or the making of any material 
change in any building or land and includes redevelopment; 
(e) "development area" means any area declared to be a 5 
development area under sub-section (1) of section 11; 
(f) "engineering operations" includes the formation or lay-
ing out of means of access to a road; 
(g) "means of access" includes any means of access whether 
private or public, for vehicles or for foot passengers, and in- fO 
eludes a road; 
(h) "regulation" means a regulation made under this Act 
by the Delhi Development Authority constituted under section 3; 
(i) "rule", means a rule made under this Act by the Central 
Government; 
(j) "to erect" in relation to any building has the same 
meaning as the expression "to erect or re-erect" in clause (5) 
of section 3 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911; and 
(k) "zone" means anyone of the divisions in which Delhi 
may be divided for the purposes of developmen.t uncier this Act. 20 
CHAPTER n 
THE DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY AND ITS OBJECTS 
The Delhi 3. (1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act; the 
=;nent Cent~aI Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
y. constitute for the purposes of this Act an authority to be called- the 25 
Delhi Development Authority (hereinafter referred to as the 
Autbority). 
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name afore-
said having perpetual succession and a common seal with power to 
acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable 30 
and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued. 
(3) The Authority shall consist of the following members, 
namely:-
(a) a chairman who shall be the administrator of the Union 
territory of Delhi, ex-officio;' 35 
(b) a vice-chairman to be appointed by the Central Govern-
ment from amongst officers of that Government; 
(c) a finance and accounts member to be appointed by tht: 
Central Government; 
Punjab A'I 
3 of 1911, 

~ 
(d) an engineer member to be appointed by the Central 
Government; 
(e) two representatives of the Municipal Corporation of 
Delhi to be selected by the councillors of the Corporation from 
5 among themselves; and 
(f) the Commissioner of the Municipal Corporation of 
Delhi, ex-officiO. 
(4) The vice-chairman, the finance and accounts member and the 
engineer member shall be whole-time paid members of the Autho-
10 rity and shall be entitled to receive from the funds of the Authority 
such salaries and such allowances, if any, and governed by such con-
ditions of service as may be determined by rules made in this 
behalf. I 
(5) A representative of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi elect. 
15 ed under clause (e) of sub-section (3) may be paid from the funds 
of the Authority such allowances, if any, as may be fixed by the 
Central "Government in this behalf. 
(6) The vice-chairman, the finance and accounts member and the 
engineer member shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central 
20 Government. 
(7) Save as provided in sub-section (8) a representative of the 
Municipal Corporation of Delhi shall hold office for a term of three 
years from the date of his election to the Authority and shall be 
eligible for re-election: 
2S Provided that such term shall come to an end as soon as he 
ceases to be a councillor of the said Corporation. 
(8) A representative of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi 
elected under clause (e) of sub-section (3) to fill a casual vacancy 
shall conti1'l:ue in office for the remainder of the term of the member 
30 in whose place he is elected. 
(9) A member other than an ex-officio member may resign his 
office by writing under his hand addressed to the Central Govern-
ment but shall continue in office until his resignation is accepted by 
that Government. 
35 (10) No act or proceedings of the Authority shall be invalid by 
reason of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitu-
tion of, the Authority. 
4. (1) The Central Government shall appoint two suitable per- Stalfoltls_ 
sons respectively as the secretary and the chief accounts officer of Authority. 
40 the Authority who shall exercise such powers and perform such 
1170 L.S.-2 -... 

AdvilOI)' 
Council. 
.. 
, ' 
. ~ :. 
'4 
duties as may 'be prescribed by regulations or delegated to them by 
the Authority or the chairman. 
(2) Subject to such control and restrictions as may be prescribed 
by rules, the Authority mayappoinf such number of other officers 
and employees (including experts for technical work) as may be S 
necessary for the ~fticient performance of its functions and may 
determine their designations and grades. 
(3) The secretary, chief accounts officer and other officers and 
employees of the Authority shall be entitled to receive from the 
funds of the Authority such salaries and such allowances, if any, 10 
and shall be governed boY such conditions of service as may be deter-
mined by regulations made in this behalf. 
5. (1) The Authority shall, as soon as may be, constitute an 
advisory council for the purpose of advising the Authority on the 
preparation of the master plan and the zonal development plans and IS 
generally on the planning of development of Delhi and on such 
other matters arising out of, or in connection'. with, the administra-
tion of this Act as may be referred to it by the Authority. 
(2) The advisory council shall consist of the following members, 
namely:- 20 
(a) the chairman of the Authority, ex-officio, who shall b~ 
the president; 
(b) two persons with knowledge of town planning or archi-
tecture to be nominated by the Central Government; 
(c~ one representative of the' Health Services of Delhi 25 
administration to be nominated by the Central Government; -
(d) four representatives of the Municipal Corporation of 
Delhi'to be elected by the councillors from among themselves; 
(eJ three persons representing the Delhi Electric Supply 
Committee, the Delhi Transport Committee and the Delhi Water 30 
Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee of the said Corpora .. 
tion, of whom-
(i) one shall be elected, by the members of the Delhi 
Electric Supply Committee from among themselves; 
(ii) one shall be elected by the members of the Delhi 3S 
Transport Committee from among themselves; and 
(iii)'bne shall be elected by the members of the Delhi 
Water Supply Rnd Sewage Disposal Committee from among 
themselves. ' . 

10 
s 
(f) three persons to be nominated by the Central Govern-
ment of whom one shall represent the interests of commerce 
and industry and one, the interests of labour, in Delhi; 
(g) 'four persons from the technical departments of the 
Central Government to be nominated by that Government; and 
(h) three members of Purliament of whom two shall be 
members of the House of the People and one shall be a member 
of the Council of States to be elected respectively by the mem-
bers of the House of the People and the members of the Councl1 
of States. 
(3) The council shall meet as and when required to do so by the 
Authority and shall have the power to regulate its own procedure. 
(4) An elected member shall hold office for a term of three years 
from the date of his election to the council and shall be eligible for 
IS re-election: 
Provided that such term shall come to an end as soon as the 
member ceases to be a member of the body from which he was 
elected. 
- ,. "," 
6. The objects of the Authority shall be to promote and secure ~bj:\t8hf 
. 20 the development of Delhi according to plap. and for that purpose the ~~. ut 0-
Authority shall have the power to acquire, hold, manage and dispose 
of land and other property, to carry out building, engineering, min-
ing and other operations, to execute works in connection with supply 
of water and -electricity, disposal of sewage and other services and 
25 amenities and generally to do anything necessary or expedient fOf' 
purposes of such development and for purposes incidental thereto: 
Provided that save as provided in this Act, nothing contained 
in this Act shall be construed as authorising the disregard by the 
Authority of any law for the time being in force. 
CHArTER III 
MASTER PLAN AND ZoNAL DEVELOPMENT PLANS 
7. (1) The Authority shall, as soon as may be, ~arry out a civic Civic s'U1'WJ 
'f d 't 1 f D' lhi of. and survey 0 ,an preijll'e Q mas er p an or, e . muter plan 
h I h 11 " for, De1bi. (2) T e master pans a -
" 3' (a) define the various zones into which Delhi may be divided 
fo, the purposes of development and indicate the manner in whiCh 
the land in each zone is proposed to be used (whether by the car-
rying out thereon of development or ot~erwfse) and the stages by 
which any IiiUCP. development shall be oarried out; and 

(b) serve as a basic pattern of frame-work within which the 
zonal development plans of the various zones may be prepared. 
8. (1) Simultaneously with the preparation of the master plan or as 
soon as may be thereafter, the Authority shall proceed with the pre-
paration of a zonal development plan for each of the zones into which 5 
Delhi may be divided. 
:: . 
, . 
r 
(2) A zonal development plan shall-
(a) contain a site-plan and use-plan for the development of 
the zone and show the approximate locations and extents of land-
uses proposed in the zone for such things as public buildings and 10 
other public works and utilities, roads, housing, recreation, indus-
try, business, markets, schools, hospitals and public and private 
open spaces and other categories of public and private uses; 
(b) specify the standards of population density and building 
density; 15 
(c) show every area in the zone which may, in the opinion of 
the Authority, be required or declared for development or re-
development; and 
(d) in particular, contain provisions regarding all or any of 
the following matters, namely:- . 20 
(i) the division of any site into plots for the erection of 
buildings; 
(ii) the allotment or reserwtion of land for roads, open 
spaces, gardens, recreation grounds, schools, markets and 
,other public purposes; 2S 
(iii) the development of any area into a township or 
colony and the restrictions and conditions subject to which 
such development may be undertaken or carried out; 
(iv) the erection of buildings on any site and the res-
trictions and conditions in regard to the open spaces to be 30 
maintained in or around buildings and height and character 
of buildings; 
(v) the alignment of buildings on any site; 
,':: .,-~ - (vi) the architectural features of the elevation or front-... 
~ . 
'( .' 
. 
age of any building to be erected on any site; 35 
(vii) the number of residential buildings which may be 
erected on any plot or site; 
(viii) the amenities to be provided in relation to any site 
or buildings on such site whether before or after the erec-
tion of buildings and the person or authority by whom or at 
whose expense such amenities are to be provided; 40 

7 
(Lx) the prohibitions or restrictions regarding erection 
of shops, workshops, warehouses or factories or buildings of 
a specified architectural feature or buildings designed for 
particular purposes in the locality; 
S (x) the maintenance of walls, fences, hedges or any 
other structural or architectural construction and the height 
at which they shall be maintained; 
(xi) the restrictions regarding the use of any site for 
purposes other than erection of buildings; and 
10 (xii) any other matter which is necessary for the proper 
development of the zone or any areas thereof according to 
plan and for preventing buildings being erected haphazard-
ly in such zone or area. 
9. (1) In this section and in sections 10 and 11, the word "plan" ~f~~:~~fhe 
15 means the master plan as well as the zonal development plan for a Central 
Government 
for approval. zone. 
(2) Every plan shall, as soon as may be after its preparation, be 
submitted by the Authority to the Central Government for appro-
val and that Government may either approve the plan without 
20 modifications or with such modifications as it may consider necessary 
or reject the plan with directions to the Authority to prepare a 
fresh plan according to such directions. 
10. Immediately after a plan has been approved by the Central Date of 
Government, the Authority shall publish in such manner as may be °f:~:~ion of 
25 prescribed by regulations a notice stating that a plan has been ap- P 
proved and naming a place where a copy of the plan may be inspect-
ed at a reasonable hours and upon the date of the first publication of 
the aforesaid notice the plan shall come into operation. 
CHAPTER IV 
DEVELOPMENT OF LANDS 
11. (1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act the Declaration 
Central Government after consultation with the Authority and the ~e~~~~~­
Municipal Corporation of Delhi, may, by notification in the Official and develop-. • ment of land Gazette, declare any area In DelhI to be a development area for the in those and 
35 purposes of this Act. other areas. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Authority shall 
.-not undertake or carry out any de",elopment of land in any area 
which is not a development area. 

Application 
for pennis-
lio,l. 
8 
(3) ~fter the commencement of this Act but before the com.ng 
into operation of any of the plans in a zone no development of land 
in any development area in the zone shall be undertaken or carried 
out by any person or body (including a development of Government) 
unless permission for such development has been obtained in writ- S 
lng from the Authority. 
(4) After the coming into operation of any of the plans in a zone 
no development of land shall be undertaken or carried out-
(a) in any development area in the zone-
(J) by the Authority itself except in accordance with 1.0 
such plans; 
(2) by any person or body (including a department of 
Governemnt)-
(i) except in accordance with such plans; and 
(ii) unless permission for 'such deVelopment has IS 
been obtained in writing from the Authority; 
(b) in any area other than a development area in the, zone, 
by any person or body (including a department of Government) 
except in accordance with such plans. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (3) and 20 
(4) development of any land begun by any department of Govern-
ment before the commencement of this Act may be completed by 
that department without compliance with the requirements of those 
sub-sections. 
12. (1) Every person or body (including a department of Govern- 2S 
ment) desiring to obtain the permission referred to in section 11 
shall make an application in writing to the Authority in such form 
and containing such particulars in respect of the development to 
which the application relates. as may be prescribed by regulations. 
(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied 30 
by such fee as may be prescribed by rules: 
Provided that no such fee shall be necessary in the case of an ap-
plication made by a department of the Government. 
(3) On the receipt of an application for permission under sub-
section (1), the Authority after making such inquiry as it considers 35 
necessaz:y in relation to any matter specified in clause (d) of sub-
section' (2) of section 8 or in relation to any other matter, shall by 
order in writing, either grant the permission, subject to such condi-
tions, if any, as may be spe~ified jn the order or refuse to grant such . . . permIssIon: ,,0 

9 
Provided that before making an order refusing such permission, 
the applicant shall be given a reasonable opportunity to show cause 
why the permission should not be refused. 
(4) Where permission is refused, the grounds of such refusal shall 
5 be communicated to the applicant in the manner prescribed by regu-
lations. 
(5) The Authority shall keep in such form as may be prescribed 
by regulations a register of applications for permission under this 
section. . 
10 (6) The said register shall contain such particulars including in-
formation as to the manner in which applications for permission 
have been dealt with as may be prescribed by regulations and shall 
be available for inspection by any member of the public at all rea-
sonable hours on payment of such fee not exceeding rupees five as 
15 may be prescribed by regulations. 
(7) Wnere permis.;;ion is refused under this section, the applicant 
or any person claiming through him shall not be entitled to get 
refund of the fee paid on the application for permission but the 
Authority may, on an application for refund being made within 
20 three months of the communication of the grounds of the refusal 
under sub-section (-1) direct refund of such portion of the fee as to 
it may seem proper in the circumstances of the case. 
CHAPTER V 
ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF LAND 
25 13. (1) If any land is required by the Authority for purposes of Comp,:,lsory 
development or any other functions of the Authority under this Act, ~~~~10n 
the Authority may acquire such land by publishing in the Official 
Gazette a notice specifying the particular purpose for which such 
land is required and stating that the Authority has decided to ac-
30 quire the land in pursuance of this section. 
(2) Before publishing such notice, the Authority shall call upon 
the owner of the land and any other person who in the opinion of 
the Authority may be interested therein, to show cause why the 
land should not be acquired. 
35 (3) After considering the cause, if any, shown by the owner of 
. the land and by any other person interested therein and after giving 
such owner and person an opportunity of being heard, the Authority 
may pass such orders as it deems fit. 
(4) When a notice under sub-section (1) is published in the 
040 Official Gazette, the land shall on and from the date of such publica-
tion, vest absolutely in the Authority free from all encumbrances. 

Compensa-
tion for 
compulsory 
acquisition 
ofland. 
10 
14. (1) Where any land is acquired by the Authority under this 
Act, the Authority shall pay for such acquisition, compensation the 
amount of which shall be determined in accordance with the pro-
visions of this section. 
(2) Where the amount of compensation can be determined by 5 
agreement between the A.uthority and the person to be compensated, 
it shall be determined in accordance with such agreement. 
(3) Where no such agreement can be reached, the Authority 
shall refer the case to the Collector for determination of the amount 
of compensation to be paid for such acquisition as also the person 10 
or persons to whom such compensation shall be paid. 
(4) Before finally determining the amount of com~nsation, the 
Collector shall give an opportunity to. every person to be compen .. 
sated to state his case as to the amount of compensation. 
(5) In determining the amount of Compensation, the Collector JS 
shall be guided by the following principles, namely:-
.(a) no allowance shall be made on account of the acquisi-
tion being compulsoIJ:; 
(b) the value of the land shall, subject as hereinafter pro-
vided, be taken to be the amount which the land if.· sold in the 20 
optm market by a willing seller might be expected to realise: 
Provided that the Collector shall be entitled to consider all 
returns and assessments of capital value for taxation made or 
acquisced in by the person to be compensated. 
(c) the value of the land under clause (b) shall be deter- 25 
mined on the assumption that permission for development under 
this Act would be granted only for development within the 
range of existing use of the land at the time of its acquisition 
and would not be granted for any other development; 
(d) the special suitability or adaptability of the land for 30 
any purpose shall not be taken into account if that purpose it a 
purpose to which it would be applied only in pursuance of sta-
tutory powers, or for which there is not a market apart from 
the special needs of a particular purchaser or the requirements of 
any department of Government or any local or public authority. 35 
(e) where the value of the land is increased by reason 
of the use thereof or of any premises thereon in a manner which 
could be restrained by any court, or is contrary to law, or is 
detrimental to the health of the inmates of the premises, or to 

Ii 
public health, the amount of that increase shall not be take!}' 
into account. 
(6) For the purpose of determining the amount of compensa-
tion-
S (a.) the Collector shall have the power to require any per-
IOn to deliver to him such returns and assessments as he con. 
siders necessary; 
(b) the Collector shall also have the power to require any 
person known or believed to be interested in the land to deliver 
10 to him a statement containing, as far as may be practieable, the 
name of every other person having any interest in the land as 
co-owner, mortgagee, tenant or otherwise, and the nature of 
such interest, and of the rents and 'proftts (if any) received or 
receivable on account thereof for three years next preceding 
15 the date of the statement. 
(1) Every person required to deliver a return, assessment or 
statement under sub-section (6) shall be deemed to be legally bound 
to do so, within the meaning of section 175 and section 176 of the 
Indian Penal Code. 
20 (8) The Collector may hear expert witnesses if it be necessary 
. to do so in any particular case. 
(9) The Collector shall be entitled to enter on and inspect any 
land which is the subject of proceedings before him. 
(10) The Collector shall dispose of every case referred to him 
25 under sub-section (3) for determination of compensation as expedi-
tiously as possible and in any case within such time as may be 
prescribed by rules. 
(11) The Collector shall determine the amount of costs incurred 
in any case disposed of by him under this section, and by what 
30 persons and in what proportions they are to be paid. 
15. (1) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Collector Appeal to 
determining the amount of compensation may within sixty days from the diltrict , 
the date of such decision appeal to the court of the district judge =mat deci- (j 
of Delhi. lion of the ~ eoUoctor. ' .. 
3S (2) The decision of the court of the district judge on such appeal, ::' 
and subject only to such decision, the decision of the Collector 
determining the amount of compensation shall be final and .hall not f 
be questioned in any court. 
1170 L.S.-3. L •• ___ • "._ •.•• ,. 

.' 
Oiaputeaas 
to'appor-
tionment of 
the compel-
sat ion. 
12 
16. If any dispute arises 'as to the apportionment of compensation 
among persons claiming to be entitled thereto the Authority shall 
refer such dispute for the decision of the court of the district judge 
of Delhi and the decision of that court thereon shall be fina1. 
Payment of 17. (1) Where the amount of compensation is determined by S 
=~:~_ agreement, the Authority shall pay such amount to the person or 
lit of tile persons entitled thereto. 
lIame in 
court. (2) Where the amount of compensation is determined by the 
Collector under the provisions of section 14, the Authority shall 
tender payment of the compensation determined to the persons en- 10 
titled thereto according to such determination and shall pay to them 
unless prevented by some one or more of the contingencies men-
tioned in the next sub-section. 
(3) If the persons entitled to compensation according to the 
decision of the Collector do not consent to receive it, or if there be 15 
no person competent to alienate the land or if there be any dispute 
as to the title to recieve the compensation, the Authority shall 
deposit the amount of the compensation in the court of the district 
judge of Delhi: 
Provided that any person admitted to be interested may receive 20 
such payment under protest as to the sufficiency of the amount of, 
compensation: 
Provided further that nothing herein contained shall affect the 
liability of any person who may receive the whole or any part of 
any compensation determined under this Act, to pay the same to the 25 
person lawfully entitled thereto. 
Investment 18. Where any amount of compensation has been deposited in 
:~!~~=;_ court under section 17, the court may either of its own motion or on 
enllation the application made by or on behalf of any party interested or 
=.ited in claiming to be interested in such amount, order the same to be 30 
invested in such Government or other approved securities as it 
may think proper, and may direct the interest or other proceeds 
of any such investment to be accumulated and paid in such manner 
as will, in its opinion, give the parties interested therein the same 
benefit therefrom as they might have had from the land in respect 35 
whereof such amount has been deposited or as near thereto as may 
be. 
Disposal of 19. (1) Subject to any directions given by the Central Govern-
land by the ment under this Act, the Authority may dispose of-
Authority. 
(a) any land acquired by .it without undertaking or carry- 40 
inS out any development thereonj or 

13 
(b) any such land after undertaking or carrying out such 
development as it thinks fit, 
to such persons, in such manner and subject to such convenants 
and conditions as it considers expedient for securing the develop-
S ment of Delhi according to plan. 
(2) The powers of the Authority with respect to the disposal of 
land acquired by it under this Act shall be so exercised as to secure, 
so far as practicable, that persons who are living or carrying on 
business or other activities on land so acquired shall, if they desire 
10 to obtain accommodation on land belonging to the Authority and 
are willing to comply with any requirements of the Authority as 
to its development and use, have an opportunity to obtain thereon 
accommodation suitable to their reasonable requirements on terms 
settled with due regard to the price at which any such land has been 
IS acquired from them: 
Provided that where the Authority proposes to dispose of by 
sale any land without any development having been undertaken or 
carried out thereon, it shall offer the land in the first instance to the 
persons from whom it was acquired, if they desire to purchase it 
20 subject to such requirements as to its development and use as the 
Authority may think fit to impose. 
(3) Nothing in this Act shall be construed as enabling the 
Authority to dispose of land by way of gift, mortgage or charge, but 
subject as aforesaid reference in this Act to the disposal of land 
25 shall be construed as reference to the disposal thereof in any 
manner, whether by way of sale, exchange or lease or by the crea-
tion qf any easement right or privilege or otherwise. • 
20. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Nazullands. 
Official Gazette and upon such terms and conditions as may be 
30 agreed upon between that Government and the Authority, place at 
the disposal of the Authority all or any developed and undeveloped 
lands in Delhi vested in the Union (known and hereinafter refer-
red to as "nazul lands") for the purpose of development in accord-
ance with the provisions of this Act. 
35 (2) No development of any nazul land shall be undertaken or 
carried out except by, or under the control and supervision of, the 
Authority after such land has been placed at the disposal of the 
Authority under sub-section (1). 
(3) After any such nazul land has been developed by, or under 
40 the t!ontrol and supervision of, the Authority it shall be dealt with 
by the Authority in accordance with rules made and directions 
given by the Central Government in this behalf. 
(4) If any nazul land placed at the disposal of the Authority 
under sub-section (1) ~ fequifed. .~ any ttaw U1~ by ~ 

14 
Central Government, the Authority shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, replace it at the disposal of that Government upon 
such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon between that 
Government and the Authority. 
CHAPTER VI 
FINANCE. ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
5 
Fund of the 21. (1) The Authority shall have and maintain its own fund to 
A"thority. which shall be credited-
.' 
(4) all moneys received by the Authority from the 
Central Government by way of grants, loans, advances ar other- 10 
wise; 
(b) all fees and charges received by the Authority under 
this Act; 
(c) all moneys received by the Authority from the disposal 
of lands, buildings and other properties, movable and immov- IS 
able; and 
(d) all moneys received by the Authority by way of rents 
and profits or in any other manner or from any other source. 
(2) The fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses in-
curred by the Authority in the administration of this Act and for no 20 
other purposes. 
(3) The Authority may keep in current account of the State 
Bank of India or any other bank approved by the Central Govern-
ment in this behalf such sum of money out of its fund as may bE' 
prescribed by rules and any money in excess of the said sum shall 25 
be invested in such manner as may be approved by the Central 
Government. 
(4) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by lew in this behalf, make such grants, advances 
and loans to the Authority as that Government may deem necessary 30 
for the performance of the functions of the Authority under this 
Act; and all grants, loans and allowances made shall be on such 
terms and conditions as the Central Government may determine. 
~t of %2. The Authority shall prepare in such form and at such time 
:~ uthori- every year as may be prescribed by rules a budget in respect of the 35 
financial year next ensuing showing the estimated receipts and ex-
penditure of the Authority and shall forward to the Central Gov-
ernment such number of copies thereof as may be prescribed by 
rules. 
WxiounU and 23. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other 4Q 
udit. . relevant records and prepare an annual statement of a~ounts in-
CI\J,4ine the balance-sheet in such form as the Central Government 

IS 
may by rules prescribe in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be subject to audit annu-
ally by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India and any ex-
5 penditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be 
payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor General 
of India. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor General of India and any per-
. son appointed by him in connection with the audit of accounts of the 
10 Authority shall have the same right, privilege and authority in con-
nection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts 
and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
. books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and 
15 papers and to inspect the office. of the Authority. 
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India or any other person appointed by him 
in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be for-
warded annually to the Central Government and that Government 
20 shall cause a copy of the same to be laid before both Houses of Par-
liament. 
24. The Authority shall prepare for every year a report of its AnnUBI 
activities during that year and submit the report to the Central Gov- report. 
ernment in such form and on or before such date as may be pres-
25 cribed by rules, and that Government shall cause a copy of the report 
to be laid before both Houses of Parliament. 
25. (1) The Authority shall constitute for the benefit of its whole- Pens!don and .. . provl cnt time paid members and of Its officers and other employees In such fund. 
manner and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed by 
30 rules,such pension and provident funds as it may deem fit . 
3S 
.. 
(2) Where any such penSion or provident fund has been consti-
tuted, the Central Government may declare that the provisions of 
the Provident Funds Act, 1925, shall apply to such fund as if it were 
a Government Provident Fund. 
CHAPTER VII 
SUPPLEMENTAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
26. The Authority may authorise any person to enter into or powers or 
upon any land· or building with or without assistants or workmen entry. 
for the purpose of-
(a) making any enquiry, inspection, measurement or sur-
vey or taking l~vels of such land or building; 

the 
16 
(b) examining works under construction and ascertaininl 
course of sewers and drains; 
(c) digging or boring into the sub-soil; 
(d) setting out boundaries and intended lines of work; 
(e) making such levels, boundaries and lines by placing S 
marks and cutting trenches; 
(f) ascertaining whether any land is being or has been 
developed in contravention of the master plan or zonal deve-
lopment plan or without the permission referred to in section 
11 or in contravention of any condition subject to which such 10 
permission has been granted; or 
(g) doing any other thing necessary for the efficient ad-
ministration of this Act: 
Provided that-
(i) no such entry shall be made except between the hours 15 
of sunrise and sunset and without giving reasonable notice to 
the occupier. or if there be no occupier, to the owner of the 
land or building; 
(ii) sufficient opportunity shall in every instance be given 
to enable women (if any) to withdraw from such land or build- 20 
ing; 
(iii) due regard shall always be had, so far as may be 
compatible with the exigencies of the purpose for which the 
entry is made, to the social and religious usages of the occu-
pants of the land or building entered. 25 
Penalties. 27. (1) Any person who whether at his own instance or at the 
instance of any other person or any body (including a department of 
Government) undertakes or carries out development of any land in 
contravention of the master plan or zonal development plan or with-
out the permission referred to in section 11 or in contravention of 30 
any condition subject to which such permislJion has been granted, 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees, and in the case of a continuing offence, with further ftne 
which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day during 
which such offence continues after conviction for the first commis- 35 
sion of the offence. 
(2) Any person who obstructs the entry of a person authorised 
under section 26 to entel' into or upon any land or building or molests 
such person after such entry shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to six months, or wtth ~~ wllich may 4Q 
~ to OQe thaUNnd rupees, Of with both. 

I" 
28. (1) Where th~ erection of any building has been Commen~ OrcIr:t'of 
and completed in contravention of the master plan or zonal develop- ~~=~ 0 
ment plan or without the permission referred to in section 11 or in 
contravention of any condition subject to which such permission has 
S been granted, any officer of the Authority empowered by it in this 
behalf may, in addition to any prosecution that may be instituted 
under this Act, make an order directing that such erection shall be 
demolished by the owner thereof within such period not exceeding 
two months as may be specified in the order, and on the failure of the 
10 owner to comply with the order, the officer may himself cause the 
erection to be demolished and the expenses of such demolition shall 
be recoverable from the owner as arrears of land revenue: 
Provided that no such order shall be made unless the owner has 
been given an opportunity to show cause why the order should, ,,~t 
IS be made. " 
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order under sub-section (1) may 
appeal to the Chairman of the Authority against that order within 
thirty days from the date thereof; and the Chairman may after 
hearing the parties to the appeal either allow or dismiss the appeal " 
20 or may reverse or vary any part of the order. ' 
(3) The decision of the Chairman on the appeal and subject only 
to such decision the order under sub-section (1), shall be final and 
shall not be questioned in any court. 
29. (1) Where the erection of any building has been commenced Power of 
2, as described in section 28 but has not been completed, the Authority ~~th:~~~~~~ 
may, in addition to any prosecution that may be instituted under ot!rations. 
this Act, make an order requiring the building operations in relation 
to such erection to be discontinued on and from the date of the ser-
vice of the order. 
30 (2) Any person failing to comply with an order under sub-section 
(1) shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred 
rupees for every day during which the non-compliance continues 
after the service of the order. 
(3) No compensation shall be claimable by any person for any 
35 damage which he may sustain in consequence of the discontinuance 
of the erection of any building. 
30. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a Ofl'cncc~ by 
. th ff . ted compllnJe8. company, every person, who, at the bme e 0 ence was commit 
was incharge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct 
40 of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be 
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shan· be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly: 

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall reDder 
any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he 
proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that 
he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such 
oftence. 5 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) where 
an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it 
is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or. 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such 10 
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to 
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purpose of this section-
(a) "company" means a body corporate and includes a firm 15 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the 
firm. 
Pines when 31. All fines realised in connection with prosecutions under this 
=~s:- to be Act shall be paid to the Authority. 20 
Authority. 
Compoaition 
of offences. 
Defaull 
poweraof 
Authority. 
32. (1) The Authority or any person authorised by it by general 
or special order in this behalf may either before or after the institu-
tion of the proceedings compound any offence made punishable by 
or under this Act. 
, (2) Where an offence has been compounded, the offender, if in 25 
custody shall be discharged and no further proceedings shall be taken 
against him in respect of the offence compounded. 
33. (1) If the Authority after holding a local inquiry or upon re-
port from any of its officers or other information in its possession is 
satisfied that the owner of any land in a development area has failed 30 
to carry out any development of the land which in the opinion of the 
Authority ought to be carried out or for which permission has been 
obtained under this Act, it may serve upon the owner a notice re-
quiring him to carry out the development within such time as may 
be specified in the notice. 35 
(2) If such development is not carried out within the time speci-
fied in the notice, then, the Authority may itself carry it out or have 
it carried out through such agency as it deems 1\t. 
(3) All expenses incurred by the Authority or the agency em-
ployed by it in carrying out the development together with interest 40 
at such rate as the Central Govemment may by order fix, from the 

19 
date when a demand for the expenses is made until payment may be 
recovered by the Authority from the owner as arrears of land reve-
nue. 
34. Where any area has been developed by the Authority, the Power .of 
S AuthDrity may require the local authority within whose local limits ~~~~~l 
the area so developed is situated, to assume responsibility for the authC'rity to 
. t f h . h h h . assume res-mam enance 0 t e amenities w ic ave been provided in the area ponsibility 
, by the Authority and for the provision of the amenities which have f~r ~oni­
not been provided by the Authority but which in i~s opinion should :'~!fn 
10 be provided in the area, on terms and conditions agreed upon be. cases 
tween the Authority and that local authority; and where such terms 
and conditions cannot be agreed upon, on terms and condition set-
tled by the Central Government in consultation with the local autho-
rity on a reference of the matter to that Government by the Autho-
IS rity. 
35. (1) Where as a consequence of any development having been power?f . AuthorIty to carrled out by the Authority in any area, the value of any property levy hotter-
in that area has increased or is likely to increase, the. Authority shall mont char-
be entitled to levy upon the owner of the property an annual better- lOS. 
20 ment charge for such term of years and at such percentage of the 
increase in value not exceeding ten per cent, as may be ftxed by 
rules made in this behalf: 
Provided that the aggregate amount of the charge so levied shall 
not exceed one-half of the maximum increase in value during the 
2S aforesaid term of years as fixed hereunder. 
35 
40 
(2) The levy of the betterment charge shall, in respect of each 
property be governed by the following principles, namely:-
(a) the market value of the property on the date of com-
mencement of the development in the area shall be estimated 
without any reference to that development; 
(b) for each ftnancial year succeeding the year in which 
the development is commenced by the Authority, its market 
value on the 1st of April of that financial year shall be ascer-
.tained by the Chairman of the Authority; 
(c) if in any ftnancial year the market value as ascertained 
under clause (b) does not exceed the market value as ascer-
tained under clause (a), no betterment charge shall be levied 
on the property for that year; 
(d) if in any financial year the market value as ascertained 
unaler clause (b) exceeds the market value as ascertained under 
1170 L.S.-4. 

20 
clause (a), the Authority shall levy a betterment charge on the 
diaerence between the two according to the percentage fixed 
by rules made in this behalf. 
(3.) In ascertained the market value of a property under clause 
(a) or clause ('b) of sub-section (2), the value of buildings or other 5 
works erected or in the course of erection on such property shall 
not be taken into consideration. 
(4) The betterment charge levied under this section shall be 
payable in such number of instalments and each instalment shall 
be' payable at such time as may be fixed by rules made in this 10 
behalf. 
(5) Any arrear of the betterment charge shall be recoverable as 
an arrear of land revenue. 
Controi by 36. (1) The Authority shall carry out such directions as may be 
Centrll Go- issued to it from time to time by the Central Government for the IS 
VenuDCnt. efficient administration of this Act. 
(2) If in, or in connection with, the exercise of its powers and 
discharge of its functions by the Authority under this Act, any dis-
pute arises between the A.uthority and the Central Government the 
decision of the Central Government on such dispute shall be final. 20 
Return. and 37. The Authority shall furnish to the Centrel Government such 
Information. reports, returns and other information as that Government may 
from time to time require . 
. 
Service of 
notices, etc. 
'38. (1) All notices, orders and other documents required by this 
Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder to be served. upon 25 
any person shall, save as otherwise provided in this Act or such rule 
or regulation be deemed to be duly served-
(a) where the person to be served is a company if the docu-
ment is addressed to the secretary of the company at its regis-
tel'ed office or at its principal office or place of business and Is 30 
either-
(i) sent by registered post, or 
(ii) delivered at the registered office or at the principal 
mBce or place of business of the company; 
(b) where the person to be served ~s a partnership, if the 35 
document is addressed to the partnership at its princfpal place 
of business, identifying it by the name or style under which 
Itlbusiness ilt .carried on" and is either:-
(i) lent by r~iltered post,or 

2.1 
(ii) delivered at the said place of business; 
(c) where the person to be served is a public body or a 
eorporation M society or. other body, if the document is addres-
sed to the secretary, treasurer or other head officer of that body, 
corporation or society at its principal office, and is either-
(i) sent by registered post, or 
(ii) delivered at that ofllce; 
"(d) in any other case, if the document is addressed to the 
person to be served and-
10 (i) is given or tendered to him, or 
(ii) if such person cannot be found, is affixed on some 
conspicuous part of his last known place of residence or 
business, if within the Union territory of Delhi or is given 
or tendered to some adult member of his family or is affixed 
] 5 on some conspicuous part of the land or building to which 
it reLates, or 
(iii) is sent by registered post to that person. 
(2) Any document which is required or authorised to be served 
on the owner or occupier of any land or building may be addressed 
20 "the owner'" or "the Occupier", as the case may be, of that land or 
building (naming that land or building) without further name or 
description, and shall be deemed to be duly served-
(a) if the document so aGdressed is sent or delivered in 
accordance with clause id) of sub-section (1); or 
25 ~b} if tJae docunumt SO addressed or a copy thereof so 
addressed, is delivefed to som~ person on the land or building 
or, where there is no person on the land or building to whom it 
ean' be delivered, is eIlxed to some conspicuous part of the land 
or building. 
30 (3) Where a document is served on a partnership in 'accordance 
with this section, the dOCument shall be deemed to be served on 
each partner. 
(4) For the purpose of enabling any doc\lftlent to be served on 
the owner of any property the secretary to the Authority may by 
35 notice in writing require the occul>ier (if any) of the property to 
. sta~ the name and address of the owner thereof. 
(5) Where the person on whom a document is to be served is a 
miIDM, the service upon his guardian or any adult member of his 
family shall be_ deemed· to be service upon the minor. 

(6) A servant is not a member of the family within the meaning 
of this section. 
t~~~o n~tic:c 39. Every' public notice given under this Act shall be in writing 
made known. over the signature of the secretary to the Authority and shall be 
widely made known in the locality to be affected thereby by affixing 5 
copies thereof in conspicuous public places within the said locality, 
Notices, etc., 
to filt 
reasonable 
time. 
Authenti-
cation of 
orders and 
documents 
of the 
Authority. 
or by publishing the same by beat of drum or by advertisement in 
local newspaper or by any two or more of these means, and by any 
other means that the secretary may think fit. -
40. Where any notice, order or other document issued or made 10 
under this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder requires 
anything to be done for the doing of which no time is fixed in this 
Act or the rule or regulation, the notice, order or other document 
shall specify a reasonable time for doing the same. 
41. All permissions, orders, decisions, notices and other documents 15 
of the Authority shall be authenticated by the signature of the sec-
retary to the Authority or any other officer authorised by the Autho-
rity in this behalf. 
Members 42.: Every member and every officer and other employee of the 
and officers Authority shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning 20 to be public 
servants. of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
J un idicti on 
of courtS. 43. No court inferior to that of a magistrate of the first class shall 
try an offence publishable under this Act. 
S"nction of 44. No prosecution for any offence publishable under this Act shall 
prosecution. be instituted except with the previous sanction of the Authority or 25 
any officer authorised by the Authority in this behalf. 
45. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 32 of the Code 
45 of 11160. 
Magistrate's 
power to 
unpose 
enhanced 
penalties. 
of Criminal Procedure, 1898, it shall be lawful for any court of a 5 of 1898. 
Protection 
of action 
taken in 
good faith. 
Power to 
odepto. 
magistrate of the first class to pass any sentence aut~orised by this 
Act in excess of its POWel'S ·under the said section. 30 
46. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to 
be done under this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder. 
47. The Authority may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act except the 35 
power to make regulations may also be exercised by such officer or 
local authority as may be mentioned therein, in such cases and sub-
ject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified therein. 

5 
... 
~~ 
48. (1) The provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations AI;;t to over-
made thereunder shall he.ve effect notwithstanding anything incon- ride other 
sistent therewith contained in any other law. laws. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law-
10 
(a) when permission for development in respect of any 
land has been obtained under this Act such development shall 
not be deemed to be unlawfully undertaken or carried out by 
reason only of the fact that permission, approval or sanction 
required under such other law for such development has not 
been obtained; 
15 
20 
3S 
(b) when permission for such development has not been. 
obtained under this Act, such development shall no~ be deemed 
to be lawfully undertaken or carried out by reason only of the 
fact that permission, approval or sanction required under such 
other law for such development has been obtained. 
49. Nothing in this Act shall apply to- Savings. 
(a) the carrying out of works for the maintenance, improve-
ment or other alteration of any building, being works which 
affect only the interior of the building or which do not material-
1)' affect the external appearance of the building; 
(b) the carrying out by any local authority or by any 
depanment of Government of any works for the purpose of ins-
pecting, repairing. or renewing any drains, sewers, mains, pipes, 
cables or other apparatus including the breaking open of any 
street or other land for that purpose; 
te) the erection"of a building, not being a dwelling house 
if such building is required for the purposes subservient to agri-
culture; 
(d) the erection of a place of worship or a tomb or cenotaph 
or of a wall enclosing a graveyard, place of worship, cenotaph 
or samadhi on land which at the commencement of this Act is 
occupied by or for the purpose of such worship, tomb, cenotaph, 
araveyard or samadhi; 
(e) the excavations (including wells) made in the ordinary 
eourse of agricultural operations; and 
<f> the construction of unmettalled road intended to give 
Ilccess to land solely for agricultural purposes. 
50. (1) Where any land situated in any area in Delhi is required Pllnlto 
d modi by the master plan or a zonal development plan to be kept as an fi:fin -
40 open space or un built .upon or is designated in any such plan as certain ate., 
.ubject to compulsory acquisition, then, if at the expiration of 

24 
ten years boom the date of operation of the plan under section. 10 
. or where such larid has been so required or designated by any 
8.m:endment of such plan, from the date of operation of such amend-
ment, the land is not compulsorily acquired under the provisions 
of this Act or, as the case may be, of any other lew relating to S 
8Pl}\lisition Qf immovable property, by the authority for the time 
being charged with the development of the area in which the land 
~sitlilated. _ the owner of the land may serve on the authority a 
eotice requiring his interest in th~ land to be so acquired. 
- -(2) If the authority for the time being charged with the develop- 10 
ment of the area fails to acquire the land within a period of six 
mcmtils from the date of receipt of the notice, the master plan or, 
u-:the case may be, the zonat development plan shall have effect, 
after the expiration of the said six months as if the land were not 
JRquired.. to be .kept as an open space or unbuilt upon or were not 15 
designated as subject tp compulsory acquisition. 
Power to 51. (1) The Central Government, after consultation with the 
make I'Ules. Authority, may, by notification in the Official Qizette, make rules to 
catry out the purposes of this Act: 
Provided that consultation with the Authority shall not be neces- 20 
sary on the first occasion of the making of rules under this section, 
but the Central Government shall take into consideration any sug-
gestions which the Authority may make in relation to· the 4ImeIld-
ment of such rules after they are made. 
(2) 111 particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 25 
forego,ing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
in~ matters, namely:-
(a) the manner of election of representatives of the Munici-
pal Corporation of Delhi under clause (e) of sub-section (3) of 
IeQtion 3' 30 
~ - _ • t - - . ~ 
(b) the salaries, allowances and conditions of service of the 
~ole·time paid members of the Authority; 
(c) the control and r~trictions in relation to appomtmeat of 
C?1Jicers and other employees; 
(d) the form and eontent of the master plan and a zonal 3$ 
·devel~nt plan and the procedure to be followed in connection 
. "with the preparation, submission and approval of such plans; 
(e). the local inquiries and other hearings that may be held 
before a plan is approv~; 
<I> the periodical am.endtnent of the master plan and a zonal ..0. 
1 development plan, the period at the expiration of which such 

as 
amendment may be taken up, the procedure to be followed in 
making such amendment and the date of operation of such 
amendment; 
(g) the fee to be pai~ on an application for permission 1IDder 
5 sub-section (1) of section 12 and the factors and circumstances to 
be taken into consideration in determinini. such fee; 
(h) the time within which cases referred to the Collector 
under sub-section (3) of section 14 for determination of compen-
.. tion shall be disposed of; 
10 (i) the manner in which nazullands shall be dealt with after 
development; 
(j) the procedure for referring any matter to the Central 
Government under section 34 for settlement of terms and condi;. 
tions subject to which a local authority may be required to assume 
IS responsibility for amenities in any aree; 
(k) the term of years for which and the unifonn percentage 
of the increase in value at which, betterment charges may be 
levied, the time and instalments for payment of betterment 
charges and any other ~tter in reletion to the assessment and 
20 collection of betterment charges; 
(t) the sum of money that may be kept in current account; 
(m) the form of the budget of the Authority and the manner 
of preparing the same; 
. (n) the form of the balance-sheet and statement of aceounts; 
(0) the form of the annUIQI report and the date on or before 
which it shall be submitted to the Central Government; 
(p) the manner of constitution of the pension and provi-
dent funds for whole-time paid members and officers and other 
employees of the Authority and the conditions subject to which 
such funds may be constituted; 
(q) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed 
by rules: 
u. (1) The Authority may, with the previous approval of the Power to 
Central Government, make regulations consistent with this Act and i!to:~-
35 the rules made thereunder, to carry out the purposes of this Act, .and 
without prejudice to the generality of this power, such regulatlOllS 
may provide for-
(a) the summoning and holding of meetings of the Authority, 
the time and place where such meetings'are to be held, the con-
duct of business at such meetings and the number of members 
necessary to form a quorum thereat; 

Laying of 
rules and 
regulations 
befo~ 
Parlilment. 
Pissolution 
oftbe 
Authority. 
,.. . 26 
(b) the powers and duties of the secretary and chief ac-
counts officer of the Authority; 
(c) the salaries, allowances and conditions of service of the 
secretary, chief accounts officer and other officers and employees; 
(d) the procedure for the cal'l'ying out of the functions of 5 
the Authority under Chapter III; 
(e) the fonn in which any application for permission under 
sub-section (1) of section 12 shell be made and the particulars 
to be furnished in such application; 
(f) the manner of publication of the notice under section 13; 10 
(g) the manner of communicating the grounds of refusal 
of pennission f~.r development; 
(h) the form of the register of applications for permission 
and the particulars to be contained in such register; 
(i) the management of the properties of the Authority; and 15 
(j) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed 
by regulations. 
(2) Until the Authority is established under this Act, any regula-
tion which may be made under sub-section (1) may be made 'by the 
Central Government; and any regulation so made may be altered 20 
or rescinded by the Authority in exercise of its powers under sub-
section (1). 
53. All rules and regulations made under this Act shall be laid 
for not less than thirty days before each House of Parliament 81 
soon as may be after they are made and shall be subject to such 25 
modifications as Parliament may make during the session in which 
they are so laid or the session immediately following. 
54. (1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that the pur-
poses for which the Authority was established under this Act have 
been substantially achieved so as to render the continued existence 30 
of the Authority in the opinion of the Central Government un-
necessary, that Government may by notification in the Oftielal 
. Gazette declare that the Authority shall be dissolved with effect 
from such date as may be specified in the notification; and the Au-
thority shall be deemed to be dissolved accordingly. 3S 
(2) From the 9Qid dat~ 
(a) all properties, funds and dues which are wsted in, or 
realisable by, the Authority shall vest in, or be realisable by the 
Central Government; 

.P. Act 
27 
(b) all nazul lands placed at the disposal of the Authority 
shall revert to the Central Government; 
(c) all liabilities which are enforceable against the Autho-
rity shall be enforceable against the Central Government; and 
S (d) for the purpose of carrying Qut any development which 
has not been fully carried out by the Authority and for the pur-
pose of realising properties, funds and dues referred to in clause 
(a), the functions of the Authority shall be discharged by the 
Central Government. 
10 Repeal, etc. 
55. (1) As from the date of the constitution of the Authority,- and saving •• 
(a) the United Provinces Town Improvement Act, 1919, 
shall cease to have effect in the Union territory of Delhi; and :II of 1919. 
of 19S5. (b) the Delhi (Control of Building Operations) Act, 1955, 
shall stand repealed. 
IS (2) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (1)-
(a) every officer and other employee serving under the 
Delhi Improvement Trust or the Delhi Development (ProviSio-
nal) Authority immediately before the date of the constitution 
of the Authority shall, on and from such date, be iransferred to 
20 and become an officer or other employee of the Authority with 
such designations as the Authority may determine and shall 
hold office by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and 
on the same terms and conditions of service as he would have 
held the same if the Authority had not been constituted, and 
25 shall continue to do so unless and until such tenure, remunera-
tion and terms and conditions are duly altered by the Authority: 
Provided that any service rendered by any such officer or other 
employee before the constitution of the Authority shall be deemed 
to be service renedered under it: 
30 Provided further that the Authority may employ any such officer 
" "or other employee in the discharge of such functions under this 
. Act as it may think proper and every such officer or other employee 
shall" discharge those functions accordingly; 
(b) anything done or any action taken (including any ap-
3S pointment, delegation, notification, order, scheme, permission, 
rule, bye-law, regulation of form made, granted or issued) under 
,any. of. theaf<;>resaidActs, shall, so far' as it" is not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act, continue in force and be deemed 
to have been done or taken under the provisions of this Act un-
40' less and until it is superseded by anything done or any action 
taken under the said provisions. 
1170 L. S.--5 

STATEMENT 'oF bBJECTS AND REASONS 
in order to check hapbetaMconsiroction aWd to regulate and con-
trol the building activities in Delhi, the Delhi (Control of Build-
ing Operations) Ordinance, 1955 was promulgated on the 22hd Octo-
ber, 1955, under which the Delhi Development (Provisional) 
Authority was constituted. The said Ordinance was replaced by 
the Delhi (Control of Building Operations) Act, 1955. Originally 
the enactment was to be in force up to the 31st December, 19515, but 
its opreation has been extended up to the 31st December, 1957, by 
an amending Act. 
The present B1llseeks to replace the Delhi Development (Provi-
sional) Authority, and the Delhi Improvement Trust with the object 
of promoting and securing the development of Delhi in accordance 
with the master plan and zonal development plans to be prepared by 
the Authorityahd approved by the Central Government. The 
Authority will consist of the Administrator of Delhi as chairman, 
a whole-time paid vice-chairman, a whole-time paid engineer 
member and a whole-time paid finance member, two members of 
the Corporation to be elected by the Councillors of the DeDii Muni-
cipal Corporation from amongst themselves and the Commil!lsioner 
of the Corporation (e:i-ofJicib). 
The development activities of the Authority will be confted only 
to such areas as may be declared "development areas" by the Cen-
tral Government in consultation with the Authority and the Delh1 
Municipal Corporation. 
The Authority will be advised by an Advisory Council which 
will consist of three members to be ~ected by Parliament, repre-
sentatives ~f the Eelhi M~cipal Corporation and persons to be 
Ilominated by the ~tra1 Governhi~t to repr'eBeilt the iritetests at 
commerce and i,rid~try8:n~ labour, lUI w'ell as pm-sons havrn, laYOw-
redge of town pliuuiliig, archite<:t'ut'e, pUblic 'h~lth ana (,th'elrVeh-
nical mattera. 
~ Dam; 
~ ttUlS'Ptm.bItr, 196'1. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Delhi Development (,Provisional) Authority and the Town 
Planning Office which are now in charge of the prevention of 
haphazard constructions and the preparation of the Master Plan 
for Delhi will merge with the Delhi Development Authority when 
it is constituted. Expenditure on the staff and the contingencies 
of these two Organisations is now being met from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. It is envisaged that the Authority which will in 
due course have its own funds as indicated in the succeeding para-
graph may have to be financed in regard to its expenditure on st8ft 
and contingencies in the initial period by way of grants from. the 
Consolim.tedFund of India. The expe.nditure on this account may 
be about Rs. 12 lakhs per annum· It is anticipated that the Autho-
rity will come into being during the last quarter of the current 
financial year in which case the actual expenditure during the cur-
rent year will be about Rs. 3 lakhs. 
2. In regard to development to be carried out by the Authority 
in "Development Arear" funds will be provided as loans to the 
Authority and no grants are envisaged for this purpose. The 
amount of loans that will be advanced will depend on the actual 
development that the Authority will undertake during each year. 
The loans will be repaid by the Authority from funds which will 
accrue to it (a) by sale of plots in developed areas, (b) by the 
levy of betterment charges and (c) by such other fees or charges 
which it may recover for granting permission for development and 
building in "Development Areas". 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
In clause 51 it is proposed to delegate to the Central Government 
power to make rules after consultation with the Authority to carry 
out the purposes of the Bill. Under clause 52 it is proposed to 
delegate to the Delhi Development Authority powers to make regu-
lations with the previous approval of the Central Government. The 
powers proposed to be delegated to the Central Government and 
the Authority under these two clauses relate to the various matters 
specified therein. As will appear from these two clauses these mat-
ters are necessary for the day to day administration of the Act and 
do not involve any matters of policy. 
These delegations have been proposed for administrative con-
venience and with a view not to making the Bill unnecessarily 
cumbersome. The delegation of legislative powers both to the CaD-
tral Government and the Authority is of e normal type. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the devel~ment of Delhi according to plan 
and for matters ancillary thereto. 
GIPND-LS-I-1170 LS-6-9-117-UIOO. 
(Shri Gomnd BaIlabh Pant, 
Minister of Home A/fa1rs.) 