1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
I..uK SABHA 
-
C(;HHIGENlJri 
to \\ 
. ~E a'\."JYING LAWS (IUENI:MENT) BlLL, 1983 
tl?J19r~~I~~ 
Page ~, "Cl9ainst l~ne 4 4r insert t.he marginal ci~,-
( : ·"2',) IJf H~81.u. I, 
\ ; 
- I " " 
Page l~, in the margin~l~ading to proposed ~-
~-' \ 
J!idl "instrunent" ~ 1ns.t.runE1rt$~'· 
P a~e 30, line 34,-
fO t "include" "be· 
"maY" 
"National" 
, 
6. Page 86, lira\:: _;_8, in the marginal he·adi.n9_io ... section 43,-
.!.2.L. li{ll'"'isiled" ~ 1tfumishe~" 
7. 
t 
P .age 87,· a':.;03inst line 22.. insert the margina~ citation,.-
,. 
"5 of 1970." 
\ 
8. Page ~'7, ~ns . ..-:i.:l. the marginal heading.to section 16,-
"Li-abil ity cf Corporation j,n 
respect of in~ured deposit.\" 
'i. Page 90, lin(~ 3,-
,.ait,li".I " the" ins e rt II c as~" 
/ \ 
I ... 
NEW ~ELH:r.; 

As INTRODUCED IN Lox SUHA ON \ 
I, 
Bill No. 70 of 1883 
THE BANKING LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1983 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title and commencement. 
CHAPl'ER II 
AMENDMENTS TO THE BANKERS' BOOKS EvIDENCE ACT, 1891 
2. Amendment of Act 18 of 1891. 
CHAPTER III 
AMENDMENTS TO THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934 
3. Amendment of section 17. 
4. Amendment of section 33. 
5., Amendment of section 40. 
6. Amendment of section 42. 
7. Amendment of section 43. 
8. Amendment of section 45H. 
9. Amendment of section 451. 
p 10. Insertion of new Chapter after Chapter IIIB. 
11. Amendment of section 58B. 
12. Amendment of section S8E. 
CHAPTER IV 
AMENDMENTS TO THE BANKING REGULATION ACT, 1949 
13. Amendment of section 5. 
14. Amendment of section 7. 
15. Amendment of section 8. 
16. Amendment of section lOA. 
17. Amendment of section lOB. 
18. Insertion of new section 10BB. 
19. Substitution of new se,ction for section IOC. 
20. Amendment of section 10D. 
21. Substitution of new section for section 18. 
22. Amendment iof seC'tion 19. 
23. Amendment of section 20. 
24. Insertion of new ftection 21A. 
( i ) 
, 

(D) 
CLAUSES 
25. Amendment of section 22. 
26. Amendment of section 24. 
27. Amendment of section 29. 
28. Amendment of section 34A. 
29. Amendment of section 35. 
30. Amendment of section 3SB. 
31. Amendment of section 36AB. 
32. Amendment of section 36AD. 
33. Amendment of section 42. 
34. Amendment of section 45. 
35. Amendment of sections 45A and,45J. 
36. Amendment of section 45S. 
37. Insertion of new Part IIlB. 
38. Amendment of section 46. 
39. Amendment of section 47. 
40. Amendment of section 51. 
41. Amendment of section 52. 
42. Amendment of section 56. 
CHAPTER V 
AMENDMENTS oro THE STATE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1955 
43. Insertion of new section 35A. 
44. Amendment of section 40. 
45 .. Amendment of section 42. 
46. Amendment of section 43. 
47. Amendment of section 49. 
48. Amendment of section 50. 
~ 
CHAPTER VI 
AMENDMENrS '10 THE STATE BANK OF INDIA (SUBSIDIARY BANU) ACT, 195. 
49. Insertion of new section 36A. 
50. Insertion of new section 38A. 
51. Amendment of section 43. 
52. Amendment ·of section 44. 
53. Amendment of section 53. 
54. Amendment of section 62. 
55. Amendment of section 63. 
CHAPTER VII 
AMENDMENTS TO THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE AND CREDIT GUARAlftU 
CORPORATION ACT, ]961 
56. Amendment of section 2. 
57. Amendment of section 4. 
58. Amendment of section 6. 
59. Ame.ndment of section 11. 
60. Amendment of section 13. 
61. Amendment of section lSA. 
62. Amendment of section 18. 
63. Amendment of section 32. 
64. Amendment of section 50. 

(iii) 
CHAPTEtt VIII 
AMENDMENTS TO THE BANKING COMPANIES (ACQUISInON AND 
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) Acr, 1970 
CLAUSES 
6l::', Amendment of section 3. 
66. Amendment of section 9. 
67. Amendment of section 10. 
68. Insertion of new section 16A. 
69. Amendment of section 19. 
CHAPTER IX 
AMENDMENTS TO THE REGIONAL RURAL BANKS ACT, 1976 
70. Amendment of section 30. ' 
CHAPTER X 
AMENDMENTS TO THE BANKING COMPANIES (ACQUISITrON AND 
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1980 
71. Amendment of section 3. 
72. Amendment of section 9. 
73. Amendment of section 10. 
74. Insertion of new section 16A. 
75. Amendment of section 19. 

Bill No. 70 of 1983 
THE BANKING LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1983 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the BClnk.ers' Books Evidence Act, 1891, the .Jlae",8 
BClnk oj India Act, 1934, the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the StClte 
Bank oj India Act. 1955, the State Blink of In4ia (Sub.idia1'Jl Banka) 
• Act, 1959, the Deposit Im-urance and Credit Guarantee Corporatioft 
Act, 1961, the Banking Companies (Acquisition and TTaftBjef' of 
Undertakmgs) Act, 1970, the Regional RUral Banks Act, 1976 and 
the Banking Companies (Acquisition and TranSfer of Undertakings) 
Act, 1980. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: - . 
CHAPTER I 
, 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Banking Laws (Amendment) Act, Short tiUe and 1983. 
. . 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may. by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and di1ferent dates 
may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and any reference 
10 in any provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as 
a reference to the coming into force of that provieion. 
commen-
cement. 

.Amead-
mentof 
Act 18 
of 1891. 
Order of 
court 
to be 
constru-
ed to be 
order. 
made by 
specifted 
officer~ 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
17. 
CHAPTER II 
A.Mi:NDMENTS 'IO 'rm; .BANKERS' BOOKS EVlDENICE Af:r, 1891 
2. In the Batikers' Books Evidence Act, HUH,-
,(a) in section 2,-
(i) 10!' clause (4), the following clause shall be substituted., 5 
namely:-
',(4) "legal proceeding" meaos,-
_(~) any Pl'oCeeding or inquiry m which evidence is 
or may be glVenj 
(ii).Ian arbitrationj and I 10 
\ (iii) any investigation or inquiry under the Code of 
Cnimmal Proceaure, H173, or, under any other law tor 2 of 1974, 
the time bemg in force for thecollectlon of evidence, 
conducted by a pollce officer or by any other person 
(not being a magistrate) authoriSed in this be.bal1 by a 15 
, maglStrate or by any law for the time being in forcej'j 
(ii) in clause (8),'for the words "such certificate beiD& 
dated and subscrIbed by the principal accountant or manager 01 
the bank with his name and officla! tiUe", the followmg shall 
be substituted, namely: - 2(\ 
"and where the copy was Qbtained by a mechanical or 
other process which in itself ensured the accuracy Of 
the copy, a further certificate to that effect, but where 
the boOK from WhICh such copy was prepared has been 
destroyed in the usual course of the bank's b'usiness after 25 
the date on which the. copy had been so prepared, a 
lwther certificate to that eifcct, each such certiticate 
being dated and subscribed by the principal accountant 
or manager 01 the bank with his name and official 
title."; 30 
,( b) after section 7,· the following section shall be inserted, . 
namely:-
'S. In the application of sections 5, 6 and 7 to any investi-
gation or inquiry referred to in sub-clause (iii) of clause (4) of 
section 2, the order of a court or a Judge referred to in the laid 35 
sections shall be construed as referring to an order made by an· 
officer of a rank not lower than the rank of a Superintendent of 
Police as may be specified in this behalf by the appropriate 
Government. 
ExpLanation,-bi this section, "appropriate Government" 40 
means the Government by which the police officer or any other 
person conducting the investigation or inqu.iry is employed'. 
CHAPTER III 
AMENDMENTS TO THE REsEaVE BAm( OF INDIA ACT, 1934 
:J, In section 17 of· the Reserve Bank. of India Act, 1934 (hereafter 2 f 193" 
in this C,hapter referred to as the Reserve Bank Act), in clause (4B), ~ 45 0 .. , 
the prOV1SO, for the words "three crores of rupees", the .words "fifteen ' 
crores. of rupees" shall be substituted. 

3 
4. In section 33 of the Re&erve Bank Act, ill sub-clause (a) of clause Amend-
(i) of sub-section (6), for the word "notified", the word J'approved" shall ment of 
be wbstituted. section 31. 
5. In section 40 of the Reserve Bank Act, in ihe ExplanGtfon. for the Amend-
7 of 194.7. 5 worde and figures "Foreign Exchan'ge' Regulation Act, 1947", the words :~!:f 
46 o~ 1973. find flgures "~'oreigri Exchange Regulation Act, 1973" shall be substituted. 40. 
26 of 1982. 
'40 of 1980. 
40 of 1980. 
6. In section 42 of the Reserve Bank Act,-
(a) in the Explanation 'to sub-section (1),-
(i) in clause (a), for the words "of a week", the words "of a 
10 fortnight" shall be substituted: . 
:olO 
~5 
30 
35 
(li) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
• (b) "fortnight" shall mean the period from Saturday to 
the second following Friday, both days inclusive;'; 
(iii) in Clause (e) ,-
(A) in sub-clause (iii), after the words ''State Govern-
ment", the words and flgures "or from the National Co-
operative Development Corporation established under the 
Nationai' Co-operative Development Corporation Act, 1962" 
shall be inserted; 
(B) after sub-clause (iv) , the following sub-clause shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"(t,') in the case of a ReJtional Rur~l Bank. also any • 
loan taken by such bank from Its Sponsor Bank;"; 
(it,) in clause (d) '. after sub-clause (m), the following sub-
clause shall he inserted, namely:-
II (iiia) a cnrrespondin/! new bank constituted bv !':ection 
3 of the Bankin/! Companies (Acquisition and Transfer ,.,f 
Undertakings) Act. 1980;"; 
tv) in clause (e). after sub-clause (iii), the followin.~ sub-
clause shall be in~ertf.'cf, namely:-
CI (iiia) a corresponding new bank constituted bv sectfon 3 
of the Banki.~ Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Unctertakir/gs), Act, 1980;~': 
(b) to sub-section (7,4'), the following proviso shall be added, 
namely:- : '. 
"Provided that thp. Bank may. by a separate notffication in 
the Gazette of India. specify different dates in respect of a bank 
subseauently included in the Second Schedule."; 
Amend-
ment ot 
section 
42. I; 
\ 

4 
(c) after sub:'section (lB). the following sub-section shall be 
inserted,namely: -'-
"(lC) The Bank may, for the purposes of this section, 
sPf!cify from time to time with reference to any transaction or 
class of transactions that such transaction or transactions shall 5 
be regarded as liability in India of a scheduled bank, and jf any 
question arises as to whether any transaction or elas!; of trans-
actions shall be regarded, for the purposes of this section, as 
liability in India of a scheduled bank. the decision of the B:mk 
thereon shall be final"; 10 
(d) in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) for the words "at t.he close of husiness on each Friday, 
and every such return shall be sent not later than five days 
after the date to which it relates". the words "at the close of 
business on each alternate Friday, and every ~ch return shall 15 
be sent not later than sev,en days after the date to which it 
relates" ~hall be substituted; 
'~'-(ii) in the second proviso, after the words "Provided 
further that where". the' words "such alternate" shall be inserted; 
(iii) for the third proviso, the following proviso shall be 20 
substituted. namely:-
"Provided also th~t where the Bank is satisfied that 
the fumishinrt of a fortnightly return under thi'l sub-section 
is imp1'8ctit':tblp. in the case of any sched'llled bank by reason 
of the geoa-ranhical position of the bank and its branches. the 25 
Bank may allow such bank-
(i) to furnish a nrovisional return for the fortnillht 
within the .eriod aforesaid to be followed by a Anal 
return not later than twenty days after the date to which 
it relates, or 3 , 
(ii) to furnish in lieu of a fortni~htlv return a month-
ly return to be sent not later than tWf'ntv days after the 
end of the month to which it relates givin~ the detans 
specified in this ~ub-section in r(>\l;pect of such bank at the -
close of business for the month.": 
(e) after sub-section (2), the following SUb-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
35 
" (2A) Where the last Friday of a month is not an alternate 
Friday for the purpose of sub-section (2), every scheduled bank 
shall send to the Bank, a special return giving the details specified 40 
in sub-section (2) as at the close of business on such last Priday 
or where such last Friday is a pUblic holiday under the Nego-
tiable Instruments Act, 1881 as at the close of business on the 
preceding working day and such return ' shall be sent not later 
than seven days after the date to which it relates."; 45 
(f) in sub-sections (3) and (3A), for the word "week" wherever 
It occurs,' the word "fortnight" shall be substituted. 

'7. In section 43 of the Reserve Bank, Act, for the wor4 "week", the 
word "fortnight" shall be substituted. 
R. In section 45H of the Reserve Bank Act, for the words and figures 
"a banking institution'notified 'Under section 51 of that Act", the words, 
5 brackets, letters and figures "a corresppnding new bank as defined in 
clause (da) of section 5 of that Act or a subsidiary bank as defined in 
38 of 1959. the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959" shall be 
substituted. 
10 
15 
lOot 1949. 20 
18 of 1964. 
9. In sec~ion 451 of the Reserve Bank Act,-
(i) for clause (bb), the following clause shall be substituted, 
. ,namely:-
'(bb) "deposit" incl'Udes and shall be deemed always to have 
included any receipt of money by way of deposit or loan or in 
any other form, but does not include,-
(i) amounts raised by way of share capital; 
(ii) amounts contrib~ted as capital by partners of,· a 
firm; 
(iii) amounts received from a 'scheduled bank or a co-
operative bank or any other banking company as defined in 
clause (e) of section 5 of the Banking Regulati9n Act, 1949; 
(iv) any amount received from,-
(a) the Development Bank, 
(b) a State Financial Corporation, 
(c) any financial inStitution specified in or under 
section 6A of the Industrial Development Bank of India 
Act, 1964, or 
(d) any other institution that may be specified by 
the Bank in this behalf; 
(v) amount.s receive<l in the ordinary course of business, 
by way of- I 
(a) security deposit, 
(b) dealership deposit, 
(c) earnest money, or 
'(d) advance against orders for goods, properties or 
services; ...... . 
Amenil-
mentof 
.ectlon 
O. 
Amend-
mentof 
.ection 
45H. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
451 • 

Inser-
tion of 
new 
Chapter 
after 
Chapter 
III B. 
Interpre-
tation. 
Dt/posits 
not to 
be ac-
cepted in 
certain 
cases. 
• (vi) any amount received from an individual or a flrm 
or an association of indivict..aals not being a body corporate, 
registered under any enactment relating to money lending 
which is for the time being in force in any State; and 
. (vii) any aDlouIit received by way of subscriptions In 5 
respect of a chit. 
Explanation 1.--"Chit" has the meaning assigned to it in 
cla~e (b) of section 2 ot the Chit Funds Act. 1982. 40 of 1982. 
Explanation II.-Any credit give~ by a saUer to a 
buyer on the sale of any property (whether movable or 10 
immovable) shall not be deemed to be deposit for the pur-
poses of thh; clause;'; 
(ii) in. clause (d), the words h, of which the capital subscribed. 
by its partners exceeds one lakh of rupees" shall be omitted; 
(iii) in clause (e), for the words ", co-operative society or ftrm", 15 
the words "or co-operative society" shall be substituted. 
10. After Cbapter IlIB of the Reserve Bank Act, the followin, 
Chapter shall be inserted, namely:-
• 
"CHAPTER nlc 
PRoHIBITION OF ACCEPTANCE OF DEPOSn'B BY UNINCOBPOIIATID IIODJIB SIC) 
45R. The words and expressioll8 used in this Chapter and delnecl 
in Chapter IIIB shall have the JJ)eailings respectively assigned to 
them therein . 
. . 
451S. (1) No person, being an individual or a firm or an unincorpo-
rated associa~on~f individuals shall, at.~y time, have depo8lta from 15 
more tban the number of depositors speclfted against each, in the 
table below:-
(i) Individual 
(ii) Firm 
(iii) Unincorporated 
association of 
individuals 
TABLE. 
Not more than ten d~positora. 
. . 
Not more than ten depoaltors per So 
partQer. ~ not more than ODe 
hundred depositors in all. 
> f. 
Not more than ten depoeltora per 
indiVidual and not more than one 
hundred depositors in all 
35 

2 of 1974. 
, 
(2) Where at the commencement of section 10 of the Banking 
Laws (Amendment) Act, 1983, the deposits held by any such person 
are Dot in accordance with sub-section (1). he shall. before the expiry 
of a' 'period' of two years from the date of such commencement, repay 
5 such of the deposfts:as are necessary for bringing the number of 
depositors within the relative limits specified in that sub-section . 
. : # ~ . . 
Explanaticn.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) where a deposit has been made by two or more persons, 
it shall be deemed to have been made by as many depositors as 
10 there are n'Umber of person~ making such deposit; " 
(b) a person in whose favour a credit balance is outstand-
ing for a period not ex<:ee<iing six months in any account relating 
to mutual dealings in the ordinary course of trade or business 
shaH not, on account of such balance alone. be deemed to be 
15 a depositor. 
20 
45T. (1) Any court having jurisdiction to issue a search warrant 
llJlder the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 may, on an application 
by an oflicer of the Bank or of the State Government authorised in 
this behalf stating his belief that certain documents relating to 
'acceptance of deposits in contravention of the provisions of section 
45S are secreted in any place within the local limits of the jurisdic-
ti9,n of sllch court, issue a warrant to search for such documents. 
2 of 197 •. 115 
(2) A warrant issued under sub-section (1) shall be executed 
,in the same manner and shall have the same effect as a search 
warrant issued under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.". 
2 of 197 •• 
11. In section 58B of the Reserve Bank Act, after sub-section (5), the 
folloWing sub-sections shall ,be inserted, namely:-
"(5A) If any person contravenes any provision of section 455, 
he sball be p'unishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years, or With fine which may extend to twice the 
amount of deposit received by such person in contravention of that 
sectJon, or two thousand rupees, whichever is more, or with both: 
'. , .. ' .. \ 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons 
to the contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court. the 
'imprisonment shan not be less than' one ~ear and the fine shall not 
beie:;s than one thousand rupees. 
(,jB) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 29 'of the 
Cooe of "Criminal PrOcedure. 1973, it shall be lawful for a Metro-
pOlitan Magistrate 'or a Judicill Magistrate of the first class to impose 
a "lienumee"ot f\ne in excess oltlie limit apccifted in t1nlt section on 
any person convicted under sub-section (SA) .". 
12. In section 58E of the Reserve Bank Act, to sUb-section (1), the 
f~llowing pr~iso'l;hall be.a~d~. :~ameIY:-
""Provided that in respect of ally offence punishable under sub-
. section (5A) of section 58B, 8 complaint in writing may also be made 
by an ofticer of"the State "Government, generally or specially authoris-
ed in writing in this behalf by 't~at Gov~rnment.". 
. Power 
to issue 
search 
warrants. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
58B. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
SSE. 

Amend-
mento! 
section 
e. 
Amend-
mento! 
seet10D 
'I. 
8 
CHAPTER.IV 
AMENDMENTS TO THE BANKING REGULATION ACT, 1&49 
13. In section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (hereafter in this 10 of 1049. 
Chapter referred to as . the Banking Regulation Act),-
(II) for clause (II), the following clause shall be substituted,' 5 
namely:-
, • 
'(a) "approved securities" means-
(i) securities in which a trustee may invest money 
under clause (a), clause (b), clause (bb) , clause (c) or 
clause (d) of section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882; 10 20fl882. 
(ii) such of the securities authorised by the Central 
Government under clause· (f) of section 20 of the Indian 
Trusts Act, 1882, as may be prescribed;'; 20fl882. 
(b) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:- 15 
, (da) "corresponding new bank" means a corresponding new 
bank constituted under ~ection 3 of the Banking Companies' 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, or under 5 of 1970. 
section 3 of the Banking Companie~ (Acquisition and.Transfer 
of Undertakings) Act, 1980;'; 20 40 of 1980 . 
. ,,..,1 
(c) after clause <1J), the following clauses shall be 'serted, 
namely:- I:. 
'(JJa) "Development Bank" Il)eans the Industrial &vetop-
ment Bank of India established under section 3 of the Industrial 
Development Bank of India Act, 1964; 25 18 of 1984. 
(ffb) "Exim Bank" means the Export~Import Bank of India 
established under section 3 of the Export-Import Bank of· India 
Act, 1981;'; . 
(d) for clause (1), the following clause. shall . be substituted, 
namely:-
'(l) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India 
constituted under section 3 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 
1934;'; 
30 
I (e) clause (nb) and clause (nc) shall be re-lettered as clause 
(nd) and clause (ne), respectively, al'ld before clause (nd) as 80 35 
re-Iettered, the following clauses shall be inserted, name11:-
'(nb) "Sponsor Bank" has ihe meaning assigned to Iltn the 
Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976; 
(nc) "State Bank of India" means the State· Bank of India 
28 of 1981. 
2 of 1934. 
21 at 1978. 
cons~itute,d under section 3 of t~e State Bank of ,India. Act, 1955;'. 40 23 of 19BB. 
14. In secti~~ 7 of the Banking Regulation Ac~, in, sub-section (1), .. 
after the words shall use as part of i~ name", the wor.d~ "or in connection 
with its business" shall be inserted .. 

5 
• 
15. In section 8 of the Banking Regulation Act, for the proviso, the 
following proviso shall be substituted, namely:-
"Provided that this section shall not apply to any such business 
~s is specified in pursuance of clause (0) of sub-section (1) of section 
6.". 
Amend .. 
mentQf 
section 
8. 
J6. In section lOA of the Banking Regulation Act, after sub-section Amend-
(2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: _ ment of 
section 
"(2A) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in lOA. 
t of 19S8. the Companies Act, 1956, or in any other law for the time being in 
10 force,-
(i) no director of a banking company, other than its chair-
>' man or w~ole-time director, by whatever name called, shall hold 
office continuously for a period exceeding eight years; 
(ii) a chairman or other whole-time director of a banking 
15 company who has been removed from office as such ~hairman, 
or whole-ti.'1le director, as the case may be, under the proVisions 
or this Act shall also cease to be a director of the banking com-
pany and shall also not be eligible to be appointed as a director 
of such banking company, whether by election or co-option or 
lIO otherwise, for a period of four years from the date of his 
ceasing to be the chairman or whole-time director, as the case 
may be.". 
17. In section lOB of the Banki~g Regulation Act,- Amend-
mentol 
25 
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "shall have a chairman of section 
its Board of directors", the words "shall have one of its directors as lOB. 
chairman of its Board of directors" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (5), the words "but shall continue in office 
until his successor assumes office" shall be omitted; 
(c) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be 
30 inserted, namely:-
"(5A) A chalrman of the Board of directors whose term of 
office has come to an end, either by reason of his resignation or 
by reason of expiry of the period of his office, shall, subject to the 
approval of the Reserve Bank, continue in office until his succes-
35 sor assumes office.". 
18. After section lOB of the Banking Regulation Act, the follOWing 
.section shall be inserted, namely:-
Inser-
tion of 
new sec-
tion 
lOBB. 
"lOBB. (1) Where the office of the chainnan of a banking com- Power of 
pany is vacant, the Reserve Bank may, if it is of opinion that the Rcst'rve 
Bank to continuation of such vacancy is likely to adversely aft'ect the appoint 

chairman 
of a 
bankin, 
company. 
Substi-
tution of 
new sec-
tion for 
section 
lOCo 
Chair-
man and 
certain 
directors 
not to 
be re-
quired to 
hold 
qualifica-
tion 
shares. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
10n. 
10 
interests of the banking company, appoint a person, eUgi1;»le ,UDder 
sub-section (4) of section lOB to be. so appointed, to be tbe c:balnnan 
of the banking company and where the person so appointed Is not a 
director of such banking ~ompany, he shall, so long as be bolds the 
office of the chairman, be deemed to be a director of the banking 5 . company. 
(2) The chairman so appointed by the Reserve Bank m.ul be in 
the whole-time elQ.ployment of the banking company and shall bold 
office for such period not exceeding three years, as the Reserve 
Bank may specify, but shall, subject to other provitdons of this Act, 10 
be eligible for reappointment. 
(3) The chairman s. appointed by the Reserve Bank shall 
draw from the banking company S'Uch pay and allowances as the 
. Reserve Bank may determine and may be removed from office only 
by the Reserve Bank. . 
(4) Save as otherwise provide~ in this section, the provisions 
of section lOB shall, as far as may be, apply to the ch61rman appointed 
by the Reserve Bank under sub-section "(1) as they apply to a 
chairman appointed by the banking company.". 
19. For section toe of the Banking Regulation Act, the following 20 
section shall be substituted, namely:-
"loe. A chairman of a banking company, (by whomsoever 
appointed) and, a director of· a banking company (appointed by the 
Reserve Bank under section lOA) shall not be required to bold 
qualification shares in the banking company.". 
20. In section IOn of the Banking Regulation Ad, after the words, 
figures and letters "in pursuance' of section lOA or section lOB" the words. 
figures and letters "or section lOBB" shall be inserted. 

260t 1881. 
5 
10 
Ii 
21. For section 18 of the Banking Regulation Act, the following see- Substt-
tion shall be substituted, namely:- tution ot 
new sec-
tion tor 
section 
18. 
'18. (1) Every banking company, not being a scheduled bank, Cash re-
shall maintain in India by way of cash reserve with itself or by way serve. 
of balance in a current account with the Reserve Bank, or by way 
of net balance· in current accounts or in one or more of the aforesaid 
ways,. a sum equivalent to at least three per cent. of the total of its 
demand and time liabilities in India as on the last Friday of the 
second preceding fortnight and shall submit to the Reserve Bank 
before the twentieth day of every month a return showing the amount 
s9 held on alternate Fridays during a month with particulars of its 
demand and time liabilities in India on such Fridays or if any such· 
Friday is a public holiday under the Negotiable Instnunents Act, 
1881, at the close of business on the preceding working day. 
15 Explanation.-In this section, and in section 24,-
~o 
(a) "liabilities in ¥1dia" shall not include-
(i) the paid-up capital or the reserves or any credit 
balance in the profit and loss account of the banking 
company; 
(ii) any advance taken from the Reserve Bank or from 
the Development Bank or from the Exim Bank or from the 
National Bank by the banking company; 
(iii) in the case of a Regional Rural Bank, also any loan 
taken by such bank from its Sponsor Bank; 
(b) "fortnight" shall mean the period from Saturday to the 
second following Friday, both days inclusive; 
(c) "net balance in current acCO'Ullts" shall, in relation to 
a banking company, mean the excess, if any, of the aggregate 
of the credit balances in current account maintained by that 
banking company with the State Bank of India or a subsidiary 
bank or a corresponding new bank 'over the aggregate of the 
credit balances in current account held by the said banks with 
such banking company; 
(d) for the purposes of computation of liabilities, the aggre-
gate of the liabilities of a banking company to the State Bank 
of India, a subsidiary bank, a correspondin~ new bank, a regional 
rural bank, another banking company, a co-operative bank or 
any other financial institution notified by the Central Govern-
ment in this behalf, shall be reduced by the aggregate of the 
liabilities of all such banks and institutions to the banking com-
pany; 
(e) the expression "co-operative bank" shall have the mean-
ing assigned to it in clause (cci) of section 56. 

Amend-
mentof 
section 
19.-
Amend-
mentof 
section 
20. 
Inser-
tioft of 
newlec-
tion 21A. 
Rates 
of inte-
rest chari· 
ed by 
b;nking 
com-
panies 
notte» 
be 8Ub-
,ed to 
8Crutin7 
i»7courtL 
12 
(2) The Reserve Bank may, for the purposes of this section and 
section 24, specify from time to time, with reference to any trans-
action or claoss of transactions, that such transaction or transactions 
shall be regarded as liability in India of a banking company and, if 
any question arises as to whether any transaction or class of trans- 5 
action!:; shall ~ regarded for the purposes of this section and section 
24 as liability in India of a banking company, the decision of the 
Reserve Bank thereon shall be final.'. 
22. In section 19 of the Banking Regulation Act, for sub-section (1), 
the following sub-section shall be S'Ilbstituted, namely: - 10 .. 
.. (1) A banking company shall not form any subsidiary com-
pany except a subsidiary company formed for one or more of the 
following purposes, namely:-
(a) the undertaking of any business which, under ·c1.auses 
(4) to (0) of sub-section (1) of section 6, is permissible for a 1 5 
banking company to undertake, or -
(b) with the previous permission in writing of the Reserve 
Bank, the carrying on of the business of banking exclusively 
outside India, or .. 
(c) the undertaking of such other business, which the 20 
Reserve Bank may, with the prior approval of the Central 
Government, consider to be conducive to the spread of banking 
in India or to be otherwise useful or necessary in the public 
interest. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of section 8, a banking company 2 5 
shall not be deemed, by reason of its forming or having a subsidiary 
company, to be engaged indirectly in the bushiess carried on by such • , 
subsidiary company.". 
23. In section 20 of the Banking Regulation Act, in sub-eection (1). 
in clause (b), in mtb-c1ause (iii) J after the words "of which" the words 30 - , 
", or the subsidiary or the holding company of which" shall be inserted. 
24. After section 21 of the Banking Regulation Act, the following'-
section shall be inserted, namely:-
"21A. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Usurious Loans 
Act, 1918, or any other law relating to indebtedness in force in any 35 10otl9I8. 
State, a transaction between a banking company and its debtor 
shall not be reopened by any Caurt on the ground that the rate of 
interest charged by the banking company in respect of such transac-
tion is excessive.". 

13 
Z5. In section 22 of the Banking Regulation Act,-
(i) in sub-section (3),-
(a) in the opening portion, the words "all or any of" shall 
be omitted; 
5 . (b) for clause (c) , the following clauses shall be substituted, 
10 
20 
35 
• 
namely:-
.. (e) that the general character of the proposed manage-
ment of the company will not b~ prejudicial to the public 
interest or the interest of its depositors; 
(d) that the company. has adequate capital structure and 
earning prospects; 
(e) that the public interest will be served by the grant 
of a licence to the cOPlpany to carry on banking business in 
India; 
<f) that having regard to the banking facilities available 
in the proposed principal area of operations of the com-
pany, the potential sC2pe for expansion of banks already in 
existence in the area and other relevant Cactors the grant 
of the licence would not be prejudicial to the operation and 
consolidation of the banking system consistent with 
monetary stability and economic growth; 
(g) any other condition. the fulfilment of which WOUld, 
in the opinion of the Reserve Bank, be necessary to ensure 
that the carrying on of banking business in India by the 
company will not be prejudiCial to the public interest . or 
the interests of the depositors."; 
(ii) after sub-section (,1), the following SUb-section shall be 
insetted, name~:-
"(3A) Before granting any licence under this sec'tion to a 
company incorporated outside India; the Reserve Bank may re-
quire to be satisfied by an'inspection of the books of the company 
or otherwise that the conditions specified in sub-section (3) are 
fulfilled and that the carrying on of banking business by such 
company in IndiD will be in the public interest and that the 
Government or law of the country irt which it is incorporated 
does not discriminate in any way against banking companies re-
gistered in India and that the company complies with all the 
provisions of this Act applicable to banking companies incorpora-
ted outside lnflin.". 
(Hi) in sub-section (4). in clause (iii), after the word. brackets 
and figure "sub-section (3)", the words, bra('k(!t~,c'ngnrr and letter 
flp~d sqb-section '(3A)" shAlJ be $nserted. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
22. 

Amend-
lIlent of 
section 
14. 
14 
26. In section 24 of the Banking Regulation Act,-
(4) in sub-section (1) , for the words "time and demand liabfll-
ties", the words "demand and time liabilities" shall be substitutedj 
(b) in sub-section (ZA) ,-
(i) in clause (a). for the words and figures "shall maintain 5 
in India in cash, gold or unencumbered approved securities, 
valued at a price not exceeding the current market price, an 
amount which shall not at the close of business on any day be 
less than 25 per cent. of the total of its demand and time 
liabilities in India", the following shall be substituted, namely:- 10 
"shall maintain in India,-
(A) in cash, or 
,. 
(B) in gold valued at a price not exceeding the cur-
rent market price or in unencumbered approved securi-
ties valued at a price determined in accordance with such '5 
one or more of, or combination of, the following me-
thods of valuation, namely, vahlation with reference to 
cost price, market price, book value, as may be specified 
by the Reserve Bank from time to time, 
an amount which shall not, at the close of business on any ~o 
day, be less than twenty-five per cent. or such other per-
centage not exceeding forty per cent. as the Reserve Bank 
may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify, of the total of its demand and time liabilities in Indiil, 
as on the last Friday of the second preceding fortnight"; 
(ii) for clause (b). the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
... 
.. (b) in computing the amount for the purposes of clause 
(4),-
(i) the deposit required under sUb-section (2) of 30 
section 11 to be m~ with the Reserve Bank by a 
banking company incorporated outside India' . , 
(ii) any cash or balances maintained in Indln by a 
banking company other than a Rchedu}t'd bank with 
itself or with the Re3erve Bank or by way of net balnl1C'r! ~ 
, .. in current account in exce~9 of the aggregate of the cash 3:) 
or balance, or net balance rp.quil'f'd to be maintained lPl_ sectIon 18i . . 

20f 1934. 
5 
10 
21 of 1976. 
20 
35 
'. " . 
. (iii) any balances maintained by a schechlled bank 
with the Reserve Bank in excess of the balance required 
to be U18intaincd by it Wlder scction 42. of the Reserve 
Bank of lndia Act, 1934; 
.(iv) the net balance in current accounts maintained 
in India by a scheduled bank; 
(v) any balances maintained by a Regional Rural 
Bank in call or fixed deposit with its Sponsor Bank, 
sbll be deemed to be cash maintained in India."; 
! (ioii) the following Explanation shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:- ..... _ ...................... , ... .... 
"Explanat-ion.-For the purpose of clause .(0.) of this 
sub-section, the mark.et p.t'ice of an approved secl'fity shall 
be the pnce as on the ctate of the issue of the notitication 
or as 011 any earlier or later date as may be notified from 
time to time by the Reserve Bank in respect of any class or 
classes of securities."; 
(c) in sub-section (2B) J the words and figures "established under 
section 3"of the .l:tegional Rural Hanks Act, 1970" shall be omitted; 
.(d) for sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be subs-
tituted, namely:-
'(3) For the purpose of ensuring compliance with the pro-
visions ot this sectIon, every bank.1ng company shall, not later 
than twenty aays atter the end of the montn to wbich it relat.e.1:;, 
funush toLhe ..H.eserve Bank m the prescribed form and manner 
a monthly return showing particulaN of its assets maintained. in 
accordance with this sec~oIl, and its demand and time liabilities 
in .l:ndia at tbe close of business on each alternate .b'riday during 
the month, or if any sucb Friday IS a public holiday, at the close 
of business .on the preceding working day: 
Provided that every Regional Rural Bank shall also furnish 
a copy of the said return to the National Bank. 
.(4) (a) If on any alternate ]'riday or, if such Friday is a 
pubhc holiday, on the preceding working day, the amount 
maintained by a banking company' at the close of business on 
that day falls b,low the minimum prescribed by or under 
clause (a) of sub-section (2A), such banking company shall be 
liable to pay to the Reserve Bank in respect of that day's de-
fault, penal interest for that day at the rate· of three per cent. 
per annum above the bank rate on the amount by which the 
amount actually maintained falls short of the prescribed minimum 
on that day; and 

16 
(b) if the default occurs again 011 the next succeeding al-
ternate· Friday, or, if such Friday is a pubUc holiday, on the 
preceding working day, and continues on succeeding alternate 
Fridays or preceding working, days, as the case may be, the rate 
of penal interest shall be increased to a rate of five pr cent. per 5 
annum above the bank rate on each such shortfall in respect of 
that alternate Friday and each succeeding alternate Friday or 
preceding working day, if such Friday is a pubUc holiday, on 
which the default continues. 
(5) (a) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section JO 
(3), the Reserve Bank may require a banking company to fur-
nish to it a return in the form and manner specified by it show-
ing particulars of its assets maintained in accordance with this 
section and its demand ~d time liabilities. in India, as at the 
clm:.e of business on each day of a month; and 15 
(b) without prejudice to the provisions of b"Ub-secfion (4), 
on the failure of a banking company to maintain as on any day, 
the amount so required to be· maintained by or under clause (4) 
of sub-section (2A) the Reserve Bank may. in respect of such 
default, requir~ the banking company to pay penal interest for 110 
that day as provided in clause (a.) of sub-section (4) and if the 
default continues on the next s'Ucceeding working day. the penal 
interest may be increased as provided in clause (b) of sub-section 
(4) for the concerned days. 
(6) (~) The penalty payable under sub-section (4) and sub- 25 
section (5) shall be paid within a period of fourteen days from 
the date on which a notice issued by the Reserve Bank demand-
ing payment of the same is served on the banking company 
and in the event of failure of the banking company to pay the 
s~me within such period, the penalty may be levied by a direc- 30 
bon of the principal civil court having jurisdiction in the area 
where .an ~ftice 'bf the defaulting banking company is situated, 
such directIon to be made only upon an application made by the 
Reserve Banlt in this behalf to the court j and 
(~) when the cour~ makes a direction under clause (4) it 
~all ISsue a certificate specifying the sum payable by the~. 35 
mg company and every such certificate shall be enforceable in 
the same manner as if it were a decree made by the court i 
~t na 
(7) When under the provisions of clause (b) f b t' 
(4) penal interest at the increased rate of fiv 0 su -sec IOn 40 
the bank t h b e per cent. above ra e as ecome payable by a banki 
thereafter the amount required t b .. ng company, if 
sue d' It 0 e mamtamed on the next 
th~ ~e~~gp:e::;i~~ ~~~~~gord~y~uj~~ ~~d?eliS a r:blic h.()!i~y, 
mIrumum, every director ma ow e prescnbed 
company wh . k .' nager or secretary of the banking 45 
shall be Puni~h~~len~;~g~~e a~~.WilfUllY a party to the default, 
rupees and with ~. furth fi l~h may extend to five hundred 
. er ne which may extend to ftv hund d 
rupees for each subsequent alternate Frida th e re 
working day, as the case may be, on which t:e ::fau~t ~=:. 5° 

26 of 1881. 
1 of 1956. 
5 
· 17 
(8) Notwithstanding anything·. contained in this section, if 
tbe Reserve Bank is satisfied, un an application ill writing by the 
defaulting banking company. that the banking company had 
sufficlent cause for its failure to comply with the provisions of 
clause (a) of sub-section (2A) , the Reserve Bank may not 
demand the payment of the penal interest. 
'ExpZanation.-In this section, the expression "public holiday" 
m~ans a day which is a public holiday under the Negotiable 
Instruments Act, 1881.'. 
10 27. In sectiCJn 29 of the Banking Regulation Act, after sub-section Amend-
mentaf 
section 29. 
20 
35 
(3), the following sub-osection shall be inserted, namely:-
"(3A) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contaihed in 
sub-~tion (3) of section 210 of the Companies Act, 1956, the period 
to which the profit and loss account relates shall, in the case of a 
banking company, be the period ending with the last working day 
of the Y'Car immediately preceding the year in which th...: annual 
general meeting is held.". 
28. In section 34A of the Banking Regulation Act, for sub~section (3), 
the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
. ' (3, For the purposes of this section "banking company" in-
cludes the Reserve Bank, the Development BfUlk, the Exim Bank, 
the National Bank, the State Bank of India, a corresponding new 
bank, a regional rural bank and a subsidiary bank.'. 
29. In section 35 of the Banking Regulation Act,-
Amend-
mental 
section 
34A . 
Amend-
mpntof 
(i) after sub-section (1), the following sub~section shall be section 35. 
inserted and shall be creemed to have always been so inserted, 
namely:-
"(lA) (a) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary con:' 
tained. in any law for the time being in force and without pre-
judice to the provisiOns of sub~section (1), the Reserve Bank, 
at any time, may also cause a scrutiny to be made by anyone 
or more of its officers, of the affairs of allY banking company and 
its books and accounts; and 
(b) a copy of the report "of the scrutiny shall be furnished 
to the banking company if the banking company makes a re-
quest for the same or if any adverse action is contemplated 
against the banking company on the basi:; of the scrutiny,"; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), after the words, brackets and figure "any 
officer making an inspection under sub-section (1) ", the words, 
brackets, figure and letter "or a scrutiny under S'Ub-section (lA) ". 
shall be inserted; 
(iii) ill sub-section (3), after the words, brackets and figure 
"inspection' under sub~section (1) ", the words, brackets, figure and 
letter "or a scrutiny under sub "'Section (IA)" shall be inserted; 
(iv) in sub-~ction (4), after the words "on any inspection", 
the words "or scrutiny" shall be inserted. 

Amend-
mentol 
section 
3SB. 
Amend-
mentO'f 
section 
36AB. 
Amend-
mentol 
section 
36AD. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 42. 
Amend-
mentor 
aection45. 
t. 
30. In section 35B of the Banking ReI:,fUlation Act.-
(i) in sub~scc1.ioll (1), in clause (a), alter tho wurds "ally pro-
vision relating to", the words "the maXimum permissible numocr of 
directors or" shall be inserted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2). for the words and figures "provisions of 5 
sections 310", the words and figures "provisions of sedions 269, 310" 
shall be substituted; 
(iii) after sub-section (2), the following sUb-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
.. (2A) Nothing contained in section 198 of the Companies 10 
Act, 1956 shall apply to a banking company and the provisions of 
sub-section (1) of section 309 and of section 387 of that Act 
shall, insofar as they are applicable to a banking company, have 
effect as if no reference had been made in the said }frovisions to 
section 198 of that Act.". 
31. In section 36AB of the Banking Regulation Act, in sub-sectioD 
(1), the proviso shall be omitted. 
32. In section 36AD of the Banking Regulation Act, for sUb-section 
.(3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
15 
• (3) For the purposes of this section "banking company" includes !lO 
the Reserve Bank, the Development Bank, the Exim Bank, the 
National Bank, the State Bank of India, a corresponding new bank, 
a regional rural bank and a subsidiary bank.'. 
33. In section 42 of the Banking Regulation Act,-
(i) for the words and figures "sections 460, 464 and 465", the 25 
word and f~gures "section 460" shall be substituted; and 
(ii) the words "or with the appointment of a committee of 
inspection" shall be omitted. 
34. In section 45 of the Banking Regulation Act,-
,(a) in sub-section (5). in clause (i),-
(i) in the first proviso, for the words "as are applicable", in 
the two places ·where they occm', the words "as are, at the time 
of such payment or grant, applicable" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in the second proviso, for the words "the doubt or 
diiIerence shall be referred", the words "the doubt or difference 
shall be referred, before the expiry of a period of three years 35 
from the date of the payment or grant mentioned in that clause," 
shall be substit'Uted; 
(b) in sub-section (8), the following shall be inserted at the 
end, namely:-
"including the trustees or other persons managing, or connect-
ed lD any other manner with, any provident fund or other fund 
maintained by any of those companies or the transferee bank'" 
I 
1 of 1956. 

5 of 1898. 
2 of 1974. 
".. •... 
19 
(c) in sub-section (9), for the words "On and from such date 
as tnay be specified by the Central Government in this behalf", the 
words "On and from the date of the corning into operation of, or as 
the case mily be, the date specified in this behalf in, the scheme" 
5 shall be substituted; 
(d) in sub-section (15), for the words and figures "any other 
banking institution notified by the Central Government under Sec-
tion 51", the words "a subsidiary bank, or a corresponding new 
bank" shall be substituted; 
10 (t') the following E:t-p7anation shall be insl'rted at the end, 
namely:-
t<Explanation.--References in this section to the terms and 
conditions of service as applicable to an employee shall not be 
con.·;trued 3S extending to the rank and status of sllch employee.". 
IS 35. In sections 45A and 45J of the Banking Regulation Act, for the 
words and figures "Code of Criminal Procedure. 1898", wherever they 
occur, the words and figures "Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973" shall be 
substituted and in sub-section (5) of the said section 45J, the \'1rords 
"and all such trials shall be without the aid of a jury" shall be omitted. 
20 36. In section 455 of the Banking Regulation Act, for the words "Chief 
Presidency Magistrate or the District Magistrate", wherever they occur, 
the words "Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the Chief Judicial Magis-
trate" shall be substituted. 
Amend-
ment of 
sections 
45Aand 
45J. 
Amend-
ment ot 
section 
458. 
37. After section 450X of the Banking Regulation Act, the following Insertion 
25 Part shall be inserted, namely: - of new 
PartlIIB. 
35 
"PART um 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO CERTAIN OPERATIONS OF BANKING COlVIPANlES 
45Y. The Central Government may, after consultation with the 
Reserve Bank and by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
specifying the periods for which-
(a) a banking company shall preserve its books, acc<?unts 
and other documents; and 
Power of 
Central 
Govern-
mentto 
make 
rules 
for the 
(b) a banking company shall preserve and keep with itself ~~~;va-
ditrorent instruments paid by it. records. 
4~·Z. (1) Where a banking company is required by its customer 
to return to him n pnidinstrument before the expiry of the period 
specified by rules mnde under section 45Y, the· banking company 
shnll not return thl.' instrum('nt ("x('cpt after making and keeping in 
its possession a true copy of all relevant p~n·ts of such instrument, 
such copy being mac'le hy n mc>eh:micnl or ot'!1cr process which in 
. itself en':lures the arcurncy of the copy. 
(2) Th~ banking eompnny f,hall he entitled to recovC'r from the 
customer the cost ot making such copies of the im:trnmf'nt. 
Explanation.-In this section, "cl1!;tomer" includes a GovE'rn-
Return 
of paid 
instru-
ment to 
.customer&. 
45 ment department and ~ corporation incorporflted by Ot' '(.lnder any 

!fomlna-
tion for 
payment 
of de po-
sitors' 
money. 
Notice 
of 
claim;; of 
other 
persons 
regarding 
deposits 
not receiv-
able. 
Nomina-
tionfor 
return 
of arti-
cles kept 
in safe 
custody 
with 
banking 
company. 
45ZA. (1) Where a deposit is held by a banking company to the 
credit of one or more person's, the depositor or, as the case may be, 
all the depositors together, may nominate, in the prescribed manner, 
one person to whom in the event of the death of the sole depositor 
or the death of all the depositors, the amount of deposit may be 5 
returned by the bunking company. 
(2) Notwithst~nding anything contained in any other l~w for the 
time bf;!ing in force or in any disposition, whether testamentary or 
otherwise, in respect of such deposit, where a nomination made in 
the prescribed manner purpor1s to confer on any person the right 10 
to receive the amount of deposit from the banking company. the 
nominee shaH, on the death of the sale depositor or, as the case. may 
be, on the death of all the depositors, become entitled to all the 
rights of the sole depositor or, as the case may be, of the depositors. 
in relation to such deposit to the exclusion of all other persons, I~ 
unless the nomination is varied or cancelled in the prescribed 
manner. 
(3) Where the nominee is a minor, it shall be lawful for the 
depositor makIng the nomin-ation to appoint in the prescribed manner 
any person to receiVe the amount of deposit in the event of his death :10 
during the minority of the nominee. 
(4) Payment by a banking company in accordance with the 
provisions of this section shall constitute a full discharge to the 
banking company or its liability in respect of the deposit: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-sec~on shall affect 25 
the right or claim wliich any person may have against the .person 
to whom any payment is made under this sectlon. 
45ZB. No notice ()f the claim of arw person, other than the 
person or persons in whose name a deposit is held by a banking 
company, 'Shall be receivable by the banking company, nor shall the 30 
banking company be bound by any such notice e·ven thO'Ugh expressly 
given to it: 
Provided that where any decree. order, certificate or other 
authority from a court of c~mpetent judsdiction relating to such 
deposit is produced before a banking company, the banking company 35 
shall take due note of such decree, order, certificate or other 
authority. .' , ... ' -, ·71 ,., 
45ZC. (l) Where any person leaves any article in safe custody 
with a banking company, such person may nominate, in the pres-
cribed manner, one person to whom, in the event of t~ death of 40 
the person leaving the article in safe cl1stody, such article may be 
returned by the h'nnking company. 
(2) Where thf' nominee is :1 minor, it shall be lawful for the 
person making the nomination to appoint in the prescribed manner 
any. per~on to rec.<'ive the article deposited in the event of his death 45 
durmg t:1e minofJty of the nominee. . 
·(3) The banking company shall, before returning any artirlps 
uJlder this ~ection to the. nominee Qr the per~ appointed ul1~~r 

'.~ . III ..... ' '-'-~ 
suIMIect10n (2), prepare. in such manner as may be cU:rect:ed bY' the 
Reserve Bank from time to time. an mventory of the said articles 
which shall be signed by such nemmee or person and sha1l deItver 
a copy of the inventory so prepared to such nominee or peracm. 
5 '(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for 
the time being in force or in any disposition. whether testamentary 
or otherwise, in respect of S'Ilch article, where a nomination made in 
the prescribed manner purports to confer on any person the right, 
to receive the article from the banking company, the nominee shall, 
10 on the death of the person leaving the article in safe custody, 
_ome entitled to the return of the article to the exclusion of aU 
other persons, unless the nomination is varied or cancelled in the 
prescribed manner: 
Provi'ded that nothing contained in this section shall affect the 
15 right or claim which any person may have against the person to 
whom the article is returned in pursuance of this sub-section. 
45ZD. No notice of the claim of any perRon, other than the penmn Not.i~e of 
or persons in whose name any article is held by a banking company • claims of 
In safe custody, shall be receivable by the banking company, nOr shall other 
20 the banking -company be bound by any such notice even thougli =. 
expressly ~ven to it: artIcleiI 
notreeelv. 
Provided that where any decree, order, certfftcate or other able. 
authority from a court of competent' jurisdiction relating to such 
article fs produced before a banking company, the banking company 
25 shaD take due note of such decree. order, certificate or other 
authority. 
30 
40 
45 
45ZE. (1) Where an individual is the sole hirer of a locker from. a 
banking company, whether such locker i~ located in th~ safe deposit 
vault of such banking company 01' elsewhere, such individual may 
nominate one person to whom. in the event of the death of such 
individual. the banking company ma~r give :'I('ces!'! to the lockf.r and 
liberty to remove the contents of ~he locker. 
(2) Where any sucn locker is hired from 'a bankfnf! comPAny by-
two or more 'ndividuals jointly, :md. unner thp contract of hire. the 
locker is to be operated . under the joint ,;i~atures of two or more 
of such hirers, ~ch hirel"S mav nomin~te one or more persons to 
whom, in the event of the death of such. joint hirer Or hirers, the 
banking company mav $ve. iointly with the 5lrrviving joint h'!rer 
or foint hirers, as the ('Else may be, access to the locker and liberty 
to remove the contents of :;;uch locker. 
(3) Every nomination under sub-section "(I) or sub·sectinn (2) 
sliall be made in thE' prescribed manner. 
(4) The bankin(! company shall. before permitting the removal 
of the contents of any- locker by any nominee or jolntlv bv any 
nominee and survivnrs as aforesaid, prepare. in such manner 8F! m'Bv 
be directed by the Reserve Bank from time to time, an inventory of 
the cQlltents of the lqc'k~r which shall be sfEmcd by such nominee 
Releaseot 
conteD.t.I 
of aafety 
locken. 

Notice of 
claimaof 
other per-
BODIIre-
.ardiD, 
safety 
lockets 
notre-
c:elvable. 
Amend-
mento! 
HCtion48. 
Amend-
mentof 
HCtioa47. 
*' Jo!ntly 1ty such nominee and survivors, and shall deliver a cOP,f 
oltha inventory so prepared to such nominee or DomJnee and sur-
viwn. 
'(5) On the removal of the contents of any locker by any nominee 
or jointly by any nominee and survivors as aforesaid, the liability 5 
of the banldng company in relation to the contents of the locker shall 
stand d1scharged, 
(6) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 11e 
against 'B banking company for any damage caused or likely to be 
caused, for allowing access to any locker, and liberty to remove the 10 
contents of such locker, in pursuance of the provision.o; of sub-
aection (1) or sub-section (2), as the case may be. 
45ZF. No notice of the claim of any person, other than hirer or 
hirers Of a locker, shall be receivable by a banking company nor 
shall the banking company be bound by any such notice ~en though 15 
expressly given to it: 
Provided that where any decree, order, certificate or other ! 
authority from a court of competent jurisdiction relatine to the 
locker or its contents is pro~u('erl befo1'e the bAnkini! com13any, the 
banking company shalJ take due note of such decree, o"der, certt- ao 
ftcate or other authority.". 
II. In section 46 of the Banklng Regulation Act,-
(i) In sub-section (2), for the words cC an officer making an 
inspection under that section", the word'S "an ofticer making an 
iDspection or scrutiny under that section" shall be substituted; 15 
(ti) for sub-section (4), the follOwing sub-seetion shaH be sub-
stituted, namely: - ' 
, 
"(4) If any other provision of this Act is contravened or if 
any default is made In-
(t) complying with any requirement of this Act or of 30 
any order, rule, or direction made or condition imposed 
thereunder, or 
(ii) carrying out the terms of, or the obltgatfons under, 
a sch~ sanctioned under sub-section (7) of section 45, 
by any person, such person shaD be punish::tble with flne which 35 
may extend to two thousand rupees, and where a contraven-
tion or default Is a contfnuing one, with 1:1 further flne whfch 
mav extend to one hundreti, nmee'l for every day, during which 
the contravention or default continues.". 
~. ,In s~on 47 of the Banking Regulati~n Act, for the words "DO 40 
co"r tn f el""r to thAt of A Pre!lirlencV M"ll1i.,trate or a Ma~strate of th 
ftrst class", the words Clno court other than' that of a MetroPolita: 
Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the ftnt class or any CQurt super:lor 
thereto" shRll be substituted ' 

lof 1970. 
21 of 1976. 
fOol 1980. 
\ 
23 
40. Section 51 of the Bankin& Regulati'ln Act shall be re-numbered 
as SUD-SeC~J.on. .(1) of tnat secuon., an.a.-
(a) in. sub-sectiOIl (1) as so re-n.wnbered-
(t) for tile ligurds, words, bracke~ and letters "19 to 21, 23 
5 1.0 ~, ~ lex.cJ.uwng SUD-secuon. lJ) J. ;:S1, ~ ~. JJA, :So l~U.Q.IJl& 
Clause lu.) or liuo-seCLlOn· tt) J, 46 to '.itS'", me ogures, worus, .I.etters 
ana oraC.kets "l~ to ~lA, ~ to ~H, ~ LexClUCUllg SUD-6ectlOD. 
"(J) J, ;:S1, Ji, ;:15, 3;:)i~,:io LexC!uwng c.&.auae la) ot s~tJ.On 
(1) J. '*'>t to 4:),6J:'", ':to to 41S" SilaU be SUDStltUteO.; 
10 
So 
35 
(ii.) for the words, fi&u.res an.d bracKets "or my correspcmd-
illg n.ew bank consLnutea. Ull(1el' sectloD. a ot tOe .t)aOKID& ~om­
pi:t1ues V~C'1UlS1tlO.D. unu 'J.'r<aIUiler 01 UllUertaJWlgS) ACt, ,UI'IU, or 
a ~&1UWl.l. .t(.uraJ. J:)a.u.K estaDJJ:>nea. ll.IlUer IoeCLlOn. ;:s ot the 
lteilU.ua1 .t1.uraJ. jj~ act, J.lflO or any cOJ.re.slXlJlUJ.llg new DaIlJt 
COllJi\.t~ULeU UllUer seclJ.on. a of ToUe . .bawwlg U>.W,P.uJ..Les l.t\cqw-
SLIJ.UU i:UlIl J.J.tUJ.liLec OL UDUenaJUllgS) .t\ct, .11:1(sU, at any ot.Der 
balJ.K.fJlg lJlSULUW,q.a not1l1ec1 by tile ~traJ. uovemm£nr. J..Q tJwI 
bellaU"", tne wur'us "or aLly corr~poDWDg .new Da.D.K. or a 
~~uWIJ. i1.w-al .t)i:llllt or any SUD'SlUJ.aty owiAt" Slla.U. be sUDlti-
tUte<1; ..... 
(iii) in the proviso,-
(A) in clause (a), tor the words ",eneral manager", the 
words "managmg dJ.rector" shall be SUbstitutec1; " 
(B) for clauses (0) and .(c), the folloWllli clauses aball 
be suustttuteC1, n.ameJ.y:-
.. (b) nothina contained in sub-cla'Ule (iii) of ~U18 
(b) of sub-'SectlOJl (1) of section. 20 shall apply m ally' 
bank re1erred to in sub-section (1). 1n&olar u tbe Aid 
SUb-clause (itl) of clause (b) precludes that bank from. 
enterina into any commitment for granUDi any .loan or 
advance to or OIl bebal:f of a company (DOt beiAB • 
Government company) in w.b1ch AOt,.- tban ton" per 
cen.t. of the paid-up capital is .be.ld (whether siDaly or 
taken togetJler) by the Central Government or tbe 
Reserve Bank or a corporation owned by that baDk; aDd 
(e) nothing contained in section 46 or ill section '1A 
shall apply to,-
(i) an omcer of the Cen.tral Government or t.be 
Reserve Bank, nominated or appointed 88 direc-
tor of the State Bank of India or" any correapondfu, 
new bank or a Regional Rural'Bank or aD.J subId-
diary bank or a bankjn, company; or 
45 
(ii) an officer of the State Bank of IDd1a or a 
corresponding new bank or a Regional Rural Bank 
or a subsidiary bank nominated or appointed -
director of any of the said banks (not being the 
bank of which he is an ofBcer) or of a banklnl 
compaD1."; 
c 
AmeDd. 
mentor 
aect10nSL 

Amend-
mentof 
section 52, 
Amend-
mentof 
section 56. 
Use of 
words 
"'baDk". 
"banker" 
or 
"1Nm!dn.t' , 
A4 
,(b) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following 8Ub-
section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) References to a banking company in any rule or direc-
tion relating to any provision of this Act referred to in tub-
secti0I\ (1) shall, except where such rule or direction provides 5 
otherwise, be construed as referring also to the State Bank of 
India, a corresponding new bank, a Regional Rural Bank and a 
subsidiary bank". ' 
41. In section 52 of the Banking Regulation Act,-
(4) sub-section (3) shall be C?mitted; 10 
(b) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section ahaU be 
inserted, namely:-
"(5) Every rule made by the Central Government under 
this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, be10n 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 15 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or In two 
or more successive sessions, and il, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the succetIIve 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modiftcation 
in the nUe or both Houses agree that the rule -should not be 20 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such moc:Wled 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.". 
42. In section 56 of the Banking Regulation Act,-
(i) . for sub-cla'Use (ii) of clause (c), the follOwing sub-clause 25 
shall be substituted, namely:-- . 
"(ii) clauses (if), '(h) and (nb) shall be omitted;"; 
(ii) for clause (f), the following clause shall be :substituted, 
namely:-
•• 'c 30 
(1) for se<!hon 7, the following section shall be pubsUtuted, 
namely:-
"7. (1) No co-operative society other ~ a co-operatlw 
bank shall use as part of its name or in coDDeCt1oa with 
its business any of the words "bank" "han__ ar 
"banking", and no co-operative society shall carry on the S5 
business at banking in India unless it UIeS as part of ita name 
at least one of such words. . 
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to-
(a) a primary credit society, or 
(b) a co-operative SOCiety fonned for the protection 40 
of the, mutual interest of co-operative banks or c0-
operative land mortgage banks, or 
(c) any co-operative society not being a primary 
credit SOCiety, fonned by the en:Ployees of-
. (i) a banking company or the State Bank of 45 
Indla or a corresponcUng new bank or a mblldfary 
bank of such banking company, State Bank of lDdIa 
or a corresponding new bank, or 

i 
25 
(ii) a co-operative bank or a primary credit 
society or a co-operative land mortgage baJ'l_k, 
insofar as the word "bank", "banker" or "banldng" 
appears as part of :he name of the employer bank, or 
as the case may be, of the bank, whose subsidiary the 
employer bank is." 'j 
(iii) after clause (f). the fol1owing cl,uses shall be inserted, 
namely:- " 
'(fi) in section 8. for the proviso, the following provjso 
[0 shall be substituted, namely:-
20 
"Provided that this section shall not apply-
(a) to any such business as aforesaid which wu in 
the course of being transacted on the commencement at 
clause (iii) of section 42 of the Banking Laws (Amend-
ment) Act. 1983, so, however. that the said business 
shall be completed before the expiry of one year from 
such commencement; or 
(b) to any business al is specified in pursuance of 
clause (0) of sub-eection (1) of section 6;"; 
(fii) in section 9, for the second proviso. the following pr0-
visos shall be substituted. namely:-
"Provided further that in the case of a primary credit 
society which becomes a primary co-operative bank after the 
commencement of clause (iii) of section 42 of the Banking 
Laws (Amendment) Act, 1983. the period of seven ),ears 
shall commence from the day it so becomes a primary c0-
operative bank: • 
. Provided also that the Reserve Bank may. m my partI-
c:aJar ease, extend the aforeu1d period of .... ~ by 
such period as it may conSider necessary where it is satisfied 
that such extension would be in the interests of the deposi-
tors of the co-operative bank."'; 
(i'O) in clause (g), for the figures and' letters "lOB, lOC", the 
figures and letters "lOB, lOBB, lOC" shall be substituted; 
35 (v) for clause (j), the following clause shall be substituted, 
45 
namely:- ! 
• (1) for section 18" the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"18. (1) Every co-operative bank, not being a State' co- Cub 
operative bank for the time befn.g included in the Second reI81'9" 
Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (herein-
after referred to as a "scheduled State Ca-operathrc Bank'"), 
shall maintain in India by way of cash reserve with itself 
or by way of balance in a current acconnt with the Reserve 
Bank or the State co-operative bank of the State concerned or 
by way of net balance in current accounts, or, in the case of 

a primary co-operative bank, with the central co-operative 
bank of the district concerned, or in one or more of the afore-
said ways, a sum equivalent to at least three per cent. of the 
total of its demand and time liabilities in India, as on the last 
Friday of the second preceding fortnight and shall submit to 5 
the Reserve Bank before the fifteenth day of every month a 
return showing the amount so held on alternate Fridays 
during a month with particulars of its' demand and time 
liabilities in India on such Fridays or if any such Friday 
is a public holiday under the Negotiable Instruments Act, to 
1881, at the' close of business on the preceding working day. 26 of 1881. 
Expwnation.-In this section and in section 24-
(a) "liabilities in India" shall not include-
(i) the paid-up capital or the reserves or any 
credit balance in the profit and loss account of (he 15 
co-operative bank; 
(ii) any advance taken from a State Govern .. 
ment, the Reserve Bank, the Development 
Bank, the Exim Bank, the National Bank or from 
the National Co-operative Development Corporation J20 
established under section 3 of the -National Co-
operative Development Corporation Act, 1962 by the 
co-operative bank; 
(iii) in the case of a State or central co-operative 
bank, also any deposit of money with it representlDg 25 
the reserve fund or any part thereof maintained 
with it by any other co-operative society within its 
area of operation, and in the case of a central co-
. operative bank, eJ.so an advance taken by it from the 
State co-operative bank of the State concerned; go 
(iv) in the case of a primary co-operative bank, 
also any advance taken by it from the State c0-
operative bank of the State concerned or the' central 
co-operative bank of the district con,cerned; 
(v) in the case of any co-operaUve bank, which 35 
has granted an advance against any balance main-
taIned with it, such balance to the extent of the 
amount outstanding in respect of such advance; and 
(vi) in the case of any co-operative bank, the 
amount of any advance or other credit arrangement 40 
drawn and availed of against approved securities; 
(b) "fortnight" shall mean the period from Saturday 
to the second follo)Ving Friday, both days inclusive; 
(c) "net balance in current accounts" shaD, in 
relation to a co-operative bank, mean the excess, if any, 45 
of the aggregate of the credit balances in current 
account mainta;ned by that co-operative bank with the 
State Bank of India or a subsidiary bank or a cort'a-
26 of 1962. 

loua_ 
23 ot 1985. 
If) 
• "t 
I\l.. 
'J.7 
ponding new bank, over the aggregate ot the credit 
balances in current accounts held by the said b~ 
witli such co-operative bank; 
(d) for the purpose of computation of liabilities, the 
aggregate of the liapilities of a co-operative bank to the 
State Bank of India, a subsidiary bank, a corresponding 
new bank, a Regional Rural Bank, a banking company 
or any other financial institution notified by the Central 
Government in this behalf shall be reduced by the 
aggregate of the liabilities of all such banks and instI-
tutions to the:co-operative 'bank;1 
(e) any cash with a co-operative bank or any balance 
held by a co-operative bank with, another bank, shall 
not, to the extent such cash or such balance represents 
the balance in, or investment of. AgricuHural Credit 
Stabilisation Fund of such co-operative bank, be deemed 
to be cash maintained in India 
(2) The Reserve Bank may, for the purposes of this 
section and section 24, specifv from time to time, with 
reference to any transaction or class of transactions, that 
such transaction or transactions shall be reatarded as IJabtlfty 
in India of a co--operative bank, and, if anv question ariseS 
as to whether any transaction or class of transactfons shall 
be reearded for the purposes ,of this section and section 24. 
as liability in India of a co-onerative bank, the decision of 
the Reserve Bank thereon shall be final."'; 
'(tn) for clat1S~ (m), the following claust' shnll be substituted . 
'''''; • namely: - I 
35 
.... ~.'~ 
45 
'em) in section 20A, in sub-section '(1),-
'(i) th«!' words and fi~lres "Notwithstand;nl2' anvthin~ to 
the contrary contained in section 293 of the Companies Act, 
1956," shall be omitted; 
(ii) in clause (0). for the words "any of it.q directors". 
the words "any of itc; past or present directors" shall be 
substituted:'; 
(vii) in clause (0) rel~tin~ to the modification of section 22.-
(A) in sUb-clause -(0. for sub-section (2) of section 22 afore-
said as substituted bv thl'lt sub-clau~e. the followinq sub-section 
shall be subRtituted, namely:-
"(2) Everv co-operative socletv carrvinS!; on business as a 
co-oDerative bank at thp commencement of the Bankine' Laws 
(ADDlication to CO-ODerative Societies) Act, 1965. shall 
before the exoirv of three months from such commencement. 
everv co-operative bank which comes into exiRtence as a 
result of the division of any t.,ther co-o'Derathre society 
carrving on business as a en-operative bank. or the amalV8-
matian of two or more cn-onerathre societies cerrvine' on 
bankinj! business shall. br.fore the exniry of three months 
from its~o coming int.o existence_ every prim !lTV credit ~~r.~ietv 
which becomes a primary ('o-operath·e b,m'k after such 

28 
commencement shall before the expiry of three months 
from the date on which it so becomes a primary co-operative 
bank and every co-operative society other than a primary 
credit society shall before commencing banking 1.;usiness in 
India, apply in writing to the Reserve Bank for a licence 5 
'Ullder this section: 
Provided that nothing in clause (b) of sub-section (t} 
shall be deemed to prohibit-
(i) a co-operative society carrying on business as a 
co-operative bank at the commencement of the Banking 10 
Laws (Application to Co-operative Societies) Act, 1965; 23 of lINtS. 
or 
(ii) a co-operative bank which has come into exist-
ence as a result of the division of any other co-operative 
society carrying on business as a co-operative bank, or 15 
the amalgamation of two or more co-operative societies 
carrying on banking business at the commencement of 
the Banking Laws (AppUcation to Co-operatlve 
Societies) Act, 1965 or at any time thereafter; or 23 ot 1ge1. 
(iii) a primaTY.. credit society which becomes a pri. 20 
mary co-operative bank after such commencement, 
from carrying on banking business until it is granted a 
licence in pursuance of this section or is, by a notice in writ-
ing, notified by the Reserve Bank that the licence cannot be 
granted to it.";. as 
(B) for sub-clause (ii). the fonowing sub-clauses shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(ii) sub-se~tion (3A) shall be omitted; 
(iii) in sub-section (4). in clause (iii), the words, 
brackets. figure and letter "and sub-section (.1A)" shall be 30 
omitted;"; . 
(triii) it". clause (p). for sub-clause (ii) , the following sub-clause 
shall be substituted, namely:-
f (ii) after sub-section (4), the fonowing sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely: - . 35 
"(4A) Any co-operative bank other than a primarv co-
operative bank requirint! the. permission of the Reserve Bank 
under this section shall forward its application to the 
Reserve Bank through the National Bank which shall give 
its comments on the merits of the rrpplication and send ft 1:0 40 
the Reserve Bank: 
Provided that the co--operative bank shall also send an 
advance copy of the 8pplication directly to the Reserve 
Bank."'; 
(b:) far' clause (q), the foTIowjng clause shall be. substituted. 45 
namely:- , 
'(q) in section 24.-:- A 
(I) In sub·section (1). thp wI)rds "After the expiry 
two years from the commen('em~J1t of this Act.- shall 
omJtted; . 

.5 
, . 
2 of 1934. 10 
20 
23 of 1965. 
2 of 1934. 
35 
45 
(ii) for sub-sections (%) and (2A) , the following sub-
sections shall be substituted, namely:-
"(2) In computing the amount for the purposes of 
sUb-section (1) ,-
(a) any balances maintained in' India by a co-
operative bank in current account with the Reserve 
Bank or by way of net balance in current accounts, 
and in the catJe of a' scheduled State co-operative 
bank, also the balance required under section 42 of 
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. to be so main-
tained; 
(b) any balances maintained by a central co-
operative bank with the State co-operative bank of 
the State concerned, and 
(e) any balances maintained by a primary co-
operative bank with central co-operative bank of the 
district concerned or with the Sta~e co-operative 
bank of the State concerned, 
shall be deemed to be cash maintained in India. 
(2A) (a) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (1) or in sub~ection (2), after the expiry of two 
years from the commencement of the Banking Laws 
(Application to Co-operative Societies) Act, 1965, or of 
such further period not exceeding one year as the 
Reserve Bank. having regard to the interests of the co-
operative bank concerned, may think fit in any parti-
cular case to allow,-
(i) a scheduled State co-operative bank, in addi-
tion to the average daily balance which it is, or may 
be, required to maintain under section 42 of the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, and 
(ii) every other co-operative bank, in addition to 
the cash reserve which it is required to maintain 
under section 18, 
shall maintain in India. in cash, or in gold valued at a 
price not exceeding the current market price or in un-
encumbered approved securities valued at a price deter-
mined in accordance with such one or more of, or combi-
nation of, the lollowing methods of valuation, namely, 
valuation with reference to cost price, market price, 
book value. as may be specified by the Reserve Bank 
from time to time, an amount which shall not, at the 
close of business on' any day, be less than twenty-five 
per cent. or S'Uch other percentage not exceeding forty per 
cent. as the Reserve Bank may, from time to time, by 
notiftcation in the Official Gazette, specify, of the total· 
of its demand and time liabilities in India, as on the 
last Friday of the second preceding fortnight. 

(b) In computing the amount for the purpose of 
clause (a), the following shall be deemed to be cash 
maintained in India, namely:-
(i) any balance maintained by a scheduled State 
co-operative bank with the Reserve Bank in excess of 5 
the balance required to be maintained by it under 
section 42 'of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 20f 1934. 
(ii) any cash or balances maintained in India by 
a co-operative bank, other than a scheduled State 
co-operative bank, with itself or with the State co- 10 
operative bank of the State concerned, or in current 
account WIth the Reserve Bank or by way of net 
balance in current accaunts and, in the case of a 
primary co~perative bank, also any balances main-
tained with the central co-operative bank of the,. J 5 
district concerned, in excess of the aggregate of the 
cash or balances required to be maintained under 
section 18; 
(iii) any net balance in current accounts. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section- 20 
(a) approved securities, or a portion thereof, 
representing investment of monies of Agricultural 
Credit Stabilisation Fund of a co-operative bank shall 
not be deemed to be 'Ullencumbered approved 
securities; 25 
(b) in case a co-operative bank bas taken an 
advance against any balance maintained with the 
State co-operative bank of the State concerned or 
with the central co-operative bank of the district 
concerned, such balance to the extent to which it: 0 
has been drawn against or availed of shall not be 
deemed to be cash maintained in India; 
(c) for the purpose of clause (a), the market 
price of an approved security shall include the price 
as on the date of the issue of the notification or 8S 35 
o~ any earlier or later date, as may be notified from 
time to time by the Reserve Bank in respect of any 
class or classes of securities;"; 
(iii) in sub-section (3), for the proviso, the following 
proviso shall be substituted, namely:- 40 
"Provided that every co-operative bank, other than a 
primary co-operative bank, shall also furnish withip the 
said period, a copy of the said retum to the National 
Bank:'; 
(iv) in sub-section (6), in clause (4), for the worda 45 
"fourteen days", the words "thirty days" shall be substitut-
ed~; I 

5 
10 
20 
(x) after clause (4), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(qq) after section 24, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"24A. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 53, Power to 
the Reserve Bank may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt. 
declare that; for such period and subject to !Nch conditiOns 
as may be specified in such nofiflcation, the whole or any 
part of the provisions of section 18 or section 24, as may be 
specified therein, shall not apply to any co-operative bank or 
class of co-operative banks, with reference to all Or any of 
the offices of such co-operative bank or banks, or with refer-
ence to the whole or any part of the assets and liabilities of 
such co-operativ~ bank qr banks." '; 
~xD in clause (w) relating to the modification of section 35,-
(4) in sub-clause (i), for item (b), the following item shall 
be substituted, namely:-
, (b) the following proviso shalll:>e inserted at the end, 
namely:-
"Provided that the Reserve Bank may, if it consi-
ders it necessary or expedient so to do, cause an inspection 
to be made of a primary co-operative bank under this 
sub-section by one or more officers of a State co-operative 
bank in the State in wI1ich such primary co· operative 
bank is registered." '; 
(b) sub-clauses (iii) and (iv) shall be re-numbered as sub-
clauses (iv) and (v) respectively and before sub-clause (iv) as 
10 re-numbered, the -following sub-clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
30 "(iii) atter sub--section (4)" the following sub-section 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"(4A) Without prejudice to 'the provisions of sub-
section (4), the Reserve Bank may, if it considers it 
necessary or expedient so to do supply a coP.... of the 
35 report on any inspection or scrutiny to the State co-
operatiVe bank and the Registrar of co-operative societies 
of the State in which the bank which has been inspected 
or whose affairs have been scrutinised is registered." '; 
(xii) for clause (z), the following clause shall be substituted, 
40 namely:-
45 
• (z) in section 36, in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) clause (b) shall be omitted; 
(b) for clause (d), the following clause shall he substi-
tuted, namely:- -
Ie (d) at any time, if it is satisfied that for the re· 
organisation or expansion of co-operative credit on sound 

rnsertion 
of new 
section 
35A. 
Arrange-
ment 
with the 
State 
Bank on 
appoint-
ment. of 
direc-
tors to 
prevail. 
lines it is necessary so to do, by an order in writing and 
on such terms and conditions as many be specified 
therein.-
(i) depute one or ·more of its oftlcers to watch 
the proceedings at any meeting .~f the Board of 5 
directors of the co-operative bank or of any other 
body constituted by it and require the co~perative 
bank to aive an opportunity to the ofticer so deputed 
to be heard at such meetings and to offer such 
advice on such matters as the officer may consider 10 
necessary or proper for the reorganisation and 
expansion of co-operative credit on sound lines, and 
also require such officer to send a report of such 
proceedings to the Reserve Bank i 
(ii) appoint one or more of its officers to observe 15 
the manner in which the affairs of the c~perative 
bank or its offices or branches are heinl conducted 
and make a report thereon;" '; . 
(xiii) in clause (za) relating to the modification of section 36A, 
In sub-clause (ii) , in sub-section (3) as inserted by that sub-clause, 20 
for the words, brackets, letters and figure "in clause (ecc) of section 
5", the words, brackets, letters and figure "in clause (cev) of 
section 5" shall be substituted; 
(xiv) after clause (za) , the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:- 25 
.. (zaa) in section 36AD, sub-section (3) shall be omitted;"; 
(xv) for clause (zc) , the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
'(zc) in section 46,-
(it) in sub-section (4), the word "or" occurring at the 30 
end of clause (i) and clause (ii) shall be omitted; 
(ii) in clause (a) of the Explanation, after the words 
"includes a", the words "co-operative society" shall be insert- ., 
ed;'. 
CHAPTER V 35 
AMENDMENTS TO THE STATE BANK OF INDIA Act, 1955 
43. In Chapter VI. after section 35 of the State Bank of India Act, 1955 23 of 
(hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the State Bank Act), the ]955. 
:following section shall be inserted, namely:-
"35A. (1) Where any arrangement entered into by the State 40 
Bank with a company provides for the appointment by the State 
l3ank of one or more directors of such company, such proviSions and 
any apPOintment of directors made in pursuance thereof shall be 
valid and effective notwithstanding anything to the contrary contain-
ed in the Companies Act, 1956, or in any other law for the time being 45 1 of 1156_ 
in force or in the memorandum, articles of association or any otht;r 
instrument relating to the company, and any provision regarding 
share qualification, age limit, number of directorships, removal from 

53 
oftlce of directors and such like conditions contained in any such Jaw 
or instrument aforesaid, shall not apply to any director appointed by 
the State Bank in pursuance of the arrangement as aforesaid. 
(2) Any director appointed as aforesaid shall-
5 (a) hold office during the pleasure of the State Bank and 
may be removed or substituted by any person by order in writing 
of the State Bank; 
(b) not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of 
his being 1i director or for anything done or omitted to be done 
lOin good, faith in the discharge of his duties as a director or any-
thing in· relation thereto; 
(c) not be liable to retirement by rotation and $11 110t be 
taken into account for computing the number of directors liable 
to such retirement.". 
44. In section 40 of the State Bank Act,-
(i) in sub:section (1), for the words "auditors' report on the 
working of the State Bank", the words "auditors"report and a report 
by the Central Board on the working and activities of the State 
Bank" shall be substituted; 
20 (ii) after sub-section (3), the foll~wing sub-section shall be 
ill6erted, namely:.--
"(4) The Central Government shall cause the auditors' 
report and the report by the Central· Board on the working 
and activities of the State Bank to be laid, as soon as may be 
25 after they are received, ,before each House of Parliament while 
it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions.". 
45. In section 42 of the State Bank Act, in sUb-section (2), after the 
word "working", the words "and activities" shall be im;erted. 
30 46. In section 43 of the State Bank Act, in sub-section (2), for the 
words "as may be", the words "as may, by general or speciaJ order, be" 
shall be suhtitituted. 
47. In section 49 of the State Bank Act, after sub-section (2), the 
fOllowing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
Amend-
ment of 
section 
40. 
Amend-
meut of 
section 
'OJ '1_. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 43. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
, :t9. "(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this 35 
Act shall be laid, as soon aos may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, 'while it is in session, for a total periOd of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
s~ccessive sessions, and if, before the expiry. of the session imme-
diately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule Or both Houses 
agree that the rule sho'Uld not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case. 

Amend-
ment of 
sectlOD 50. 
Insertion 
of new 
section. 
36A. 
Subsi-
diary 
Bank to 
act as 
agent of 
the lte-
aerv. 
Bank. 
34 
may be; so, hpwever, that any such modification or ~nulment shpll 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.". 
I 
48. In section 50 of the State Bank Act, after sub-6ection (3), the 
fol1owin~ S'Ub-section shall be inserted, namely:- 5 
" (4) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be after it is made 
under this Act by the Central Board, be forwarded to the Central 
Government and that Government shall cause a copy of the same to 
be laid before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a 
total period of thirty days, which may be .comprised in one session or 10 
in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation shO'Uld not be 
made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 15 
fonn or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that regulation.". 
CHAPTER VI 
AMENDMENTS TO THE STATE BANK OF INDIA (SVBSl!>IARY BANKS) ~CT, 1959 20 
49. After section 36 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) .aa of 
Act, 1959 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Subsidiary Banks 1959. 
Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely:-
"36A.(1) A subsidiary bank shall, if so required by the Reserve 
Bank, act as agent of the Reserve Bank at all places in India, where 25 
. it has a branch, for-
(a) paying, receiving, collecting and remitting money, 
bullion and securities on behalf of any Government in India; 
and 
(b) undertaking and transacting any other business which 30 
the Reserve Bank may from time to time entrust to it. 
(2) The terms and conditions on which any such agency bUsiness 
shall be carried on by the subsidiary bank on behalf of the Reserve 
Bank shall be such as may be agreed upon. 
(3) If, no agreement can be reached on any matter referred to 35 
in sub-section (2) or jf a dispute arises between a subsidiary bank 
and the Reserve Bank as to the in~rpretation of any agreement 
between them, the matter shall be re'ferred to the Central Govern-
ment and the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be 
final. 
(4) A subsidiary bank may transact any business or perform any 
functions e~trusted to it under sub-section (I), by itself or throu,h 
any agent app~oved by the Reserve Bank.". 
40 

10f 1956. 
5 
10 
3.5 
SO. After section 38 of the Subsidiary .Banks Act, the following IDJertion 
lection shall be inserted, namely:- of new section 
"38A. (1) Where any arrangement entered into by a subsidiary 
bank with a company provides for the appointment by the subsidiary 
banIt of one or more directors of such company, such provision and 
any appointment of directors made in pursuance thereof shall be 
valid and effective notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained 
in the Companies Act, 1956, or in any other law for the time being 
in force or in the memorandum, articles of association or any other 
instrument relating to the company, and any provision regarding 
I!\harc qualification, age limit, number of directorships, removal from 
office or directOl's and such like conditions contained in any such law 
or instrument aforesaid, shall not apply to any director appointed 
by the subsidiary bank in pursuance of the arrangement as aforesaid. 
3BA. 
Arrange'"-
ment 
with 
subsi-
diary 
banks on 
appoint-
ment of 
direC!-
tors to 
prevail. 
15 (2) Any director appointed as aforesaid shall-
20 
(a.)' hold office during the pleasure of the subsidiary bank 
and may be removed or SUbstituted by any person by order in 
writing of the subsidiary bank; 
(b) not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of 
his being a director or for anything done or omitted to be done 
in good faith in the discharge of his duties as a director or any-
thing in relation thereto; f. . 
(e) not be liable to retirement by rotation and shall not be 
taken into account for computing the number of directors Uable 
to such retirement.". ' 
'. 
51. In section 43 of the Subsidiary Banks Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1) ,-
; 
(a) in the opening portion, for the words "and the Reserve 
Bank", the words ", the Reserve Bank and the Central Govem-
30 ment" shall be S'Ubstituted; 
35 
(b) in clause (a), after the words "on the working", the 
words "and activities" shall be ins'erted; 
(ii) after sub-section (2), the following S'Ub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(3) The Central Go~rnment shall cause the auditor's 
report and the report by the Board ·of directors on the working 
and activities of the subsidiary bank to be laid, as soon as 
may be after they are received, before each House of Parliament, 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
43. 

Amend-
m«w1 of 
section 
44. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
:53. 
Amend. 
ment ot 
section 
62. 
Amend-
ment 01 
section 
63. 
I 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions.". 
52. I n section 44 of the Su bsidiax-y Banks Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), in the proviso, for the words "the State 5 
Banlc, or to the Reserve Bank", the words "the State Bank, the 
Reserve Bank or the Central Government" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-'SeCtion (2), after the word "working", the words "and 
activities" shall be inserted. 
13. In section 53 of the Subsidiary Banks Act, after sub-section (2), 10 
the following wb-section shall be inserted, namely:-
•. (3) Where the State Banlc:. nominates any of its officers as 
director of a subsidiary bank, such director shall not incur any obli-
gation or liability by reason only of his being a director or for 
anything done or omitted to be done in good faith in the- discharge of 15 
his duties as director or anything in relation thereto.". 
54. In section 62 of the Subsidiary Banks Act, for sub-section (3), the 
following sub-section shsl1 be substituted, namely:~ 
, .. (3) Every rule made under thiS section shall be laid, as ~oon 
a'3 may be after it is made, before each HO'USe of Parliament, while 20 
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be com-
prised in one session or. in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of tht session immediately following the se6sion or 
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agJ.'ee in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not 25 
be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be withO'Ut prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule.". 
55. In section 63 of the Subsidiary Banks Act, after sub-section (3), the 30 "'~ 
following sub-'3eetion shall be inserted, namely:-
•. (4) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be after it is made 
'Under this Act by the State Bank, be forwarded to the Central Gov-
ernmeut and that Government shall cause a copy of the same to be 
laid hefo.re each House of Parliament, whil~ it is in session, for a 35 
total perIOd of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions af~resaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in 
the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not 4" 
he made, the regulation shall thp.reafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect. as the case may be; so, however, 
that any ~u~~ )'nOdification or annulment shall be withO'Ut prejudlCt: 
to the validl.y of anything previously done under that regulation.". 
I 

,., of leU 
lOOflM9. 
lot 1.,0. 
4Octll880. 
37 
.CHAPTER VII 
AMENDMENTS TO mE DEPOSIT INsURANCE AND CREDIT GUA.IWftEI: 
CORPORATION ACT, 1961 
56. In section 2 of the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Amend-
5 Corporation Act, 1961 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the ment of 
10 
Deposit Insurance Corporation Act) ,_ section 2. 
(a) in clause (b), for the wordo; and figures ", a subsidiary bank 
and any other banking institution notified under section 51 of the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949", the words "and a subsidiary bank" 
shall be substituted; 
(b) ior clause (ee) , the following clause shall be .ubstituted, 
namely:-
'(ee) "corresponding new bank" means a corresponc:Jing 
new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 or, as 
the case may be, under section 3 of the Banking Companies 
(AcqUisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980;'; 
(e) in clause (i) ,-
(i) after the words "banking company", at the first place 
ao where they occur, the words "or a corresponding new bank" 
shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted. with 
effect from the 1st day of July, 1971; 
(ii) for sub-clause (i), the following sub-clauses shall be 
substituted and shall be deemed to have been SUbstituted with 
25 effect from the 19th day of July, 1969, namely:-
"(i) a banking company referred to in clause (a) or 
clause (b) of sub-section (1) or section 13, or 
(ia) a corresponding new bank, to which the provisions 
of clause fa) Of sub-section (1) of 'SectiOll 13 apply, or"; 
30 (d) in clause (k), the words and figures ", and includes any 
banking institution notified under section 51 of the said Act after 
such commencement" shall be omitted. 
57. In section 4 of the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, in sub- Amend-
section (1), for the words "fifteen crores of rupees", the words "ftfty ment ot 
:-J5 crores of rupees" shall be substituted. section". 
58. In aection 6 of the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act,-- Amend-
ment of 
(a) for sub-section (2). the following sub-section shall be section 8. 
substituted, name1y:-
"(2) (i) A direct",· nominated under clallse (0) or clause (c) 
40 of sub-section (1) shall hoJd office during the pleasure of the 
authority nominating him; and 

.Amend-
ment of 
aect10n 11. 
Amend-
ment ot 
tec:tion' 13. 
Amend-
ment of 
sectloh 
13A. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 16. 
Amend-
ment of 
8edlon 32. 
S8 
. (ii) 'A director nominated under clause (d) or clause (e) ot 
sub-section (I), shall pold office for such period not exceeding 
four years as may be specified by the Central Government and 
thereafter until his successor assumes office."; 
(b) in sub-section (3), in the opening portion, after the word, 5 
brackets and letter "clause (d) tI, the words, brackets and letter "or 
clause (e)" shall be inserted; 
(c) after sub-section (4), the following BUb-'section shall be 
inserted, namely:--
"(5) If a director nominated under clause (e) of sub-eectfon 10 
(1)-
(0.) becomes subject to any of the disqualiflcations men-
tioned in clauses (0.) to (d) of sub-section (3); or 
(b) is absent without leave of the Board for more 
than three consecutive meetings thereof, 15 
his seat sh-all thereupon become vacant." . 
59. In section 11 of the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, the words 
and figures ", or, as the case may be"after it is notified under section 51 
of the said Act" shall be omitted. 
80. In section 13 of the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, in sub- 110 
sections (2) and (3), the brRcketR and letter" (b) ," shall be omitted. 
61. In section 13A of the Deposit Immrance Corporation Act, in claWle 
(b) of sub-section (2), after sub-clause (ii), the following sub-clause 
shall be inserted, namely: -' ~ 
"(iii) every co-operative bank which has come into existence after 25 
the commencement of the Deposit Insurance Corporation (Amend-
ment) Act, 1968, as a result of the division of any other co-operative ~6 of 1968. 
society carrying on business as a co-operative bank, or the amalga-
mation of two or more co-operative societies carrying on banking 
bUSiness, at the commencement of the Banking Laws (Application to go 
Co-operative Societies) Act, 1985, or at any time thereafter, within 23 of 1966. 
three months of its having made an application for a licence under 
the said section:". 
62. In section 16 of the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, in sub-
section (1), in the proviso, for the words and figures "of section 13", the 35 
words, brackets and figures "of sub-section (1) of section IS" shall be 
substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect 
from the 19th day of July. 1969. 
63. In scction 32 of the DepOSit Insurance Corporation Act, in wb-
section (2), for the words "for not less than thirty days before each 4D 
House of Parliament as soon as may be after ellCh such report Sa neelv-
ed by the Central Government", tiM! worda "a~J soon u may be after 
they are rec(fived before each House of Parliament while it is in HUlon . " for a total pP.rlod of thirty days which may be comprised in one ~on 
or in two or more SUccossive sessions" shall be ~bltltuted. 
.5 

S9 
... In section 50 of the Deposit Insut'8nce Corporation Act, after sub-
aection (.'), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
.. (4) Every regulation shall: as soon as may be after it is made 
under this Act by the Board, be forwarded to the Central Govern-
5 ment and that Government shall cause a coPy of the same to be 
laid before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a 
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more 'Successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive 
10 sessions aforesaid, both Hou'ses agree in making any modification in 
the regulation, or both Houses agree that the regulation should not 
be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified fonD. or be of no effect, as the case may be; 50, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
15 to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation!'. 
CHAPTER VUI 
.A.IB:NDMENTS TO THE BANKING COMPA:"!"'; (ACQUlSInON AND 
TaANsnn OF UNDERTAKINGS) A~, 1970 
Amend-
ment of 
section ISO • 
IS. In section 3 of the Banking Companies (AcqUisition and Transfer Amend-
S of uno. gO ot Undertakings) Act, 1970 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the ment of 
Bank Nationalisation Act),- section 3. 
35 
(i) in sub-section (5), for the words "one or more forms of 
business", the words "one or more of the other forms of business" 
shall be substituted; 
(ii) after 5ub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
• .. (7) (i) The 'corresponding new bank shall, if so reqnired 
by the Reserve Bank, act as agent of the Reserve Bank at all 
places in India where it has a branch, for-
(a) paying, receiving, collecting and remitting money, 
bullion and securities on behalf of 'any Government in India; 
and 
(b) undertaking and transacting any other busine. 
which the Reserve Bank may from. time to time entrust to 
it. 
(ii) The terms and conditions on which any 'Such agency 
business shall be carried on by the corresponding new bank on 
belTalf of the Reserve Bank shall be such as may be agreed upon. 
(iii) If no agreement can be reacbed on any matter referred 
to in clause (ii) , or if a dispute arises between the corresponding 
new bank and the Reserve Bank as to the interpretation of any 
agreement between them, the matter shall be referred to the 
Central Government and the decision of the Central Govern-
ment thereon shalI be final. 
(i,,) The corresponding new bank may transact any business 
Or perform any functions entrusted to it under clause (i) by 
Itself or throueh any agent approved by the Reserve Bank.". , 

Amend-__ t of 
l8CUonlO. 
61. In section 9 of the Bank Nationalisation Act,-
(i) sub-section (5) shall be re-numbered a'S sub-section (6) and 
before sub-section (6) as so re-numbered, the following sub-sectl .. 
and Explanation shall be inserted, namely:-
'(5) On and from the date of coming into operation of a 5 
. scheme made under this section with respect to any of the 
matters referred to ill clause (c) of sub-section (3) or any 
·matters incidental, consequential and supplemental thereto,-
(a) the scheme shall be binding on the corresponding 
new ·bank or corporations or banking institutiOD'S, and also 10 
on the members. if any. the depositors, and other creditors 
and employees of each of them and on any other persons 
having any right or liability in relation to any of them 
including the trustees or other persons, managing or in any 
other manner connected with, 'any provident fund 01' other 15 
fund maintained by any of them; 
(b) the properties and assets of the corresponding new 
bank, or as the case may be, of the banking institution shall, 
by virtue of and to the extent provided in the scheme, stand 
transferred to, and vested in, and the liabilities of the cones- !ZO 
ponding new bank, or, as the case may be, of the banking in-
stitution shall, by virtue of, and to the extent provided :in 
the scheme, stand transferred to, and become the Uabilities 
of, the corporation or corporations brought into existence 
by reconstitution or the banking institution or the corr .. 25 
ponding new bank, as the case may be. 
Explanation.-In this section. "banking institution" means a 
banking company and includes the State Bank of India or a 
subsidiary bank.'. 
(ii) in sUb-section (6) as so re-numbered, for the words "which 30 
may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessiODB, and 
if, before the expiry of the session in which it is SO laid or the 
session immediately following", the words "which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry Of the session immediately following the session or the succes- 35 
sive sessions aforesaid" shall be substituted. 
67. In section 10 of the Bank Nationalisation Act,-
(i) after sub-section (4), the following E:rplandtiOl1S shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"Ea;pl.anation 1.-For the purposes of this Act- 40 
(a) the btuance-sheet shall not be treated u not di8-
~losing a true and fair view of the affairs of the correspond-
m.~ new bank, and 
(b) the profit and loss account shall not be treated u 
not showing a true balance of profit or lOBS for the period 45 
covered by such account, 
merely by reason of the fact that the balance-sheet or, as the 
cue may be, the profit and lou accouut, does not disclose all1 

IOaflH9. 
5 
matters which are by the provisions of the Banking Regulation 
Act, f949, read with the relevant provisions of this Act or a,ny 
other Act, not required to be disclOsed. 
E:rplanation H.-For the purposes of this Act the acct7Unts of 
the corresponding new bank shall not be deemed as having not 
been properly drawn up on the ground merely that they do not 
disclos&. certain matters if- . 
10 of 11'8. 10 
(i) those matters are such as the corresponding new 
bank is, by virtue Gf any provision contained in the BAnking 
RegulRtion Act, 1949, read with the relevant provisions of 
this Act, or any other &:t, not required to disclose; and 
30 
35 
(ii) the provisions referred to in clause (i) are specified 
in the balance-sheet and profit and loss aCCC7IlDt of the 
corresponding new bank or in the auditor's report."; 
(ii) after sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
.. (1 A) Every corresponding new bank shall furnish to the 
Central Government the annual balance-sheet, the. profit and loss 
account, and the auditor's report and a report by its Board of 
/ directors on the working and activities of the bank during the 
period covered by the accounts."; 
(iii) in sub-section (6), for the words "for not less than thirty 
dayw before each House of Parliament as soon as may be after each 
auch report is received by the Central Government", the words '''as 
lOOn as may be after they are received before each House of Parlia-
ment, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised. in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions" shall be substituted; 
(if-') after sub-aection (8), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(9) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions, the 
Central Govermnent may, at any time, appoint such number of 
auditors as it thinks fit to examine and report on the accounts 
of a corresponding new bank and the auditors so appointed shall 
have aU the rights, privileges and authority in relation to the 
audit of the accounts of ·the corresponding new bank. which an 
auditor appointed by the corresponding new bank has under this 
section,". 
68. Aft~r section 16 of the Bank Na!ionalisation Act, the follow;ng 
40 section shall be inserted, namely:-· 
45 
"16A. (1) Where any arrangement entered into by a correspond-
ing new bank with a company provides for the appointment by the 
corresponding new bank of one or more directors of such company, 
such provision and any appointment ot directors made in pursuance 
thereof shall be valid and effective notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in the Companies Act, 1956, or in any other law 
for the time being in force or in the memorandum, articles of 
association or any other instrument relating to the Company, and 
Insertion 
of new 
I8etion 
16A. 
Arrange_ 
ment 
with 
~orre&-
pondiJrg 
bewbank 
on 
appoint-
ment of 
directors 
toprevaU. 

.Amecl-
ment of 
IIeCtioB 19. 
Amend-
meat of 
section 80 
any proviSion regarding .ware quaWication, age limit., nwnbeJ: of 
directorships, removal from office of directors and such like conditions 
contained in. any such law or inst.rument aforesaid, ~ not apply 
to any director appoiDted by the corresponding new bank in pursu-
aiwe of the arrangf'ment as aforesaid. ., 5 
(~) Any d.1rector appointed as aforesaid shall- -
(a) hold office dw.'iDg the p.Leasw:e 01 tlle ,f,',conesponding 
new bank and may be removed or substituted by any person 
by order in writing of the corresponding new banlt; 
(b) not incur any obligatio.a or liability by reason only ot 10 
his beillg a dirt'Ctor or for anything done or omitted to be dOne 
ill goou fai1.h m the dlscbarge of his dulJ.es as a director or 
anytiullg in relation thereto; 
(c) not be liable to l'etirement by rota.\.lon and shall not 1)8 
taken lllto account for COIUPUti.a& the. llumber ot directors 'WL~ 15 
to such l'eLU'ement.". 
fi9. In sectioll 19 of the Bank N ationalisation Act, after sub-sectioo 
(3), the lol1<>wing sub-section Shall be inserted, namely:-
. (4) Every regulation shall, as SO011 as may be after it is lnade 
under this Act by the Board of directors of a cO~pol1dlDg. new 20 
bank, be iorwardeci to the Central Government md that GOVel'w:nellt 
s.b.all cause a copy of the same to be laid . before eacll House of 
.Parliament, while it .lS in session, tor a total period of thirty days 
whu:.b. may be comprist.>U lJl one ,5ess,ion or in two or more auccessive 
IiCSslo.w;, and if, before the expiry of t.be seiSion immediately follo~ ~5 
mg tile session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
;~gl'ec in maKlng any modification in the regulation or both Houses 
iigtee tnat tne regulation should not be made, the re~t1on sball 
tJle1'eafter have effect only in such modilied form or be of no e1fect, 
as the case may be; so, however, Wlat any such modificatlon or 30 
annulment sha.iJ. be Wlthout prejudice to the validu.y of any thinS 
previoUSly (lOlle under tbat regulation.". 
CHAPTER IX 
A.MElmM:ENTS TO nu: REGIONAL RURAL l3.A1us Ar:r, 1976 
70. Section 30 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 shall be re- 11 of 
numbered as sub-section. (1) thereof, and after sub-tlection (1) as 80 re- 35 19'18. 
numbered, the followma sub-section shall be inserted, ~:- . 
'. (2) Every reiUJ,ation shall, as SO~)ll as may be after it is made 
under this Act by the Board of directors, be forwarded to the Central 
Government and that Government shall cause a copy of the same to 
.be laid before each Ho!:,se of Parliament, while it is in session, lor a total .f.O 
period of thirty. days which may be comprised in one session or in 
two or IDore successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately foll~wing the se88ion or the aucce&ll:ve seulODS 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 45 
regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should. not be 
made, the regulation shall thereafter have e1fect only in suCh modi-
fied form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 80, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to 
\he validity of anything previously done under that recuJ.aUon. .. , 50 

.oaf 1980. 
• 
43 
CHAPI'ER X 
AMBNDMJINTS TO THE BANKING CoMPANUS (ACQUlSlTION\ND 
TRANsFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) Ac:r, 1980. 
71. In section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer 
5 of Undertakings) Act, 1980 [hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the 
Bank (Second) Nattonalisation Act],-
(I) in sub-section (5), for the words "one or more forms of 
business", the words "one or more of the other forms of business" 
shall be substituted; 
10 (ii) after sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(7) (i) The corresponding new bank shall, if so required 
by the Reserve Bank, act as agent of the Reserve Bank at all 
places in India where it has a branch, for-
15 (a) paying, receiving, collecting Ilnd remitting money, 
bullion and securities on behalf of any Gm~rnment in 
India: and 
(b) undertaking and transacting any other ~ltsiness 
which the Reserve Bank may from time to time entrust 
110 to it . 
. (ii) The terms and conditions on which any such agency 
business shall be carried on by the corresponding new bank on 
behalf of the Reserve Bank shall be such as may be agreed ullOn. 
(iii) If no agreement can be reached on ROy matt~l' l."cfel'red 
to in clause (ii), or if a dispute ari~s between the rOM'eosponding 
new bank and the Reserve Bank as to the interpretation of any 
agreement between them, the matter shall be refel'T'ffl (0 the 
Central Government and the rlecision of the Central Gnvern-
ment thereon shall be final. 
30 (iv) The correspondfn~ new bank may transact f'nv busine~s 
or perfonn any functions entrusted to it lln~er chu<;e (f), bv 
itself or through any lH!ent auproved bv the Resenre Bank.". 
72. In section 9 of the Banle: (Seconrl) Nati'analisation Act. sub-
flection (5) shall be re-nllmbered 1l~ sub-~ection (6) anti before sub-
35 se-ction (6) as ~o re-numbered, thf' following sub-serti~n and E-eplar>oUon 
45 
~hal1 be inserted, namely: - ' 
• (5) On and from the date of mming into operation of a schpme 
made under this section with rp~pect to anv of the matteJ:'s referred 
to jn clause (c) of sub-!!Iection (2) or any mntters incld~nta1. conse-
quential and supplementai thereto.-
(tt) the scheme shall be bindin~ on th~ rorreS'!"londinrr new 
bank or corporations or banking institutions. and '11<:0 
on the membe~. if any. the deoositors and oth~r crecP('rs 
and (>mploy~('~ of each of them nlld on any nther persons hRV;'1g 
any right or Ii abiUtyin T'elatfon to an" of them jndu(Ung- \ he 
~sb~ or othE'T persom, mana1!fn~ or in ."ny other mmlner 
connected with ilnv providr.nt fund Oy- othf--funil ma'ntnln't"d 
hY' Any of thpm: 
• 
Amend-
ment of 
IeCtitm3. 
Am,eJ1d-
ment of 
Iectlon 8. 

Amend-
ment of 
-.ctidh 
10. 
• (b) the properties and '.seets of the correspondine new 
bank or, as the case may be, of the banking inatimtioo shall, by 
virtue of and to the extent provided in the scheme, stand trans-
ferred to, and vested. in, and the liabilities of the corresponding 
. new bank or, as the case may be, of the banking iDstftutioD shall, 5 
by virtue of, and to the extent provided in the scheme, stand 
transferred to, and become the liabilities of,.· the corporation or 
corporations brought into existence by reconstitution of the 
hanking institution or the corresponding new bank, as ~ case 
may be. 10 
Explon4tion.-In this section, "banking institution" means a 
banking company and includes the State Bank of India or a sub-
sidiary bank.'. • 
13. In 'Section 10 of the Bank (Second) Nationalisatlon Act,-
(i) after sub-section (4), the following Explanations shall be J 5 
inserted, namely:-
"'Explanation I.-For the purposes of this Aet,-
(a) the balance-sheet shall not be treated as Dot di6-
closing a true and fair view of the affairs of the correspond'lnl 
DeW bank, and litO 
(b) the profit and lou account shall not be treated u 
not showing a true balance of profit or 1011 for the period 
covered by such account, 
merely by reason of the fact that the balance-sheet or, as the 
case may be, the profit and lOIS accouut, does not disclose any ~5 
matters which are by the provisions of the Banking Regulation 
Act, 194f, read with the relevant provisions of this Act or any 
other Act, not required to be disclosed. 
Explanation Il.-For the purpose~ of this Act, the accounts 
of the corresponding new bank shall not be deemed es having 30 
not been properly drawn up on the ground merely that they do 
not disclose certain matters tf-
(i) those matters are such as the corresponding new 
bank is, by virtu-e of any provision contained in the Banking 
10tJIlMt. 
Regulation Act, 1949, read with the relevant provisions of 35 II or 1M •. 
this Act, or any other Act, not required to diselose; and 
(ii) the provisions referred to in clause (i) are specified 
in the balance-sheet and profit and loss account of the 
corresponding new bank or in the auditor's report. It; 
(ii) after sub-secUon (1), the following BUb-section shaU be 40 
insened, nam.ely:-
•• (7 A) Every corresponding new hank shall fumblh to the 
Central Government the annual ba1ance-sheet, the profit and 
loss account, and the auditor's report and a report by its Board 
of directors on th(> workin.g and activities of the bank during the 45 
period covered by the accounts."; 

hU156. 
45 
(til) in sub-section (8), for the words "for not less than thirty 
days before each House of Parliament as soon as may be after each 
such report is received by the Central Government", the words "as 
'Soon as may be after they are received before each House of Parlia-
, ment, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one Session or in two Or more successive sessions" 
shall be substituted; 
(iv) after SUb-section (8), the following 'Sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
10 "(9) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions, the 
Central. Government may, at any time, appoint such number of 
auditors as it thinks fit to examine and report on the accounts of 
a corresponding new bank and the auditors so appointed shall 
have all the rights, privileges and authority in relation to the 
15 audit of the accounts of the corresponding new bank which an 
auditor appointed by the corresponding new bank has under this 
section.". 
20 
25 
74. After section 16 of the Bank (Second) Nationalisation Act, the 
following section shall be inserted, namely:-
"16A. (1) Where any arrangement entered into by a correspond-
ing new bank with a company provides for the appointment by the 
corresponding new bank of one or more directors of such comptmy, 
such provision and any appointment of directors made in pursuance 
thereof shall be valid and effective notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in the Companies Act, 1956, or in any other law 
for the time being in force or in t~ memorandum, articles of asso-
ciation or any other instrument relating to the Company, and any 
provision regarding share qualification, age limit, number of direc-
torships, removal from office of directors and such like conditions 
contained in any J;uch law or instrument aforesaid, shall not apply 
to any director appoin~d by the corresponding new bank in pursu-
ance of the arrangement as afo~said. 
(2) Any director appointed as;aforesaid shall-
(a) hold office during the pleasure of the corresponding new 
35 bank and may be removed or substituted by any person by 
order in writing of the corresponding new bank; 
(b) not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of 
his being a director or for anything done or omitted to be done 
in good faith in the discharge of his duties as a director or any-
40 thing in relation thereto; 
(c) not be liable to retirement by rotation and shall not be .. 
taken into account for computing the number of directors liable 
to such retirement.". 
75. In section 19 of the Bank (Second) Nationalisation Act, after S'Ilb-
45 section (3), the following sub-section 'Shall be inserted, namely:-
"(4) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be after it is made 
under this Act by the Board of directors of a corresponding new 
Insertion 
ot hew 
section 
16A. 
Arrange_ 
ment 
with 
carre,.. 
ponciing 
new bank 
on appoint 
ment of 
director. 
to prevail. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
I •. 

bank, be forwarded to the Central Government and that Government 
shall cau~ a copy of the same to be laid before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more succeS'Sive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately follow- 5 
ing the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the regulation or both Houses 
agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation sball 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the caSe may be; so, however, that any such modification or 10 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that regulation.". 

, 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bill seeks to amend the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891, the 
Reserve Bank of India Act. 1934. the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the 
State Bank of India Act 195-5, the State Bank of India (Subsidiary 
Banks) Act,' 1959, the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corpora-
tion Act. ] 961, the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act. 1970, the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 and the' 
Banking Companies (Acq'uisition and Transfer of Undertakin$s) Act, 
1980. in pursuance of the recommendations of the Banking Commission 
an.d of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation and also in ,the light 
of the experience gained in the administration of those Acts, The 
following are the more important amendments proposed in the Bill:-
(i) It is proposed to provide for the facility; of nomination to a 
"depositor", to nominate a person who could be paid, on the deposi-
tor's death. the amount to the credit of the depositor'~ accounts. 
Likewise, the nominee of a person who has kept articles in safe 
custody with the bankers or has hired a locker will be able to get 
the articles kept in the bank's safe custody or locker in the event 
of the death of such a person. The banks will be required to keep 
an inventory of the articles returned to the persons concerned in 
such manner as may be directed by the Reserve Bank from time to 
time. 
(ii) The scope of the purposes for which banks can form S'Ub-
sidiaries is being widened. 
(iii) It is proposed to a'Uthorise the Reserve Bank to increase 
the statutory liquidity ratio to be maintained in India by banks 
from 25 per cent. up to a maximum of 40 per cent. of the total 
demand and time liabilit:les of a bank in India and also to em-
power the Reserve Bank to impose penalties on banks which do not 
comply with the liquidity requirements of section 24 of the Bank-
ing Regulation Act. 1949, on the .lines of similar provisions regard-
ing maintenance of cash reserves contained in section 42 of the 
Reserve Bank of India Act. 1934. It is also proposed to change the 
period for filing of returns from weekly to fortnightly and to em-
power the Reserve Bank to specify the mode of valuation of 
security. 
(iv) Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 is being 
amended to provide that the concept of average daily balance will 
now be linked to balances held at the close of business on each 
day of a fortnight instead of a week and to enable the scheduled 
banks to file fortnightly returns on ~ach altem.te Friday in a 
month instead of on each Friday of the month. 
47 

" 
48 
(v) Sections 45R, 45S and 45T of new Chapter lIIC,tought to 
be inserted in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, provide that 
no individual or firm or an 'i1nincorporated association of indivi-
duals shall, at any time, have deposits from more than the speci-
fied number of depositors mentioned therein. The officers of the 
Reserve Bank or the State Governments, authorised in this behalf, 
will have power to obtain search warrant from a court so as . to 
enable them to enter into and search any premises suspected to be 
used for purposes connected with the receipt of deposits in contra-
vention of the provisions of the Act. 
(vi) It is proposed to amend the State Bank of India Act, 1955 
and the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 for lay .. 
ing before each House of Parliament, as in the case of nationalised 
banks, the auditors' report and the annual report on the working 
and the activities of the banks. 
(vii) The Banking Regulation Act, 1949 is being amended-
(a) to empower the Central Government to frame rules 
specifying the periods for the preservation of the various types 
of records, S'uch as, books, accounts and other documents as 
also of the different instruments paid by banks; 
(b)· to provide that banks may return at the reqUest of a 
customer a paid instrument before the prescribed preserva-
tion period,' only after making and keeping in the bank's pos-
session a true copy of all relevant parts thereof made by mecha-
nical or other processes ensuring the accuracy of the copy. 
(viii) The Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891 is being amen-
ded-
(a) to prQvide that during police investigations it would 
be sufficient for a bank to produce before police authorities 
certified copies of relevant extracts from its books unless the pro-
duction of copies is considered not adeq'uate by an officer of a 
rank not lower than the rank of a Superintendent of Police; 
(b) to make it clear that if the original documents are 
destroyed by a bank in the usual course of its business and the 
copies of documents have been obtained by mechanical or 
other process before such destruction they shall be admissible 
in evidence. 
(ix) It is further proposed to amend the State Bank of India 
Act, .1!}55 , the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 
and the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Under-
takings) Act, 1970 and the Banking Companies (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980. so as to provide a certain 
measure of pt'otection to the directors nominated by S'Uch banks on 
the boards of companies assisted by them against prosecution as 8 
result of non-compliance with provisions like share qualification, 
age limit, number of directorships, removal from office, retirement 
by retation, etc., contained in the Companies Act, 1956 or any other 
law or the memorandum or articles of association or any other ins-
trument of the concerned company. 

49 
(x) It is further proposed to include the usual provision for 
laying of rules and regulations made under Acts before Parlia-
j 
ment in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the State Bank of India 
Act. 19f15, the State Bank of India (S'ubsidiary Banks) Act. 1959, 
the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961, 
the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertak-
ings) Act. 1970, the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 and the Bank-
ing Cbmpanies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act. 
1980. 
2. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions con-
tained in the Bill. 
NEW DELm; 
The 27th April, 1983. 
PRANAB MUKHERJEE. 

Notes on clauses 
Clause 2.-This clause seeks to substitute clause (4) of section 2 of 
the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891 so as to amplify the definition of 
the term "legal proceedings" by including therein any investigation or 
inquiry under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or under any other 
law for the time being in force for the collection of evidence conducted 
by a police officer or by any other person (not being a magistrate) autho-
rised in this .behalf by a magistrate or by any law for the time being in 
force. This clause also seeks to amend clause (8) of the said section so 
as to provide that a copy made from the original document by mechanical 
or other process ensuring the accuracy of such copy, together with a certi-
ficate to that effect, as- also a copy prepared from the original doc~ment 
prior to the destruction of the original by a bank in the usual course of 
its business, together with a c~rtificate to that effect shall be admissible 
in evidence. These amendments are based on the recommendations of 
the Banking Commission. This clause further seeks to incorporate a new 
section in the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891. so as to provide that thl! 
order of a court or judge for production and inspection <if books of thl.! 
bank shall be construed a'i referring to an order made by an officer of a 
f rank not luwer than a Superintendent of Police as may be specified in this 
behalf by the Government by which the police officer or any other per~on 
conducting the investigation or inquiry is employed. 
Clause 3.-This clause seeks to amend clause (4B) of section 17 of 
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. so as to enhance the ceiling on 
advances that can be granted by the Reserve Bank of India to the Indus-
trial Finance Corporation of India, from Rs. 3 crores to Rs. 15 crores. 
This amendment is cpnst:quential to the amendment already carried out to 
sub-section (3) of section 21 of the Industrial Finance Corporation Act. 
1948 by the Industrial Finance Corporation (Amendment) Act, 1982. 
Clause 4.-The amendment seeks to enable the Central Governm-:nt 
t~) approve the for~ of .securities. that may be held by the Reserve Bank 
for the purposes of sectIOn 33 of the Reserve Bank of India Act 1934 
without having to formany notify the securities that may be so held. ' 
Clause. 5.-This clause seeks to amend Explanation to section 40 of 
the ~eserve Bank of India. Act. 1934, so as to replace the reference to 
Foreign Exchange Regulation Act. 1947, by a reference to Foreign 
Exchange Regulation Act, 1973. ~ 
Cl~lIse 6.-This clause !.ceks to amend section 42 of the Reserve Bank 
of India Act, 1934,- .. 
(i) to en~ure that 10LlOS from National Co-operative Dcvelop-
Il~cn.t . ,?orporatJon by the State Co-operativc Banks are not treated .. IS 
lIabilities for the purpose of calculation of "cash reserves" ratio, 
. . (ii) to ensure that loan.s. ~rom Sponsor Banks by Regional Rural 
Hanks ,!!"C D?t treated as hablhttcs for purposes of calculation of "cash rcseJ'Ves ratIo, 
50 

(iii) to authorise the Reserve Bank to settle any disputes or 
douots that may arise in c!a~:sifying transactions as liabilities. 
.. ( iv) to provide that the concept of average daily balance will 
now be linked to balances held at the close of business on each day 
of a fortnight instead of a week and that the scheduled banks will 
now be required to file fortnightly .returns on each alternate .Friday 
in a month instead of on '!ach Fnday of the month as hItherto. 
Provision is also being made for filing of a special return when: hlst 
Friday of a month is not an alternate Friday for the purpo!'te of sub-
section (2) of section 42. 
CLause 7.--Consequential to the amendment of section .42 of the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. section 43 is sought to be amended to 
enable the Reserve Bank to publish a consolidated statement each fort~ 
night, instead of each week as at present. 
• Clall~'e H.-This clause seeks to amend section 45H of the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934 consequent to an amendment to section 5 J of 
the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (vide clause 40( a)( ii)]. 
Clause 9.-This clause seeks to amend clause (bb) of section 451 of 
the Reserve Bank of India Act. 1934. which contains the definition of the 
term "deposit". The definition of the term "deposit" is being widened 
so as to include any receipt of money by way of deposit or loan or in any 
other form, bUl specifically excluding certain types of deposits mentioned 
therein so as to enable individuals and unincorporated associations and 
firms to obtain funds or advances for their legitimate business. 
Clause to.-This clause seeks to insert new Chapter IIIC containing 
sections 45R. 45S and 45T in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. 
Section 45S seeks to provide that no individual or firm or an unincorpo-
rated association of individuals shaH. at any time have deposits from more 
than the number of depositors mentioned therein. Section 45T seeks to 
vest in the officers of the Reserve Bank or the State Governmellts, autho~ 
rised in that behalf. the power to obtain search wart ant from courts so 
as to enable them to enter into and search any premises suspected to be 
used for the purpose connected with the receipt of deposits in contraven-
tion of the Act. Such a warrant shall be executed in the same way and 
shall have the same effect as a search warrant issued under the Code of 
Criminal Procedure. ] 973. ' 
/ 
Cloll.\cs I 1 and 12.-These clauses seek to amend respectively section 
58B and section 5SE of the Reserve Bank of India Act, ] 934 with a view 
to providing for penalties for contravening the provisions of new section 
455 uf that Act (vide clause 10). 
Clause J 3.-This clause seeks to amplify the existing definitioll in 
section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 of the term "approved 
securities". It also seeks to incorporate in that section the definitions of 
the terms "corresponding new bank", "Development Bank", "Exim Bank", 
"Reserve Bank", "Sponsor Bank" and "State Bank of India". 
Clause 14.-This clause seeks to amend section 7 of the Banking 
Regulation ~ct, 1'49, so as to clarify therein that no company other 
than a bankmg company shall use any of the words, viz., "bank", "banker" 
or "banking" as part of its, name, or in connection with its business. 
\ 
Clause ] 5.-This clause seeks to amend section 8 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949. in pursuance of the recommendation of the Bank-
ing Commission, to provide that the provisions of the said section do not 

52 
hit the business which the Central Government may specify under section 
(i (1 )( 0) thereof as a form of business in which it is lawful for a banking 
company to engage. 
Clallse 1 (i.-This clause seeks to' insert a new sub-section (2A) in 
section lOA of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 'so as to provide that a 
director of a banking company. other than its chairman or woholetimc direc- ~ 
tor, by whatever name called, shall not hold office continuously for a period 
exceeding 8 years. It also seeks to provide that if a chairman or other 
wholetime director of a banking company is removed from office as such 
chairman or wholetime director. he shaH also cease to be a director of the 
banking company and shalI not be eligible to be appointed as director of 
such banking company for a period of four years from the date of his 
ceasing to be the chairman or wholetime director, as the case may be. 
Clause 17.-This clause seeks to amend section 10B of the Banking 
Regulation Act. 1949. so as to provide that one of the directors of tke 
banking company shaH be the chairman of its Board of directors. This 
clause further seeks to provide that a chairman whose term of office has 
come to an end in certain circumstances shall, subject to the approval of 
the Reserve Bank, continue in office until his 'successor assumes office. 
Clause t 8.-This clause seeks to insert a new section IOBB in the 
Banking Regulation Act. 1949; so as to empower the Reserve Bank to 
appoint any person as the chairman of a banking company when the office 
of its chairman remains vacant for a long time and when. in the opinion 
of the Reo;erve Bank, the interests of the said banking company are likely 
to be adversely affected by the said office so remainin~ vacant. 
Clause 19.-This clause seeks to substitute section tOC of the Bank-
ing Regulation Act, 1949, so ac; to provide that a chairman of a banking 
company, whether appointed by the banking company itself or by the 
Reserve Bank, and a director of a banking company appointed by the 
Reserve Bank under section lOA of that Act, shall not be required to hold 
any qualification shares in the banking company. 
Clau.~e 20.--"section I OD of the Banking Regulation Act. 1949 is 
being amended as a result of the introduction of new section 10BB in the 
same Act (vide clause 1 R). 
Clause 2 I.-This clause ~,eeks to substitute section 18 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, t 949. so as to provide. in accordance with the recom-
mendation of the Banking Commission in this behalf. that the ca'ih reserve, 
which every non-scheduled banking company is required to maintain in 
India. shaH be maintained by it with itself or with the Reserve Bank only 
and not with the Reserve Bank or the State Bank of India or any other 
bank notified by the Central Government in this behalf a'i is provided) at 
present. This cash reserve. is to be maintained on the basis of the 3 per 
cent. of the total of the demand and time liabilities in India as on the last 
F~day of the second preceding fortnight instead of calculating the same 
With reference to each day's demand and time liabilities. Further, the 
monthly return shall, henceforth, show the amount so held on alternate 
Fridays during a month instead of showing the amount so held on Fridav 
of each week. At the same" time. it seeks to introduce the concept of 
"net balance" for the purpose of arriving at the amount of "balance in 
current accounts" which is to be treated as liquid asset.· In terms of this 
provision. each bank will be required to work out the difference between 
the balance. held by. it in curren.t accounts with the public sector banks 
anrl the b~lan~es wh~ch the pu~hc .sec.tor banks may have in current 
accounts With 1t and mc1ude ~n Its hquld assets only the excess. if any, of 
~he former over .~~e l~!t~r .. 1 he ~l,~use fu~her seeks to modify the defini-
tion of the term habdltJes tn Ir.ciJa occurrmg in the "Explanation" below 

S3 
existing section 18 of the aforesaid Act in respect or which minimum cash 
balances are to be m'aintained by every banking company, not being a 
scheduled bank. In the case of a banking company, not being a scheduled 
bank, only the net liability of that ban~ to. the enti~e b~nking system, that 
is after deduction of the balances mamtamed by It wIth all other banks 
fr~m its gross liabilities to all those other banks, will be deemed to be its 
liability to these banks, for the purpose of section. 18. This Exp/~nation 
also applies to all banks for th~. purpose of section 24 of the saId Act. 
The Explanation is further modlhed to ensure that loan from a Sponsor 
Bank by a Regional Rural Bank is excluded for purposes of calculating 
statutory liquidity ratio under sect inn 24 of the Bunking Regulation Act, 
1949. The clause also seeks to authorise the Reserve Bank to settle any 
dispute or doubts that may arise in classifying transactions as liabilities. 
Clause 22.-This clause seeks to amend section 19 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949, so as to amplify, in pursuance of the recommenda-
tion of the Banking Commisskn, the scope of the said section with a 
view to enlarging the purposes for which a banking company can form 
subsidiaries. A banking company would, n()w be permitted to form subsi-
diaries for carrying on one or more kinds of business which it is r~PlIlitted 
to engage in under clauses (a) to (0) of section 6 ( 1) of the said Act. 
At present, a banking company is not permitted to form subsidiaries except 
for undertaking and executing trusts, administration of estates as executors 
and for doing banking business outside India. 
Clause 23.-This clause seeks to amend section 20(1)(b)(iil) of the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949, so as to provide that a banking company 
is precluded from granting any loans or advances to a company when the 
banking company's director is a director, managing agent, manager, 
employee or guarantor of such company or its subsidiary or holding coin· 
pany or in which such director holds substantial interest. 
Clause 24.-This clause seeks to insert a new section 21A in the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949, so as to provide that rates of interest 
charged by banking companies to the debtors shall not be r~opened in a 
Court notwithstanding anything contained in the Usurious Loans Act, 
1918, or any other State Law relating to indebtedness. 
Clsuse 25.-This clause seeks to amend sub-section (3) of section 22 
of the Banking Regulation Act, ] 949, so as to widen the scope of the 
matters which the Reserve Bank may consider before granting a licence 
to a company to can)' on banking business in India and also insert 'a new 
sub-section (3A) which is basad on the existing clause (c) of sub-section 
(3). A consequential amendment is also being made to clause (iii) of 
sub-section (4) of that section. 
Cla~se 26.-This clause seeks to amend section 24 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949, so as to empower the Reserve Bank to increase the 
statutory liquidity ratio which the scheduled and non-scheduled banks are 
required to maintain in india, from the ·present statutory minimum limit 
of 25 per cent. to a maximum of 40 per cent. of their total demand and 
time l~abilities ~ India with reference to the last Friday .of the second 
prece~lI1g fortmght. The ~l.ause further seeks to modify the mode of 
yaluatlon of approved seCUrIties fo~ the purpose of statut0l1' liquidity ratio 
m pursuance of the recommendations of the Working Group on Public 
Debt. Management set up by the Reserve Bank. Hence section 24 is 
bein~ amended with a view tc? giving Reserve Bank an en~blmg power to 
speCify the mode of the valuatIon of approved securities in accordance with 
policy req~irements. A~ Ex!"anation is also added 'to provide that the 
market pnce shall be the prIce as on the date of issue of the notifica-
tiofl or as on any earlier or later date as may be notified from time to time 
by the Reserve Bank in respect of any class or classes of securities. Th~ 
r 

Reserve Bank of India is also sought to be empowered to charge peaaI 
interest if there is a default in the maintenance of the minimum statutory 
liquidity ratio. The clause a~so includes amendme~ts consequential to the 
amendments proposed to section 1 8 of the Act (ville clause 21). 
Clause 27.-This clause seeks to amend section 29 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949, so as to cJa!ify th~t the period specifi~ in sub-
section (3) of section 210 of the Compames Act, 1956, relating to pre-
paration of the balance-sheet and profi! and I~ss a~count shall, in !he 
case of a banking company, be the penod endmg With the last working 
day of the year immediately preceding the year in which its annual general 
meeting is held. 
Clauses 28 and 32.-1n view of .the insertion and revision of certaiu 
definitions in section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (vide clause 
13), consequential amendments arc being made to sections 34A and 36AD 
of the said Act. 
Qlause 29.-This clause seeks to amend section 35 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949, for the following purposes:-
(i) to clarify that the Reserve Bank has always been empowered 
to conduct scrutiny of the affairs of banking companit!s in addition 
to conducting regular inspection under that section; 
(ii) to empower an officer conducting scrutiny to have the same 
powers as that of an inspecting officer under that section; and 
(iii) to provide that the Reserve Bank shall furnish a copy of 
the scrutiny report to the banking company if it makes a request or 
if any adverse ~ction is contemplated against the banking company. 
Clause 30.-This clause seeks to amend section 35B of the Bankinc 
Regulation Act, 1949, so as to make the Reserve Bank's approval neces-
sary for any change in the maximum permissible number of directors of 
a banking company. It also .seeks to remove the existing dual control in 
regard to the managerial remuneration in the case of a banking company, 
one by the Reserve Bank under section 35B of the Banking RegulatiOn 
Act, 1949 and the other by the Government of India in the circumstances 
mentioned in sub-section (4) of section 198 of the Companies Act, 1956. 
Clause 31.-This clause seeks .to amend section 36AB of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949, so as to remove the limit on the number of addi-
tional directors which the Reserve Bank can appoint on the board of a 
banking company under that section. 
Clause 33.-Under section 464 of the Companies Act, 1956, as 
amended in 1960, the earJier powers given to the Liquidator have been 
withdrawn and the High Court has been empowered to exercise a discretion 
for appointing a committee of inspection. This clause seeks to make 
consequential amendments to ~cction 42 of the Banking Regulation Act 
1949. ' 
Clause 34.-ln addition to making some textual changes in section, 45 
of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, this clause seeks to amend-
(i) sub-section (8) of the aforesaid section so as to make it 
clear that. the. sc~em~ of am~lgamation. of one banking, company with 
any bankiilg mstltution shall also be bmding on the trustees or other 
~sons managing, or in any other manner connected with, aJJY pro-
vuient fund or other fund maintained by any such company or the 
transferee bank~ 
. (ii) sub-s~tion (15) of the said section with a view toconfin-
mg the scope of the definition of the term "banking institution" to 

55 
~y banking company including the State Bank of India, a subsidiary 
bank or a corresponding new bank; and . 
(iii) the said section by adding an Explanation thereto so as to 
avoid a claim by an employee of the transferor bank that he should 
be given in the transferee bank the same ''rank or status" as he had 
in the transferor bank at the time of amalgamation. 
Clause 35.-This cla'bse seeks to amend section 45A and section 451 
of the Banking Regulation Act. 1949. respectively, so as to replace refer-
ences to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, by references to the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and to make amendments to omit reference 
to jury trial. 
Clause 36.-This clause seeks to amend section 45S of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949, so as to replace the reference to Chief Presidency 
Magistrate or the District Magistrate by a reference to Chief Metropolitan 
Magistrate or the Chief Judicial Magistrate respectively. These amend-
ments are necessitated by the coming into force of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973. 
Clause 37.-This clause seeks to insert a new Part consisting 0: sectionlt 
45Y, 45Z, 45ZA, 45ZB, 45ZC, 45ZD. 45ZE and 45ZF in the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949, based on the recommendations of the Banking Com-
mission, so as- ' 
(i) to empower the Central Government to frame rules specify-
ing the periods of preservation of various types of records such as 
books, accounts and documents required to be maintained by a bank-
in2 company as also of the different instruments paid by it (section 
45Y); 
(ii) to enable a banking company to return at the request of a 
customer (including Government Departments and statutory 
corporations) a paid instrument, before the prescribed preservation 
-period. only after making and ~eeping in its possession a true copy 
thereof made by mechanical processes (section 45Z); 
(iii) to empower a banking company to make payment to the 
nominee of a d~positor or the person appointed under sub-section (3) 
of the new section 45ZA -of. the amount to his credit, in the event 
of the death of the depositor (section 45ZA); 
(iv) to protect a banking company against any 'claim of the 
third party to the deposit (section 45ZB): 
(v) to emlble a banking. company to retum the m'ticles .kept 
by a person in its safe custody to the nominee or the person apPOlnted 
under sub-section (2) of new section 45ZC in the event of the death 
of th person leaving the articles in safe custody, after making inven-
tory of the articles in the manner directed by the Reserve Bank, the 
inventory being signed by the person receiving the articles (section 
45ZC); 
(vi) to protect a banking company against any claim, to any 
articks, made by any person other than the person who placed the 
article in safe custody with the banking company (section 45ZD); 
(vii) to enable a banking company to release the contents of a 
safety locker to the nominee ~r survivor of the hirer of such locker 
in the event of the deafh o€ the hirer, by making an inventory of the 
contents of a safety locker in the manner directed by the ~eservc 
Bank the inventory being signed by the nominee or the survivor as 
also to protect the banking company against any liability for so releas-
ing the contents of the locker (section 45ZE); 

58 
(viii) to protect a banking company against any claim to the 
contents of a safety locker. made by any person other than ~e hirer 
of such locker who placed the articles in the safe custody with the 
, bank.ing company (section 45ZF). 
Clause 38.-This clause, besides making changes in sub-section (2) of 
section 46 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 as consequent to amend-
ment proposed vide clause 29, seeks to substitute sub-section. (4) of the said 
section so as to make a failure to comply with any reqUIrement of that 
Act or of any order,,'rule or direction made thereunder or a failure to carry 
out the terms of an amalgamation sanctioned under section 45, as offences 
punishable with fine under section 46. 
Clause 39.-This clause seeks to amend section 47 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949, to substitute old functionaries under the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898 by new functionaries under the Code of Crimi· 
nal Procedure, 1973. 
Clause 40.-This clause seeks to amend section 51 of the Banking 
Re~ation Act so as:-
(i) to make the prohibition contained in section 20 thereof 
against making advances to companies having a common director, 
inapplicable to advances by the public sector banks to companies in 
which the Central Government or the Reserve Bank or a Corporation 
owned by that bank holds 40 per cent. or more of the paid-up capital; 
(ii) to extend the statutory protection given by clause (c) of 
the proviso to section 51 thereof to an officer of the Central Govern-
ment or the Reserve Bank or the State Bank who may be nominated 
on the Board of a corresponding new bank or a Regional Rural Bank 
or any subsidiary bank or of a banking company and also to an 
officer of a corresponding new bank or a Regional Rural Bank or a 
subsidiary bank who may be nominated as director on the Board of 
any of the said banks; and 
(iii) to provide that a rule or direction made under the Ace 
shall also apply to the State Bank of India, any corresponding new 
bank, a Regional Rural Bank and a subsidiary bank. Other amend· 
ments proposed to be made by this clause are of a consequenti~ 
nature. 
Clause 41.-This clause seeks to amend section 52 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949, so as to provide for laying of rules made by the 
Central Government under the aforesaid Act before each House of Parlia-
~ent. T~e a!llendment also seeks to dispense with the condition of pre-
VIOUS publIcatIon of the rules to be framed under this section. 
Clau~e 42:-Section 56 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, specifies 
the modi~catIons to certain sections of the Act in their application to 
co-operatIve banks. This clause deals with the modifications of the rele-
v~t sections as a result of the proposed amendments to the Banking Regu-
latIon Act. The important -modifications are: 
. (i) the. proviso 'proposed to be substituted for the existing pro-
VISO to. section 8 (relating to prohibition of trading) provides that 
the perIod of completing any business referred to in 'that section wi]) 
be extended only up to the expiry of one year from the commence-
ment of the amending legislation. 
. (ii) th.e provisQ!; proposed to be substituted for the second pro-
VISO to section 9. empower the Reserve Bank to extend the period of 
seven years for ~hsposl\l of non-banking asse,ts of a co-operative bank, 

57 
if the Reserve Bank is satisfied that such extension would be in the 
interests of the depositlJrs of the co-operative bank. 
(iii) clause (j) of section 56 of the Banking Regulation Act, 
1949, which amends section 18 of the said Act, in its application to 
co-operative societies, is b.eing substituted by a new clause, the amend-
ments being on the lines similar to the amendments to section 18 of 
the Banking Regulation Act, as applicable to commercial banks (vide 
clause 21). This is to provide that the cash reserve of 3 per cent. is 
to be maintained with reference to demand and time liabilities as on 
the last Friday of the second preceding fortnight instead of calculat-
ing the same with rcference to each day's demand and time liabili-
ties. Further, the monthly return submitted by co-operative banks 
shall show the position as on alternate Fridays instead of every 
Friday. 
(iv) section 24, as applicable to co-operative banks. is being 
amended to empower the Reserve Bank to increase the percentage 
of the statutory liquidity ratio from 25 per cent. to 40 per cent. maxi-
mum. of the total of the demand and time liabilities in India as on 
the last Friday of !he second preceding fortnight .and also to change 
the period fur filing the returns showiRg the position on alternate 
Fridays instead of every Friuay. The sub-clause further seeks to 
umend the section as applicable to co-operative banks on the lines 
similar to the amendments to section 24 of the Banking Regulation 
Act, 1949 as applicable to commercial banks (vide clause 26) in the 
matter of valuation of approved securities for the purpose of statutory 
liquidity ratio. 
(v) a new section-section 24A-is proposed to be inserted 
empowering the Reserve Bank to exempt, by notification, any co-
operative bank or class of co-operative banks from the applicability 
of the whole or any part of the provisions of section 18 or section 24 
of the Act with reference to all or any of the officei of such co-opera J 
tive bank or co-operative banks or with reference to the whole or 
any part of the assets and liabilities of such co-operative bank or 
co-operative banks and for such period and subject to such conditions 
as may be speci.fied in the notification . . , 
(vi) clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 3b is proposed 
to be substituted by a new clause which would enable the Reserve 
Bank to depute one or more of its officers to watch the proceedings 
at any meeting of the Board of directors of a co·operative bank or 
to appoint its officers to observe the manner in which the affjlirs of 
the co-operative bank or its offices or branches are conducted and 
make a report-thereon. 
Clause 43.-This clause seeks' to insert a new section 35A in the State 
Bank of India Act, 1955, with a view to providing certain protection to 
• directors appointed by the State Bunk on the boards of companies assisted 
by it against prosecution as a re<;ult· of non-compliance with the provisions 
contained in the Companies Act, 1956, or in any other law 0; in the 
Memorandum or Articles of Association. It further seeks to provide that 
such a director shall hold office during the pleasure of the State Bank and 
may be removed by it. Further, such a director will not incur any obli-
~ation or liability by reason only of his being a director or for lIDything 
done or omitted to be done in good faith in the discharge of his duty as 
a director. It alsL) provides that such director shall not be liable to retire-
ment by rotation and shall not be taken into account for computing the 
number of directors liable to such retirement. 

58 
Clause 44.-This clause seeks to amend sect jon 40 of the State Bank 
of India Act, 1955, so &'l to provide for a report by the Central Board 
on the working and activities of the State Bank. It also seeks to provide for 
laying before each Hou~e. C?f Parliament the auditor's r~port ~nd the ~eport 
on the working and activIties of the State Bank of India, as 15 done In the 
case of the nationalised banks. 
Claltse 45.-The amendment to section 42 of the State Bank of India 
Act, 1955, is consequential to the amendment proposed to ~ction 40 of 
the Act by clause 44. 
Clause 46.-This clause seeks to amend section 43 of the State Bank 
of India Act, 1955, so as to empower the Central Board of the Bank to 
delegate by general or special order the powers to the officers of the Bank. 
Clauses 47 and 48.-These clauses seek to amend section 49 and sec-
tion 50 respectively of the State Bank of India Act, 1955, so as to provide 
for laving of rules and regulations made under the aforesaid Act before 
each House of Parliament. 
Clause 49.-The National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Develop-
ment Act. 19R 1 has amended section 45 of the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934 and accordingly. the Reserve Bank has been empowered to 
appoint subsidiary banks also to act as its alZents. In the absence of an 
explicit provision in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 
enabling the said banks to undertake such a~ency business, it is necessary 
to 'incorporate a new section 36A in the said Ae;t for the purpose. 
Clause 50.-This clause seeks to insert a new section 38A in the State 
Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act. 1959 (on the lines of new section 
35A proposed to he inserted in the State' Bank of India Act, 1955, by 
clause 4~) with a vie IV to providing certain protection to directors appoint-
ed bv a subsidiary bclOk on the boards of companies assisted by it against 
pros('cutic'O ns a result of non-compliance with the llt'ovisions contained in 
the Companies Act, 1956 or in any other law for the time being in force 
or in the Memorandum or Artic1~ of Association. It further seeks to 
provide that such a director shall hoJd office during the plea!ilure of the 
subsidiary bank and may be removed by it. Further. such a (iirector will 
not incur any obligation or liability by rea'\on only of his bein~ a director 
or 'or anything done or omitted to be done in good faith in the dischanze 
of his duty as a director. It also nrovides on the Jines of new section 35A 
that such director shall not be liable to retirement by rotation. 
Clause 5t.-This clause seeks to make some verbal amendments to 
section 43 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 and 
also to provide for the auditors' reoort and the reoort bv the Board of 
directors on the working and activities of 'a subsidiary bank being laid 
before each House of Parliament. 
C~a,~se 52.-The amendments to section 44 of the State Bank of India 
C~~~~:l~ltry Banks) Act, 1959 are consequential to t~~.a~l1en_d':.;!,~:. 
Clause 53.-This clause seeks to amend section 53 of the" State Bank 
of India (S?bsidiary Banks) Act. 1959, with a view to providinl:{ that the 
officer nOf!1mated by th~ State Bank as a director of its suhsidiary bank 
s~al1 Dot mcur any ?bhgation or liability by reason only of his &ein~' a 
d!fector. or for. anvthlDJ% done or omitted to be done in good faith in the 
discharge of hIS duty as a dir~tor. 

59 
,clauses 54 a~ld 55.-These clauses seek to amend section 62 and 
section 63 respectIvely of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 
1959, ~o as to provide for laying of rules and regulations made under the 
aforesaId Act before each House of Parliament. 
Clause 56.-This clause seeks to amend the definition of the term 
"jn~llrcd bank" in clause (i) of section 2 of the DepOsit lnsuranc~ and 
Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961 so as to include therein a corres-
ponding new bank constituted under the Banking Companies Acquisition 
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, a<; also a corresponding new 
bank constituted under the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer 
of Undertakings) Act, 1980. Since clause (i) of section 2, as substi-
tuted by the De!,osit Insurance Corporation ( Amendment) Act, 1968 
which came into force from the 1st July, 1971 did not include a reference 
to corresponding new banks constituted under the First Nationalisation 
Act, 1970, the amendment is sought to be made with retrospective effect 
from the 1st July, 1971 in respect of such banks. In section 2(i), sub-
clause (i) is also being substituted as an amendment consequential to the 
amendment of section 13 by the Nationalisation Act, 1970. being retros-
pective with effect from the 19th July, 1969, which is the date on which 
the Nationalisation Act. 1970. came into force. This clause also makes 
amendments consequent on certain amendments by clause 40. 
Clause 57.-This clause seeks to provide that the capital of the Deposit 
Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation may 1?e raised to Rs. 50 
crores instead of Rs. 15 crores as at present. 
Clause 58.-This clause seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 6 
of the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961 
with a view to providing that the additional directors appointed under 
section 6 ( 1 ) ( e) of the Act shall hold office for a term not exceeding four 
• years as may be specified by the Central Government. It also seeks to 
provide that such director whose term of office comes to an end shall 
continue in office until his successor assumes office. Further, it seeks 
to amend sub-section (3) of section 6 of the Act so as to provide that a 
director nominated by Central Government under clause (e) of sub-section 
( 1) of section 6 shall not be capable of being nominated as a director in 
the circumstances indicated in sub-section (3). It further seeks to insert 
a new sub-section (5) so as to provide that the seat of a director nomi-
nated under clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 6 shall become vacant 
in specified circumstances. 
Clause 59.-This amendment is consequential to certain amendments 
by clause 40. 
Clause 60.-This clause seeks to amend sub-sections (2) and (3) of 
section 13 of the ~posit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation 
Act, 19,61 so as to omit the reference to clause (b) on the ground that the 
prov!sions of section 22 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, are not 
applIcable to the corresponding new bank vide section 51 of that Act. 
Clause 61.-Consequent upon the proposed amendment to section 
56 ( 0) of the Banking Regulation Act. 1949 [section 22 (2) of the said 
Act as applicable to co-operative banks vide clause 42(vii)] this clause 
seeks to introduce a new sub-clause (iii) in clause (b) of sub-section (2) 
of section 13A in the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantcc Corpora-
tion Act, 1961 with a view to extending insurance coverage to deposits 
with such banks as mentioned in the said section 22(2). ~ 
Clause 62.-This clause seeks to amend section 16 of the Deposit 
~nsu!ance and Credit Guaran.tee Corporation Act, 1961 retrospectively 
m VIew of amendment of sectIon 13 by the Nationalisation Act, 1970. 

Clause 63.-This clause s~eks to make textual changes in sub-section 
(2) of section 3~ of the Deposit Insur.mcc i and Credit Guarantee Cor-
poration Act, 1961, with regard tu laying of certain r\!ports before each 
House of Parliament. 
Clause 64.-This clause seeks to amend section 50 of the Deposit 
Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961, so as to provide 
for laying of regulations made under the aforesaid Act before each House 
of Parliament. 
. Clause 65.-This clause seeks to make certain textual ch<lngcs in sec-
tion 3 of the Banking, Companies (Acquisition and Trarlsfcr of Under-
takings) Act. 1970. Further, the National B!lnk for Agriculture and 
Rural Development Act, 1981 has amended section 45 of the Reserve Bank 
of India Act, 1934 and accordillgly, the Reserve Bank has been empower-
ed to appoint a corresponding n~w bank to act as its agent. In the absence 
of explicit provisions in the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Trans-
fer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 enabling .1 corresponding new bank to 
undertake such agency busine.~s, it is necessary to incorporate a new sub-
section. 
~" 
Clause 66.-This clause seeks to insert a new sub-section in section 9 
of the Banking Companies (Acq\lisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Act, 1970 so as to specifically provide that a scheme made under section 9 
of that Act shall be binding on the creditors, depositors, employees and 
, other persons affected by it. This clause further seeks to incorporate a;" 
, defmition of the term "banking institution" in the said section 0n the lines 
of definition in sub-section (15) of section 45 of the Banking Regulation 
Act, 1949, as proposed to be amended by clause 34. It also s,eeks to 
amend sub-section (6) relatirig to laying of scheme before Parliament. 
Clause 67.-This clause seeks to introduce two "Explanations" in sec-
tion 10 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Under-
takings) Act, 1970 on the lines of the corresponding provisions in the 
Companies Act, 1956 dealing with the scope of the auditors' reports in the 
matter of certifying that the balance-sheet exhibits a true and fair view of 
the affairs of the nationalised bank concerned. This clause further seeks 
to insert new sllb-section (7 A) in section 10 so as to rationalise the exist-
ing arrangements regarding the furnishing of its annual balance-sheet and 
accounts together with the auditors' report and the annual report on its 
working and activities by each nationalised bank to the Central Govern-
ment. It also seeks to make certain textual changes in sub-section (8) 
of the said section relating to laying of reports before Parliament. It also 
seeks to insert new sub-section (9) in section 10 of the Act so as to em-
power the Central Government to appoint, at any time, such number of 
auditors as it thinks fit to examine and report on the accounts of a natio-
nalised bank. 
Clause 68.-' This clause seeks to insert a new se~tion 16A in the Bank-
ing Companies (Acquis~tion and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 
(on the lmes of new secbon 35A proposed to be inserted in the State Bank 
of India ~ct, 1955, by clause 43) with a view to providing certain protec-
tion to dIrectors appointed by a nationalised bank on the boards of com-
p~ies I assiste~ . by it ag~inst .prosecution as. a result of nOQ-com-pliance 
WIth the. prOVISIOns contamed m the Comparues Act, 1956 or in any other 
law or m the Memorandum or Article:; of Association. It further seeks 
to provi~e that such a director shall hold offi~e during the pleasure of the 
nationalIsed bank and may be removed by It. Further, such a director 
will not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of his being a 
.' 

61 
director or for anything done or omitted to be done in' good faith in the 
discharge of his duty as a director. It also provides on the lines of new 
section 35A that such director shall not be liable to retirement by rotation. 
Clause 69.-Thls c1ause seeks to amend section 19 of the BankinJt 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 so as 
to provide for the layinJt of regulations made by the Board of directors 
of a corresponding new bank under the aforesaid Act before each House 
of Parliament. 
Clause 70.-1111s clause seeb to amend section 30 of the Regional 
Rural Banks Act, 1976, so as to provide that regulations made under that 
Act shall be laid before each House of Parliament. 
Clause 71.-This c1aU!~e seeks to make certain textual changes in 
section 3 of the Bankine; Companies (Acquisition and 'Transfer of Under-
takings) Act, 1980. Further. the National Bank for Agriculture and 
Rural Development Act. 1981 haq amended section 45 of the Reserve 
Bank of India Act. 1934 and accordingly. the Reserve Bank has been 
empowered to appoint a correspondtne; new bank to act as its agent. In 
the absence of explicit provisions in the 'Ranking Companies (Acquisition 
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act. 1980 enabling a correspondinr new 
bank to undertake such agency business, it is necessary to incorporate a 
new sub-section. 
Clause 72.-This clause seeks to insert a new sub-section in section 
9 of the Ban king Companies (Acauisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Act. 1980 so as to specifically provide that a scheme made under section 9 
of that Act shall be binding on the creditors. depositors. employees and 
other persons affected by it. This clause further seeks to incorporate a 
definition of the term "bankin~ institution" in the said section on the lines 
of definition in sub-section (15) of section 45 of the Banking RegulatioD 
Act, 1949, as proposed to he amended by clause 34. 
Clnu,.e 73.-This claus/" seeks to introduct." two "Explanatio1ls" in 
section 1 0 of the 'Rankinl! Companieq (Acquisition and Transfer of Under-
takings) Act, 1980 on the lines of the correspondin~ provisions in the 
Companies Act. 1956 dealing with the scope of the auditors' r~port in the 
matter of certifying that the halance-sheet exhibits a true and fair view of 
the affairs of -the nationalised bank concerned. This clause further seeks 
to insert new sub-section (7 A) ;n section 10 so as to rationalise the exist-
ing arrang~ments reparding the furnishing of its annual balance-sheet and 
accounts tov.ether with the auditors' reoort and the annual report on its 
workin~ and activities bv each nationalised bank to the Central Govern-
ment. It also seeks to make certain textual chane:es in sub-section (8) of 
the said section relating to layinl': of reports before Parliament. It also 
seeks to insert new suh-section (9) in section 10 of the Act so aq to 
empow~r the C:entral Government to appoint. at any time. such number 
of audItors as 1t thinks fit to examine and report on the accounts of a 
nationalised bank. 
Clause 74.-This clause seeks to insert a new section 16A in the Bank-
ing Comp~nies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act. 1980 
(on the hne~ of new section 35A proposed to be inserted in the State 
Bank ~f IndIa. Act. 1955-vide dause 43) with a view to providing 
• protectIon to dIrectors appointed by a nationalised bank on the boards of 
c,!mpanies as~i~tcd by it ~gain~t prosecution as a re.qu1t of non-compliance 
WIth th: prowaons cont:uned In the Companies Act. 1956 or in any nther 
Jawor m the Memorandum or ArticJ~s of Association. It further seeks to 
provide tha.t such a director sh~n hold office during the pleasure of the 

nationalised bank and may be removed by it. Further, such a director 
will not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of his being a 
director or for anything done or omitted to be done in good faith in the 
discharge of his duty as a director. It also provides on the lines of new 
section 35A that such director shall not be liable to retirement by rota-
don. . •. "" I.t. i"'.iI'.'.1 .. !billi",,: 
Clause 75.-This clause seeks to amend section 19 of the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 so as 
to provide for the laying of regulations made, by the Board of directors 
of a corre~onding new bank under the aforesaid Act before each House 
of Parliament. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 6, sub-clause (b), of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (IA) 
of section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1~4 $0 as to empower 
tb:e Reserve Bank to specify, by notification in the Gazette of India, 
different dates in respect of banks subsequently included in the Second 
Schedule to that Act. Sub-clause (c) of that clause seeks to insert 
sub· section (IC) in section 42 of the said Act enabling the Reserve Bank 
to specify from time to time any transaction or class of transactions 
which shall be regarded as liability in India of a scheduled bank. 
Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to amend the definition of "approved 
securities" In section 5 of the Banking Regulatk~ Act, 1949, as mepn-
ing, inter aZia, such of the securities authorised tly' the Central Gov-
ernment under clause (f) of section 20 of the ndian Trusts Act, 1882 
as may be prescribed by rules made by the Central Government under 
the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. ,lo .. ..1. ,.;" 
Cla'Use 21 of the Bill and clal,lsc 42· as applicable to co-operative 80-
cieties seek to substitute section 18 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. 
Clause (d) of the Explanation to sub-section (1) of the said section 18 
empowers the Central Government to notify financial institutions for 
the purposes of that clause. Sub-section (2) of the said section 18 em-
powers the Reserve Bank to specify any transaction or class of transac-
tions to be regarded as liability in Indla of a banking company or a co-
operative bank, as the case may be, for the purposes of section 18 and 
section 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. 
Clause 26 of the Bill and clause 42 as applicable to co-operative so-
cieties, seek to amend section 24 (2A) (a) of the Banking Regulation 
Act, 1949 so as to empower the Reserve Bank to increase the liquidity 
ratio from the present statutory minimum limit of 25 per cent. up to a 
limit not exceeding 40 per cent., as may be specified by the Reserve 
Bank ill the notification. The relevant clauses also provide for banking 
companies and co-operative banks furnishing a special return in. the 
prescribed form and manner. Further, the Reserve Bank is empowered 
to specify the mode of valuation of securities to be adopted by banks 
for the purpose of section 24 of the Bankini Regulation Act, 1949. 
Clause 37 uf the Bill seeks to insert a new section 45Y in the Bank., 
ing Regulation Act, 1949, which empowers the Central Government, 
after consultation with the Reserve Bank to make rules specifying the 
periods for which banks shall preserve and keep their books, accounts 
and other documents as well as different instruments paid by them. 
Different periods may have to be fixed for different types of records, 
depending upon the nature of each record, and keeping in view the 
needs' and practical difficulties of the banks, and usefulness in connec-
tion with tax and other regulatory proceedings. This clause further 
seeks to insert new sections 41)ZA, 45ZC and 45ZE in the Bankhlg Re-
gulation Act, 1949, in pursuance whereof, the depositors of banks, per-
sons leaving articles in safe custody . with banks, and hirers of safety 

lockers from banks. are given the right of nomination in the manner 
prescribed by rules made by the Central Government 'Under the. said 
Act. Th~ nomination so made can also be varied or ckncellcd in the 
prescribed manner. The said sections 45ZC and 45ZE also require the 
banks to prepare, in such manner as may be directed by the RCflerve 
Bank, an inventory of articles returned to claimants. 
Clause 42 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 24A as applicable 
to co-operative societies for empowering the fleserve Bank to exempt, 
by notification, any co-operative bank or class of co-operative banks 
from the applicability oi the whole or any part of the provisions of sec-
tion 18 or section 24 of the Act, with 'reference to all or any of the 
omccs of such co-operative bank or co-operative banks, or with refe-
rence to· the whole or any part o~. the assets and liabilities of such co-
operative bank or co-operative banks, and for such period and subject 
to such conditions as may be $pecified in the notification. 
Clause 46 of the Bill seeks to amend section 43 of the State Bank of 
India Act; 19550 so as to provide for delegation of powers to the. officers 
of the Bank also by general or special Ilrders made by tlle Central 
Board of the Bank. . . 
The matters in respect of which an authority is empowered to 
issue any authorisation, notification or order Or to make l"'.lles, relate 
to matters of procedure and administrative details. The delegation of 
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 

ANNEXURE , 
EX·.1'RACTS FROM THE BANKF.RS' BOOKS EVIDENCE ACT, 1891 • 
(18 OF 1891) 
'" '" '" '" • 
.) 
2. In this Act,· unless there is something repugnant in the subject or Deftni-
context,- tlona. 
'" '" '" '" '" (4) "legal proceeding" means any proceeding or inquiry in which 
evidence is or may be given, and includes an arbitration: 
'" '" '" • • 
(8) "certified copy" means a COPy of any entry in the books of a 
bank together with a certificate written at the foot of such copy that 
it it; a true copy of such entry, that such entry is contained in one 
of the. ordinary books of the bank and was made in the usual and 
ordinary course of business, and that 'Such book is still in the custody 
of the bank, such certificate being dated and subscribed by the 
principal accountant or manager of the bank with his name and 
oftlcial title. 
'" '" • '" 
EXTRACTS FROM THE REsER.'VE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934 
(2 OF .1934) 
• '" '" '" • 
• 
17. The Bank 'Shall be authorised to carry on and transact the several 
kinds of business hereinafter specified. n~ely:-
'" '" '" '" • 
(4B) the making to the Industrial Finance Corporation of India 
of loans and advances,-
'" • • • • 
(b) repayable on the expiry of fixed periods not exceeding 
eighteen months from the date of such loan or advance, against 
securities of the Central Government· of any maturity or 
against bonds and debentures issued by the said Corporation 
and guaranteed by the Central Government and maturing 
within a per~od not exceeding eighteen months from the date 
of such loan or advance: 
Provided that the amount of loans and advances granted 
under clause (b) shall not at any time exceed three crores of 
rupees in the aggregate; 
• • • • • 
33. (1) • • • • • 
6S 
Business 
which the 
Bank may 
trmsact. 
A~tsnf 
~ 
I •• ueDe-
~rtmen,. 

Transac-
tions in 
foreign 
exchal'l'ge. 
Cash 
reserves 
of'SChe. 
dult!d 
banks to 
be kept 
with the 
Bank. 
(6) For the purposes of this section, the foreign securities which maY 
be held as part of the assets shall be-
I 
(i) securities of the following kinds payable in the currency of 
any foreign country which is a member of the International Monetary 
Fund, namely:-
(a) balances with the bank which is the principal currency 
authority of that foreign country and any other balances or 
securities in foreign currency maintained with or issued by the 
International Monetary Fund, the International Bank for Re-
construction and Development, the International Development 
Association or the International Finance Corporation or Asian 
Development Bank or the Bank for International Settlements or 
any banking or financial institution notified by the Central Gov-
ernment in this behalf, provided that they are repayable within 
a period of ten years; 
... '" • ... ... 
40. The Bank shall sell to Or buy from any authorized person' who 
makes a demand in that behalf at its bffice in Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi or 
Madras" or at such of its branches as the Central Government may, by 
order determine, foreign exchange at such rates of exchange and on such 
conditions as the Central Government may from time to time by general 
or special order determine, havdng regard so far as rates of exchange are 
concerned to its obligations to the International Monetary Fund: 
Provided that no person shall be entitled to demand to buy or sell 
.foreign exchange of a value less than two lakhs of rupees. 
Explanation.-In this section "authorized person" means a person who 
is entitled by or under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947, to 'I of 1947. 
buy, or as the case may be, sell, the foreign exchange to which his demand 
relates. 
• • • • • 
42. (1) Every bank included in the Second Schedule shall maintain 
with the Bank an average daily balance the amount of which shall not be 
less than three per cent. of the total of the demand and ~e liabilities in 
India of such bank as shown in the return referred to in 'Sub-section (2): 
Provided that the Bank may, by notification in the Gazette of India, 
increase the said rate to such higher rate as, may be specified in the noti-
Slcation so however that the rate shall not be more than fifteen per cent. 
of the total of the demand and time liabilities. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "average daily balance" shall mean the ,average of the 
balances held at the close of busine~s on each day of a weeki 
(b) "week" shall mean the period from Saturday to the followini 
Friday, .... both days inclusive; , 
(c) "liabilities" shall not include-
• • • • • 

~ of 1970. 
50f 19'70. 
(iii) in the C~ of a State co-op~raUvebank. also any loaa 
taken by such bank from a State Government and any deposit 
of money with such bank representing the reserve fund or any 
part thereof maintained with it by any co-operative society 
within its area of operation; 
· .. ... • • • 
(d) the aggregate of the "liabilities" of a scheduled bank which 
is not a State co-operative bank, to,-
• • ... • • 
(iii) a corresponding new bank 'coq,stituted by section 3 of 
the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfel" of Under-
takings) Act, 1970; 
• ... ... • • 
shall be reduced by the aggregate of the liabilities or all such banks 
and institutions to the scheduled bank; 
(e) the aggregate of the "liabilities" of a scheduled bank which 
is a State co-operative ~, to,-
• ... ... • • 
(iii) a corresponding new bank constituted by section 3 of 
the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Under-
takings) Act, 1970; 
• • • • • 
shall be reduced by the aggregate of the liabilities of all such banks 
and institutions to the State co-operative bank. 
• ... • • ... 
(2) Every scheduled bank shall send to the Bank a return signed by 
two responsible officers of such bank showing-
(a) the amount of its demand and time liabilities and the amount 
of its borrowings from banks in India classifying them into demand 
and time liabilities; 
• ... • • ... 
at the close of business on each Friday, and every such retwn shall be 
sent not later than five days after the date to which it relates: 
Provided that the Bank may, by notification in the Gazette of India, 
delete or modify or add to any of the particulars specified in the foregoing 
clauses: 
Provided further that where Friday is a public holiday under the 
.01 1111. Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, for one or more offices of a scheduled 
bank, the re1:urn shall give the preceding working day's figures in respect 
of such office or offices, but shall nevertheless be deemed to relate tn that 
Friday: 
Provided also that where the Bank is satisfied that the. furnishing of 
a weekly return qnder this sub-section is impr.acticable in the case of any 

Publica·· 
tionot 
consolidat. 
eel state-
me'nt by 
~heau~ 
68 
scbeduled bank by reason of the geographical position of the bank and 
its branches, the Bank may allow such bank-
(i) to furnish a provisional return for the week within the 
period aforesaid to be followled up by a final return not later than 
ten days after the date to which it relates, or 
(ii) to furnish in lieu of a weekly return 'D monthly return to be 
sent not' later than fourteen .days afteor the end of the month to which 
it relates giving the details specified in thi's sub-section in respect of 
such bank at the close of business for the month. 
(3) If the averap,l' daily balance held at th~ Bank by a scheduled bank 
during any week is below the minimum prescribed by or under sub-'Section 
(1)' or sub-section (lA), such scherluled hank shall be liable to p~y to 
the Bank in respect of that week penal interest at a rtlte of three pet" 
cent. above the bank rllte on the amount by which such balance with the 
Bank falls short of the prescribed minimum, and if during the next 
'SUcceeding week, such avera~e daily bal'3nce is still below the prescribed 
minimum, the rates of penal interest shall be increased to a rate of five 
per cent. above the bank rate in respect of that week and each subsequent 
week during which the default continues on the amount by which such 
balance at the Bank falls short of the pre$_ed minimum. 
(3A) When under the provisions of sub-'Section (.'l) penal interest at 
the increased rate of five per cent. above the bank rate has become pay-
able by a scheduled bank. if thereafter the average daily balance held at 
the Bank during the next succeeding week is still below the prescribed 
minimum,- " , 
(a) every director, manager Or secretary of the scheduled bank. 
who is knowin~lv and wilfullv a ~arty to the default. shall be punish-
able with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and with a 
further fine which m'av extend to five .hundred rupee!; for each sub-
sequent week durjn~ which the default continues, and 
(b) the Bank mav prohibit the scheduled bank from receiving 
after the said week any fresh deposit. 
and, if default is made bv the scheduled bank in complving with the pro-
hibition referred to in clause (b). everv qirector and officer. of the sche,. 
duled bank Who is knowinglv and wilful1v a party to such default or 
who throtlT!h neglil!enC'e or otherwise contributes to such default shall in 
resnect of pach such d('fault be punishable with fine which mav extend 
to five hundred rupees and with a furthf'!r flne which mav extend to flvp 
hundred rupees fot' each d'3v after the first on which a depo!';it received 
in contravention of such prohibition is retained by the scheduled bank. 
E:rplanation.-YJ1! thi-::: sub-sertirm "officer" includes a manager, 
secretary, branch mnna~p.r. and hrnnch flecrl'tnry: 
• • • • • 
43. The Bank sh'311 'Cnuse to hi> pl1hlisht'd ellC'!h WMlr n C'onsoliitA.ted 
statement shmvinl:! theo ngF,I'e~:1b. lhbilitl"!s and a~"1pt~ of all thE' ~C'hf'~t11pd 
hanks tOP.'p.thpr, ba.sed o~' the' rptllrnc; ~md information received under this 
Act or any other law for. the time being in force. 
• • • • • 

JOoflM9. 
90tl8U. 
2 of 1882. 
PBOVISIONS RELATING TO NON-BANXING INSTITUTIONS IUIlCEJ:\I'ING DEPOSITS 
AND nNANCIAL INSTIIOuONS . 
45R. The provisions of this Chapter shiill not apply to the State Bank 
or a banking company as defined in section' 5 of the Banking ~gulation 
Act, 1949 or a banking institution notified under section 51 of that Act 
or a Regional Rural Bank or a co-operative bank or a primary agricultural 
credit society or a pri:mary credit society: 
Chapter 
mBnot 
to apply 
in certain 
cases. 
'Provided that for the purposes of this Chapter, the Tamil Nadu Indus-
trial Investment Corporation Limited shall not be deemed to be a banking 
company. 
451. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(bb) "deposit" shall include, and shall be deemed always to have 
included, any money received by a non-banking institution by way 
of deposit. or loan or in any other form, but shall not includ~ amounts 
raised, by way of share capital, or contributed as c8ipital by pa~:tners 
of a firm; ~ 
• • • • • 
(d) "firm" means a firm as defined in the Indian Partnership Act, 
1932, of which the capital subscribed by its partnerS' exceeds one lakh 
of rupees; 
(e) "non-banking institution" means a company, corporation, 
co-operative SOCiety or firm. 
• • • • • 
58E. (1') No court shall take cognizance of any o1fence punishable 
under this Act except upon a complaint in writing made by an offiCer of 
the Bank, generally or specially authorised in writing in this behalf by 
the Bank, and no court other than that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or 
a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a court superior' thereto shall 
try any such offence. . ._ ! ~,.,.j 
• • • • • 
ExTRACTS FROM THE BANKING RlXmLA'l'ION A.ur, 1949 
(10 OF 19(9) 
• • • • • 
Deftni_ 
tiol1B . 
Cogni.. 
zanceot 
offencea. 
5. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or Inter.pre-
context,- _. tatMt. 
(a) "approved securities" meanS securities in which a trustee may f 
invest money under clause (4). clause (b), clause (~). clause (c) I)r 
clause (d) of section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, .1882; 
• • • • 
(1) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India; 
• • • • • 
'1. (1) No company other than a 'banldng company shall use as .'part 
of 'its name any of the words "bank", "banker" or "banking" and nc;> 
company shall carry on the business Of banking in India unless it \1SI!'5 as 
part of its name at'least one of such words. 
• • • • • 
Use of 
words 
''bank'', 
"banker", 
"banking" 
or "'bank. 
mgcom.. 
peny·'. 

Prohibi-
tionof 
trading. 
Bankin, 
company 
to be 
managed 
bywholr=,. 
time 
chairman. 
Chairman 
or 
DireCtor 
appointed 
by the 
Reserve 
Baunot 
to be 
required 
to hold 
qualiftca-
tier! 
shares. 
Pro-vlsiorlS 
of sections 
~OA and 
lOB to 
o-verride 
aU other 
la1ltS, 
eontraet6. 
etc. 
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 6 or in any contract, 
no banking company shall directly or indirectly deal in the huying 01' 
selling ,or bartering of goods, except in connection with the realisation of 
security given to or held by it, or engage in any u-ade, or buy, sell or 
barter goods for others otherwise than in connection with bills uf 
exchange received fOr collection or negotiation or with such of its busin(.;ss 
a'd is referred to in clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 6: 
Provided that this section shall not apply to any such businessai 
. aforesaid which was in the course of being transacted on the cpnunence-
, ment Of this Act, so however, that the said business shall be completed 
before the expiry of one yP.ar from such commencement. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, "goods" means every 
kind of movable property, other than . actionable claims, st9ckS, shares, 
money, bullion and specie, and all instruments referred to in clause (a) of 
sub-section (1) of section 6. 
• • • • • 
lOB. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
being in force or in any contract to the contrary, every banking company 
in existence on the commencement of section 3 of the Banking Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 1968, or which comes into existence thereafter shall 
haV>e a chairman of its Board of directors who shall be entrusted with 
the management of the whole of the affairs of the banking com~any: 
Provided that the chairman shall exercise his powers subject to the 
superintendence, control and direction of the Board of directors: 
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a 
banking company in existence on the commencement of the said ~tion 
for a ·Period of three month'S frem such commencement .. 
• • • • • • 
(5) A chairman of the Board of directors of a banking company may, 
by writing under his hand addressed" to the company, resign his office 
but shall continue in office until his successor assumes oftice. 
• • • • 
IOC. Any director or chairman appointed by the Reserve Bank under 
section lOA or section lOB, as the case may be, shalt not be required to 
.hold qualification shares in the banking company. 
10D. Any appointment or removal of a director or chairman in pur-
suance of section lOA or section lOB shall haV>e effect and any such person 
shall not be entitled to claim any COMpensation for the loss or termination 
of .oftice, notwithstanding anything contained in any law oT in any 
contract, memorandum Or articles ofsssociatiqn. 
58 of 1968. 
'. 

28 of 1881. 
2 of 1934. 
1 of 1956, 
1 of 1956, . 
71 
• • • • • 
18. Every banking company, not being a scheduled bank, shall main- Cash 
tain in India, by way of cash reserve with itself or in current account reserve. 
opened with the Res~rve Bank or the State Bank of India or any other 
bank noUfied by the Central Government in this behalf or partly in cash 
with itself and partly in such .account or accounts, a sum equivalent to 
at'lea'St three per cent. of the total of ~ts time and' demand liabilities in 
India, and shall submit to the Reserve Bank before the fifteenth day of 
every month a return showing the amount so held on Friday of each week 
of the preceding month with particulars of its time and demand liabilities 
in India on each such Friday, or, if any such Friday is a public holiday 
under the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, at the close of b~siness on 
the preceding working day. 
Explanation.-In this section and in section 24, "liabilities in India" 
shall not incltid~-
(a) the paid-up capital or the reserves or any credit ba'ance in 
the proit and loss account of the banking company; 
(b) any advance taken from the Reserve Bank or from the 
State Bank of'India or from the Industrial Development Bank of 
India or from the Export~Import Bank of India: or from the Notional 
Bank or from any bank notingd by the Central 
GO'lernment under clause (c) of the Explanation to sub-section (1) 
of section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. 
19. (1) A banking company shall not form any subsidiary company 
except a subsidiary company, formed for one or more of the following 
purposes, namely, the undertaking and executing of trusts, the undertak-
ing of the 8.dministration of estates as executor, trustee or otherwise, the 
providing of safe deposit vaults or, 'with the previpus permission in 
writing of the Reserve Bank, the carrying on of the business of banking 
exclusively outside India, or such other purposes as are incidental to the 
business of banking. 
I 
• • ... ... ... 
20. (1). Notwithstanding anything to. the contrary contained in section 
77 of the Companies Act, 1956, no banking company shall-
... ... ... " 
(b) e~ter into any commitment for granting any loan or advance 
to or on behalf of-
• • ... ... • 
(iii) any company (not being a subsidiary of the banking 
company or a company registered under section 25 of the Com-
panies Act, 1956, or a Government company)· of which any of 
the directors of the banking company is a director, managing 
agent, manager, employee ,or guarantor or in which he holds 
substanti8I interest, or 
... ... • " ... 
Restric_ 
tio'h on 
nature of 
aubsi. 
diary com-
paniee. 
Restric-
tionso n 
lOan98.tld 
advances. 

Ucenalng 
of bank. 
lb. COIn. 
panies. 
Mainte· 
'nance of 
a percen-
tage ot 
assets. 
72 
zz. (1). • • !II • 
(3) BefOl'e granting any licence under ·thm section, the &!serve Bank 
may require to be satisfled by an inspection of the books of the company 
or otherwiise that all or any of the following conditions are ful1ll1ed, 
name1y:- . 
• • * • • 
(c) in the case of a company incorporated outside India that the 
carrying on of banking b~by sw:h company in India will be in 
the public·interest and that the Government or law of the country in 
which it is incorporated does not discriminate in any way against 
banking companies registered in India, and that the company complies 
with all the provisiOns of this Act, applicable to banking companies 
incorporated outside India 
• * • • * 
(4) The Reserve Bank may ~ancel a licenCe granted to. a banking 
company under this section-
• * • • • 
(iii) if at any time; any of the conditiC>ns referred to in slib-sectioD 
.(3) is not fulfilled: 
Provided that before cancelling a licence under clause (ii) or clause 
(iii) of this sub-section on the ground that the banking company h..a 
failed to:comply with or has failed to fulfil any of the conditions referred 
to therein,. the Reserve Bank, unless it is of opinion that the delay will 
be prejudicial to the interests of the company's depositors or the public, 
shan grant to the company on ~uch terms as it may specify, an opportunity 
of taking the necessary steps for complying with or fulfilling such 
condition. 
• • • • • 
24. (1) After the expiry of two years from the commencement of this 
Act. every bankinf, company shall maintain in India in cash, gold or 
unencumbered approved securities, valued at a price not exceeding the 
current market price, an amount which 'Shall not at the close of business 
on any day be less than 20 per cent. of the total of its time and 'demand 
liabilities in India. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, "unencumbered approv-
ed securities" of a banking company shall include its approved securities 
lodged with another institution for an advance or any other credit 
arrangement to the extent to which such securities haye not been drawn 
against or availed of: 
• • • • • 
(2A) (a) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or in 
sub-section (2), after the expiry of two years from the commencement of 
the Banking Companies (Amendment) Act, 1962,-
'(i) a scheduled bank, in addition to the average daily 9ti1ance 
which it is, or may be, required to maintain under section 42 of the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, and 
(ii) every other banking company', in addition to the cash ,reserve 
which it is required to maintain under section 18, 
shall maintain in lndia in cash, gold or unencumbered approved securities, 
36 of 1962. 
2 of 198-4. 
valued at a price not exceeding the current, market price, an amount I • 
which shall not at the cl~ K of business on any day be leB'S than 2S per \ 
cent. of the total of its demand and time lipl..IUties in India; 

toUts.. 
21 of 1976. 
26 of 1881. 
I of 19'10. 
21 of 1976. 
.of1980. 
73 
(b) in computing the amount for the purp.>SeS'of clause (a),-
(0 the deposit required under sub-section (2) of 'Section 11 to be 
made with the Reserve Bank by a banking company incorporated 
outside India, and 
(ii) any cash or balances maintained in India by a banking c0m-
pany other than a scheduled bank with itself or in current account 
with the Reserve Bank or the State Bank of India or with any other 
,bank: which may be notified in this behalf by the Central Government, 
in excess of the aggregate of the cash or balance or·both required to 
be maintained under section 18, and 
(iii), any balances maintained by a scheduled bank with the 
Reserve Bank in excess of the balance required to be maintained by 
it under section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act., 1934, and any 
balances in current account maintained in India by a scheduled bank 
with the State Bank Of India or with any other bank which may be 
notified in this behalf by the Central Government, 
shall be deemed to be cash maintained in India. 
(2B) The Reserve Bank may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
vary the percentage referred to in sub-section (2A) in ~--pect of a 
Regional Rural Bank established under section 3 of the Regional Rural 
Banks Act, 1976. 
(3) For the purpose of enSuring compliance with the provisions of this 
section, every banking company shall, not later than fifteen days after 
the end of the month to which it relates, furnish to the Reserve Bank in 
the prescribed form and manner a monthly return shpwing particulars of 
its assets maintained in accordance with this section, and its time and 
demand liabilities in India at the close of bUsiness on each Friday duri.ng 
the month, or if any Friday is a .public holiday under the Negotiable 
Instruments Act, 1881, at the clo'se of business on the preceding working 
day: 
Provided that every regional rural bank shall also furnish a COPy of 
the said return to the National Bank. 
• '" '" • • 
34A. (1) ... '" • '. • 
(3) For the purposes of this section, "banking company" includes the 
Export-Import Bank of India, the' Industrial Development Bank of India, 
the National Bank, the Reserve Bank, the State Bank of India a corres-
ponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Tran'sfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, a Regional Rural 
Bank established under section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976, 
a corresponding' new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banldng 
Companies (Acquisition, and Transfer of U~dertakings) Act, 1980, and 
any subsidiary bank. 
35. (1) • • • • • 
(2) It shall be the duty of every director or CJther omcer or employee 
of the banking company to produce to any oftlcer making an inspection 
under sub-section (1) all such books, accounts and other documents in his 
custody or power and to. furnish him with any . statements and information 
Produc-
tion of 
docu.. 
mentsof 
confiden.-
tial 
Dature. 

Amend. 
mentsof 
Pl'OVi-
sions re-
JOlting to 
appoint-
JJJents'of 
managing 
directoL"0, 
.etc., to be 
subj'ectto 
pJ"t"vious 
approval 
of the 
f".eserve 
Bank. 
74 
,relating to the affairs of the banking company as the said officer may 
require of him within such time as the said offi.cer may specify. 
(3) Any person making all inspection under sub-secticm (1) lUay 
examine on, oath any director or other officer or employee of the banking 
company in relation to its business, and may administer an oath accord-
ingly, . 
(4) The Reserve Bank shall, if it has been directed. by the Central 
Government to cause an inspection to be made, and may, in any other 
case, report to the Central Government on any inspection made under 
this section, and the Central Government, if it is of opinion after con-
sidering the report that the affairs of the banking company are being 
conducted to the detriment of the interests of its depositorS, may, after 
giving such opportunity to the' banking company to make a representation 
in connection with the report as, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
seems reasonable, by order in writing-
(a) prohibit the banking company from receiving fresh deposits; 
(b) direct the Reserve Bank to apply under section 38 for the 
winding up of the banking company: . 
Provided that the Central Government may defer, for such period. as 
it may think fit, the passing of an order under this sub-section, or ca~el 
,or modify any such order, upon such terms and conditions as it may think 
tit to impose. 
• • • • • 
E~lanation.-For the purposes of this' section, the expression "banldng 
company" shall include-
(i) in the case of a banking company incorporated. outside India. 
all its , branches in India; and 
(ii) in 'the case of '8 bankirig company incorporated 'in India-
(a) all its subsidiaries formed for the purpose of. carrying 
on the busine-ss of banking exclUSively outside India; and ' 
(b) all its branches whether sLtuated in India 'or outside 
India. 
• • .. • • 
• 358. (1) In the ~se of a banking company-
(a) no amendment of any proviSion relating to the appointment 
9r re-appoi~tment or termination of appointment or remuneration of 
a chairman, a managing director or any other director, whole-time 
ur otherwjse or of a manager Or a chief executive officer by what-
ever name called, whether that .provision be 'containedin the 
company's memorandum or articles of association, or in an ~greement 
entered into by it, or in any resolution passed by the cOmpany in 
general meeting or by its Board of directors shall have effect unless 
approved by the Reserve Bank; 
.. .. .. • • 
ExplanatiO'n • .::....Fot' the purposes of this sub-sectibn, any ,provision con-
ferring any benefl.t or prOviding ariy amenity or perquisite, 'in 'whatever 
form, whether during Or after the· termination of the term of oftlce of 

1 of 1956. 
5 ot 1970. 
21 ot 1976. 
40 of 1980. 
1 of 19.')6. 
14'Of 1947. 
75 
the chairman or the ~nager or the chiei executi~ ofticer by whatever 
name ,called or the managin6: director, or any other di.):ector, Whole-time 
,or otherwise, shall be deemed to be a provision relating' to his remunera-
tion. . . 
{2) Nothing contained in 'Sections 268 and 269, the proviso to sub-
, section (3) of section 309, sectionS 310 and 311, the proviso to section 387, 
, and section 388 (in so far as 'Section 388 makes the provisions oi s~ctions 
310 and 311 apply in relation to the manager of a company) of the 
Companies Act, 1956, shall apply to any matter in respect of which the 
approval of the Reserve Bank has to be obtained under sub-section (1) . 
• • • • • 
3GAB. (1) If the Reserve Bank is of opinion that ~n the interest of 
banking policy or in the public interest or in the interests of the banking 
GO.mpany or its deposi~ors it is necessary so to do, it may, from time to 
time by order in writing, appoint, with effect from such date as may be 
specified in the order, one Or more' persons to hold office as additional 
directon; of the banking company: ' 
Provided that the number of additional directors so appointed shall 
not at any time exceed five or one-third of the maximum stl'ength fixed 
for the Board' by the articles, whichever is less . 
• .. • • • 
36AD. (1) ~. .. • .. 
(3) For the purposes of this section, "banking company" includes the 
Export-Import Bank of Indi~, the Reserve Bank, the Industrial Deve-
lopment Bank of India, the National Bank, the State Bank of India, a cor-
responding new bank constituted under'section 3 of the Banking Companles 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, a Regional Rural 
Bank established under section 3 of the Regionill Rural .Banks Act, 1976, 
a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980, and 
any subsidiary bank. 
'" • .. '" '" 
42. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in sections 460, 
464 and 465 of the Companies Act, 1956, the High Court may, in the pro- . 
ceedings for winding up a banking company, dispense with any meetings 
of creditors or contributories or with the appointment of a committee of 
inspection if it considers that no obJect will be secured thereby sufficient 
to justify the delay and' expense. 
. '" '" . . 
45; (1) .. '" '" '" '" 
(5) The scheme aforesaid may contain provdsions for all Or any' of 
the following matters, namely:-
'" '" '" • • 
(i) the continuance of the services of all the employees of. th~ bank-
ing company (exCepting such of them as not being workmen within 
the ,meaning of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 are specifically 
mentioned in the scheme) in the banking company itself on its re-
construction or, as the case may be, in the trans'foer,ee bank at the 
same remuneration and on the same terms and conditions of service, 
which they were getting or, as the case may be, by which they were 
Power Of 
Reserve 
Bank to 
appoint 
additional 
directors. 
PU:1ish-
menU; for 
certain 
activities 
in relation 
to bank.. 
in,com.. 
pabies. 
Power to 
dispense 
with 
meetings 
of credi-
tors, etc. 
Power of 
Reserve 
Bank to 
apply to 
Centl~al 
Govern-
mentfor 
suspen-
sion of 
bU3inesg 
bya bank-
ingcom-
panyand 
to prepare. 

lChemeof 
J'eCODIU-
tutionor 
~. 
mation. 
Part IlIA 
to over. 
ride 
other 
]a ... 
76 
beiDg govemed, immediately before the. date of the order of mora.-
torium: " . l _dI 
• f'I.2Z. 
Provided that the scheme ahalI contain a provision that- " 
(i) the banking company shall payor grant not later than 
the expiry of the period of three years trom the date OD which 
the scheme is sanctioned by the Central Government, to the 
said employees the same remuneration and the same terms and 
conditions of service as are applicable to employees of corres-
ponding rank or status of a comparable banking company to be 
determined for this purpose by the Reserve Bank (whose deter. 
mination in ¢.is respect ~hall be final);' 
(ii) the transferee bank shall payor grant not later than the 
expiry of the aforesaid period of three years, to the said employees 
the same remuneration and the same terms and conditions of 
service as are applicable to the other emplSyees of corresponding 
rank or status of the transferee bank subject to the qualiftcatlOns 
and experience of the said employees being the same as or equi-
valent to those of such other employees of the transferee bank: 
Provid~ further 'that if in any case under clause (ii) of the 
first proviso any doubt or difference 'arises as to whether the quaU-
fication and experience of any of the said employees are the same as 
or equivalent to the qualifications and experience of the other 
employees of corresponding rank or status of the transferee bank, the 
doubt or difference shall be referred to the Reserve Bank whose 
decision thereon shall be final; 
• • • • • 
(8) On and from the date of the coming into operation of the scheme 
or any provi'Sion thereof, the scheme or such provision shall be binding 
on th~ banking company or, as the case may be, on the transferee bank 
and any other banlting company concerned in the amalgamation and also 
on all the members, depositors and other creditors and employees of 
each of those companies and of the transferee bank, and on any other 
person having any right or liability in relation to any of those eom:panies 
or the transferee bank. 
(9) On and from such date as may be specified by the Central Gov-
ernment in this behalf, the properties and assets of the banking company 
shBll, by Vtirtue of and to the exretit provided in the scheme, stand trans-
ferred to, and vest in, and the liabilities of the banking company shall, 
by virtue of and to the extent provided in the scheme, sumd transferred 
to, and become the liabilities of, the transferee bank. 
" " • • " 
(15) In this section, "banking mstitution" means any banking company 
and includes the State Bank of' India or any other banking institution 
notified by the Central Government under section 51., ' 
" " • • • 
GAo The provisions of this Part and the rules made thereunder shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in 
the Companies Act, 1956 or the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1898 or any other law for the time being in force 
or any instrument havlng effect by virtue of any such law; but the pro-
visions of any such law or instrument in so far as the same are not 
lIV\-: I 
1 of 1958. 
50f 1908. 
501 1898. 

1 of 1956. 
5 of 1898. 
5 of 1898. 
1 of 1956. 
5 of 1898. 
5 of 1898. 
77 
varied by, or inconsistent with, the proviSions of this Part or rules mAde 
thereunder shall apply to all proceedings under this Part. 
. . . . ~ 
45J. (1) The High Court may, if it thinks fit, take cognizance of and 
try in a summary way any offence alleged to have been committed by 
any person who has taken part in the promotion or formation of the 
bank'ing company which is being wound up or by any director, manager 
or officer thereol: 
Special 
provi-
sions for 
punish-
ing 
off~es 
in rela-
Provided that the offenc.e is one punishable under this Act or under lion to 
the Companies Act, 1956. banking 
COIn_ 
(2) When trying any such offence as aforesaid, the High Court may panies 
also try any other offence not referred to in sub-section (1) which is an being 
offence with which the accused may, under the Code of Criminal Prace- wu,ound p. 
dure, 1898, be charged at the same trial. 
(3) In any case tried summarily under sub-section (1), the High 
Court-
~ 
(a) need not summon any witness, if it is satisfied that the evi-
dence of such witness will not be material; 
(b) shaU not be bound to adjourn a trial for any purpose unless 
adjournment is, in the opinion of the High Court, necessary in the 
interests of justice; 
(c) shall, before passing any sentence, record judgment embody-
ing the S'ubstance of the evidence and also the particulars specified 
in section 263 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, so far as that 
section may be applicable; 
and nothing contained in sub~ection (2) of section 262 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898, shall apply to any such trial. 
(4) All offences in relation to winding up alleged to have been com-
mitted by any person specified in sub-section (1) which are punishable 
under this Act or under the Companies Act, 1956, and which are not tried 
in a summary way under sub-sec~ion (1) shall, notwithstanding any-
thing to the contrary contained in that Act or the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1898 or in any other law for the time being in force, be taken 
cognizance of and tried by a Judge of the High Court other than the 
Judge for the time being dealing with the proceedings for the winding 
up of the banking company . 
. (5) NotWithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1898, the High Court may take cognizance of any 
offence under this 'section without the accused being committed to it for 
trial and all such trials shall be without the aid of a jury . 
• • * * . • 
45S. (1) For the purpose of enabling the official liqUidator or the ChiefPr _ 
special officer appointed under sub-section (3) of section 37 to take into flidenc! e 
his custody or under his control, all property, effects and actionable claim1il Magis: 
to which a banking company, is or appears to be entitled the official trate and 
liquidator or the special officer, astbe case may be, may request in Dist~ict 
. writing the Chief Presidency Magistrate or the District Magistrate, within ~:~~~o 
whase jurisdiction any property, books of account or other documents of assist 
such banking company may be situate or be found, to take possession offlcial 

liquidator 
in 
taking 
charge of 
• property 
of bank-
ing com-
pany 
'being 
wound 
up. 
Penalties. 
Cogni.. 
zanceof 
offences, 
thereof, and the Chief Presidency Magistrate or the District Magistrate, 
as the case may be, shall, on such request being made to him,- ' 
(4) take possession of such property, books of accounts or other 
documer.ts, and . 
(b) forward them to the official liquidator or the special officer. 
(2) Where any such property and effects are in the possession of 
the Chief Presidency Magistrate or the District Magistrate, as the case 
may be, such Magistrate shall, on request in writing being made to him 
by the official liquidator or the special officer referred 1;0 in' sub-section 
(1) sell such property and effects and forward the net proceeds of the 
sale to the official liquidator or the special officer: 
Provided that such sale shall, as far as practicable, be effected by 
public auction. 
(3) For the purpose of securing compliance with the provisions of 
sub-section (1), the Chief Presidency Magistrate or the District Magi&-
trate may take or cause to be taken such steps and use or cause to be 
used such force as may. in his opinion, be necessary. 
(4) No act of the Chief Presidency Magistrate or the District Magis-
trate done in pursuance of this section shall' be called in question in any 
court or before any authority. 
• • • • • 
(S. (1) • • • • • 
(2) If any person fails to produce any book, account or other docu-
ment or to furnish any statement or information which under sub-section, 
(2) of section 35 it is his' duty to produce or furnish, or to ~r any 
question relating to the business of a banking company which he is asked 
by an officer making an inspection'llnder that section, he shall be punish-
able with a fine which may extend to two thousand rupees in respect 
of each offence, and if he persists in such refusal, to a further fine which 
may extend to one hundred rupees for every day during· which the 
offence contin'lles. 
• • * • • 
(4) If any other provision of this Act is contravened or if any default 
is made in complying with any requirement of this Act or of any order, 
rule or direction made or condition imposed thereunder, any peNon 
guilty of such contravention or default shall be punishable with flne 
which may extend to two thousand rupees, and wlu!le a contravention 
Or default is a continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to 
one hundred rupees for every day during which the contravention or 
default continues . 
• • • • • 
4'1. No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
sub-section (5) of section 36AA or section 46 except upon complaint in 
writing made by 'an officer of the Reserve Bank or, as the case'may be, 
the National Bank generally or specially authorised in 'writing in this 
behalf by the Reserve Bank or, as the case may 'be, the National Bank, 
and no court inferior to that of a 'Presidency Magi'Strate or a Magistrate 
of the first class shall try any such offence . 
• • • • 

23 of 1955. 
• Sot 19'TO. 
21 of 1976. 
'._ 1980. 
100f 1897, 
, 
79 
51. Without prejua1ce to the proVISlons.)f the State Bank of India 
Act, 1955, or any other enactment, the provisions of sections 10 13 to 15 
17" 19·to 21, 23 to 28, 29 [excluding-sub-section (3)],31, 34,35, 35A, 36 [ex~ 
eluding clause (d) of sub-section (1)], 46 to 48, 50, 52 and 53 shall also 
apply, so far as may be, to and in relation to the State Bank of India or 
any corresponding new bank const.itut~d under section 3 of the Bankling 
Companies (Acquisition, and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, or a 
Regional Rural Bank established under section 3 of the Regional Rural 
Banks Act, 1976, or any corresponding new bank constituted under section 
3 of th~ Banking Comp~nies (Acquisition and Transfer of Under-
takings) Act, 1980, or any oth8'r banking institution notified by the 
Central Government in this behalf as they apply to and in relation to 
banking companies: 
Provided that-
(0) nothing contained in clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 
10 shall apply to the chainn:an of the State Bank: of India or to a 
general manager of any subsidiary bank in so far as the said clause 
precludes him from being 'a director of. or bolding an officp in, any 
institution approved by the R~serve Bank; 
(b) nothing contained in section 19 shall apply to tbe holding 
by the State Bank of India of shares 1n the capital of any such sub-
sidiary bank; and 
(e) nothing contained in section 46 or in section 47A shall apply 
to !lny officer of the Central Government or tbe Reserve Bank or the 
State Bank of India, nominated or appointed as director of the State 
Bank of India, or any such subsidiary bank or any' other banldng 
fDstitution notified by the Central Government under this section. 
S2, (1) .. .. • .. .. 
(3) All rules made under this section shall be subject to the condition 
of previous publication, and the date to be spec'lfted under clause (3)' of 
section 23 of tbe General Clauses Aet, 1897, shall not be less than six 
months from the date on which the draft of the proposed rules was 
published: 
Provided tliat in respect of the ftrst occasion on which rules are made 
under this section (including the rules made for the first time on matters 
specifted in sections lOA and 47A). the provisions of this sub-section shaH 
not apply. .. . -", ~ 
" " • • " 
56. Tbe provisions of this Act, as in force for the time being, shall 
apply to, or in relation to, co-operative socie1des as tbey apply' to, or in 
relation t.:', banki'ng companies subject to the following modifications, 
namely:-
• • • ... 
" 
(c) in section ~,-
• • " '. • 
(ii) dau'ses (ff) and (h) shall be omitted; 
• " " " " 
(f) for section 7, tbe following section shall be substituted, 
namely:- • 
'7. (1) No co-operative society other than a co-operative 
bank shall use as part of its name any of the ",,'0rds "bank", 
"banker" or "banking" and no co-oPerative society shall carry on 
the business of banking in India unless it uses as part of its 
.• name at least one of such words. 
AppUca. 
tion of 
certain 
prOVision. 
to the 
State 
Barrk of 
India and 
other 
tlotifted, 
banks. 
Power of 
Central 
Govern-
mentto 
make 
rules. 
Act to ap-
plytoc()-
operative 
societies 
aubjecttc. 
modiJi.. 
cations . 
USe of 
word 
"bank", 
~at1'ker" 
or 

"bIbk-
in .... 
Cuh 
l'eIel'Ve. 
• 
80 
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to--
(a) a primary credit society, or 
(b) a co-operative society formed for the protection of 
the mutual interests of co-operative banks or co-operative 
land mortgage banks, 
(c) any co-operative society, not being a primary credit 
society, formed by the employees of a banking company or 
the Stat~ Bank of India or any other banking institution 
notified by the Central Government under section 51 or the 
employees of a subsidiary of such banking company or the 
Sta~ Bank of India or, as the case may be, 'Such banking 
institUtion.'; 
(g) sections 10, lOA, lOB, lOC and IOD shall be omitted; 
• • • • • • 
(;) for section 18, the followin~· section shall be substituted, 
namely:-
'18. Every co-operative bank, not being a S,tate co-operative 
bank for the time being included in the Second Schedule to the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, shall maintain in India, by 2 of 1934. 
way of cash reserve with itself or in current account opened with 
the Reserve Bank or the State Bank of India or the State co-
operative bank of the State concerned or with any other bank 
notified by the Central Government in this behalf or, in the 
case of a primary co-operative bank, with the central co-operative 
bank of the district conceraed or partly in cash with itself and 
partly in such account or accounts, a sum equivalent to at least 
three per cent. of the total of its time and demand liabilities in 
India, and shall submit tQ the Reserve Bank before the l~th day 
of every month a return showing the amount so held on Friday 
of each week of the preceding month with particulars of its time 
and demand liabilities in India on each such Friday, or, if any 
such Friday is a public holiday under the Negotiable Instruments 
Act, 1881, at the clO'se of business on the preceding, working day. 26 of 1881. 
Explanation.-In this section and section 24 "liabilities in 
India" shall not include,-
(a) the paid-up capital or the reseryes or any credit 
balance in the proflt and loss account of the co-operative 
bank; 
(b) any advance taken from a State Government, the 
Reserw Bank, the State Bank of India, the Industrial Develop-
ment Bank of India, the Export-Import Bank of India, the 
National Bank or any bank notified by the Central Govern-
ment under claUse (e) of the Explanation to sub-section (1) 
of section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 
(c) in the Ji,ilse of a State or central co-operative bank, 
also any deposit of money wtth it representing the reserve 
[undor any part thereof required to be maintained with it 
J of 191 •• ' 

lof 1956. 
23 of 1965. 
23 of 1~3. 
• 
• 
81 
by any other co-operative society within its area of operation, 
and in the case of a central co-operatiV!e ,bank, also an advance 
taken ~y it from the State co-operative bank of the State 
concerned; 
(d) in the case of a primary co-operative bank, also any 
advance taken by it from the State co-operative bank of the 
State concerned or the central co-operative bank of the 
district concerned.'; 
* * * * 
(m) in section 2QA. in sub-section (1), the words and figures 
"Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in section 293 
of the Companies Act, 1956," shall be omitted; 
* * * .. • 
(0) in section 22,-
(i) for sub-sections (1) and (2) , the following sub-sections 
shall be substituted, namely:-
• * • • .' 
(2) Every co-operative society carrying on business as a 
co-operative bank at the commencement of the Banking 
Laws (Application to Co-operative Societies) Act, 1965, 'Shall 
before the expiry of three months from such commencement, 
every primary credit society which becomes a primary co-
operative bank after such commencement shall before the 
expiry of three months from the date on which it so becomes 
a primary co-operative bank and every co-operative society 
other than a primary credit society shall before commencing 
banking bU'siness in India, app.ly in writing to the Resex:ve 
Bank for a licence under this section: 
Provided that nothing in clause (b) of sub-section (1) 
shall be deemed to prohibit-
(i) a co-operative society carrying on business as a 
co-operative bank 'at the commencement of the Banking 
Laws (Applic,ation to Co-operative Societies) Act, 1965, 
or 
(ii) a co-operative bank which has come into exis-
tence a's a result of the division of any other co-operativf" 
society. or the amalgamation of other co-operative 
socteties carrying on business in either case as a co-
operative bank or banks at such commencement, or 
(iii) a primary credit society which becomes a 
primary co-operat've bank af~er such commencement, 
~rom carrying on banking business until it is granted. a licence 
In ~ursuance of this section or is, by a no~ice in writing, 
notified by the Reserve Bank that the licence cannot be 
granted to it."; 
* • • • .' (p) in section 23,-
• • * • * 

--
(ii) after sub-section (4), the following sub-'dection shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(4A) Any co-operative bank requiring the permission of 
the Reserw Bank under this section shall forward its 
application to the Reserve Bank through the National Bank 
which shall give its comments on the merits of the application 
and send it to the Reserve Bank: ' 
Provided that the co-operative bank shnll also' send an 
advance copy of the application directly to the Reserve 
Bank."; 
,(q) in section 24,-
(i) in sub-section (1), the words "after the expiry of two 
years from the commencement of this Act," 'shall be omitted; 
('~i) for sub-sections (2) and (2A) , the following sub-sections 
shall be substituted, namely:-
.< (2) In computing the amount for the purposes of sub-
section (1) ,-
(a) any bamnces maintained in India, by a c0-
operative bank in current account. with the Reserve Bank 
or the State Bank of India or with any other bank which 
may be notifif~d in this behalf by the Central Govern-
ment, including in the case of a State co-opei'ative bank, 
the balan('e' required under section 42 of the Reserve 
I' 
Bank of India Act. 1934, to be so maintained, 2 of 1934. 
(b) any balances maintained by a central co-operative 
bank with the State co-operative bank of the State con-
cerned, and 
(c) any balances rn~ntained by a primary co-opera-
tive bank with. the central co-operative bank of the 
district concerned or with the State co-operativebank 
of the State concerned, 
shall be deemed to be cash maintained in India. 
(2A) (a) Notwithstanding anything ~ contained in sub-
section (1) or in 'sub-section (2), after the expiry of two 
years from the commencement of the Banking Laws (Appli-
cation to Co-operative Societies) Act, 1965, or of such further 23 of 19611. 
period not exceeding one yenr as the Reserve Bank, having 
regard to the interests of the co-operative bank coneerned, 
may think fit in any particular case to allow,-
(i) a State co-operative bank,.in addition to the 
average c1aHy balance which it is, or may be, required to 
maintain' under section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934, and 2 of 1934. 
(ii) every other co-operative bank, in aadition to 
the cash reserve which it is required to maintain under 
section l8, 
shalI maintain in India in cash, gold or unencumbered 
approved eecurities, valued at a price not exceeding the 

20t 1914. 
;" .. 
current market price, an amount which shall not at the close 
of business on any day be less than twetlty-five per cent. of 
the total of its demand and time liabilities in India; 
(b) in computing the amount for the purpose of clause 
(a),-
(i) any cash or balances maintained in India by a 
co-operative bank, other than a scheduled State co-
operative bank, with itself or in current account with the 
. Reserve Bank or the State Bank of India or With any 
other bank which may be notified, in this behalf by the 
Central Government and also any balances mantained 
with the State co-operative bank of the State concerned, 
and, in the case of a primary co-operative bank, also any 
balances maintained with the central co-operative bank 
of the district concerned or with the State co-operative 
bank of the State concerned in excess of the aggregate of 
the cash or balances or both required to be maintained 
under section 18; and 
(ii) any balance maintained by a scheduled State 
CD-eperative bank with the Reserve Bank in excess of 
~e balance required to be maintained by it under &1!ction 
42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, and any 
balances in current account maintained in India by a: 
'Scheduled State co-operative bank with the State Bank 
of India or with any other bank which may be notified 
by the Central Government, 
shall be deemed to be cash maintained in India. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this suh-section,-
(a) approved securities, or a portion thereof, re-
preSenting i.vestment of Agricultural Credit Stabiliza-
tion. Fund of a co-operative. bank shall not be deemed to 
be unencumbered approved securities; 
(b) balance with the State co-operative bank of the 
. State concerned or with the central co-operative bank of 
the district concerned, or a portion thereof, representing 
investment of Agricultural Credit Stabilization Fund of 
a co-operative ba~ shall not be deemed to be cash main-
tained in India; 
(c) dn caSe a co-operative bank has taken an advance 
against any balance .maintained with the State Bank of 
India or with any- other bank which may be notift.ed in 
this behalf by the Central Government or with the State 
co-()perative bank of tbe State I concerned' or with the 
central co-operative bank of the district concerned, such 
balance to the eJ..-tent to which it has been drawn against 
or availed of shall not be deemed to be cash maintained 
in India."; 
• • • • 

." 
(w) in section 35,-
(i) in 'Sub-section (1),-
• • • • • 
(b) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:-
"Provided that the Reserve Bank may, if it considers 
necessary or expedient so to do, cause an inspection to 
be made of a primary co-operative bank under this sub-
section by one or more officers of a State co-operative 
bank in the State in which such primary co-operative 
bank carries on business and may, if it considers it 
necessary and expedient so to do, 'Supply a copy of the 
said report to the State co-operative bank or the Registrar 
of co-operative societies of the State in which the inspecl-
ed bank is registered."; 
(ii) in sub'iiection (4), clause (b) 'Shal~ be omitted; 
(iii) in sub-scction (6), for the expressions "reeional rural 
banks" and "regional rural bank", wherever they occur, the ex-
pressions "co-operative banks other than primary co-operative 
banks" and "co-operative bank other than a primary co-operative 
bank" shall., respectively, be substituted; 
(iu) the Explana«on shall be omitted; 
• • • • • 
(z) in section 36, in sub-section (1), clauses (b) and (d) shall 
be omitted; 
(za) in section 36A,--
• • • • • 
(ii) after sub-section (2), the f~llowing sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (1) and 
(2), a co-operative society carrying on business as a primary 
co-operative bank at the commencement of the Banking Laws 
(Application to Co-operative Societies) Act, 1965, or a co- 23 of 1981. 
operative 'Society which becomes a primary co-operative bank 
after such commencement shall, notwithstanding that it does 
not at any time thereafter satisfy the requirements of the 
definition of primary co-operative bank in clause (ccc) of 
section 5, continue to be a primary co-operative bank: within 
the meaning Of this Act, and may, with the approval of the 
~erve Bank and subject to such terms and condition'S as 
the Reserve Bank may specify in that behalf, continue to 
carry on the business of banking."; 
• • • • • 
(%c) in section 46, in clause (a) of the Ezplanation, after the 
words "includes an, the words "co-operative 'Society,'" shall be in-
serted; 

'I'J( .' .. tf" 
, (zd) in section 47, the words, bracketE, figures and letters "sub-
section (5) of section 36M or" shall be omitted; • 
Dotla. 
• 
(ze) section 49 shall be omitted; 
(zf) in section 49A, for the proviso, the following proviso shall 
be subStituted, namely:- . 
"Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply 
to-
(a) a primary credit society, ..... 
. (b) any other co-operative society accepting such 
deposits at the commencement of the Banking Laws (Appli-
cation to Co-operative Societies) Act, 1965, for a period of one 
year from the date of such commencement; and 
(e) any savings bank scheme run by the Government."; 
(zg) sections 49B and 49C s~ be omitted; 
(zh) in section SO, the figures and letters "10, 12A, 16." "3SB," 
and "43A" shall be omitted; 
(%i) section .51 shall be omitted; 
(zj) in section 52,-
'(i) in sub-section (2), the words, figures and letter "and 
the form in which the official liquidator may ftIe lists of debtors 
to the Court having jurisdiction under Part m or Part nIA and 
the particulars which such lists may contain" shall be omit~; 
(ii) sub-section (4) shall be omitted; 
(zk) for section 55 and the First Schedule, the following se~tion 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"55. (1) The Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891 shall apply 
in relation to a cb-operative bank as it applies in relation to a 
bank as, defined in section 2 of that I Act. 
(2) The Banking Companies (Legal Practitioners' Clients' 
Accounts) Act. 1949 shall appty in relation to a . co-operative 
bank as it applies in relation to a banking company as defined in 
section 2 of tpat Act. "'; 
.. .. • .. 
EXTRACTS FROM THE STATE BANE OF INDIA ACT, 1955 
(23 OP 1955)" 
.. .. .. 
Act 180t 
1891 and 
Act 48 of 
• 1949 to 
apply in 
relation 
to co-
opel'ative 
banb. 
". (1) The State Bank shall furnish to the Central Government and Returns, 
to the Reserve Bank within three months from the 31st day of Decem-
ber, as on whicl1 its books are closed and bal~ed its balance sheet, 
~. together with the profit and loss account and the auditors' report~on the 
working of the State Bank during the period covered by the accounts: 
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with 
the ~serve Bank, extend the said period of three months by such" 
further period, not exceeding three months, as it may thi.nk fit. 
. . . .. . 

Balance 
sheet, etc., • 
of State 
Bank 
may be 
d1Bc:ussed 
at general 
meetiIig. 
State 
Bank may 
appoint 
of6eera 
8D'dother 
emplo-
yees. 
Returns 
to be 
funish-
eel by a 
subsidiary 
bank. ' 
GenA!ral 
meetfh,lI. 
86 
42. (1) • • * . • • 
(2) The shareholders present at an annual general meeting shall be 
entitled to discuss the balance sheet and the profit and loss account of 
the state Bank made up to the previous 31st day of December, the 
report· of the Central Board qn the working of the State Bank for the 
period tovered by the accounts and the auditors' report on the balance 
sheet and accounts. 
43. (1) • * 
CHAPTER VIII 
\ MISCELLANEoUS 
• • • 
(2) Tbeofficers, advisel'S and employees of the State Bank: shall 
exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be entrusted or 
delegated to them by the Central Board. 
., 
ExTRACTS FROM THE STATE BANK OF INDIA (SUBSIDIARY BANEs) 
AcT, 1959 
(38 OF 1959) 
• • • • • 
43. (1) A subsidiary bank shall furnish to the State Bank and the 
Reserve Bank-
~ 
. (a) within three m~ntb.s from the 31st day of December as on 
which its books are closed and balanced, its balance sheet, together 
with the profit and loss account and the auditor's report, and a report 
by the Board of Directors on the working of the subsidiary bank 
during the period covered by the accounts; and 
• • • • .' 
Provided that the Reserve Bank may, after consultation with the 
State Bank, extend the said period of three months by such further 
period, not exce~ding three months, as it may think fit. , 
• • • • 
44. (1) A general meeting (hereinafter referred to as an annual general 
meeting) of a subsidiary bank shall be held in each year at the place 
where the heed office of the subsidiary bank is sitUate, and any other 
general meeting may be convened by the Board of Directors at any time:· 
Provided that such annual general meeting shall be held before the 
expiry of six weeks from the date on which the balance-sheet, together 
with the profit and loss account and auditor's report, is, under sub-
section (1) of section 43, forwarded to the State Bank, or to the Reserve 
Bank, . whichever date is earlier. 
(2) The shareholders present at an annual general meeting shall be 
entitled to discuss the balance sheet and profit and loss account of the 
bank concerned, nlade up to the previous 31st day of December, the 
report of the Board of Directors on the working of that bank for the 
period covered by the accounts and the auditors' report pn the bat.nee 
sheet and accounts . 
• • • • • 

10 of 1949. 
40 of 1980. 
lOot 1949. 
62. (1) .. • .. .. .. 
.(3), All rules made under this section.shall be laid for not less than 
thirty days before each House of Parliament as soon as may be atter 
they are made, and shall be subject to such mo4ilicawons as .Par!lament 
may make during the session in which they are so laId or the seSSIon 
immediately following. 
... .. • '. 
EXTRACTS It'ROM THE DEPOSIT INStlllANCE AND CllEDIT GUARANTEE 
CoRPORATION AI:r, 1961 
(47 OJ' 1961), 
• • • • .. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • .. 
(b) ''banking company"" means iBny cqmpany which tram»acts 
the business of banking in India and includes the State Bank, a 
,f; subsidiarY bank and any other banking institution notified. under 
" section 51 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, .but does not ,'nelude 
the Tamil N adu Industrial Investment Corporation Limited; 
... ... ... • ... 
(ee) "corresponding new bank" means a corresponcing new 
bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acqui-
sition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 Or a corresponding 
new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakin&'i) Act, 1980; 
... • ... .. .. 
,(i) "insured. bank" means a banking company or a Regional 
Rural Bank or an eligible co-operative bank for the time being 
registered under the provisiOns of this Act and includes for the 
purposes of sections 16, 17, 18 and 21,-
(i) a banking company referred. to in clause (a) or clause 
(b) of section 13, or 
... .. • • , . 
(k) "new banking company" means a "banking company whlch 
begins 'to transact the business of bQnking after the commencement 
of this Act under a licence granted to it under section 22 of the 
Bankiing Regulation Act, 1949, and includes any banking institution 
notified under section 51 of the said Act after such commenoement; 
• • • • • 
4. (1) The authorised capital of the Corporation shall be one crore of 
rupees but the Central Government may. in consultation with the 
Reserve Bank, increase such capital from time to time, so, however, that 
the total authorised. capital shall not exceed. fifteen crores of rupees. 
• • * • * 
6. '(1) • • • •• • 
(2) A director nominated under clause (b) or clause (c) of suJ;. 
section (1) shall hold office during the pleasure of the authorit~ nomi-
nating him and a director nominated under clause (d) of'Sub-sectlon (1) 
Power 
of Cen-
tral Gov-
ernment, 
to make 
rules. 
Defini-
tions. 
Capital 
ofCox--
poration. 
Board of 
director.9. 

, 
Registra-
tionof 
new bank·· 
ingcom_ 
patries. 
Cancel-
lation ~ 
registra.-
tiob. 
Beptra. 
tlon of 
eo..ope-
ratlve 
banks. 
88 
shall hold of!ice for such period not exceeding four ~ars as may' be 
specified by the Central. Government. 
(3) A person shall not be capable of being nominated as a director 
under clause (d) of sub-sec1ll.on .(1) if-
,(4) he has been removed or dismissed from the service Of Gov-
enunent or of a local authority or of a corporation or company in 
which. not less than fifty-one per cent. of the paid-up share capital 
is held by Government; or 
• (b) be is Or at any time has been acljudicate~ as an insolvent 
or has suspended payment of his debts or has compounded w.l.th his 
creditors; or 
(c) he is of unsound mind and stands SO declared by a COJDP.&-
tent court; or 
(d) he has been convicted of any offenCe which, in the o~n 
of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude. 
• • * * * 
• 
11. The Corporation shall register every new banking company as an 
insured bank ns soon as may be after it is granted a licence under section 
22 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, or, as the case may he, after it 
is notified under section 51 of the said Act. 
• • • * • 
13. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The provisiOns of claWles (a), (b), (c), (d) and (h) of sub-section 
(1) shall apply, to a coITesponding new bank as they apply to a banking 
company. . • ..: L<:.I.i 
(3) The provisions of clauses (4), (b), (c), (d) and (h) of sub-
section (1) shall apply to a Regional Rural Bank as they apply to a 
banking company. 
... • • *, . • 
13A. (1) ... .• ... • • 
(2) Subject as aforesaid-
• • ... * • 
(b) the Corporation shall ~giSter as an insured bank-
• ... ... • 
(ii) a primary credit society becoming a primary co-opera-
tive bank after such commencement within three months of 11. 
having made an application for a licence under the said aectiOn:J 
Provided that a bank referred to in clause (b) shall not be 
~o registered if it has bt!en informed by notice in writing by 
the Reserve Bank that IUCh a licence cBDDOt; be granted to it. 
• • • • • 
10 of 1949. 

lOot 1949. 
$9 
16. (1) Where an order for the winding up or liquidatidtJ. of a insured 
ba.nk is mad~, the. Corporation shall, subject tt> the other provision of 
this Act, be hable to pay to every 'depositor of that bank. in accordance 
with the provisions of section 17 an amount equal to the amount due 
to him in respect of his deposit in that bank at the time when such order 
is made: 
• 
Provided that the liability of the Corporation in respect of an insured 
bank referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of section 13 or clause 
(a) or clause (b) of section 13C shall be limited to the deposits as on 
the date of the cancellation of the registration: 
Provided further that the total ainount payable by the Corporation 
to anyone depositor in respect of his deposit in that bank in the same 
capacity and in the same right 'Shall not exceed one thousand and five 
hundred rupees: 
Provided fUrther that the Corporation may, from time to time, having 
regard to its financial position and to the interests of the banking 
system of the country as a whole, raise, with the previous approval of 
the Central Government, the aforesaid limit of one thousand and five 
hundred rupees. 
... ... '" '" '" 
32. (1) '" '" 
lit lit 
(2) The Central Government shall cause every auditor's report and 
n!pOrt of the working of the Corporation to be laid for not less than 
thirty days before each House of Parliament as soon !as may be after 
each such report is received by the Central Government. 
'" 
lit ... '" ... 
EXTRACTS FROM THE BANKING COMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER. 
OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 19'ZO 
(5 OF 1970) 
'" 
lit 
'" • • 
3. (1) '" '" • • '" 
(5) Every corresponding new bank shall carry on and transact the 
business of banking as defined in clause (b) of section 5 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949, and may engage in one Or more forms of business 
specified in sUb-sectton (1) of section 6 of that Act. 
• • • '" • 
'" '" '" • • 
Annual 
accounts 
and 
reports. 
Establish-
ment of 
1C'Orres.. 
pOD'ding 
new 
banks and 
bwines. 
thereof . 
B. (n. 
(5) Every scheme -made by the Central Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may ,be after it is mad~, before each House of 
PBl'l'iament while it is in session for a total period of thirtyl days which 
may be compri&ed in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid Or the session 
Immediately following, botli Houses ~gree in making any· modiftcatlon in 
Powerot 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
make 
scheme. 

CloIIureof 
accounts 
ami 
dispnsal 
Dfprofit& 
Power. 
IDIb 
repla..; 
Udhs. 
the scheme of both Houses' agree that the scheme should not be made, 
the 'scheme shall thereafter have effect only ,in such modi1led form or be 
of no effeCt, as the may be. so, however; that any Such modification 
or annulment shall. be without prejudice to the validity of anytbing 
previously done under that scheme. 
• • • • 
10. (1) • • • • • 
.(4) Every auditor of a corresponding new bank shall make a report 
to the Central Government upon the annual balaDce-sbeet and accounts 
and in every such report shall state-
(a) whether, in his opinion, the balance-sheet i~ a full and fair 
balance-sheet containing all the necessary particulars and is properly 
drawn up so as to exhibit a true and fair view of the affairs of the 
corresponding new bank, and in case he had called for any explana-
tion or information, whether it has been given and whether it is 
satisfactory; 
(b) whether or not the transactions of the corresponding new 
bank, which have come to his notice, have been within the powers 
of that bank; 
,(c) whether or not the returns received from the oftlces and 
branches of the corresponding new bank have been fOUlld adequate 
for the purpose of his audit; 
,(d) whether the profit and loss account shows a true balance 
of profit or loss for the period covered by such account; and 
(e) any other matter which he considers should be brought to 
the notice of the Central Government. 
• • • • • 
(8) The Central Goverrunent shall cause every auditor's report and 
report on the working and activities of each corresponding new bank 
to be laid for not less than thirty days before each HoUse of Parliament 
as soon as may be after each such report is received by' the Central 
Gove1'lUllel1t. 
• • • 
;EX'l'BACTS FBOJrI THE :R.r.GroNAL Rmw. BANKS N:rl 1976 
(21 OF 1976) 
• • ". • • 
'. '- .•. _-
, 30. The Board of directors of a Regional Rural Bank may, after 
consultation with the Sponsor. Bank and the Reserve Bank, and with 
the previous sanction of the Central Government, Jp.ak:e regulations, 
not incouistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, to provide for all matters for which proviSion is necesaary • 
or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act. 
• • • • • 

10 of 1941. 
91 
Err.aA.CTS FROM THE BANKING COMPANIEs (AcQtJIS[T.[ON .un, TRANSFER 
OF UNDBRTAKINGS) Ac:r, 1980 
(40 OF 1980) 
• • • • • • .I 
3. (1) • • ... • • 
. (5) Every c~rresponding new bank shall carry on and transact the 
business of banking as defined in clause (b) of section 5 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949, and may engage in one or more forms of business 
specified in sUb-section (1) of section 6 of that Act. 
• • • • • 
9. (1) • • • ... • 
(5) Every scheme made by the Central Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon· as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it i'i~ in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the eXpiry of the session immedi'ately following the 
sersion or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the scheme or both Houses agree that the scheme 
should not be made, the scheme shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that scheme. ... ... . . .. 
10. (1) • • • ... • 
(4) Every auditor of a corresponding new hank shall make a report 
to the Central Government upon the annual balance-sheet and accounts 
and in every such report shall sta~ 
(a)' whether, in his opinion, the balance-sheet is a full and 
fair balance-sheet containing all the necessary parti'culars and is 
properly drawn up so as to exhibit a true and fair vi~w of the alfalrs 
of the corresponding new bank, and in case he had called for any 
explanation or information, whether it has been given and whether 
it i's satisfactory; 
(b) whether or not the transactions of the corr.e,aponding new 
bank, which have come to his notice, have been witb'fn the ·powers 
of that bank: 
'(e) whether or not the returns ntceiv.ed from the offices and 
branches of the corresponding nJw bank haye been found adequate 
for the purpose of his audit; 
'(d) whether the profit and loss account shows a true balance 
of profit or loss for the 'period covered by such account; and 
(e) any other matter which he considers 'Should be brought to 
the notice of the Central Government. 
• • • 
(8) The Central Government shall cause every auditor's report and 
report on the working and activit!~s of each corresponding new bank to 
be laid for not less than thirty days before each House of Parliament 
as. soon ~s may be after each 'Such report is received by the Central 
Government. 
• • • 
Establish-
ment of 
correa. 
pOnding 
new 
banks and 
buSines • 
thereof. 
Powerot 
Central 
Govern-
meat to 
make 
scheme. 
Closure' of 
acCOUhts 
andd1L 
posal of 
profits. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891, the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934, the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the State 
Bank of India Act, 1955, the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) 
Act 1959, the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation 
Act, 1961, the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1970, the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 and the 
Banking Companies (AcqUisition and Transfer of Undffrtakings) 
Act, 1980. 
, 
(Shri PTanab Kum.ar· Mukherjee, 
Minister of Finance.) 