BW No • .,. of I", 
THE CENTRAL SALES TAX 
BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 

BID No. ,. of I,,, 
THE CENTRAL SALES TAX BILL, 1956. 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to jormuJate principles jor determining when a sale or purchaH of 
goods takes place in the course oj inter-State trade or commerce 
or outride a State or in the courJe of import into or export from 
India, to provide for the levy, collection and dimibution of tare. 
on sales of goods in the course of inter-St4te trade or commerce 
and to declare certain goods to be of special impdrtance in inter-
State trade or commerce and specihl the re~1rictions and condi-
tiOn.t to which State laws impoling taxes on the sale or purchase 
of such goods of special importance shall be IUb;ect. 
B& it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAptER I 
PREuMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. 
10 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammulnd Short 1itIe. 
Kashmir. tKtcDt aDd oonun"",... 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govem- mdlt. 
ment may, by n9tiftcation in the Official Gazette, appoint, and differ-
ent dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appropriate State" means- DclDitioDs. 
(i) in relation to a dealer who has one or more places 
of business situate in the same State, that State; 
(ii) in relation to a dealer who has one or more places 
of business situate in different States, every such State with 
~~ct to the place or places of business situate within its 
territory; 

, , 
Expla1Udion.- ClPlace of business" means-
(i) in the ease of a sale of good in the course ot 
inter-Sta~e trade or commerce falling within clause (a) 
of section 3, the place from which the goods have been .5 
moved by reason of such sale; 
(ii) in the case of any such sale falling \,7ithin clause 
(b) of section 3, the place where the sale is effected. 
(b) "dealer" means any person who carries on the business 
of selling goods, and includes a Government \\hich carries on 10 
such business; 
(c) "declared goods" means goods declared l:nder section 14 
to be of special importance in inter-State trade or commerce; 
(d) "goods" includes all materials, articles, ccmmod;ties and 
all other kinds of movable property, but does not include action- 15 
able claims, stocks, shares and securities; 
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by ruleR Tr.lide under thig 
Act; 
(f) "registered deaJ::>r" means a dealer who is rf>gistered 
under section 7; 20 
(g) "sale", with its grammatical variations and cognate ex-
pressions, means any transfer of property in goods by one per-
son to another for cash or for deferred payment or for any other 
valuable consideration, and includes a transfer of goods on the 
hire-purchase or other system of payment by instalments, but 25 
does not include a mortgage or hypothecation or or a charge or 
pIE'dge on goods; 
(h) "sale price" means the amount payable to R dealer as 
consideration for the sale of any geod~, less Mny sum allowed 
as cash discount according to the practice normMlly prevailing in 
the trade, but inclusive of any sum charged {or nnything done 30 
by the dealer in respect of the goods at the time of or before the 
delivery thereof other than the cost Clf freight or delivery or the 
cost of installation in cases where such cost is separately charged: 
(i) "sales tax law" means any law for the tIme lJeing in force 35 
in any State or part thereof which provides (or the IE'VY (If taxes 
on the sale or purchase of goods generally or on any specifted 
goods expressly mentioned in that behalf, and "general sales tax 
law" means the law for the time being in force in 5ny State or 
part thereof which provides for the levy of tax on the f:1I1e or 40 
purchase of goods generally; 
(;) "turnover" used in relation to any dealer liable to tax 
under this Act means the aggregate of the sale price! received 
and receivable by him in respect of sales of any goods lD the 
Course of inter-State trade or commerce made during any pres-
cribed period and determined in the prescribed manner; 4~ 
(k) "year", in relation to a dealer, means the year applicable 
in relation to him under the general,lales tax law of the appro-
priate State, and where there Is no such year applicable, the 
financial year. 

-_. 3 
CHAPTER II 
1"0RMtTLATION OF PRINCIPLES FOR DETERMINING WHEN' SALE OR PURCHASE 
0 .. GOODS TAKES PLACE IN THE COURSE OF INTER-STATE TRADE OR 
COMMERCE OR OUTSIDE A STATE OR IN THE COURSE OF IMPORT OR 
EXPORT. 
, 3. A sale or purchase of goods shall be deemed to' take place in WheD is a 
the course of inter-State trade or commerce if the sale or purchase- ~~fpur-
10 
(a) occasions the movement of goods from on", State to~' rd ~o 
another; or the c!:e ::c 
(b) is effected by a transfer of documents of title to the goods ::-!,tate. 
during their movement from one State to another. commerce. 
Explanation l.-Where goods are delivered to a carrier 01 
other baUee for transmission, the movement of the goods shall, 
for the purposes of clause (b), be deemed to commence at 
the time of such delivery and terminate at the time when deli-
very is taken from such carrier or bailee. 
Explanation 2.-Where the movement of goods COl!lmenCes 
and terminates in the same State it shall not be deemed to be a 
movement of goods from one State to another by reason merely 
of the fact that in the course .of such movement the goods pass 
through the territory of any other State. 
t. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in sectior;. 3, Vol hen a sale WheD is a 
or purchase of goods is determined in accordance with ,ub-~ection (2) eale or pur-
to take place inside a State, such sale or purchase shall be deemed to = ~dto 
have taken place outside all other States. take· place 
outside I 
~5 (2) A sale or purchase of goods shall be deemed to take place State. 
30 
inside a State if the goods are within the State-
(4) in the case of specific or ascertained goods, at the time 
the contract of sale is made; and 
(b) in the case of unascertained or future goods, at the time 
of their appropriation to the contract of sale by the seller or 
by the buyer, whether assent of the other party is prior or 
subsequent to such appropriation. 
E.:tplanation.-Where there is a single contract of sale or 
purchue of goods situated at more places than one, the provisions 
of this sub-section shall apply as if there were separate eon tracts 
in respect of the goods at each of such places. 
5. (1) A sale or purchase of goods shall be deemed to take place WhcDisa.1 
in the course of the export of the goods out of the territory of India or purchaae 
only if the sale or purchase either occasions such export or is effected ~c tk"'p~ 
40 by a transfel' of documents of title to the goods after the goods have i~ thee course 
crossed the customs frontiers of India. of Import or 
export. 
(2) A sale or purchase of goods shall be deemed to take place 
in the course of the import of the goods into the territory of India 
.u only if the sale or purchase either occasions such import or is effected 
by a transfer of documents of title to the goods before the goods 
have crassed the customs frontiers of India. 

4 
CHAPTER III 
INTER-STATE SALES TAX 
-, 
.. Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, every 
lAIbiUty to dealer shall, with effect from such date as 1 he Central Government , 
ta oD biter- may, by notification in the Official Gazette, &Ppoint, not being earlier 
Slate sales. than thirty days from the date of such notitication, be liable to pay 
tax under this Act on all sales effected by him in the course of 
inter-State trade or commerce during any yE:ar on and from the date 
so notified. 10 
7. (1) Every dealer liable to pay tax under this Act shall, within 
such time as may be prescribed for the purpose, make an application 
for registration under this Act to such authority In the appropriate 
State as the Central Government may, by general or special order, 
specify, and every such application shall contain such particulars I, 
as may be prescribed. 
(2) Any dealer who is liable to pay tax under the sales tax law 
of the appropriate State may, notwithstanding that he is not liable 
to pay tax under this Act, apply for registration under this Act to 
the authority referred to in sUb-section (1), and every such applica-
tion shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed. ~o 
(3) If the authority to whom en application under sub--section (1) 
or sub-section (2) is made is satisfted that the application is In 
conformity with the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, he shall register the applicant and grant to him a certifi- 2, 
cate of re,patration in the prescribed form which shall specify the 
class or craases of goods for the purposes of sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 8. 
(4) A certificate of registration granted under this section may 
be cancelled by the authority granting it, where it is satisfied that 30 
the dealer to whom it has been granted has ceased to carry on 
business or has ceased to exist or, In the case of a dealer registered 
under sub-section (2), has ceased to be liable to pay tax under the 
sales-tax law of the appropriate State or for any other suftlcient 
reason. 3' 
(5) A registered dealer may apply in the prescribed manner not 
later than six months before the end of a year to the authority 
which granted his certificate of registration for the cancellation of 
such registration, and the authority shall, unless the dealer is liable 
to pay tax under this Act, cancel the registration accordingly, and 0 
where he does so, the cancellation shall take effect from the end of 4 
the year. 
8. (1) Every dealer who, in the course of inter-State trade or 
Rates of ': commerce sells to a reJlistered dealer goods of the description referred 
~:::.e of to in sub-section (3) snaIl be liable to pay tax under this Act, which 4' 
iDter-St8Ic shall be one per cent. of his turnover: 
tnde of 
C'OIDIDeftII. Provided that, if under the sales-tax law of the appropriate State, 
the sale or purchase of any goods by a dealer is exempt from tax 
aeneraUy and not in specified cases or in specified circumstances or 
js subject to tax (by whatever name called) at a rate or rates which 50 

5 
is or are lower than the rate specified in sub-section (1), the tax 
payable under this Act on the turnover in relation to the sale of 
such goods in the course of inter-State trade or commerce shall be 
niZ or shall be calculated at the lower r,ate, as the case may be. 
5 (2) The tax payable by any dealer in any case not falling within 
sub-section (1) in respect of the sale by him of any goods in the 
course of inter-State trade or commerce shall be calculated at the 
same rates and in the same manner as would have been done if the 
sale had, in fact, taken place inside the appropriate State, and for 
10 the purpose of making any such calculation any such dealer shall 
be deemed to be a dealer liable to pay tax under the sales tax law 
of the appropriate State, notwithstanding that he, in fact, may not 
be so liable under that law. 
(3) The goods referred to in sub-section (1)-
IS (a) in the case of declared goods, are goods Qf the class or 
20 
classes specified in the certificate of registration of the registered 
dealer purchasing the goods as being intended for resale by him; 
and 
(b) in any other case, are goods of the class or classes 
specified in the certificate of registration of the registered dealer 
purchasing the goods as being intended for resale by him or for 
use by him in the manufacture Df goods for sale or for use by 
him in the execution of any contract; 
and in either case include the containers or other materials used for 
2S the packing of goods of the class or classes of goods so specified. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, "contract" 
means any agreement for carrying out for cash or deferred payment 
or other valuable consideration-
(i) the construction, fitting out, improvement or repair of 
30 any building, road, bridge or other immovable property; or 
(ii) the installation or repair of any machinery affixed to 
any building or other immovable property. 
(4) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply to any sale 
in the course of inter-State trade or commerce unless the dealer 
35 selling the' goods furnishes to the prescribed authority in the 
ptescribed manner a declaration duly filled and signed by the 
registered dealer to whom the goods are sold, containing the 
prescribed particulars on a prescribed form obtained from the 
prescribed authority. 
40 9. (1) The tax payable by 8l'ly dealer under this Act shall be and 
levied and collected in the appropriate State by the Government of ~OD of 
India in the manner provided in sub-section (2). taL 
(2) The authorities for the time being empowered to assess, 
collect and enforce payment of any tax under the general sales-tax 
4,' law of the a~propriate State shall, on behal.f of the Government of 
India and subJect to any rules made under thiS Act, assess, collect and 
enforce payment of any tax payable by a dealer under this Act in the 
same manner as the tax on the sale or purchase of goods under the 
general sales-tax law of the State is assessed, paid and collected; and 
50 for this purpose they may exercise all or any of the powers they have 

Pcnaltiea. 
Cognizance 
of offences. 
Pawn to 
make ru1ea. 
«I 
under the general sales-tax law of the State; and the provisions of 
such law. including provisions relating to returns. appeals, reviews, 
revisions, references, penalties and compounding of offences, shall 
apply accordU1gly. 
(3) The proceeds (reduced by the cost of collection) in any finan- , 
cial year of any tax levied and collected under this Act in any State 
on behalf of the Government of India shall. except in so far liS those 
proceeds represent proceeds attributable to Union territories, be 
assigned to that State and shall be retained by it; and the proceeds 
attributable to Union territories shall form part of the Consolidated 10 
Fund of India. 
10. It any person-
(a) fails to get himself registered as required by section 7; or 
(b) being a registered dealer, falsely represents when pur-
chasing any class of goods that goods of such class are covered I' 
by his certificate of registration; or , 
(c) not being a registered dealer, falsely represents when 
purchasing goods in the course of inter-State trade or commerce 
that he is a registered dealer; or 
(d) after purchasU1g any goods for any of the purposes 
specified U1 clause (b) of sub-section (3) of section 8 fails. with- 20 
out reasonable excuse, to make use of the goods for any such 
purpose; . 
(e) has in his possession any form prescribed for the purpose 
of sub-section (4) of section 8 which has not been obtained by 
him or by his principal or by h~s agent in accordance with the 2 
. provisions of this Act or any rules made thereunder; 
he shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend 
to six months, or with fine. or with both; and when the offence is a 
continuing offence, with a daily fine which may extend to fifty rupees 
for eve'rf day during which the offence continues. 30 
11. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable 
under this Act or the rules made thereunder except with the previous 
sanction of the Government within the local-limits of whose jUrIsdic-
tion the offence has been committed or of such officer of that Govern-
ment as it may, by general or special order, specify in this behalf; 3S 
and no court inferior to that of a presidency magistrate or a magis-
trate of the first class shall try any such offence. 
(2) All offences punishable under this Act shall 'be cognitable and 
bailable. 
12. No suit. prosecution or other legal proceeding shalllie against 
any officer of Government for anything which is in good faith done 40 
or intended to be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder. 
13. (1) The Central Government maYJ by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules providing for-
(a) the manner in which applications for registration may 
be made under this Act, the particulars to be contained therein,4S 
the procedure for the grant of. such registration, the circum-
stances in which registration may be refused and the form in 
which the certificate of registration may be given; 

10 
., 
(b) the period of turnover, the manner in which the turnover 
in relation to the sale of any goods under this Act shall be deter-
mined, and the deductions which may be made in the process of 
such determination; 
(c) the cases and circumstances in which and the conditions 
subject to which any registration granted under this Act may be 
cancelled; 
(d) the particulars to be contained in the declaration to be 
given by any registered dealer purchasing goods and the. form of 
such declaration. 
(2) All rules made by the Central Government under sub-sectlon 
(1) shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament as soon as may 
be after they are made and shall be subject to such modifications as 
Parliament may make during the session in which they are so laid or 
IS the session immediately following. 
(3) The State Government may make rules, not inconsistent with 
the provisions of this Act and the rules made under sub-section (1), 
to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(4) In particular and without prejudice to the powers ('onferred 
20 by sub-section (3), the State Government may make rules for all or 
any of the following purposes, namely:- . 
(a) the publication of lists of registered dealers, of the 
amendments made in such lists from time to time, and the parti-
culars to be contained in such lists; 
(b) the form and manner in which accounts relating to sales 
25 in the course of inter-State trade or commerce shall be kept by 
registered dealers; 
(c) the furnishing of any information relating to the stocks 
of goods of, purchases, sales and deliveries of goods by, any dealer 
or any other information relating to his business as may be 
30 necessary for the purposes of this Act; 
35 
45 
(d) the inspection of any books, accounts or documents 
required to be kept under this Act, the entry into any premises 
at all reasonable' times for the purposes of searching for any 
such books, accounts or documents kept Or suspected to be kept 
in such premises and the seizure of such books, accounts or 
documents; 
(e) the authority from which any form of declaration pres-
cribed under sub-section (4) of section 6 may be obtained, the 
manner in which the form shall be kept in custody and records 
relating thereto maintained, the manner in which any such form 
may be used and any such declaration may be furnished; 
(f) in the case of an undivided Hindu family, a~socjation, 
club, society, firm or company or in the case of a person who 
carries on business as a guardian or trustee or otherwise cn be-
half of another pE!rson, the furnishing of a dE:claration stating 
the name of the person who shall be deemed to be the manager 
in relation to the business of the dealer in the State and the form 
in which such declaration may be given; 

8 
(g) the time within which, the manner in which end the 
authorities to which any change in the ownership of any 
business or in the nature of any business carried on by any 
dealer shall be furnished. 
(5) In making any rule under this section the State Government 5 
may d!rect that a breach thereof shall be punishable with fine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees and when the offence is a continu-
ing offenc~, with a daily fine which may extend to fifty rupees for 
every day during which the offence continues. 
CHAPTER IV 10 
GOODS OF SPECIAL IMPORTANCE IN INTER-STATE TRADE COMMERCE 
~~~ be 14. It is hereby declared that the following goods are of special 
of ap:cial importance in inter-State trade or commerce: - . 
!mPJrtancc 
III Inter-Slate 
trade or 
CXIII1D1eI'Ce. 
(i) coal, including coke in all its forms; 
(ii) cotton, that is to say, all kinds {)f cotton (indigenous or 15 
imported) in its unmanufactured state, whether ginned or un-
ginned, baled, pressed or otherwise, but not including cotton 
waste; 
(iii) hides and skins, whether in a raw or dressed state; 
(iv) iron and steel, that is to say,-
(a) pig iron and iron scrap; 
(b) iron plates sold in the same form in which they are 
directly produced by the rolling mill without further process-
ing or fabrication; 
20 
(c) steel scrap, steel ineots, steel billets, steel bars and 2S 
rods; 
(d) (i) steel plates, }S ld ill th ~'n (") te I h ts 0 e aamc .orm I 
.~~ S e s ee,. which they are diroctly pro-
(tn) sheet bars and tm bars, duced by the rolling mill 
(iv) rolled steel sections, withru.t f~rther processing 
(v) tool alloy steel; or fabnc&uODi 
(v) jute, that is to say, the fibre extracted from plants.belcng- 30 
ing to the species corchorus capsula", and corchorus oZitorious 
and the fibre known as mesta or bimli extracted from plants of 
the species hibiscus cannapinm and hibiscw .abdariffa-var 
altissima., whether baled or otherwise; 
(vi) oil seeds, that is to say, seeds yielding non-volatile oils 3' 
used for human consumption, or in industry, or in the manufac-
ture of varnishes, soaps and the like, or in lubrication, and vola-
tile oils used chiefly in medicines, perfumes, cosmetics and the 
¥ke. 
=~~ 15. Notwithstanding anything contained in the saleI' tax law tIt any 40 
tione ill re- State, the tax payable by any dealer under that law in Iespect f'f any 
Iud to tax sales or purchases ot declared goods made by him inside the State 
on :c- or shall not exceed two per cent. of the sale price thereof. and such tax 
~~: 0 shall not be levied at more than one stage in a State. 
goods. 
Rrpea1 of 16. The Essential Goods (Declaration and Regulation of Tax on 
Act 5a of Sale or Purchase) Act, 1952, is hereby repealed. 45 
1953. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In the interest of the national economy of India certain amend-
ments were undertaken in the Constitution by the Constitution 
(Sixth Amendment) Act, 1956, whereby-
(4) taxes on sales or purchases of goods in the course of 
inter-State trade or commerce were brought expressly within 
the purview of the legislative jurisdiction of Parliament; 
(b) restrictions could be imposed (m the powers of State 
legislatures with re$pect to the levy of taxes on the sale or 
ourehue of goocls within the State where the goods are of special 
Importance in inter-State trade or commerce. 
The amendments at the same time authorised Parliament to formulate 
prineiples for determining when a sale or purchase takes place 
in the eourse of inter-State trade or commerce or in the course of 
export or import or outside a State in order that the legislative 
spheres of- Parliament and the State legislatures become clearly 
demarcated. In the case of goods of special importance in inter-State 
trade or commerce, a law of Parliament is to lay dQwn the restrictions 
and conditions subject to which any State law may regulate the tax 
on sales or purchases of such goods in the State. 
2. This Bill seeks to provide for the legislation authorised by the 
Constitution as amended above with a view to enabling the State 
Governments to raise additional revenues by levying tax on inter-
State transactions which are at pJlesent immune from tax under their 
respective sales tax laws. After taking into account the recom-
. mendations of the Taxation Enquiry Commission and in consultation 
with the States, the Government of India are of the view that the 
following principles should govern the scheme of the detailed 
legislation on the three inter-related subjects:-
(i) The Central Government should authorise the State 
Governments to impose on behalf of the Central Government a 
tax on the sale or purchase of goods in the course of inter-State 
trade or commerce. The Central legislation should also.delegate 
to the States the Central Government's power to levy and collect 
the tax and for this purpose prescribe the same system of 
registration, assessment, etc., as prevails in the States concerned 
under their own sales-tax system. 
(ii) An important aspect of the Central Legislation will be 
concerned with the definition of the locale of sales for the purpose 
of defining in detail the relative jurisdiction, firstly of the Union 
and the States, and secondly, of the States inter-Be. It is, 
therefore, necessary that the law should define clearly, with 
specific reference to sales tax, the circumstances in which a sale 
or purchase becomes taxable by a particular State and no other. 
It should also define for the purpose of the Constitutional 
I 

10 
restrictions on the State's power to impose a tax under item If 
of the State U.ri, when a sale or purehue of good. may be .. id 
to take place: 
(a) in the course of export out of India, 
(b) in the course of import into India, and 
(c) in the course of inter-State trade or commerce. 
(iii) The Central legislation should provide for the declara-
tion of certain commodities which are in the nature of raw 
materials and of special importance in inter-State trade or 
commerce and lay down the restrictions and conditiona .. to 
the rate, system of levy and other incidents of tax subject to 
which the States may impose tax on the sale or purehue thereof. 
3. Nec:esaary provisions have, therefore, been made in the cWlerent 
Chapters of this BUt incorporating the principles atated above. 
NEW DBua; 
The 14th November, 1956. T. T. KRISHNAlfACHARI. 
-

FtNANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Under clause 9 of the Bill, the assessment and collection of the 
tax on behalf of the Central Government will be made by the 
exlsUng Sales Tax machinery of the State Governments empowered 
to aaess and collect taxes leviable under their respective State Sales 
Tax Actl. The said clause also provides that the proceeds in any 
financial year of the tax levied and collected under this Act in any 
St.te, redueed by their COlt of collection, except in so far as thole 
proeeeds represent proceeds attributable to Union territories, shall 
be aaigned to the States within which the tax has been levied and 
collected and shall be retained by them. The proceeds attributable 
to Union territories shall form part of the Consolidated Fund of India. 
So far as States other than Union territories are concerned, no 
net withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund of India would be 
involved by reason of the provisions of the Bill. The Union terri-
tories, except Delhi, have no appreciable volume of inter-State trade 
so as to require any additional expenditure by way of staff. Some 
expenditure might, however, be required to be incurred on the 
printing of forms, registers, etc., prescribed under the law and other 
items of stationery. In addition, the sales tax staff in Delhi may 
have to be slightly increased. On a rough estimate, the total of 
such expenditure is not likely to exceed rupees one lakh per annum . 
• 

MEMORANDUM RgGARDING btLEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 14 of the Bill specifies the mattera respecting which rules 
may be made under this law. The rules relate to matters like the 
manner in which applications for registration may be made. the 
particulars which may be contained therein, the manner in which 
the turnover shall be determined for the purposes of this law, the 
particulars to be contained in the declaration furnished by • 
registered dealer purchasing goods in order that the goocll purchued 
lIy him are liable to tax at the lower rate, the form and manner 
in which accounts relating to sales. shall be maintained, the inspection 
of books of accounts, documents. etc., and so on. The rule-makinc 
power is being shared by the Central and the State Governments 
for the reason that the actual levy, assessment and collection w1ll 
have to be made by the State Governments through their own 
agencies, as the taxes are ultimately to be retained by them under 
the principles laid down in the Bill. Sharing of the rule-making 
powers by two Goverr..ments is not an unusual feature (ct. section S6 
of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950, as originally 
enacted). Matters which are of a general nature and in respect of 
which some uniformity is desirable, are left to be regulated by rules 
made by the Central Government whereas matters which are 
pr~ural in nature, are left to be regulated by rules made by State 
Governments. It is unnecessary to burden the Act with detalla 
relating to these matters. 
The rule-making power is of a normal character . 
• 
12 

LOI{ SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to fonnulate principles for determining when a sale or 
purchase of goods takes place in the course of inter-State 
trade or commerce or outside a State or in the course of 
import into or export from India, to provide for the levy, 
collection and distribution .f taXes on sales of goods in the 
course of inter-State trade or commerce and to declare 
certain goods to be of special importance in inter-State 
trade or commerce and specify the restrictions and con-
ditions to which State laws imposing taxes on the sale or 
purchase of such goods of special importance shall be 
subject. 
The President ha~, in pursuance of clauses (I)' and (3) of 
article 117 and clause (1) of article 274 of the 
Constitution It)f India, recollUllended to Lok Sabha the 
introduction and cOllSideralien of the Bill· 
----
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, 
. Minister of Finance) 
GIPND-SS-969 M ufLaW-2J-II-5~I7S0 