10K SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE COAL MINES NATIONAIJISATION LAWS (A:·:ENDMENT) 
BILL, 1978 
LTh bel As in traduced in Ipk Sabhe. 7 
1 • Page 5, against 1in3 32, in the marginal ci tation,-
for "1962 " read 
2. Page 5, line 36,-
omit "and" 
3. Page 6, against line 20, 
"46 of 1948. " 
NEW DELHI; 
April 20, 1978 
Cha1tra 30, 1900 (Saka) 
"195'2" 
in~ert the marginal ci tation,-

As INTRODUCED IN LQK SABRA ON 
I~. ':. 
Bill, No. 70 of 1978 
't9E COAL MINES NATIONALISATION LAWS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1978 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Coking Coal Mines (NationaliBation) Act, 1972, 
and the Coal Mines (NationalisatiOn) Act, 1973. 
BB it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of the 
Republic of India aa follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Coal Mines Nationalisation Laws Short 
(Amendment) Act, 1978. title. 
S 2. In section 3 of the Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 Am~nd; 
(hereinafter referred to as the Coking Coal Act) ,- mecteni 0 3 - 8 on 
(i) in claUse (b), in wb-claUSe (vi), for the 'Explana.ticm, the ~ ~;;2.3G 
following Explanation shall be substituted, and shall be deemed to 
have been substituted with effect from the 1st day of May, 1972, 
10 namely:-
• 
,clit3:pUmation.-The expression "current assets" does not 
Ulclude,-
(a) dues representing the sale of coal and coal pro-
ducts eiIeeted at any time before the appointed day and 
otItstanding immediately before the said day; 
(0) dues from the Coal Board, established under section 
4 of the Coal Mines (Conservation, Safety and Development) 

Amend-
ment of 
section 20. 
2 
Act, 1952, prior to the repeal of the said Act, with respect 
to any period before the appointed day; 
(c) dues from sundry debtors, loans and advances to 
other parties and investments, not being investments in the 
coke oven plant; 
(d) security deposits made by the owners with the 
Coal Controller appointed by the Central 90vemment or with 
the Railways for the fulfilment of contracts or with a State 
Electricity Board for the payment of bills; 
19 of 1952. 
5 
(e) earnest money deposited by the owners with the 10 
Railways for obtaining contracts;'; 
(ii) in clause (j), in sub-clause (xi), for the Explanation, th9 
following Erplanaticm shall be substituted, and shall be deemed to 
have been substituted with effect from the 1st day of May, 1972, 
namely:-
'Explanation.-The expression "current assets" does not 
include.-
(a) dues representing the sale of coal and coal pz:oducts 
effected at any time before the appointed day and outstand-
ing immediately before the said day; 20 
(b) dues ·from the Coal Board, established, under section 
4 of the Coal Mines (Conservation. Safety and Develop-
ment) Act, 1952, prior to the repeal of the said Act, with 19 of 1952. 
respect to any period before the appointed day; 
(c) d~es from sundry debtors, loans and . advances to 15 
other parties and investments, not being investmenta in the 
coking coal mine; 
(d) security deposits made by the owners with the Coal 
Controller appointed by the Central Government or with the 
Railways for the fulfilment of, contraets or with a State 30 
Electricity Board fOf the payment of bills; 
(e) earnest money deposited by the owners with the 
Railways for obtaining contracts;'. 
A 
3. In section 20 of the Coking Coal Act, for sub-section (2), the 
following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:-
"(2) The Central Government may appoint such other person& 
35 
as it may think .fit to assist the Commissioner and thereupon the 
Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons to also 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this 
Act, and different persons may be authorised to exercise different 40 
powers. 
(2A) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exerciH 
any powers may exercise those powers in the same manner and 
with the same effect as if they have been conferred on that person 
directly by this Act and not by way of autborlsation.". 
$" ; 
45 

5 
10 
~5 
4. After section 22 of the Coking Coal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"22A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, as 
amended by section 2 of the Coal Mines Nationalisation Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 1978, any money collected by the Central 
Government or the Government company during the period com-
mencing on the appointed day and ending with the date specified 
under sub-section (3) of section 22 shall be deemed to have been 
validly collected by the Central Government or the Government 
company, as the case may be, and any such money shall be applied 
in accordance with the provisions of section 22. 
(2) Any money collected as aforesaid shall not be called in 
question in any court of law.". 
5. In section 23 of the Coking Coal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (IA) ,-
(i) after the words and figures "the Coal Mines Provident 
Fund, Fami~y Pension and Bonus Schemes Act, 1948;", the 
following shall be inserted, and shall be deemed to have been 
inserted with effect from the 1st day of May, 1972, namely:-
"and claims in relation to any other matter may be filed 
nn behalf of all or any of the persons so employed or any 
group of such persons, by any Trade Union, registered under 
the Trade Unions Act, 1926, or, where no such claim has 
been filed by any Trade Union, by the Chief Labour Com-
missioner (Central) appointed by the Central Government 
or any officer subordinate to him;"; 
(ii) in the proviso, after the words "the Coal Mines Provi-
dent Fund Commissbner", the following shall be inserted. and 
shall be deemed to have ber:-n inserted with effect from the 1st 
day of M~y, 1972, namely:-
<lor the Trade Union or the Chief Labour Commissioner 
(Central) or any officer subordinate to him,"; 
(b) after sub-section (1A), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, and shall be deemed to have been inserted. with effect from 
35 the 1st day of November, 1973, namely:-
"(IAA) Where any c1aim._not being a claim which was time-
barred ()n the 17th day of October, 1971, was preferred under 
sub-section (1) within the period specified therefor and was 
rejected merely on the ground that such claim was time-barred, 
40 such claim shall be deemed not to have been rejected and the 
Commissioner shall restore on his file such claim and shall deal 
with it in the manner specified in this section."; 
45 
(c) after sub-section (9), the following SUb-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(9A) The Commissioner may, on receipt of a c1aim,-
'" (a) elect to settle the claim himself; or 
Insertion 
of neW 
section 
22A. 
Valida-
tion of 
~ertain 
collec-
tions. 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 23. 

Insertion 
of new 
section 
23A. 
Applica-
tion of 
sections 
5 and 12 
of the 
Limita-
tion Act. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
24A. 
Interest 
on 
admitted 
claims. 
lMertion 
of new 
section 
25A. 
Notice 
to owners 
of co-king 
coal 
mines Or 
coke 
oven 
4 
(b) transfer the claim jor settlement to a person 
authorised in this behalf under sub-s~ction (2) of section 20; 
or 
(c) withdraw the claim from the .person referred to in 
clause (b) and either settle the claim himself or transfer it 5 
for disposal to any other pel'$OD who h~s been authorised 
in this behalf under sub-section (2) of section 20."; 
(d) in sub--section (10) ,-
(i) for the words "A claimant whio is dissatisfied with the 
decision of the Commiss~oner may prefer an appeal against the 10 
decision,", the words "A claimant or owner who is dissatisfied 
with the decjsion of tbe Commissioner may pre;fer. an appeal, 
within a period of sixty days from the date of the decision," 
shall be substituted; . 
(ii) after the! proviso, the following fu,rther proviso shall be 15 
inserted, namely:-
"Provided further that any appeal which has not been 
preferred before the date on which the Coal Mines Nationa-
lisation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1978, receives the assent 
Of the President, shall be preferreQ within a period of sixty 20 
days from such date.". 
6. After section 23 of ~be Coking Coal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, name1y:-
"23A. The provisions of sections 5 and 12 of the Limitation Act, 
1963, shall, so far as may be, apply to appeals under section 23.". 25 36 of 1963 .. 
7. After section 24 of the Coking Coal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from 
the 1st day of May, 1972, namely:-
"24A. Notwithstanding any award, decree or order of. any court, 
tribunal or other authority, passed before the appointed day, in rela- 30 
tion to ariy coking coal mine or coke oven plant, where any amount 
is payable in respect of a claim admitted under this Act, .the interest 
payable on such amount for any period after the appointed day shall 
be M: such rate not exceeding the I'ate of interest accruing on any 
amount deposited by the Commissioner under section 21.". . 35 
It After section 25 of the Coking Coal Act, the following section shall 
be iuserted, namely:-
"2SA. (1) After meeting the liabilities of persons whose claims 
have been admitted under this Act, the Commissioner shall notify, in 
sUc.'h manner a~ he may think fit, the amount of money available with 40 
hIim and specify in such notification a date within which the owners 
or the coking coal mines or coke oven plants, the managing contrac-
tors and the owners of any machinery, ~ujpmen~ QJ." other property 
:'.\. 

19011962. 
5 
10 
s 
which has vestea in the Central Government or a Government com-
pany under this Act and which does not belong to the owners of the 
coking coal mines or coke oven plants may apply to him fo~ pay-
ment. 
(2) Where any application is made under sUb-section (1), the 
Commissioner shall, after satisfying himself as to the right of the 
applicant to receive the whole or any part of the amount, pay the 
amount w the person concerned and in the event of there being a 
do.ubt or dispute as to the right of .the person to receive the whole 
or any part of the amount, the Commissioner shall deal with the 
application in the manner specified in sub-section (1) of section 26.". 
9. In Election 27 of the Coking Coal Act, for the words "which remains 
undi&bursed or unclaimed after such payment for a period of three 
years". the words "which remains undisbursed or unclaimed for a period 
15 of three years from the day on which the last order for disbursement was 
made" shall be substituted, and shall be deemed. to have been substituted 
with effect from the 29th day of March, 197ii. 
10. In section 2 of the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 (here-
inafter referred to as the Coal Mines Act), in clause (h). for sub-clause 
20 (xii), the following sub-clause shall be substituted, and shall be deemed 
to have been substituted with effect tirom the 1st day of May, 1973, 
namely:-
30 
35 
40 . 
'(xiii) all othe!r fixed assets, movable and immovable, belonging 
to the owner of a mine, wherever situated, and current assets, belong-
ing to a mine, whether within its premises or'outside. 
ExpZanabion..-The expr~ssion "current assets" does ~t include,-
(a) dues representing the sale of coal and coal products 
effected at any time before the appointed day and outstanding 
immediately before the said day; 
(b) dues from the Coal Board, established under section 4 of 
the Coal Mines (Conservation, Safety and Development) Act, 
1952, prior to the repeal of the said Act, with respect to any 
pe!riod before the appointed day; 
(c) dues from sundry debtors, loans and advances to other 
plU'ties and investments, not being investments in the coal mine; 
and 
~d) security deposits made by the owners with the Coal 
Controller appointed by the Central Government or with the 
RaHways for the f1,1lfllment of contracts or with a State Electri-
city Board for the payment of bills; 
(e) earnest money deposited by the owners with the Rail-
ways for obtaining contracts;'. 
plantJ 
and 
manag-
ingcon-
tractors, 
etc. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 27. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 2 
of Act 
26 of 
1973. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 18. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
19A. 
Valida-
tion of 
certain 
collec-
tions. 
Amend-
ment of 
aectlon 
10. 
6 
11. In secdon 18 of the Coal, Mines Act, in sUb-se'ctio'n (2), for the 
words "any period, after the appointed day,", the words "the period" 
shall be substituted. 
12. After section 19 of the Coal Mines Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:- 5 
"19A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 2, as 
amended by section 10 of the Coal Mines Nationalisation Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 1978, any money collected. by the Central 
Government or the Government company duri[1g the period com-
mencing on the appointed day and ending with the date specified 10 
under sub-section (3) of section 19 shall be deemed to have been 
validly collected by the Central Government or the G"ovemment 
company, as the caSe may be, and any such money shall be applied 
in accordance with the provisions of section 19. 
(2) Any money collected as aforesaid shall not be called in 15 
question in any court of law.". 
13. In section 20 of the Coal Mines Act,-
(a) in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) after the words and figures "the Coal Mines Provident 
Fund, Family Pension and Bonus Schemes Act, 1948;", the 20 
following shall be inserted, and shall be deemed to have been 
inserted with effect from the 1st day of May, 1973, namely:-
"and claims in relation to any other matter may be filed 
on behalf of. all or any of the persons so employed or any 
group of such persons, by any Trade Union, registered under 25 
the Trade Unions Act, 1926, or, where no such claim has been 16 of 1926. 
filed by any Trade Union, by the Chief Labour Commis-
sioner (Central) appointed 'by the Central Government or 
any officer subordinate to him;"; 
(ii) in the proviso, after the words "the Coal Mines PrtJvi- 30 
dent Fund Commissioner", the followin/t shall be inserted, and 
shall be deemed to have bem inserted with effect from the 1st 
day of May, 19'73, namely:-
"or the Trade Union or the Chief Labour Commissioner 
(Central) or any officer subordinate to him."; 35 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be in-
serted, and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from 
the 1st day of November, 1975, namely:-
"(3) Where any claim, not being a claim which was time-
barred on the 31st day of ,January, 1973, was prefeI'l'ed under sub- 40 
section (1) within the period specified therefor and was rejected 
mt'rely on the ground that such claim was time-barred, such 
claim shall be deemed not to have been rejected and the Com-
missioner shall restore on his file such claim and shall deal with 
it in the manner specified hi section 23.". 45 J -1- J ' 

5 
10 
20 
36 ot 1963. 30 
3S 
I 
1(. In seQ't.ion 23 of the Coal Mines Act,-
(a) after sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(6A) The Commissioner may, on receipt of a claim,-
(a) elect to ,settle the dalm himselfj or 
(b) transfer the claim for settlement to 8 person 
authorised in this behalf under sub-section (2) of section 
17; or 
(c) withdraw the claim from the perSon referred to in 
clause (b) and either settle the claim himself or transfer it 
for disposal to any other person who has been authori~ in 
this behalf under sub-section (2) of section 17."; 
(b) in sub-section (7) ,-
(i) for the woz:ds "A 'claimant who is dissatisfied with the 
decision of tp..e Commissioner may prefer an appeal against the 
decision", the words "A claimant or owner who is dissatisfied with 
the decision of the Commissioner may, prefer an appeal within a 
period of sixty days from the date of the decision," shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) after the proviso, the following further proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"Provided further that any appeal which has not been 
preferred before the date on which the Coal Mines Nationa-
lisation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1978, receives the assent of 
the PreSident, shall be preferred within a period of sixty 
days from such ~ate.". 
15. After section 23 of the Coal Mines Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:~ 
U23A. The provisions of section:; 5 and 12 of the Limitation Act, 
1963, shall, so far as may be, apply to appeals under section 23.". 
16. After section 24 of the Coal Mines Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect 
hom the 1st day of May, 1973, namely:-
"24A. Notwithstanding any. award, decree or order of any 
court, tribunal or other authOrity; passed before the appointed day, 
in relation to any coal mine, where any amount is payable in respect 
of a claim admitted under this Act, the interest payable on sw:h 
. amount for any period after the appointed day shall be at such rate 
not exceeding the rate of interest accruing on any amount deposited 
by the Commissioner under section 13.". . 
Amend-
ment of 
Section 
23. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
23A. 
AppUca-
tion of 
sections 
5 and 12 
Of the 
Limita-
tion Act. 
Inser-
tion of 
new sec-
tion 24A. 
Interest 
on 
admitted 
claims. 

Insertion 
of new 
section 
25A. 
Notice 
to owners 
of coal 
mlnesand 
managing 
contrac-
tors, 
etc. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
27. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
30. 
Claims 
made 
on behalf 
of work-
men by 
Trade 
Union, 
etc., 
to have 
effed. 
8 
17. After section 25 of the Coal Mines Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"25A. (1) After meeting the liabilities of persons whose claims 
have been admitted under this Act, the Commissioner shall notify, 
in such manner as he may think fit, the amount of money available 5 
with him and sptecify in such notification a date within which the 
owners of the coal mines, the managing contractors and the owners 
of any machinery, equipment or other property which has vested 
in the Central Government or a Government company under this 
Act and which does not belong to the owners of the coal mines may 10 
apply to him for payment. 
(2) Where any application is made under sub-section (1), 
the Commissioner shall, after satisfying himself as to the right of 
the applicant to receive the whole or any part of the amount, pay 
the amount to the person concerned and in the event of there being IS 
a doubt or dispute as to the right of the person to receive the whole 
or any part of the amount, the Commissioner shall deal with the 
application in the manner specified in aub-section (2) of section 26.". 
18. In section 27 of the Coal Mines Act, for the words "three years 
from the last day on which the disbursement was made", the words!20 
"three years from the day on which the last order for disbursement 
was made" shall be substituted. 
19. In section 30 of the Coal Mines Act, in sub-section (2), for the 
\Vt)rck "with imprisonment for a term which may extend ·to two years 
and also with fine which may axtend to ten thousand rupees", the words 25 
"y..ith imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and 
~lso witb fine which may extend to twenty 'thousand rupees" shall be 
substituted. 
20. Every claim made, before the date on which this Act receives the 
assent of the President, on behalf of all or any of the persons employed 30 
by the owner of-
(a) a coking coal mine or group of coking coal mines or a coke 
oven plant; or 
(b) a coal mine or group of coal mines, 
or on behalf of a group of such persons, by a Trade Unioni registered 35 
under the Trade Unions Act, 1926, or the Chief Labour Commissioner 16 f 1926 
(Central) appointed by the Central Government or any officer subor- 0 • 
dinate to him, against such owner, and every action taken in relation to 
such claim shall be deemed to have been made or taken in the case of a 
coking coal If!.ine or a coke oven plant, in accordance with the provisions 40 
of the Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 19'7'2, and in the case 36 of 1972. 
of a coal mine, in accordance with the provisions of the Coal Mines 
(Nationalisation) Act, 1973, as amended by this Act, as if the relevant 26 of 1971. 
Act, as amended by this Act, were ii't fOrce Jt all material times. 
, 1 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
After the nationalisation of coal mines in India under the Coking 
Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 and the Coal Mines (Nationali-
sation) Act, 1973, it was brought to light that certain provisions of these 
Acts needed clarification. It is, therefore, necessary to suitably amend 
these Acts with a view to removing the ambiguities as well as certain 
practical difficulties whiCh have come to light in the implementation 
thereof. The main amendments are as follows:-
(a) As doubts were expressed whether certain amounts like dues 
on account of the sale of coal and coal products effected before 
the date of nationalisation of coking coal mines and coal 
mines, subsidies due for the pre-nationalisation period and 
earnest monies and security deposits made by the owners of 
coal mines with the various authorities were covered by the 
exception to the assets vesting in the Government on nationa-
lisation, it is proposed to clarify in the said Acts that current 
assets vesting in the Government do not include such amounts. 
(b) The said Acts do not specify the interest rate admissible on 
the claimed amounts after the appointed day. In the absence 
of such a provision, the secured creditors have included in 
their claims interest at very high rates which, if allowed, will 
deprive the lower priority creditors, mostly Government 
organisations and small suppliers. It is, therefore, proposed 
to insert a new secti:m in each of the said Acts to provide 
that the interest payable on such amounts shall be at such 
rate not exceeding the rate of interest accruing on any amount 
deposited by the Commissioner of Payments with a nationa-' 
Used bank or in the Public Account of India as required under 
the said Acts. 
, (.) 
(c) It is proposed to empower the Commissioner of Payments-
(i) to authorise the persons appOinted to assist him under the 
Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 to exercise 
all or any of the powers exercisable by llim under the 
Act. Such a provision already exists in the Coal Mines 
(Nationalisation) Act, 1973; 
(ii) to transfer cases from one Assistant Commissioner 
to another or to himself; 
(iii) to issue a notification inviting the owners, managing con-
tractors and such other persons who are owners of any 
machinery, equipment or other property which has vested 
in the Central Government or a Government company 
under the Act and which does not belong to the colliery 
owners to apply for the residuary amount lying with the 
Commissioner of Payments after settling all the claims. 
(d) It is proposed to legalise joint claims filed by workers 
through Trade Unions or through the officers under the Chief 
Labour Commissioner (Central) against the colliery owners. 

10 
(e) Such of the claims as had not been time-barred on the 
relevant date when the management of the coal mines was 
taken over by Government and had been filed before the 
specified dates but had been rejected merely on the ground 
that such claims had become time-barred are proposed to be 
restored and dealt with. 
(f) It is proposed to prescribe a period of sixty days within 
which appeals against the decisions of the Commissioner of 
Payments have to be filed and to apply the relevant provisions 
of the Limitation Act, 1963, to such appeals. It is also pro-
posed to extend the right of appeal to the colliery owners. 
(g) It is proposed to provide that the period of three years after 
which undisbursed amounts shall revert to the general 
revenue account should be counted from the date on which 
the last order for disbursement was made by the Commis-
sioner of Payments and not from the date on which the 
amount was paid by the Government to the Commissioner. 
(h) With a view to dealing effectively with persons who indulge 
in illegal mining of coal, it is proposed to amend sub-section 
(2) of section 30 of the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973, 
by enhancing the punishment of imprisonment from two 
years to three years and of flne from ten thousand rupees to 
twenty thousand rupees. 
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
Nrw Dam; 
The 7th Ma.rch, 1978. P. RAMACHANDRAN. 

f.6 of 1948. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE COKING COAL MINES (NATIONALISA'lION) 
ACT, 1972 
(36 OF 1972) 
• • • • • 
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(b) "coke oven plant" means the plant and equipment with 
which the manufacture of hard coke has been, or is being, carried 
on, and includes-
• 
• • • • • 
(vi) all other fixed assets, movable or immovable, and cur-
rent assets belonging to a coke oven plant, whether within its 
premises or outside. 
Explanation.-"Current assets" do not include dues from 
sundry debtors, loans and advances to other parties and invest-
ments, not being investments in the coke oven plant; 
• • • • 
(j) "mine" means any excavation where any operation for the 
purpose of searching for or obtaining minerals has been or is being 
carried on, and includes-
• • • • • 
(xi) all other fixed assets, movable or immovable, anrt CU1'1'ent 
assets, belonging to a mine, whether within its premises or out-
side. 
ExpZa.natiOn.-"Current assets" do not include dues from 
sundry debtors, loans and advances to other parties and invest-
ments not being investments in the coking coal mine; 
• • • • • 
20. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it 
may think fit to assist the Commissioner. 
• • • • • 
13. (1) • • • • • 
(IA) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), claims 
In relation to a provident fund,' pension fund, gratuity fund or any 
other fund established for the welfare of the persons employed by the 
owner of a coking coal mine or group of coking coal mines or a coke 
oven plant may beflled on behalf of the persons so employed by the 
Coal Mines Provident Fund Commissioner appointed by the Central 
Government under section 3C of the Coal Mines Provident Fund. 
Family Pension and Bonus Schemes Act, 1948; and the claims so made 
11 
Deft-
nitions, 
Commis-
sioner of 
Payments 
to be 
appointed. 
Claims 
to be 
made to 
the Com-
missioner. 

Undisburs-
ed or 
unclaimed 
amounts 
to be 
deposited 
to the 
general 
revenue 
account. 
Defini-
tions. 
12 
shall be deemed to have been made by the persons having a claim 
against the owner of a coking coal mine or group of coking coal mines 
or a coke oven plant, as the case may be: 
Provided that no such claim shall be made by the Coal Mines Provi-
dent Fund Commissioner in relation to a person who has already made 
a claim under sub-section (1) . 
• • • • • 
(10) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commis-
sioner may prefer an appeal against the decision, to the principal civil 
court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction 
the coking coal mine or coke oven plant, as the case may be, is situated: 
Provided that where a person wh::l is a Judge of a High Court is 
appointed to be the Commissioner, such appeal shall lie to the High 
Court for the State in which the coking coal mine or coke oven plant, 
as the case may be, is situated, and such appeal shall be heard and dis-
posed of by nnt less than two Judges of that High Court . 
• • • • • 
27. Any money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed 
or unclaimed after such payment for a period of three y.ears shall be 
transferred by the Commissioner to the general revenue account of the 
Central Government; but a claim to any money so transferred may be 
preferred to the Central Government by the person entitled to such pay-
ment and shall be dealt with as if such transfer had not been made, the 
order, if any, for payment of the claim being treated as an order for the 
refund of revenue. 
• • • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE COAL MINES (NATIONALISATION) Ac:r, 1973 
(26 OF 1973) 
• • • • • 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(h) "mine" means any excavation where any operation for the 
purpose of searching for or obtaining minerals has been or is being 
carried on, and includes-
• • • • • 
(xii) all other fixed assets, movable and immovable, belong-
ing to the owner of a mine, wherever situated, and current assets, 
belonging to a mine, whether within its premises or outsid.,:and 
also any money lawfulily due to su.ch owner in relarti~ to the 
mine in respect ot any period prior to the appointed day. 
Explanation.-The expression "current assets" does not 
include dues from sundry debtors, ioans and advances to other 
patties and investments, not being investments in the coal mme; 
• • • • 

46 of 1948. 
13 
18. (1) • • • • • 
(2) In addition to the sum referred to in sub-section (1), the Central 
Government shall pay, in cash, to the Commissioner, such amount as may 
become due to the owner of a coal mine in relation to any period, after 
the appointed day, during which the management of the coal mine 
remains vested in the Central Government. 
* • • • • 
ZOo (1) II< • • • • 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), claims 
in relation to a provident fund, pension fund, gratuity fund or any other 
fund established for the welfare of the persons employed by the owner 
of a coal mine or group of coal mines may be filed on behalf of the per-
sons so employed by the Coal Mines Provident Fund Commissioner 
appointed by the Central Government under section 3C of the Coal Mines 
Provident Fund, Family Pension and Bonus Schemes Act, 1948; and the 
claims so made shall be deemed to have been made by the persons having 
a claim against the owner of a coal mine or group of coal mines: 
Provided that no such claim shall be made by the Coal Mines Provi-
dent Fund Commissioner in relation to a person who has already made 
a claim under sub-section (1). 
• • • • • 
23. (1) • * • • • 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commis-
sioner may prefer an appeal against the decision, to the principal civil 
court of original jUrisdietion Within the,olocal limits of whose jurisdiction 
the coal mine is situated: 
Provided that where a person Who is a Judge of a High Court is 
appointed to be the Commissioner, such appeal shall lie to the High 
Court for the State in which the coal mine is situated, and such appeal 
shall be heard and disposed of by not less than two Judges of that High 
Court. 
• • • • • 
111. Ally money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed 
or unclaimed for a period of three ye8ll's from the last day on which the 
disbursement was made, shall be transferred by the Commissioner to the 
general revenue account of the Central Government; but a claim to any 
money so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the 
perIOn entitled to such payment and shall be nealt with as if such trans-
fer had not been made, the order, if nny, for payment of the claim being 
treated as an order for the refund of revenue. 
• • • • • 
•• (1) • • • • • 
(Z) Any person who engages, or causes any other person to be 
engaged, in winning or mining coal from the whole or part at any land 
in respect of which no valid prospecting licence or mining lease or wb-
lease is in force, shall be punishable 'with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to two years and also with fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees. 
• • • • • 
Payment 
b:Pthe 
Central 
Govern-
ment 
to the 
Commis-
sioner. 
Claims 
to be 
made to 
the 
Commis-
sioner. 
Adm1Jsion 
or rejec-
tion of 
claims. 
Undis-
bursed or 
unclaimed 
amounts 
to be 
deposited 
to the 
general 
revenue 
account . 
Penalties. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 and 
the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973. 
(Shri P. Ramachandran, Minister of Energy) . 
. . \' ; 