As Dft'BODt7CBD Ilf ·LoJt SABBA 0. 
1 5 NOt 1~~ 
~ 
/ 
. 
BID No. ,. -ef 19'5 
TBB.nm~ .OEEClAL SBCRmS{AMINDMENf) 
BILL" 'I9~ 
BrLJ., 
fuTther to amend the IndiCln O;Dkt4& 8eanlta A_, Ins. 
Sa It enacted ·byParllament in the Sixteenth· Year of the 
Republ1e ¢Incfia as tonows: - . 
L . (1) 'Thill Act may be called the IntJi,an Offteial Secreta Short 
(Amendment) ~ct, 1165~ title and 
commence-
S(Z).claue.e . (b) of secticm 5. ~ come.into fo~e oJ).~cb date mente 
:as the Central Government may, by notiflca.t1,,l) in the O1Bci~ 
Gazette, appoint and the remaining provisions ot the Act shall come 
inte-'ferc!e atGDoe. 

lub.titu- I. 'or Netton 1 of the Indian OfBcial Secreta Act, 19231 (here!D-
tiaD of after ~t~ to as the principal Act), the followiBg section shall be 
~~,-~tu~ nam~:"---__________________________ __ 
t.IoDfor 
IeCtlOD 1. 
aon 
title, ex-
teDt and 
appUca-
t.IoD. 
Am8lld-
mental 
HCtiQDI. 
Amend-
ment of 
aection IS. 
"I. (1) ThJa Act may be called the Oftlcial Secreta Act, 
1923. 5 
(2). It mends to the whole of India and appliea also to Iel'-
vanta of the Government and to citizens of India outside IndiL". 
I. In IeCtion 2 of the principal Act, in clause (6), the words "or 
of the Government of the United KIngdom or of any British posse&-
lion" ahall be omitted. 10 
, . 
'- In aectiOIl 3 of the principal Act,'-:' 
(4) in'sub-aection (1), in clause (e). after the words "use-
ful to an enemy" the following words shall be inse~ed, 
namely:-
"or which relates to a matter the disclosure of which 11 IS 
llkely to affect the sovereignty and integrity of ~dia, the 
security of the State or friendly relations with foreign 
States"; 
(b)' in iUb-iection (2), ~e words "with 'imprisonment for' 
a term WhlchDiay extend to fourteen years" shall be omitted. 20 
.1. In section.' 5 of' the prill.cipal ~ct,~ 
(4) in sub-sedion (1), for the words "or which has been 
made or obtained in contravention of this Ad,", the following 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"or which is likely to assist, directly or indirectly, an 2S 
enemy or which relates to a matter the disclosure of which 
is llkely to aftect the sovereignty and integrity of India, the 
security of the State or friendly relations with loreign 
States or which has been made or obtained in contravention 
of this Act,"; 30 
(b) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(4) A person guilty of an offence under this section 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three years, or with fine, or rwith both.". 35 
1901 It2t. 
, 

'.. In ,ection ., of the principal Aci,- Amend-
IDeIltof 
(4) in sub-aedion (3}-,-for-the-words-~tw0-1eara!!rthe. wordl _~QQ'L­
"three years" shall be substituted: 
(b) in sub-section (4), the words "with imprisonment for 
a term which May extend to fourteen years" shall be omitted. 
7. In section 7 of the principal Act, in lUb-section (.2), for the Amend .. 
words "two years",-the words "three years" shall be' IUbstituted. :::::: T. 
8. In section 8 of the principal Act, in IUlHection (2), tor the Amen4 .. : ... -~.:­
words "two years", the words "three years" shall be substituted. meat of . ' leCtlon I. 
~ . 
lO I. In section 10 of the principal Act, in mb-seetion (3), for the Amend .. 
w9rds "one year". the words "three years" shall be IUbltituted. ment of 
secUoq~O, 
10. For section 12 of the principal Ac1, the following .~tioD Ihall Subltl~ .. 
. be substituted, namely:- tlonof aewaea. 
tI~fqr . 
~1' -. "12. The provisione of section 337 of the Code of CrIminal ~~ '. 
Procedure, 1898 shall apply in relatioD to an offence punishable dOM. ~ ) 
Wider seetion 3 or under section It or under section ., or under :eu~:a' 
any of the.aid aectfODl 3, 5, 01' , read WIth secttea I, .. they at 1_ to 
apply In relation to U1 offence puDllhable with ~t ~ tea 
wbicm JQ8Y Gtenc:J to "". 1""" at cdaaII UDd8r 
MCtlaDII 
Io1lCl 't. 
20 11. In Retion 13 of the principal Act, In IUb .. ectioll (3), the AmeDd .. 
proviso shall be omitted. ment of aectlODlI • 
30 
• 1%.: ),or section 15 of the principal Act, the following RetioD sha1l Amend-
be substituted, namely:- ment of MCtlonll. 
"15. (1) If the person committing an offence under this OffeDCell 
Act is a company, every person who, at the time the offence- by e'om-
was committed W8'S In charge of, and was responsible to, the paules. 
company for the conduct of business of the company, U well u 
the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded agatnat and punished 
accordingly: 

Provided that nothiQ. contained ia ~ INb4eotiOIl man 
render any such person liable to such punishment provided in 
____ -~. ~ Act if· he pr.ovea that the offence WU oommttted without hlI 
knowledge or that he exer.cised aBdwr cfiUIence to preveat the 
commission of such offence. 5 
. ,(.2) N'o:tw£ihstanahi, ,~Y~' c~tamed m ~~on (1), 
w~~rean' offence. under jllii Act lias been' commttted by a com-
pany and it 11 proved that the offence has been committed with 
tHe ecmsent dt cdmiimde ~f,' &r Bi'iftrflttitlMe ta '.ny bf!jigenC8 
8tt'·t.tte· pWtf;'t1f, iii, ~, HWliret-, ~iity 'tit otlier' ~ 10 
of the company,' such director, manager, secretary or other 
omcer &rum i1lb Be delimlfd' td' w gUIlty df thaf o1Nb:ee aa\:t II1all - .. 
lje'1'Mne ro; g~ ;ro~ Qilliit ed' putltsli~1 aectft'cWlglY. 
Ezp14MtiOn.-For the purposee of this lectton,-
ttl)· "edmi\any m.ma • bd8~ ~nrte' aini' iB~ • 8nD 15 
or other association of individuals; and 
ftiJ ~,·lit retlsdtJil: fO: t'1MD, mi8Jll il'. pwrtDir, ftI th~ 
1lrm..". 
13. In section S of the Defence of India Act. 1_. sukllU" (c) 
of elluae (1) ebaU be omitted. aQ , 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
, '1'be protection of omcial secrets is regulated by the 'Indian om. 
~al . secrets Act, 1923. Except for a few minor amendments made 
iD 1951, the Act has remained unmodified since it was enacted more 
than forty years ago. In view of the changed circumstances after 
the 'att~inment of, independenee ud the wide variety of unaerupu. 
lous methods which anti-national elements have of late been'·adopt. 
ing to secure their ends, it h.q b~:l!'p._necessarY to amend the Act 
sq.jtably to ~IQove ~ertain short-cominp and to make it more dec .. 
",,~, 
.. 'the following are the main features of tle.'BfU:-
(1) It is proposed to widen the !Cope of .eetiolll 8 and 6 of 
the Act by bringing within their ambit cases of secret oftlcial 
eodes, etc., the disclosure of which is likely to, affect the 
sovereignty and integrity of India, security of the State ",4 
friendly relations with foreign States. 
(.2) In a prosecution for an offence of spying under tectioD 
S of the Act, :It is necessary to prov& that the accused acted for 
• purpose prejudicial to the safety or interests of the State. In 
certaincaees of spying, however, where the offence 18 pllntabable 
with wpriaonment for a termwhieh may extend to fourtea' 
years, it has been provided that it would not be neeeuary to 
prove ~t the accused was guUty of any particular act tendinJ 
to show such a p~ose, if from the circumstances of the cue or 
the conduct of the accused or his known character as proved, it 
appears that his purpose was a purpose prejudicial to the safety 
or interests of the State. It is considered that this special rule 
of evidence should be made applicable to all offences of spying 
punishable u~der the section and.it is proposed to amend the . 
~n suitably for this purpose. 
(3) In the context of problems of internal and .external 
.ecurity which the country faces at present, It i. neceSl8l')' to 
Plake offences under the Act cognizable and non-bailable and to 
~nJiance the, maximum penalties prescribed for certain offences. 
Jt is, therefore, proposed to enhance the punishments for the 
offences BUitably while ensuring, at the same time, that all 
oiff!JJcel QDcler thc.t Aet ,become cognizable and ttoQ-bal1abl,. 
.... 

... to" 
c5 
(4) Considerable diftlcult1 is e~rienced In proving offen-
ces under the Act, as very often direch evidence is not a~able 
Q.Dlell one or-the particlpants-m-the-transaetion comes forward 
to give such evidence. Accordingly, it is proposed to make the 
provisions of section 337 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1898 . (tender of ·pardon to accomplice) applicable to offences 
under sections 3, 5 and 7 of the Act as also to attempts and abet-
ments of such oftences. 
3. ·The Bill leeks to achieve the above object.. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 29th October# 1985. G. L. NANDA. 

~ 
ErruCTli I'ROM 'l'II& hmIAN On'lCIAL SBCU'l'B Af:t, 1823 
(19 ow 1923) 
L (1) This Act may be called the IndJan Oftlcial Secreta Act, IhortUu .. 
ID23. . BteDt ad 
. ~~ 
(2) It extends to the whole of India and appUea also to IelVIDta 
of the Government and to cltizens of India outside India. 
I. In thiI Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the Ipbjeet DeeDltIOM.:' , 
or context,-
• • • • • • 
(8') "01Bce under Government" includes any ofBce or 
employment in or under any department of the Government 
or of the Government of the United Kingdom or of any British 
polaesaion; 
• •• • • • • 
~. (1) If any person for any purpose prejudicial to the l8fety Penaltlel 
. " .. ~ 
orinteresta of the State- fCJ1' IPJinI. 
• • • • • • 
(c) obtainl, collects, records or publishes or communicates 
to any other person any secret ofBcial code or pass word, or any 
sketch, plan, model, article or note or other document or infor-
mation which is calculated to be or might be or is intended to be, 
directly or indirectly, useful .to an enemy; 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend, where the offence is committed in relation to any work of 
defence, arsenal, naval, military or air force establishment or ita-
tion. mine, minefield, factory, dockyard, camp, ship or aircraft 
or otherwise in relation to the naval, military or aU' force affairs 
of Government, or in relation to any secret ofBcial .code, to four-
teen years and tn other cases to three yean. 
(2) On a prosecution for an offence punishable under this section 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen ye81'l, 
it shall not be necessary to show that the accused ·person was guilty 
of any particular act tending to show a purpose prejudi~ialJ to the 
,_. -_.- 7 . 

11' .. , 
I 
iaiety or interests of the State, and, notwtthst.anc:Ung ,that no IIUCh act 
u proved against him, he may be convicted if, from the circumstaDces 
of the cue .or his conduct or his .known character as proved, it appear. 
-----tthat-JUs"urp08e wu a purpose prejudicial"to the safety or int~1tI 
of the State; ud if any sketch, plan, model, article, note, document. 
or information relating to or used ,ill Im.Y .pI'ohibited place, or relating 
to anything in luch a place, or any secret ofBcial code or pass word 11 
ua.ade, obtained, coll_ted, reeol'ded, publiahed or eommunicated by 
_ .any person other than. a person ac~ing under lawful authority, and 
. mill the .cirClPDn.ncesof the case· or his conduct or his known char-
acter as proved it appeam that his purpose was a PJ11'pOle prejucUcial 
to t;he .stdetyor interests 'of the State such sketch, plan, model, article, 
. note, dooUment or information shan be presumed"to' have been made, 
obtained, collected, recorded, published or communicated for a pur-
pose prejudicial to the safety or interests of the State. 
. . .'. .. . 
WroDJful ... U) 'If any penon having iD his poasession or control any secret 
GOmm~- oflltial. code or ~ word fit any sketeh, plan, model, article, note, 
:t~~ doeumeDt or 'information which relates to or is UBed in a prohibited 
timL place or relates to anything in such a place or which ~ been 
made or obtained in contravention of this Act, or which hal been 
entrusted in confidence to him by any person holding otIlce under 
GovenuneDt. or which he has obtained or to which he has had 
. , access owing to his position 88 a person who holds or has held oftlce 
under Government, or as a person who holds or hal held a contract 
made on behalf of Government, or as a person! who is or has been 
employed under a person who holds or has he!d such an office or 
co$act--
Unautho-
riaed .use 
of unl-
torma; 
falaiftca-
ttrnl of 
reports, 
forcery, 
persona-
tion, and 
false do-
cuments. 
• • • • • • 
(4) A person guilty of an o1fence under thiI section shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a' term which may extend to two 
yem, . or with fine, or with poth. 
,., .. (1) • • • • • •• 
(3) A person guilty of an offence under this section shall! be 
punilhable with'imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with !De, or with both. • 
(4) TIle provisions of sub-section (2) of section 3 shall appply, 
for the purpose of-proving a purpose prejudicial to the safety of 
the State, to any prosecution for an offence under this section. 
relating to the naval, military or air force affairs of Government, 
or to any aecret oBlc!al code in like manner as they apply, for the 
purpose of proving a purpose pre?udicial to the wet)' or interests 

9 
of the State to P1'OleCUtioDl for offences puniahable wider that sec-
tion with imprlaoDDlat for a term whiclJ may extend to fourteen 
yean. 
7. (1) • • • • • • Interterina 
with 
omcera 
(2) H any person acta in contravention of the proVISI0D8 of of the 
this section, he shall be punilbable with bnpri.onment which may police or 
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. Ulemberl of the Armed 
8. (1) • • • • • • 
FOI'CeI of the __ _ 
Union. 
Duty of 
givint 
informa-
(2) If any person fails to give any such information or to attend tion as to 
as aforesaid, he Ihall be punishable with imprisonment which maycOlllJlU-
extend to two year a, or with fine, or with both. . ,.ion of offences . 
• • • • • • 
10. (1) • • • • • • Penalty for 
harbourina (3) A person guilty of an offence under this section shall be spies. 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one 
year, or with fine, or with both . 
• • • • • • 
12. Notwithstanding anything in the Code of Criminal Procedure, :Power to 
5 of 1898 1898,- arrest. 
(0) an oftence puniahable under section 3 or under section 
3 read with section 9 with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to fourteen years shall be a cognizable and non-bail-
able offence; 
(b) an offence under clause (0) of sub-section (1) of section 
6 aha1l be a cognizable and bailable offence; and 
(c) every other oftence under this Act shall be a non-cog-
nlzable and bailable offence, in respect of which a warrant of 
arrest shall ordinarily issue in the Brst instance .. 
13. (1) • • • • • • :ijeltric-
. . tion on (3) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence under this trial of 
Act unless upon complaint made by ardel' of, or under authority otfeucel. 

-. 10 
from, the appropriate Government, or some ofBcer empowered by the 
appropriate Government-Dr- this behalf:-: -:--------- ___ _ 
Provided that a person charged with such an offence may be 
arrested, or a warrant for his arrest may be issued. and executed, and 
any such penon may be remanded in custody or on bail, notwith-
standing that such complai~t has not been made, but no:fu~her. 
or other proceedings shall be taken until such complaint has been 
made. 
• • • • • • 
Offences 15. Where the person guilty of an offence under this Act is a 
by company or corporation, every director and ofllcer of the company 
companies, or corporation with whose knowledge and consent the offen.:e Will 
etc. committed shall be guilty of the like offence. 
Temp~­
rary 
amend-
ments 
to Acts. 
• 
EXTRACT PROM THE DEn:NCB OF INDIA ACT, 1962 
(51 or 1962) 
• • • • • 
•. During the continuance in force of this Act,-
(1) The Indian Ofticial Secrets Act, 1923 shall have effect 10 of lna. 
as if-
• • • • • • • 
• 
(c) after clause (4) of section 12 thereof, the followin, 
clause had been inserted, namely:-
(a.a) an offence under section 5' shall be copizable 
and non-bailable offence;"; 
• • • • • 

!. , .-t 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Official Secrets Act, 1923. 
(Shri Gul.arilal NtlIUla, 
Minister of Home AJlairs.) 