THE CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
By
PROF. (DR.) RANJAN PRASAD YADAV, M.P.
A
 BILL
further to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Central Universities (Amendment) Act, 2012.
2. In the Central Universities Act, 2009, in section 3, after sub-section (5), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(5A) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (5), the headquarter of the Central
University of Bihar shall be at Motihari District of the State of Bihar.".
Short title.
Bill No.  70 of 2012.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment of
section 3.
25 of 2009
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Central Universities Act, 2009 was enacted by Parliament to establish and incor-
porate universities for teaching and research in various States and to provide for matters
connected  therewith or incidental thereto. The aforesaid Act provides, inter alia, for the
establishment of a Central University in the State of Bihar by the name of Central University
of Bihar.
The democratically elected Government of the State of Bihar has expressed its desire
that the location of the newly proposed university should be in the district of Motihari.
Motihari is one of the most prominent cities of northern Bihar. It is the district headquarter
of east Champaran district and is well connected by almost all means of transport. The
establishment of a Central University in Motihari will go a long way in boosting educational
infrastructure in the northern part of Bihar. The Central Government is proposing to estab-
lish the new university at Gaya which is already well developed from both educational and
other infrastructural point of view. Moreover, it should be the prerogative of the elected
Government of a State to choose the site of universities to be established in that State as the
State Government is in a better position to know the wishes and aspirations of their people.
The imposition of the decision of the Central Government over the opinion of the State
Governments also goes against the ethos of federalism. The site of new central universities
should be selected only with the concurrence of the respective State Governments.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RANJAN PRASAD YADAV
May 18, 2012.
2

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 2009
(25 OF 2009)
* * * *
3. ( 1) * * * *
(2) * * * *
(3) * * * *
(4) * * * *
(5) The headquarters of each of the Universities, referred to in sub-section (4),
shall be such as may be specified by the Central Government by notification in the Official
Gazette.
(6) * * * *
* * * *
Establishment
of Universities.

4
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009
————
(Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1503LS(S-4)—13-07-2012.