1
Short title.
Amendment
of article 72.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
2. After clause ( 1) of article 72 of the Constitution, the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘‘(1A) Save as otherwise provided in clause ( 1), the power to grant pardons,
reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the
sentence of any person convicted of any offence relating to —
(a) sedition or waging war against the State; or
(b) terrorist activities in any part of the country,
shall be exercised by the President within a period of one year from the date of receipt
of the petition of mercy.".
Bill No.  175 of 2015
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 72 of the Constitution gives power to the President to grant pardons, reprieves,
respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any
person convicted of any offence. Accordingly, considerable number of people, who are
sentenced to death or life imprisonment, etc.  send mercy petitions to the President of India.
However, in the last several years, criminal activities against the State including that of
sedition, waging war against the Government of India and terrorist activities in many parts of
the country have noticeably increased. The persons who commit such heinous crimes as
killing innocent people to serve their narrow political or religious purposes use this tool or
mercy petition just to delay the justice and thus even after they have been convicted, they
do not serve their sentence for years because their mercy petitions take several years to be
disposed of.
Though there is no need to dilute the power of the President of India under the
Constitution regarding mercy petitions but in respect of certain offences such as sedition or
waging war against the State or terrorist activities, this power needs to be subject to the
condition that the decision of the President shall be conveyed within one year of the receipt
of the mercy petition.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
July 3, 2015.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
PART V
THE UNION
CHAPTER I.—THE EXECUTIVE
The President and Vice-President
* * * * * *
72.  (1) The President shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or
remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person
convicted of any offence—
(a) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is by a Court Martial;
(b) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is for an offence against any
law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends;
(c) in all cases where the sentence is a sentence of death.
* * * * * *
Power of
President to
grant
pardons, etc.,
and to
suspend,
remit or
commute
sentences in
certain cases.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1435LS(S3)—15-07-2015.