1
THE COMPETITION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to amend the Competition Act, 2002.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.(1) This Act may be called the Competition (Amendment) Act, 2007.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
 Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act
and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed
as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. In section 2 of the Competition Act, 2002 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: —
‘(ba) “Appellate Tribunal” means the Competition Appellate Tribunal
established under sub-section ( 1) of section 53A.’.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of section 2.
12 of 2003.
AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA ON 6.9.2007
Bill No.  70-C of 2007

2
3. In section 4 of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) No enterprise or group shall abuse its dominant position.’’;
(ii) in sub-section (2),—
(a) for the words,  brackets and figure ‘‘under sub-section ( I), if an
enterprise’’, the words, brackets and figure  ‘‘under sub-section (I), if an enterprise
or a group’’ shall be substituted;
(b) in clause ( c), after the word ‘‘access’’, the words ‘‘in any manner’’
shall be inserted;
(iii) after sub-section ( 2), in the Explanation, after clause ( b), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(c) “group” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (b) of
the Explanation to section 5.’.
4. In section 5 of the principal Act, —
(i) in clause (a),—
(a) in sub-clause (i), for item (B), the following item shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate, the assets of the value
of more than five hundred million US dollars, including at least rupees
five hundred crores in India, or turnover more than fifteen hundred million
US dollars, including at least rupees fifteen hundred crores in India; or”
(b) in sub-clause (ii), for item (B), the following item shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate, the assets of the value
of more than two billion US dollars, including at least rupees five hundred
crores in India, or turnover more than six billion US dollars, including at
least rupees fifteen hundred crores in India; or”.
(ii) in clause (b),—
(a) in sub-clause (i), for item (B), the following item shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate, the assets of the value
of more than five hundred million US dollars, including at least rupees
five hundred crores in India, or turn over more than fifteen hundred million
US dollars, including at least rupees fifteen hundred crores in India; or”
(b) in sub-clause (ii), for item (B), the following item shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate, the assets of the value
of more than two billion US dollars, including at least rupees five hundred
crores in India, or turn over more than six billion US dollars, including at
least rupees fifteen hundred crores in India; or”;
(iii) in clause (c),—
(a) in sub-clause (i), for item (B), the following item shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate, the assets of the value
of more than five hundred million US dollars, including at least rupees
five hundred crores in India, or turn over more than fifteen hundred million
US dollars, including at least rupees fifteen hundred crores in India; or”;
Amendment of
section 4.
Amendment
of section 5.

3
(b) in sub-clause (ii), for item (B), the following item shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate, the assets of the value
of more than two billion US dollars, including at least rupees five hundred
crores in India, or turn over more than six billion US dollars, including at
least rupees fifteen hundred crores in India.".
5. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(a) for the words “may, at his or its option,”, the word “shall” shall be substituted;
(b) for the words “seven days”, the words “thirty days” shall be substituted;
(c) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
 “(2A) No combination shall come into effect until two hundred and ten
days have passed from the day on which the notice has been given to the
Commission under sub-section (2) or the Commission has passed orders under
section 31, whichever is earlier.”.
6. For section 8 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“8. (1) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and not less than two
and not more than six other Members to be appointed by the Central Government.
(2) The Chairperson and every other Member shall be a person of ability, integrity
and standing and who has special knowledge of, and such professional experience of
not less than fifteen years in, international trade, economics, business, commerce,
law, finance, accountancy, management, industry, public affairs or competition matters,
including competition law and policy, which in the opinion of the Central Government,
may be useful to the Commission.
(3) The Chairperson and other Members shall be whole-time Members.”.
7. For section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“9. ( 1) The Chairperson and other Members of the Commission shall be
appointed by the Central Government from a panel of names recommended by a
Selection Committee consisting of —
(a) the Chief Justice of India or his nominee ............Chairperson;
(b) the Secretary in the Ministry of Corporate Affairs .............Member;
(c) the Secretary in the Ministry of Law and Justice ............... Member;
(d) two experts of repute who have special knowledge of, and professional
experience in international trade, economics, business, commerce, law, finance,
accountancy, management, industry, public affairs or competition matters
including competition law and policy......................................................Members.
(2) The term of the Selection Committee and the manner of selection of panel of
names shall be such as may be prescribed.”.
8. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the proviso, the following
proviso shall be substituted, namely: —
 “Provided that the Chairperson or other Members shall not hold office as such
after he has attained the age of sixty-five years.”.
Amendment
of section 6.
Substitution of
new section
for section 8.
Composition
of Commis-
sion.
Selection
Committee
for Chairper-
son and
Members of
Commission.
Substitution of
new section
for section 9.
Amendment
of section 10.

4
9. In section 12 of the principal Act, for the words “one year”, the words “two years”
shall be substituted.
10. For section 13 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“13. The Chairperson shall have the powers of general superintendence, direction
and control in respect of all administrative matters of the Commission:
 Provided that the Chairperson may delegate such of his powers relating to
administrative matters of the Commission, as he may think fit, to any other Member or
officer of the Commission.”.
11. In section 16 of the principal Act, —
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely: —
“(1) The Central Government may, by notification, appoint a Director
General for the purposes of assisting the Commission in conducting inquiry
into contravention of any of the provisions of this Act and for performing such
other functions as are, or may be, provided by or under this Act.
(1A) The number of other Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors
General or such officers or other employees in the office of Director General and
the manner of appointment of such Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant
Directors General or such officers or other employees shall be such as may be
prescribed.”;
(b) in sub-section  (2),  for the words “such other advisers, consultants and
officers,”, the words “such officers or other employees,” shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-sections (3) and (4), for the words “such other advisers, consultants
or officers,”, the words “such officers or other employees,” shall be substituted.
12. For section 17 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely: —
‘‘17. (1) The Commission may appoint a Secretary and such officers and other
employees as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of its functions
under this Act.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of the Secretary and officers and other employees of the Commission and the
number of such officers and other employees shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The Commission may engage, in accordance with the procedure specified
by regulations, such number of experts and professionals of integrity and outstanding
ability, who have special knowledge of, and experience in, economics, law, business
or such other disciplines related to competition, as it deems necessary to assist the
Commission in the discharge of its functions under this Act.”.
13. In section 19 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (a), for the words
“receipt of a complaint,”, the words “receipt of any information, in such manner and” shall
be substituted.
14. In section 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), the words, brackets and
figures “or upon receipt of a reference under sub-section (1) of section 21” shall be omitted.
Amendment
of section 12.
Substitution of
new section
for section 13.
Administrative
powers of
Chairperson.
Amendment of
section 16.
Substitution of
new section for
section 17.
Appointment
of Secretary,
experts, pro-
fessionals and
officers and
other employ-
ees of Com-
mission.
Amendment
of section 19.
Amendment
of section 20.

5
15. In section 21 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely: —
 “Provided that any statutory authority, may, suo motu , make such a
reference to the Commission.”;
(b) for sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely: —
“(2) On receipt of a reference under sub-section ( 1), the Commission
shall give its opinion, within sixty days of receipt of such reference, to such
statutory authority which shall consider the opinion of the Commission and
thereafter, give its findings recording reasons therefor on the issues referred to
in the said opinion.”.
16. After section 21 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘‘21A. (1) Where in the course of a proceeding before the Commission an issue
is raised by any party that any decision which, the Commission has taken during
such proceeding or proposes to take, is or would be contrary to any provision of this
Act whose implementation is entrusted to a statutory authority, then the Commission
may make a reference in respect of such issue to the statutory authority:
 Provided that the Commission, may, suo motu, make such a reference to the
statutory authority.
(2) On receipt of a reference under sub-section (1), the statutory authority shall
give its opinion, within sixty days of receipt of such reference, to the Commission
which shall consider the opinion of the statutory authority, and thereafter give its
findings recording reasons therefor on the issues referred to in the said opinion.”.
17. For section 22 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“22. (1) The Commission shall meet at such times and such places, and shall
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings
as may be provided by regulations.
(2) The Chairperson, if for any reason, is unable to attend a meeting of the
Commission, the senior-most Member present at the meeting, shall preside at the
meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Commission shall be
decided by a majority of the Members present and voting, and in the event of an
equality of votes, the Chairperson or in his absence, the Member presiding, shall
have a second or casting vote:
 Provided that the quorum for such meeting shall be three Members.”.
18. Sections 23, 24 and 25 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
19. For section 26 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely: —
“26. (1) On receipt of a reference from the Central Government or a State
Government or a statutory authority or on its own knowledge or information received
under section 19, if the Commission is of the opinion that there exists a prima facie
case, it shall direct the Director General to cause an investigation to be made into the
matter:
Amendment
of section 21.
Insertion of
new section
21A.
Reference by
Commission.
Substitution of
new section
for section 22.
Meetings of
Commission.
Omission of
sections 23,
24 and 25.
Substitution of
new section
for section 26.
Procedure for
inquiry under
section 19.

6
 Provided that if the subject matter of an information received is, in the opinion
of the Commission, substantially the same as or has been covered by any previous
information received, then the new information may be clubbed with the previous
information.
(2) Where on receipt of a reference from the Central Government or a State
Government or a statutory authority or information received under section 19, the
Commission is of the opinion that there exists no prima facie case, it shall close the
matter forthwith and pass such orders as it deems fit and send a copy of its order to
the Central Government or the State Government or the statutory authority or the
parties concerned, as the case may be.
(3) The Director General shall, on receipt of direction under sub-section ( 1),
submit a report on his findings within such period as may be specified by the
Commission.
(4) The Commission may forward a copy of the report referred to in sub-section
(3) to the parties concerned:
 Provided that in case the investigation is caused to be made based on a reference
received from the Central Government or the State Government or the statutory
authority, the Commission shall forward a copy of the report referred to in sub-
section ( 3) to the Central Government or the State Government or the statutory
authority, as the case may be.
(5) If the report of the Director General referred to in sub-section (3) recommends
that there is no contravention of the provisions of this Act, the Commission shall
invite objections or suggestions from the Central Government or the State Government
or the statutory authority or the parties concerned, as the case may be, on such
report of the Director General.
(6) If, after consideration of the objections or suggestions referred to in sub-
section (5), if any, the Commission agrees with the recommendation of the Director
General, it shall close the matter forthwith and pass such orders as it deems fit and
communicate its order to the Central Government or the State Government or the
statutory authority or the parties concerned, as the case may be.
(7) If, after consideration of the objections or suggestions referred to in sub-
section (5), if any, the Commission is of the opinion that further investigation is called
for, it may direct further investigation in the matter by the Director General or cause
further inquiry to be made in the matter or itself proceed with further inquiry in the
matter in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(8) If the report of the Director General referred to in sub-section (3) recommends
that there is contravention of any of the provisions of this Act, and the Commission
is of the opinion that further inquiry is called for, it shall inquire into such contravention
in accordance with the provisions of this Act.”.
20. In section 27 of the principal Act,—
(i) in clause ( b), for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted,
namely:—
 “Provided that in case any agreement referred to in section 3 has been
entered into by a cartel, the Commission may impose upon each producer,
seller, distributor, trader or service provider included in that cartel, a penalty of
up to three times of its profit for each year of the continuance of such agreement
or ten per cent. of its turnover for each year of the continuance of such
agreement, whichever is higher.”;
(ii) clauses (c) and (f) shall be omitted;
Amendment
of section 27.

7
(iii) in clause (g), for the word “order”, the words “order or issue such directions”
shall be substituted;
(iv) after clause (g), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
 “Provided that while passing orders under this section, if the Commission
comes to a finding, that an enterprise in contravention to section 3 or section 4
of the Act is a member of a group as defined in clause (b) of the Explanation to
section 5 of the Act, and other members of such a group are also responsible
for, or have contributed to, such a contravention, then it may pass orders,
under this section, against such members of the group.”.
21. In section 28 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words, brackets, letter and figures “Central
Government, on recommendation under clause ( f) of section 27”, the word
“Commission” shall be substituted;
(b) clause (d) of sub-section (2) shall be omitted.
22. In section 29 of the principal Act, —
(a) in sub-section ( 1), after the words “Where the Commission is of the”, the
words “prima facie” shall be inserted;
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) After receipt of the response of the parties to the combination
under sub-section (1), the Commission may call for a report from the Director
General and such report shall be submitted by the Director General within such
time as the Commission may direct. ”;
(c) in sub-section (2), after the words “parties to the combination”, the words,
brackets, figure and letter “or the receipt of the report from Director General called
under sub-section (1A), whichever is later” shall be inserted.
23. For section 30 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely: —
“30. Where any person or enterprise has given a notice under sub-section ( 2)
of section 6, the Commission shall examine such notice and form its prima facie
opinion as provided in sub-section ( 1) of section 29 and proceed as per provisions
contained in that section.”.
24. In section 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section (11),—
(a) for the words, brackets and figures “ninety working days from the date of
publication referred to in sub-section ( 2) of section 29”, the words, brackets and
figures “two hundred and ten days from the date of notice given to the Commission
under sub-section ( 2) of section 6” shall be substituted;
(b) in the Explanation, for the words “ninety working”, the words “two hundred
and ten” shall be substituted.
25. In section 32 of the principal Act, after clause (f), —
(a) after the words “have power to inquire”, the words and figures “in accordance
with the provisions contained in sections 19, 20, 26, 29 and 30 of the Act” shall be
inserted;
Amendment
of section 28.
Amendment
of section 29.
Procedure in
case of notice
under sub-
section ( 2) of
section 6.
Amendment
of section 31.
Amendment
of section 32.
Substitution of
new section
for section 30.

8
(b) after the words “relevant market in India”, occurring at the end, the words
“and pass such orders as it may deem fit in accordance with the provisions of this
Act” shall be inserted.
26. For section 33 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely: —
“33. Where during an inquiry, the Commission is satisfied that an act in
contravention of sub-section (1) of section 3 or sub-section (1) of section 4 or section
6 has been committed and continues to be committed or that such act is about to be
committed, the Commission may, by order, temporarily restrain any party from carrying
on such act until the conclusion of such inquiry or until further orders, without
giving notice to such party, where it deems it necessary.”.
27. Section 34 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
28. In section 35 of the principal Act, for the words “complainant or defendant”, the
words “person or an enterprise” shall be substituted.
29. For section 36 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely: —
“36. (1) In the discharge of its functions, the Commission shall be guided by the
principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any
rules made by the Central Government, the Commission shall have the powers to
regulate its own procedure.
(2) The Commission shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions
under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely: —
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining
him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit;
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(e) requisitioning, subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, any public record or document or copy of such
record or document from any office.
(3) The Commission may call upon such experts, from the fields of economics,
commerce, accountancy, international trade or from any other discipline as it deems
necessary, to assist the Commission in the conduct of any inquiry by it.
(4) The Commission may direct any person —
(a) to produce before the Director General or the Secretary or an officer
authorised by it, such books or other documents in the custody or under the
control of such person so directed as may be specified or described in the
direction, being documents relating to any trade, the examination of which may
be required for the purposes of this Act;
(b) to furnish to the Director General or the Secretary or any other officer
authorised by it, as respects the trade or such other information as may be in
his possession in relation to the trade carried on by such person as may be
required for the purposes of this Act.”.
Omission of
section 34.
Amendment
of section 35.
Substitution of
new section
for section 36.
Power of
Commission
to regulate its
own proce-
dure.
Substitution of
new section
for section 33.
Power to
issue interim
orders.
5 of 1908.
1 of 1872.

9
30. Section 37 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
31. For section 39 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely: —
“39. (1) If a person fails to pay any monetary penalty imposed on him under this
Act, the Commission shall proceed to recover such penalty in such manner as may be
specified by the regulations.
(2) In a case where the Commission is of the opinion that it would be expedient
to recover the penalty imposed under this Act in accordance with the provisions of
the Income-tax Act, 1961, it may make a reference to this effect to the concerned
income-tax authority under that Act for recovery of the penalty as tax due under the
said Act.
(3) Where a reference has been made by the Commission under sub-section (2)
for recovery of penalty, the person upon whom the penalty has been imposed shall be
deemed to be the assessee in default under the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the provisions
contained in sections 221 to 227, 228A, 229, 231 and 232 of the said Act and the
Second Schedule to that Act and any rules made thereunder shall, in so far as may be,
apply as if the said provisions were the provisions of this Act and referred to sums by
way of penalty imposed under this Act instead of to income-tax and sums imposed by
way of penalty, fine and interest under the Income-tax Act, 1961 and to the Commission
instead of the Assessing Officer.
Explanation 1.— Any reference to sub-section (2) or sub-section (6) of section
220 of the Income-tax Act, 1961, in the said provisions of that Act or the rules made
thereunder shall be construed as references to sections 43 to 45 of this Act.
Explanation 2.— The Tax Recovery Commissioner and the Tax Recovery Officer
referred to in the Income-tax Act, 1961 shall be deemed to be the Tax Recovery
Commissioner and the Tax Recovery Officer for the purposes of recovery of sums
imposed by way of penalty under this Act and reference made by the Commission
under sub-section (2) would amount to drawing of a certificate by the Tax Recovery
Officer as far as demand relating to penalty under this Act.
Explanation 3.— Any reference to appeal in Chapter XVIID and the Second
Schedule to the Income-tax Act, 1961, shall be construed as a reference to appeal
before the Competition Appellate Tribunal under section 53B of this Act.”.
32. Section 40 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
33. In section 41 of the principal Act, the following Explanation shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(a) the words “the Central Government” under section 240 of the
Companies Act, 1956 shall be construed as “the Commission”;
(b) the word “Magistrate” under section 240A of the Companies Act,
1956 shall be construed as “the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi”.’.
34. For section 42 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely: —
“42. (1) The Commission may cause an inquiry to be made into compliance of
its orders or directions made in exercise of its powers under the Act.
Omission of
section 37.
Substitution of
new section
for section 39.
Execution of
orders of
Commission
imposing
monetary
penalty.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
Omission of
section 40.
Amendment
of section 41.
Substitution of
new section
for section 42.
Contravention
of orders of
Commission.
1 of 1956.
1 of 1956.

10
(2) If any person, without reasonable cause, fails to comply with the orders or
directions of the Commission issued under sections 27, 28, 31, 32, 33, 42A and 43A of
the Act, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to rupees one lakh for
each day during which such non-compliance occurs, subject to a maximum of rupees
ten crore, as the Commission may determine.
(3) If any person does not comply with the orders or directions issued, or fails
to pay the fine imposed under sub-section ( 2), he shall, without prejudice to any
proceeding under section 39, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to rupees twenty-five crore, or
with both, as the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi may deem fit:
 Provided that the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi shall not take cognizance
of any offence under this section save on a complaint filed by the Commission or any
of its officers authorised by it.”.
35. After section 42 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“42A. Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, any person may make an
application to the Appellate Tribunal for an order for the recovery of compensation
from any enterprise for any loss or damage shown to have been suffered, by such
person as a result of the said enterprise violating directions issued by the Commission
or contravening, without any reasonable ground, any decision or order of the
Commission issued under sections 27, 28, 31, 32 and 33 or any condition or restriction
subject to which any approval, sanction, direction or exemption in relation to any
matter has been accorded, given, made or granted under this Act or delaying in
carrying out such orders or directions of the Commission.”.
36. For section 43 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“43. If any person fails to comply, without reasonable cause, with a direction
given by —
(a) the Commission under sub-sections (2) and (4) of section 36; or
(b) the Director General while exercising powers referred to in sub-section
(2) of section 41,
such person shall be punishable with fine which may extend to rupees one lakh for
each day during which such failure continues subject to a maximum of rupees one
crore, as may be determined by the Commission.”.
37. After section 43 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“43A. If any person or enterprise who fails to give notice to the Commission
under sub-section (2) of section 6, the Commission shall impose on such person or
enterprise a penalty which may extend to one per cent. of the total turnover or the
assets, whichever is higher, of such a combination.”.
38. In section 45, of  the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 44, if a person, who furnishes
or is required to furnish under this Act any particulars, documents or any information,–
Insertion of
new section
42A.
Compensation
in case of
contravention
of orders of
Commission.
Substitution of
new section
for section 43.
Penalty for
failure to
comply with
directions of
Commission
and Director
General.
Insertion of
new section
43A.
Power to
impose
penalty for
non-furnishing
of informa-
tion on
combinations.
Amendment
of section 45.

11
(a) makes any statement or furnishes any document which he knows or
has reason to believe to be false in any material particular; or
(b) omits to state any material fact knowing it to be material; or
(c) wilfully alters, suppresses or destroys any document which is required
to be furnished as aforesaid,
such person shall be punishable with fine which may extend to rupees one crore as
may be determined by the Commission.”.
39. In section 46 of the principal Act, —
(a) for the first proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:—
‘‘Provided that lesser penalty shall not be imposed by the Commission in
cases where the report of investigation directed under section 26 has been
received before making of such disclosure:”;
(b) in the second proviso, for the word “first”, the word “has” shall be substituted;
(c) after the second proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
 “Provided also that lesser penalty shall not be imposed by the
Commission if the person making the disclosure does not continue to cooperate
with the Commission till the completion of the proceedings before the
Commission.”.
40. In section 49 of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) The Central Government may, in formulating a policy on competition
(including review of laws related to competition) or on any other matter, and a
State Government may, in formulating a policy on competition or on any other
matter, as the case may be, make a reference to the Commission for its opinion
on possible effect of such policy on competition and on the receipt of such a
reference, the Commission shall, within sixty days of making such reference,
give its opinion to the Central Government, or the State Government, as the
case may be, which may thereafter take further action as it deems fit.”;
(b) in sub-section (2), after the words “Central Government”, the words “or the
State Government, as the case may be,” shall be inserted;
(c) in sub-section (3), the words “, as may be prescribed,” shall be omitted.
41. In section 51 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) clause (b) shall be omitted;
(ii) in clause ( d), for the words, brackets and letters “clauses ( a) to ( c)”, the
words, brackets and letters “clauses ( a) and (c)” shall be substituted.
42. In section 52 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), in the Explanation, for the
words “Supreme Court”, the words “Appellate Tribunal or the Supreme Court” shall be
substituted.
43. After Chapter VIII of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be inserted,
namely: —
‘CHAPTER VIII A
C
OMPETITION APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
53A. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish an Appellate
Tribunal to be known as Competition Appellate Tribunal,—
Amendment
of section 46.
Amendment
of section 49.
Amendment
of section 52.
Insertion of
new Chapter
VIII-A.
Amendment
of section 51.
Establishment
of Appellate
Tribunal.

12
(a) to hear and dispose of appeals against any direction issued or decision
made or order passed by the Commission under sub-sections ( 2) and ( 6) of
section 26, section 27, section 28, section 31, section 32, section 33, section 38,
section 39, section 43, section 43A, section 44, section 45 or section 46 of this
Act;
(b) to adjudicate on claim for compensation that may arise from the findings
of the Commission or the orders of the Appellate Tribunal in an appeal against
any finding of the Commission or under section 42A or under sub-section (2) of
section 53Q of this Act, and pass orders for the recovery of compensation
under section 53N of this Act.
(2) The Headquarter of the Appellate Tribunal shall be at such place as
the Central Government may, by notification, specify.
53B.(1) The Central Government or the State Government or a local
authority or enterprise or any person, aggrieved by any direction, decision or
order referred to in clause (a) of section 53A may prefer an appeal to the Appellate
Tribunal.
(2) Every appeal under sub-section ( 1) shall be filed within a period of
sixty days from the date on which a copy of the direction or decision or order
made by the Commission is received by the Central Government or the State
Government or a local authority or enterprise or any person referred to in that
sub-section and it shall be in such form and be accompanied by such fee as
may be prescribed:
 Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the
expiry of the said period of sixty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient
cause for not filing it within that period.
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1), the Appellate Tribunal
may, after giving the parties to the appeal, an opportunity of being heard, pass
such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or setting aside the
direction, decision or order appealed against.
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to
the Commission and the parties to the appeal.
(5) The appeal filed before the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (1)
shall be dealt with by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be
made by it to dispose of the appeal within six months from the date of receipt of
the appeal.
53C. The Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson and not more
than two other Members to be appointed by the Central Government.
53D. (1) The Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal shall be a person,
who is, or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High
Court.
(2)  A Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall be a person of ability,
integrity and standing having special knowledge of, and professional experience
of not less than twenty-five years in, competition matters, including competition
law and policy, international trade, economics, business, commerce, law, finance,
accountancy, management, industry, public affairs, administration or in any
other matter which in the opinion of the Central Government, may be useful to
the Appellate Tribunal.
53E. (1)  The Chairperson and Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall be
appointed by the Central Government from a panel of names recommended by
a Selection Committee consisting of—
Qualifications
for appoint-
ment of
Chairperson
and Members
of Appellate
Tribunal.
Selection
Committee.
Appeal  to
Appellate
Tribunal.
Composition
of Appellate
Tribunal.

13
(a) the Chief Justice of India or his nominee ..........Chairperson;
(b) the Secretary in the Ministry of Corporate Affairs ..........Member;
(c) the Secretary in the Ministry of Law and Justice ..........Member.
(2) The term of the Selection Committee and the manner of selection of panel of
names shall be such as may be prescribed.
53F. The Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall hold office as
such for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office, and
shall be eligible for re-appointment:
 Provided that no Chairperson or other Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall
hold office as such after he has attained,—
(a) in the case of the Chairperson, the age of sixty-eight years;
(b) in the case of any other Member of the Appellate Tribunal, the age of
sixty-five years.
53G . (1) The salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairperson and other Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall be such as
may be prescribed.
(2) The salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the
Chairperson and other Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall not be varied to their
disadvantage after their appointment.
53H. If, for any reason other than temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in
the office of the Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal, the Central
Government shall appoint another person in accordance with the provisions of this
Act to fill the vacancy and the proceedings may be continued before the Appellate
Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is filled.
53-I. The Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal may, by notice in
writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his office:
 Provided that the Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall,
unless he is permitted by the Central Government to relinquish his office sooner,
continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of
such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office
or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest.
53J. ( 1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the
Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal by reason of his death or resignation, the
senior-most Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall act as the Chairperson of the
Appellate Tribunal until the date on which a new Chairperson appointed in accordance
with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy enters upon his office.
(2) When the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal is unable to discharge his
functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the senior-most Member or,
as the case may be, such one of the Members of the Appellate Tribunal, as the Central
Government may, by notification, authorise in this behalf, shall discharge the functions
of the Chairperson until the date on which the Chairperson resumes his duties.
53K.(1) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Chief Justice of
India, remove from office the Chairperson or any other Member of the Appellate
Tribunal, who —
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has engaged at any time, during his term of office, in any paid
employment; or
Removal and
suspension of
Chairperson
and Members
of Appellate
Tribunal.
Term of
office of
Chairperson
and Members
of Appellate
Tribunal.
Terms and
conditions of
service
of Chairper-
son  and
Members of
Appellate
Tribunal.
Vacancies.
Resignation of
Chairperson
and Members
of Appellate
Tribunal.
Member of Ap-
pellate Tribu-
nal to act as its
Chairperson in
certain cases.

14
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(d) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such
Chairperson or other Member of the Appellate Tribunal; or
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect
prejudicially his functions as such Chairperson or Member of the Appellate
Tribunal; or
(f) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office
prejudicial to the public interest.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), no Chairperson or
a Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall be removed from his office on the ground
specified in clause (e) or clause (f) of sub-section (1) except by an order made by the
Central Government after an inquiry made in this behalf by a Judge of the Supreme
Court in which such Chairperson or Member had been informed of the charges against
him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.
53L. The Chairperson and other Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall not,
for a period of two years from the date on which they cease to hold office, accept any
employment in, or connected with the management or administration of, any enterprise
which has been a party to a proceeding before the Appellate Tribunal under this Act:
 Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to any employment
under the Central Government or a State Government or local authority or in any
statutory authority or any corporation established by or under any Central, State or
Provincial Act or a Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies
Act, 1956.
53M.(1) The Central Government shall provide the Appellate Tribunal with
such officers and other employees as it may think fit.
(2) The officers and other employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall discharge
their functions under the general superintendence and control of the Chairperson of
the Appellate Tribunal.
(3) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers
and other employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed.
53N.(1) Without prejudice to any other provisions contained in this Act, the
Central Government or a State Government or a local authority or any enterprise or
any person may make an application to the Appellate Tribunal to adjudicate on claim
for compensation that may arise from the findings of the Commission or the orders of
the Appellate Tribunal in an appeal against any finding of the Commission or under
section 42A or under sub-section (2) of section 53Q of the Act, and to pass an order
for the recovery of compensation from any enterprise for any loss or damage shown
to have been suffered, by the Central Government or a State Government or a local
authority or any enterprise or any person as a result of any contravention of the
provisions of Chapter II, having been committed by the enterprise.
(2) Every application made under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by the
findings of the Commission, if any, and also be accompanied with such fees as may be
prescribed.
(3) The Appellate Tribunal may, after an inquiry made into the allegations
mentioned in the application made under sub-section (1), pass an order directing the
enterprise to make payment to the applicant, of the amount determined by it as
realisable from the enterprise as compensation for the loss or damage caused to the
applicant as a result of any contravention of the provisions of Chapter II having been
committed by such enterprise:
Awarding
compensation.
Restriction on
employment
of Chairper-
son and other
Members of
Appellate
Tribunal in
certain cases.
Staff of
Appellate
Tribunal.
1 of 1956.

15
 Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may obtain the recommendations of the
Commission before passing an order of compensation.
(4) Where any loss or damage referred to in sub-section ( 1) is caused to
numerous persons having the same interest, one or more of such persons may, with
the permission of the Appellate Tribunal, make an application under that sub-section
for and on behalf of, or for the benefit of, the persons so interested, and thereupon,
the provisions of rule 8 of Order 1 of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, shall apply subject to the modification that every reference therein to a suit or
decree shall be construed as a reference to the application before the Appellate
Tribunal and the order of the Appellate Tribunal thereon.
Explanation.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that –
(a) an application may be made for compensation before the Appellate
Tribunal only after either the Commission or the Appellate Tribunal on appeal
under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 53A of the Act, has determined in
a proceeding before it that violation of the provisions of the Act has taken
place, or if provisions of section 42A or sub-section ( 2) of section 53Q of the
Act are attracted.
(b) enquiry to be conducted under sub-section (3) shall be for the purpose
of determining the eligibility and quantum of compensation due to a person
applying for the same, and not for examining afresh the findings of the
Commission or the Appellate Tribunal on whether any violation of the Act has
taken place.
53-O. (1) The Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down
in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, but shall be guided by the principles of natural
justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules made by the
Central Government, the Appellate Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own
procedure including the places at which they shall have their sittings.
(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its
functions under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit in respect of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining
him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872, requisitioning any public record or document or copy of
such record or document from any office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(f) reviewing its decisions;
(g) dismissing a representation for default or deciding it ex parte;
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any representation for default
or any order passed by it ex parte;
(i) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(3) Every proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be
judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes
of section 196, of the Indian Penal Code and the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed
to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Procedure and
powers of
Appellate
Tribunal.
1 of 1872.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.

16
53P .(1) Every order made by the Appellate Tribunal shall be enforced by it in
the same manner as if it were a decree made by a court in a suit pending therein, and
it shall be lawful for the Appellate Tribunal to send, in case of its inability to execute
such order, to the court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction,—
(a) in the case of an order against a company, the registered office of the
company is situated; or
(b) in the case of an order against any other person, place where the
person concerned voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works
for gain, is situated.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the Appellate
Tribunal may transmit any order made by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction
and such civil court shall execute the order as if it were a decree made by that court.
53-Q.( 1) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, if any person
contravenes, without any reasonable ground, any order of the Appellate Tribunal, he
shall be liable for a penalty of not exceeding rupees one crore or imprisonment for a
term up to three years or with both as the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi may
deem fit:
 Provided that the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi shall not take cognizance
of any offence punishable under this sub-section, save on a complaint made by an
officer authorised by the Appellate Tribunal.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, any person may make an
application to the Appellate Tribunal for an order for the recovery of compensation
from any enterprise for any loss or damage shown to have been suffered, by such
person as a result of the said enterprise contravening, without any reasonable ground,
any order of the Appellate Tribunal or delaying in carrying out such orders of the
Appellate Tribunal.
53R. No act or proceeding of the Appellate Tribunal shall be questioned or shall
be invalid merely on the ground of existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution
of the Appellate Tribunal.
53-S.(1) A person preferring an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal may either
appear in person or authorise one or more chartered accountants or company
secretaries or cost accountants or legal practitioners or any of its officers to present
his or its case before the Appellate Tribunal.
(2) The Central Government or a State Government or a local authority or any
enterprise preferring an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal may authorise one or more
chartered accountants or company secretaries or cost accountants or legal practitioners
or any of its officers to act as presenting officers and every person so authorised may
present the case with respect to any appeal before the Appellate Tribunal.
(3) The Commission may authorise one or more chartered accountants or
company secretaries or cost accountants or legal practitioners or any of its officers to
act as presenting officers and every person so authorised may present the case with
respect to any appeal before the Appellate Tribunal.
Explanation .— The expressions “chartered accountant” or “company
secretary” or “cost accountant” or “legal practitioner” shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in the Explanation to section 35.
53T. The Central Government or any State Government or the Commission or
any statutory authority or any local authority or any enterprise or any person
aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal to the
Execution of
orders of
Appellate
Tribunal.
Contravention
of orders of
Appellate
Tribunal.
Vacancy  in
Appellate
Tribunal not
to  invalidate
acts or
proceedings.
Right to legal
representa-
tion.
Appeal to
Supreme
Court.

17
Supreme Court within sixty days from the date of communication of the decision or
order of the Appellate Tribunal to them:
 Provided that the Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied that the applicant was
prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to
be filed after the expiry of the said period of sixty days.
53U. The Appellate Tribunal shall have, and exercise, the same jurisdiction,
powers and authority in respect of contempt of itself as a High Court has and may
exercise and, for this purpose, the provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971
shall have effect subject to modifications that, —
(a) the reference therein to a High Court shall be construed as including
a reference to the Appellate Tribunal;
(b) the references to the Advocate-General in section 15 of the said Act
shall be construed as a reference to such Law Officer as the Central Government
may, by notification, specify in this behalf.
44. In section 57 of the principal Act, for the words “the Commission”, the words “the
Commission or the Appellate Tribunal” shall be substituted.
45. For section 58 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“58. The Chairperson and other Members and the Director General, Additional,
Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General and Secretary and officers and other
employees of the Commission and the Chairperson, Members, officers and other
employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed, while acting or purporting to
act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.”.
46. In section 59 of the principal Act, for the words “the Registrar or officers or other
employees of the Commission”, the words “the Secretary or officers or other employees of
the Commission or the Chairperson, Members, officers and other employees of the Appellate
Tribunal” shall be substituted.
47. In section 61 of the principal Act, for the word “Commission”, the words
“Commission or the Appellate Tribunal” shall be substituted.
48. In section 63 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), —
(i) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(a) the term of the Selection Committee and the manner of selection of
panel of names under sub-section ( 2) of section 9;”;
(ii) clause (c) shall be omitted;
(iii) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: —
“(da) the number of Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors
General or such officers or other employees in the office of Director General and
the manner in which such Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors
General or such officers or other employees may be appointed under sub-
section (1A) of section 16;”;
(iv) in clauses ( e) and ( f), for the words “such other advisers, consultants or
officers”, the words “such officers or other employees” shall be substituted;
Power to
Punish for
contempt.
Amendment
of section 57.
Substitution of
new section
for section 58.
Chairperson,
Members,
Director
General,
Secretary,
officers and
other
employees,
etc., to be
public servants.
Amendment
of section 59.
Amendment
of section 61.
Amendment
of section 63.
45 of 1860.
70 of 1971.

18
(v) in clause ( g), for the word “Registrar”, the word “Secretary” shall be
substituted;
(vi) clauses (h), (i) and (j) shall be omitted;
(vii) after clause (m), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely: —
“(ma) the form in which an appeal may be filed before the Appellate
Tribunal under sub-section (2) of section 53B and the fees payable in respect
of such appeal;
(mb) the term of the Selection Committee and the manner of selection of
panel of names under sub-section (2) of section 53E;
(mc) the salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairperson and other Members of the Appellate Tribunal under sub-
section (1) of section 53G;
(md) the salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the
officers and other employees of the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section ( 3)
of section 53M;
(me) the fee which shall be accompanied with every application made
under sub-section (2) of section 53N;
(mf) the other matters under clause (i) of sub-section (2) of section 53-O
in respect of which the Appellate Tribunal shall have powers under the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit;”;
(viii) for clause (n), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
 “( n) the manner in which the monies transferred to the Competition
Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal shall be dealt with by the
Commission or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, under the fourth
proviso to sub-section ( 2) of section 66.”.
49. In section 64 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), for clauses (d) and (e), the
following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
“(d) the procedures to be followed for engaging the experts and professionals
under sub-section (3) of section 17;
(e) the fee which may be determined under clause (a) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 19;
(f) the rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at the meetings
of the Commission under sub-section (1) of section 22;
(g) the manner in which penalty shall be recovered under sub-section ( 1) of
section 39;
(h) any other matter in respect of which provision is to be, or may be, made by
regulations.”.
50. In section 66 of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section ( 1), the following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
(1) The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 is hereby
repealed and the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission
established under sub-section (1) of section 5 of the said Act (hereafter referred
to as the repealed Act) shall stand dissolved:
 Provided that, notwithstanding anything contained in this sub-section,
the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission established under
54 of 1969.
Amendment
of section 64.
Amendment
of section 66.
5 of 1908.

19
sub-section ( 1) of section 5 of the repealed Act may continue to exercise
jurisdiction and power under the repealed Act for a period of two years from the
date of the commencement of this Act in respect of all cases or proceedings
(including complaints received by it or references or applications made to it)
filed before the commencement of this Act as if the Monopolies and Restrictive
Trade Practices Act, 1969 had not been repealed and all the provisions of the
said Act so repealed shall mutatis mutandis apply to such cases or proceedings
or complaints or references or applications and to all other matters.
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that
nothing in this proviso shall confer any jurisdiction or power upon the
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission to decide or adjudicate
any case or proceeding arising under the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade
Practices Act, 1969 on or after the commencement of this Act.
(1A) The repeal of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Act, 1969 shall, however, not affect,—
(a) the previous operation of the Act so repealed or anything duly
done or suffered thereunder; or
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or
incurred under the Act so repealed; or
(c) any penalty, confiscation or punishment incurred in respect of
any contravention under the Act so repealed; or
(d) any proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege,
obligation, liability, penalty, confiscation or punishment as aforesaid,
and any such proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or
enforced, and any such penalty, confiscation or punishment may be
imposed or made as if that Act had not been repealed.”.
(b) in sub-section (2), —
(i) for the second proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted,
namely:—
 “Provided further that the Director General of Investigation and
Registration, Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General of
Investigation and Registration or any officer or other employee who has
been, immediately before the dissolution of the Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices Commission employed on regular basis by
the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission, shall
become, on and from such dissolution, the officer and employee,
respectively, of the Competition Commission of India or the Appellate
Tribunal, in such manner as may be specified by the Central Government,
with the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other like
matters as would have been admissible to him if the rights in relation to
such Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission had not
been transferred to, and vested in, the Competition Commission of India
or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, and shall continue to do so
unless and until his employment in the Competition Commission of India
or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, is duly terminated or until
his remuneration, terms and conditions of employment are duly altered
by the Competition Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal, as the
case may be;”;
(ii) in the third proviso, for the words “the Central Government”, the
words “the Competition Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal, as the
case may be,’’ shall be substituted;
54 of 1969.
54 of 1969.
54 of 1969.

20
(iii) in the fourth proviso,—
(A) for the words “the Central Government shall, out of the monies
standing”, the words “the Competition Commission of India or the
Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, shall, out of the monies standing”
shall be substituted;
(B) for the portion beginning with the words “the Central
Government and such monies” and ending with the words “as may be
prescribed” the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“the Competition Commission of India or the Appellate
Tribunal, as the case may be, and such monies which stand so
transferred shall be dealt with by the said Commission or the
Tribunal, as the case may be, in such manner as may be prescribed”;
(c) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(3) All cases pertaining to monopolistic trade practices or restrictive
trade practices pending (including such cases, in which any unfair trade practice
has also been alleged), before the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Commission shall, after the expiry of two years referred to in the proviso to sub-
section (1), stand transferred to the Appellate Tribunal and shall be adjudicated
by the Appellate Tribunal in accordance with the provisions of the repealed
Act as if that Act had not been repealed.”.
(d) in sub-section ( 4), for the words “on or before the commencement of this
Act shall, on such commencement”, the words, brackets and figure “on or before the
expiry of two years referred to in the proviso to sub-section (1),” shall be substituted;
(e) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
 “(5) All cases pertaining to unfair trade practices referred to in clause (x)
of sub-section ( 1) of section 36A of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade
Practices Act, 1969 and pending before the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade
Practices Commission shall, after the expiry of two years referred to in the
proviso to sub-section (1), stand transferred to the Appellate Tribunal and the
Appellate Tribunal shall dispose of such cases as if they were cases filed under
that Act.”.
54 of 1969.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Competition Act, 2002.
————
(As passed by Lok Sabha )
MGIPMRND—3835LS(S5)—06-09-2007.