10

AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

“9 BDEC 2005

1

Bill 1४०, 70 of 2006

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

By
Suri C.K. CHANDRAPPAN, MLP.

A

BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Bg it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2006.
2. In article 124 of the Constitution, —
(a) for clause (2), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(2) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shail be appointed by the President by
warrant under his hand and seal on the recommendation of the Judicial Committee
referred to in article 147A from amongst a panel of names suggested by the Committee
and shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-five years:

Provided that the Chief Justice of India shall be appointed by the President by
warrant under his hand and seal after consultation with such of the Judges of the
Supreme Court and of the High Courts in the States as the President may deem
necessary for the purpose:

’
|]

Short title.

Amendment
of article
124,


Provided further that—

(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign
his office;

(b) a Judge may be removed from his office in the manner provided in clause
(७). 5
(b) for clause (4), the following clause shall be substituted namely:—

“(4) A Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be removed from his office except by
an order of the President after an address by each House of Parliament supported by
a majority of members present and voting and presented to the President in the same
session for such removal on the ground of misbehaviour or incapacity.”. 10

Insertion of 3. In Part V of the Constitution, after Chapter IV, the following Chapter shall be
new Chapter inserted, namely:—

TVA.
“CHAPTER IVA—JUDICIAL COMMITTEE

Constitution 147A. (1) The President shall by order constitute a Committee, referred to in this

of Judicial Constitution as the Judicial Committee.
Committee a

and its (2) The Judicial Committee shall consist of the following:-—
22 (a) The Chief Justice of India, who shall be the Chairperson of the Committee:
(b) four other Judges of the Supreme Court next to the Chief Justice of India in
seniority;
(3) It shall be the duty of the Committee— 20

(a) to prepare a panel for appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court and Chief
Justices and other Judges of the High Courts;

(2) to draw up a code of ethics for Judges of the Supreme Court and Chief
Justices and other Judges of the High Courts; and

(c) to inquire into, suo-motu or ona complaint or reference, cases of misconduct 25
or such deviant behaviour of a Judge other than those calling for his removal and
advise the President of India appropriately after such inquiry.

(4) No person, whose name is not recommended by the Committee in the panel for
appointment as a Judge, shall be so appointed by the President.

(5) The Committee shall have the power to regulate its own procedure including the 30
procedure to be followed under sub-clause (c) of clause a

Amendment 4. In article 217 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words “after consultation with

of article 217. the Chief Justice of India, the Governor of the State, and, in the case of appointment of a
Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of the High Court”, the words “on the
recommendation of the Judicial Committee referred to in article 147A from amongst a panel of 35
names suggested by the Committee” shall be substituted.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

- Articles 124(2) and 217(1) of the Constitution, in very clear terms, lay down that the
judiciary has an integral role to play in the appointment of the judges in the higher judiciary.
These articles provide for “consultation” with the head of judiciary or any other member of
the judiciary in matters related to appointment of judges.

The ambiguity that surrounded the “kind of consultation” with judiciary has been
done away with by the constant evolution of case law on this front. The Supreme Court, in
its several judgments, has very clearly laid down the role of the judiciary in the appointment
of the judges in the higher judiciary. The most important reason that has been advanced for
giving a predominant role to judiciary in the matters relating to appointment of judges in
higher judiciary is to ensure that the independence of. judiciary is protected.

The system of having a collegium to look into the matters related to appointment has
not yielded the kind of results that were expected. The vacancies still remain unfilled as
before. Even if a vacancy gets filled, the whole process takes a lot of time. Therefore, the
objective of streamlining the process of appointment has not been achieved to the fullest
possible extent. All this has created the need of having:a proper institutionalised structure-
for dealing with matters relating to the appointment of judges in higher ‘judiciary.

The cases of judicial misconduct and deviant actions by judges are on the rise. To
make judges accountable is a growing demand, as the judicial propriety and ethics are
equally important to have a buoyant and independent judicial system.

The chances of removal of a judge in the higher judiciary through impeachment process
are very remote because of cumbersome procedure of impeachment. There is every chance
that Parliament may absolve the judge of the charges, even if he is indicted in the inquiry
Teport, as happened in one case in the past. It is, therefore, necessary to amend the provisions
of special majority required to impeach a judge in higher judiciary and to provide for requirement
of simple majority for the impeachment of a Judge.

The Bill seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to constitute a ‘judicial Committee’
to regulate appointment of judges in higher judiciary and to draw a code of conduct for
judges and inquire into cases of misconduct or deviant actions of judges, other than those
punishable with removal and advise the President of India after such inquiry. The Bill seeks
to achieve the above objective.

Hence this Bill.

New Detut, C.K.CHANDRAPPAN
July 25,2006.


Establishment
and
constitution
of Supreme
Court.

Appointment
and conditions
of the office
of a Judge of a
High Court,

ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * *
है Carrer IV—Tue Union Jupiciary
124, (1) * * * * *

(2) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant
under his hand and seal after consultation with such of the Judges of the Supreme Court and
of the High Courts in the States as the President may deem necessary for the purpose and
shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-five years:

Provided that in the case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice,
the Chief Justice of India shall always be consulted:

Provided further that—

(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President,
resign his office;

(0) a Judge may be removed from this office in the manner provided in
clause (4).

* * * * *

(4) A Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be removed from his office except by an
order, of the President passed after an address by each House of Parliament supported by a
majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds
of the members of that House present and voting has been presented to the President in the
same session for such removal on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity.

* * * * *

217. (1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant
under his hand and seal after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, the Governor of
the State, and, in the case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief
Justice of the High Court, and shall hold office, in the case of an additional or acting Judge,
as provided in article 224, and in any other case, until he attains the age of sixty-two years:

Provided that—
(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President,
resign his office;

(6) a Judge may be removed from his office by the President in the manner
provided in clause (4) of article 124 for the removal of a Judge of the
Supreme Court;

(c) the office of a Judge shall be vacated by his being appointed by the
President to be a Judge of the Supreme Court or by his being transferred by the
President to any other High Court within the territory of India.

* * * * *

=|



LOK SABHA

A

BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri C.K. Chandrappan, M.P,)

MGIPMRND—2064L S(S-3)—09.08.2006.