THE CONSUMER PROTECTION (AMENDMENT) BILL,  2010
BY
SHRI ANANDRAO VITHOBA ADSUL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Consumer Protection Act, 1986
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first  Year of the Republic of  India  as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In section 2 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (hereinafter referred to be the principal
Act), in sub-section (1), in clause (c)—
(a) in sub-clause ( ii), the words "including delay in delivery of goods either in full or
partly even after lapse of reasonable period" shall be added at the end; and
(b) in sub-clause (iii), the words "including delay in rendering services either in full or
partly even after lapse of reasonable period" shall be added at the end.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  70 of 2010
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment of
section 2.
68 of 1986.
5

3. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "at least one meeting",
the words "at least four meetings" shall be substituted.
4. In section 9 of the principal Act, in clause (a), after the existing proviso, the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that in a city having population of more than one lakh according to the
latest census, a separate District Forum shall be established”.
Amendment
of section 5.
Amendment
of section 9.
2
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Consumer Protection Act enacted in 1986 suffers from certain loopholes. The Bill,
therefore, seeks to amend the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 with a view to cover those
loopholes by providing that—
(i) the consumers can make complaints in case of delay in delivery of goods or delay
in rendering services within a reasonable period;
(ii) the meeting of the Central Council established under section 5 of the Act shall be
held at least four times in a year; and
(iii) a separate District Forum shall be set up for every city having population of more
than one lakh.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; ANANDRAO VITHOBA  ADSUL
May 7, 2010
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Council shall meet at least four times in a
year. Clause 4 provides for establishment of a separate District Forum in every city having a
population of more than one lakh. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of
about rupees fifty crores.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crores is also likely to be
involved.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 1986
(ACT NO. 68 OF 1986)
* * * * *
2. * * * * *
(c)* * * * *
(ii) the goods bought by him or agreed to be bought by him suffer from one or more
defects;
(iii) the services hired or availed of or agreed to be hired or availed of by him suffer
from deficiency in any respect.
* * * * *
5. (1) The Central Council shall meet as and when necessary, but at least one meeting
of the Council shall be held every year.
* * * * *
9. * * * * *
(a) a Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum to be known as the "District Forum"
established by the State Government in each district of the State by notification:
Provided that the State Government may, if it deems fit establish more than one District
Forum in a district.
* * * * *
Definitions.
Procedure for
meetings of
the Central
Council.
Establishment
of Consumer
Disputes
Redressal
Agencies.
5

LOK  SABHA
————————
A
BILL
further to amend the Consumer Protection Act, 1986.
————
(Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2751LS(S-4)—15-07-2010.