1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE REGULATION OF SALE OF SCHEDULE-H DRUGS BILL, 2020
By
SHRI RAHUL KASW AN,  M.P.
A
BILL
to prohibit the sale of Schedule-H Drugs without prescription of a registered
medical practitioner to ensure medical safety and for matters connected
therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Regulation of Sale of Schedule-H Drugs Act, 2020.
(2) It extends to the whole of  India.
(3)  It shall come  into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "e-pharmacy" refers to an online site or an interface selling medicinal drugs;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules under this Act; and
(c) "Schedule-H drug" means drugs mentioned in Schedule-H to the Drugs and
Cosmetics Rules, 1945 as framed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
Bill  No. 70  of  2020
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5
10
23 of 1940

2
Revision of
Schedule-H
drugs.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the
Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, revise the Schedule-H Drugs
into two categories, namely:—
(a) "general drugs" which may be sold without any restriction; and
(b) "drugs causing serious harm" which shall be sold with restrictions as imposed
on Schedule 'X' drugs under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 as framed under the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
4. The Central Government shall make it mandatory for pharmacies, medical shops
and e-pharmacies,—
(a) not to sell drugs causing serious harm under Schedule-H to any person
without prescription of a registered medical practitioner in this behalf; and
(b) to furnish appropriate bills to the customer purchasing Schedule-H drugs;
(c) to preserve the prescription of registered medical practitioner, in case of,—
(i) "general drugs" as mentioned under clause (a) of section 3 for one
year; and
(ii) "drugs causing serious harm" as mentioned under clause (b) of section
3 for two years.
5. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a
body to impose punishment including fines and cancellation of licences of the pharmacies,
medical shops or e-pharmacies selling Schedule-H drugs without prescription of a registered
medical practitioner in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this act.
(2) Every rule made this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifications, or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Constitution
of a body to
regulate sale
of Schedule-H
Drugs.
Power to
make rules.
Regulation of
sale of
Schedule-H
drugs.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
23 of 1940.
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Schedule-H drugs are those medicines which contain a very high alcoholic influence.
These are used to treat some serious diseases like heart diseases, anxiety disorders and
other diseases. Restricted sale of antibiotics to check drug resitance is emerging as a serious
health issue in the country. Resistance to antibiotics and an increase in drug resistant TB
cases are cited as a result of improper prescription and consumption of antibiotics which are
easily available.
Strict measures would ensure that pharmacists do not take advantage of unawareness
of consumers to drain profits from the sale of these drugs. It would also ensure that people
do not take these drugs lightly and know the importance of medical advice.
Having separate sets of antibiotics depending on the disease—mild ones for out-
patient and emergency patients and strong and high-end antibiotics for those under intensive
care will hopefully make sure that antibiotics are used judiciously so that resistance to
commonly used antibiotics does not develop rapidly, and that the medicines are available for
critically ill patients.
It is definitely in the best interest of people to avoid consumption of harmful drugs
until it's very necessary.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to ban the sale of Schedule-H drugs without doctor's
prescription to provide medical safety.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAHUL KASWAN
January  20, 2020.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the constitution a body to impose punishment including
fines and cancellation of licences of the pharmacies, medical shops or e-pharmacies selling
drugs without prescription of a registered medical practitioners. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of about rupees Fifty Crores per annum would be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matter of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit the sale of Schedule-H Drugs without prescription of a registered medical
practitioner to ensure medical safety and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Rahul Kaswan,  M.P .)
MGIPMRND—5348LS(S3)—03-03-2020.