Bili No. 70 of 2000.
| PROHIBITION OF PUBLICATION OF PRE-ELECTION
SURVEY BILL, 2000
By
‘Dr. RAGHUVANSH Prasab Stnau, M.P.

A
BILL

to prohibit the publication of pre-election survey.

it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

(1) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Publication of Pre-Election Survey

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
in the Official Gazette, appoint,

this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “election” means an election to fill a seat or seats in either House of Parliament
House of the Legislature of a State; and

(0) “express” means and includes expression through printing or publication in
or a book or telecast/broadcast through television/radio network or internet
through any other means to which the public has access.

Short title and
commence-
ment.

Definitions.


Prohibition of
publication of
pre-election

survey.

3. No person shall express or cause to be expressed any opinion |
election, before the completion of process of election.

Explanation.—In this section person includes any organisation or agency.
Punishment. 4. If any person violates the provisions of section 3,—

(i he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term not exceeding one
and

(ii) the registration or licence given to such an organisation or agency w
any law for the time being in force, shall be cancelled.

Act to have 5. This Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
overriding the time being in force or any decrec or judgement or order by any court or authority havi

judicial powers,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

India is a very large country and therefore, elections to Lok Sabha and State Legislatures
are held in many phases. It has been observed that various agencies start publishing pre-
poll survey about the victory or defeat of political parties on the completion of the first
phase of the elections itself. As a result, there is every possibility that the voters in other
constituencies where elections are to be held, can be influenced. Keeping this fact in view,
the Election Commission had put a ban on such surveys. However, the court struck down it
and as a result thereof various agencies started publishing their pre-poll survey. This causes
confusion among the voters of other constituencies where the polling process is yet to be
completed.

Hence it is necessary to enact a legislation to ensure that the voters are not influenced
by these surveys and fair elections are held without any fear or favour.

Hence this Bill.

New Deut; RAGHUVANSH PRASAD SINGH
March 2, 2000.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to prohibit the publication of pre-election survey.

(Dr: Raghuvansh Prasad Singh, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4638LS—06-04-2000.