 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
 Bill No. 70 of 2022
THE CONSER V A TION AND MAINTENANCE OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL
AND NA TURAL  HERIT AGE BILL, 2022
By
SHRI S HRIRANG APPA B ARNE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the conservation of archaeological
and natural heritage and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Conservation and Maintenance of
Archaeological and Natural Heritage  Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,  by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent  and
commencement.
5

2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘Board’ means the Archaeological and Natural Heritage Conservation and
Maintenance Board constituted under section 3;
(b) ‘Convention’ means the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Archaeological Organization Convention concerning the Protection of the World
Archaeological and Natural Heritage held in Paris in 1972 and ratified by India in
1977;
(c) ‘archaeological heritage’ includes the following:—
(i) ‘ancient monument’ and ‘archaeological sites and remains’ defined in
clauses (a) and (d), respectively, of section 2 of the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958;
(ii) monuments, that is to say, architectural works, works of monumental
sculpture and painting, elements or structures of an archaeological nature,
inscriptions, cave dwelling and combinations of features, which are of
outstanding universal value from the point of view of history, art or science;
(iii) groups of buildings, groups of separate or connected buildings which,
because of their architecture, homogeneity or their place in the landscape,
are of outstanding universal value from the point of view of history, art or
science;
(iv) sites, that is to say, works of man or the combined works of nature and
man, and areas including archaeological sites which are of outstanding
universal value from the historical, aesthetic, ethnological or anthropological
point of view;
(d) “natural heritage” includes,—
(i) natural sites or precisely delineated natural areas which are of
outstanding value from the point of view of science, conservation or
natural beauty;
(ii) geological and physiographical formations and precisely
delineated area which constitute the habitat of threatened species of
animals and plants and are of outstanding value from the point of
view of science or conservation;
(iii) natural features consisting of physical and biological formations
or groups of such formations, which are of outstanding value from
the aesthetic or scientific point of view; and
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(2) The words and expressions used in this Act but not defined herein and
defined in the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958
or the Indian Penal Code, 1860 or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall have
the same meaning, respectively, assigned to them in those Acts.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Board to be known as the Archaeological and Natural Heritage
Conservation and Maintenance Board for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of,
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government, from
amongst the persons having such knowledge and experience, as may
be prescribed;
5
10
2
Definitions.
15
Constitution of
the Archaeolo-
gical and Natural
Heritage
Conservation
Board.
20
25
30
35
40
45
24 of 1958.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
24 of 1958.

(b) the Members of the House of the People having archaeological
heritage or natural heritage in their constituencies;
(c) five Members of the Council of States to be nominated by the
Presiding Officer of the House; and
(d) ten other members to be appointed by the Central Government
from amongst the persons who have knowledge and experience in
the field of archaeology, history, architecture, conservation, science
and technology, environment science, town and country planning
or public administration:
Provided that the Chairperson and the members of the Board shall
be appointed in consultation with the Leaders of Opposition of both
the Houses of Parliament.
(3) The Chairperson and every member of the Board shall hold office for
a period of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service of the Chairperson and the members of the Board shall be
such as may be prescribed.
(5) The terms and conditions of the office, including the method of filling
casual vacancies in the Board, and the procedure for removal or disqualification of
the Chairperson or a member of the Board, shall be such as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
(6) The Board may, with the approval of the Central Government, make
regulations for regulating its own procedure.
(7) The Board shall have a Secretariat consisting of such number of officers
and employees as may be prescribed.
(8) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service of, the officers and employees  of the secretariat shall be
such as may be prescribed.
4. The Board shall—
(i) monitor the implementation of obligations under the Convention and issue
such directions as it may consider necessary and expedient for the effective
implementation of such obligations;
(ii) advise to the Central Government on identification, safe-keeping,
conservation and preservation of Archaeological heritage and natural heritage;
(iii) issue such directions as it considers necessary to ensure safety, security,
conservation and management of archaeological heritage and natural heritage;
(iv) cause or undertake an inquiry and initiate legal action in consultation with
the Central Government, in case of offences relating to archaeological heritage and
natural heritage sites;
 (v) take such measures as it may consider necessary for implementation of
the provisions of this Act; and
(vi) undertake such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
3
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Functions of the
Board.

5. Whoever—
(i) damages or causes any damage to archaeological heritage or natural heritage
site; or
(ii) indulges in any propaganda with the intention of causing any damage to as
archaeological heritage or natural heritage site; or
(iii) commits or omits to commit any act in relation to Archaeological heritage
or natural heritage sites, which is an offence under any other law for the time being in
force;
shall be guilty of committing an offence punishable under this Act.
6. Any person who commits any offence under section 5 shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, which
may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, proceedings of committing an offence under this Act may be instituted after
the expiry of the period of limitation.
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, an offence punishable under this Act shall be a cognizable offence.
9. It shall be the duty of every person holding a civil post in connection with the
affairs of the Union or a State to assist the Board in discharge of its functions.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of,
any other law for the time being in force.
12. (1) The Board shall prepare an annual report, in such form and manner, as
may be prescribed.
(2) The Board shall submit the annual report to the Central Government in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The annual report shall be laid by the Central Government, as soon as may
be after it is received, before each House of Parliament:
Provided that the Board may also submit interim report or reports to the Central
Government, which shall cause the report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is
received, before each House of Parliament.
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Offences.
Punishment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
Power to make
rules.
Annual report.
Provisions of
the Act to be  in
addition to other
laws.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Proceedings
after the
expiry of the
period of
limitation.
An offence
under the Act
to be a  cogniza-
ble  offence.
Every person
holding a civil
post to assist the
Board.
35
40
4

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India has a rich stock of natural and Archaeological heritage. Our heritage
provides clues to our past and how our society has evolved. It helps use examine
our history and traditions and enables us develop and awareness about ourselves.
It helps us understand and explain why we are the way we are. Heritage is a
keystone of our culture that plays an important role in our society, business and
world view. It informs influences and inspires public debate and policy both
directly and indirectly. Maintaining and conserving our both natural and
archaeological heritage provides a basis for local economic development and
innovation in tourism, agriculture, entertainment, education and business generally.
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
in its 17th General Assembly meeting on 16th November, 1972 adopted a Convention
relating to the conservation of World Archaeological and Natural Heritage. India has
ratified this convention on 14th November, 1977. Hence, it is in our own interest to
implement this convention and enact a law to give effect to the provisions of the
Convention. For the conservation of Archaeological heritage, a suitable mechanism
for vigilance and monitoring is needed. These purposes would be better served if a
Board to be known as the Archaeological and Natural Heritage Conservation Board
is set up to work as a watchdog agency for the conservation, upkeep and maintenance
of the Archaeological heritage and natural heritage sites in the country.
The terms ‘archaeological heritage’ and ‘natural heritage’ have been given a
very comprehensive meaning to include all Archaeological and natural heritage,
provided for in the Convention and the terms also cover the ancient monuments and
archaeological sites and remains defined in the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains Act, 1958.
Our archaeological and natural heritage sites are vulnerable even now. We all
know that people who visit such sites are not sensitive enough to try and keep such
sites well maintained. It is a common practice to deface our monuments by inscribing
names on them. There have also been other cases of vandalism against our
archaeological and natural heritage sites. Keeping in view the increasing number of
crimes against such sites, there is a need to provide for punitive action for such crimes.
The national and State level authorities only hold a limited number of heritage
sites under their jurisdiction and conservation efforts. Lack of required manpower is
a major hindrance to ensure the long-term survival of heritage sites which are under
the jurisdiction of the national and State authorities. The private sector in India is
involved only in the aesthetic maintenances of the heritage sites. Post-disaster
management work of heritage sites is done in terms of general repairs and is usually
for specific purposes. Importance should be given to pre-disaster management of the
heritage sites.
Since India’s stock of heritage sites is large, adequate and skilled manpower is
lacking to address the conservation issues at hand. Efforts should be made to include
the maximum number of heritage sites to the list of protected monuments in the country.
For this purpose, identification of potential heritage sites needs to be undertaken.
Since conserving the monuments requires paramount expertise, which can be
developed through field experience, newer talent should be encouraged to be a part
of the conservation projects.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;     SHRIRANG APPA BARNE
January 17, 2022
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Archaeological and Natural
Heritage Conservation and Maintenance Board for the conservation of the
archaeological sites in the country. It also provides for salaries and allowances of the
officers and employees of the secretariat of the Board.  The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve
a recurring expenditure of rupees three hundred crore per annum.
         A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
        Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Board to make regulations for regulating its
own procedure. Clause 13 empowers the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The matters in respect of which rules and
regulations may be made are matters of administrative detail and procedure and, as
such, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the conservation of archaeological
and natural heritage and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto
————
(Shri Shrirang Appa Barne, M.P .)