17?
EC ee Lox Sasa

Bill No. 70 of 2004

‘THE COMPUTER TRAINING CENTRES (REGULATION) BILL, 2004
Suri IQBAL pre ‘Sarapol, M.P,
ou
to regulate computer training centres 4३ rea ans connected therewith or incidental
ike it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as
1. (/) This Act may be called the Computer Training Centres (Regulation) Act, 2004, Short title

te id
(2) Itextends to the whole of India. Stent

5 (3) Itshall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise Tequires,— Definitions.

(०) “appropriate Government” means the Central Government or the State
it as the case may be;


Computer
centres not 10
function
without
registration.

Computer
centres to
apply for
registration.

Serutiny of an
application

Issue of
registration
certificate.

Syllabus and
fees.

Complaint to
be

investigated.

Cancellation
of registration,

Punishment.

Power to make
rules,

2

(0) “computer centre” means and includes a centre in which | courses
including advanced course in compister education are conducted for training is imparted _
to persons already knowing computer operations or where training is given to those
who are aspiring for jobs in computer or related industries; and

(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

3. On and from the date of commencement of this Act, no person shall run any computer.
centre without prior registration with the appropriate Government,

4. The in-charge or the head of the affairs of a computer centre, whether set up prior to
or afier the commencement of this Act shall apply to the appropriate Government within one
month from the date of commencement of this Act, for obtaining registration in such form as
may be prescribed.

5. The appropriate Government shall, on receipt of an application under section 4.
cause it to be scrutinized as to the genuineness of the computer centre and shall carry out
such investigation as it may deem fit to ensure that the particulars furnished by the computer
centre for registration are in order and that the, centre fulfils the conditions prescribed under
the Act or rules made thereunder.

6. On being satisfied that the computer centre fulfils the prescribed conditions, the
appropriate Government shall issue a registration certificate in favour of the computer.
for such period as it may deem fit.

7. The appropriate Government shall prescribe syllabus and fees for each course
imparted by a computer centre.

8. On receipt of a complaint regarding the functioning of a computer centre,
appropriate Government shall cause the complaint to be investigated and a decision on
shall be taken within one month from the date of the receipt of the complaint. 7

9. If, on the investigation, it is found that the complaint was in order, the
Government shall forthwith cancel the registration accorded to the computer centre
which the complaint was lodged.

10. Any person who violates the provisions of this Act shall be punishable
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years and with a fine which
not be less than one lakh rupees,

11. The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette make rules
carrying out the provisions of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

A large number of computer training centres are functioning in the country without
proper registration. These centres charge exorbitant fees from students. They do not have
proper facilities or course content to impart quality training. Recently, there have been some
instances in which the institutes closed down their operations without completing courses
after collecting huge amount of money from students. Thus students are left in the lurch. In
order to protect the interest of student community, there is a need to regulate the functioning
of the computer institutions in the country.

The Bill seeks to provide for due registration of all computer training centres and also
provides for punishment to those who are running training centres without proper registration.

Hence this Bill.

New Dewi; IQBAL AHMED SARADGI
August 18,2004.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules to be made will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A

BILL

to regulate computer training centres and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
7,

(Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi, M.P)

MGIPMRND—2344LS—17.09.2004.