Short title and
commencement.
THE  CONSTITUTION  (AMENDMENT)   BILL, 2019
By
SHRI  P.P.  CHAUDHARY,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  After article 324 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
"324A. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Election
Commission shall, as far as possible, endeavour to conduct elections to
the House of the People and to the Legislative Assemblies of all States
simultaneously.".
Election
Commission to
conduct
elections to the
House of the
People and
Legislative
Assemblies of all
States
simultaneously.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
   Bill No. 70 of  2019
Insertion of new
article 324A.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present, general elections of Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies
are being held in different years and, in many cases, even at different periods of the
same year. The tenure of both Lok Sabha and the State Legislative Assemblies have
been fixed at five years by the Constitution.
Presently, the cost of holding elections for Lok Sabha and Legislative
Assemblies of States and Union territories has been pegged at rupees four thousand
and five hundred crores by the Election Commission.
Suggestions are being received from certain quarters that a scheme should
be devised whereby the general elections to the Lok Sabha and the State Legislative
Assemblies are held simultaneously.
The rationale given is that this will result in huge saving to the public
exchequer, avoidance of replication of efforts on part of administration and law and
order machinery in holding repeated elections and bring considerable savings to
political parties and candidates in their election campaigns.
Another argument in support of the above suggestion is that now
asynchronous Lok Sabha and Legislative Assembly elections including bye-elections
result in prolonged enforcement of Model Code of Conduct with its concomitant
adverse impact on development and welfare programmes.
Under the Parliamentary democracy envisaged in our Constitution, situations
may arise from time to time, where the five year term of the Lok Sabha may have to
be either curtailed or extended. The same would be the situation in relation to the
State Legislative Assemblies. The proposal for simultaneous elections, however,
would involve having fixed term for the Union and State Legislative bodies.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; P.P. CHAUDHARY
June 6,  2019.
2

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri P.P. Chaudhary, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—419LS(S3)—18.06.2019.