Bill No. 70 of  2023
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE ANGANWADI WORKERS OF ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR
ISLANDS (REGULARIZA TION OF SERVICE
AND WELFARE) BILL, 2023
By
SHRI KULDEEP RAI SHARMA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for regularization of the services of Anganwadi workers in the Andaman and
Nicobar Islands by giving them status of permanent employee of the Government
and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called as the Anganwadi Workers of Andaman and Nicobar
Islands (Regularization of Service and Welfare) Act, 2023.
(2)  It extends to the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands only.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “anganwadi” means an anganwadi centre set up by the Central Government or
Union Territory Administration in the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands to
implement the Integrated Child Development Scheme;
(b) “anganwadi worker” means any person working in an anganwadi on regular or
contract or daily wages basis;
(c) “helper” means a person who has been engaged to assist Anganwadi workers in
discharge of their duties under Integrated Child Development Scheme; and
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, take all
such steps as may be necessary to regularize the services of Anganwadi workers and
helpers employed in Andaman and Nicobar Islands and confer the status of not less than
those of Group ‘C’ employees of the Central Government on all such Anganwadi workers.
(2) The Central Government shall also provide such wages and welfare facilities
as are available to, or not less than, Group ‘C’ employees of the Central Government.
4. The Central Government shall take steps to provide housing facilities to the
Anganwadi workers and helpers within the vicinity of their workplace.
5. (1) There shall be constituted a Committee for the socio-economic development of
Anganwadi workers employed in Andaman and Nicobar Islands to be known as the
Committee for Welfare of Anganwadi Workers.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament,
the Committee shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other
Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of the Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be such as Parliament may
by law determine.
(3) The Committee shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
(4) It shall be the duty of the Committee—
(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided for
the Anganwadi workers under any law in force at the time of the commencement of
this Act, or under any other law for the time being in force or under any order of the
Government and to evaluate the working of such safeguards;
(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of rights
and safeguards of the Anganwadi workers;
(c)  to advise on the socio-economic development of the Anganwadi workers and
to evaluate the progress of their development in the Union territory of Andaman and
Nicobar Islands;
(d)  to bring about synergy between technology and public policy and recommend
measures for enhancing income and employment potential of the Anganwadi workers
through training and reforms in the health sector; and
(e) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and
development and advancement of the Anganwadi workers.
6. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
2
Regulariza-
tion of
services of
Anganwadi
workers.
Accommoda-
tion to
Anganwadi
workers.
Committee
for welfare of
Anganwadi
Workers.
Definitions.
Provisions of
the Act to be
in addition to
other laws.
15
5
10
20
35
30
25
40

Power to
make rules.7. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive session aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
10
3

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Anganwadi Centres were started in this country by the Central Government and
State Governments for implementation of the Integrated Child Development Services Scheme.
It includes the comprehensive development of health awareness among women and child
welfare. The contribution of Anganwadi Centres is remarkable and has become an integral
and essential part of life in rural areas. The Anganwadi workers are good promoters of
various schemes of the Central Government and State Government and ensuring the health
and welfare of children and women. The duties and services rendered by the Anganwadi
workers are very important for the protection of the health and welfare of women and
children. The Anganwadi workers do not have job security and the honorarium given to
them are not sufficient to meet their immediate basic requirements. This may adversely
affect the working of the Integrated Child Development Scheme.
The Anganwadi workers are one of the main links between the Government and the
general public. They are helping the Government for the effective implementation of health
programmes. Considering the importance of their duties and service, it is highly necessary
to protect their service and welfare.
Hence this Bill.
      NEW DELHI;   KULDEEP RAI SHARMA
February 28, 2023.
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for regularisation of the services of anganwadi
workers and helpers and confers the status not less than those of Group ‘C’ employees
of the Central Government on all such workers. It also provides for such wages
and  welfare measures as are available to or not less than Group ‘C’ employees of the
Central Government to anganwadi workers. Clause 4 provides for accommodation to
Anganwadi workers. Clause 5 provides for constitution of a Committee for Welfare of
Anganwadi Workers. It also provides for appointment of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson
and Member to the Committee. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of about rupees three hundred
crore is likely to be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees three hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for regularization of the services of Anganwadi workers in the Andaman and
Nicobar Islands by giving them status of permanent employee of the Government
and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma, M.P.)