, 
,) 
• 
5 
3,7 of leu. 10 
I 
r, 
') 
; 
Bill No. 71 of 1981 
THE CINE-WORKERS WELFARE CESS BILL, 1981 
A 
BILL 
--
to prodde for the levy and collection of a. cess on feature films for tM 
1inanr.ing of activities to prom.ote the welfare of certain cine-WOrker. 
aTld for matters connected therewith ~r incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-second Year of the Republlc 
of India as follows:- i: 
I: 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Cjn~-workcrl Welfare C .. Act, 
1981. !. " 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
, 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
m~y, by notiftcntlon in the Omcia! Gazette; appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context ot~erwile requires,-
: 
(a) ''cinemntograph film" has th~ same meaning as in the 
Cinematograph Act, 1952; 
(ll) 'i'fcaturc film" means a fun length cinematograph film 
produced wholl)' or partly in India with 0. 'format and Ii story woven 
~round a numher of characters where the plot is revealt'd mainly 
through dialol!'ues and not wholly through narration, animation or 
cartoon df'plctlon pnd df)('s 110t tnC'lurle cu, advcrtb('ment fllm; 
(c) "prescribed" mel", pre8Crl~ by rules made \Ulder th .. 
Act. 
. 
It 
Short 
title, 
extent 
and 
com. 
mence- . 
ment. 
Ded-
nitioDi. 
", '. 
. . 

.ovy 
Ind 
~ollcc­
tlon of 
ccs~on 
fca:\ure 
ft¥s. 
Pay-
ment 
of duty 
of 
excise. 
Cre41t-
ing 
pro-
ce~. 
:\tyto 
ConsoU-
dated 
Fund of 
India. 
Power 
of 
~entral 
Govern-
ment to 
exempt. 
.. Plnalty 
fljr 
rion-
payment 
of duty 
of 
excise 
within 
the 
prcscrlb-
C!d 
period. 
Re-
covery of 
amounts 
duo 
~~er 
~~otoc-
tlonof 
aetion 
taken 
I In 
lood 
I-- 'Jith. 
2 
3. (1) With cffect from such datc as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Officiul Gazette, oPI,oint. there Mholl bo levied and 
collected U~ II ce~H. fflr tho IUlTl10.;('14 of tho Cine-work,·f" Welluf" Fund 
Ad, ImH, u duty of excise ut tho rllte of one thomlllnd rUI'l~ell on cv,~ry 
fcuture film c(~rtified for puhlic exhibition under section 5A of tho Cino-
matolCrnph Act, 1952. 
t2) The duty of excise levied under sub-section (1) shall be in addi-
tion to any cess or duty leviable on cinematograph films under any other 
law for the time b(:ing in force. 
~ 
4. The duty of excise l~vied under section 3 on any feature film shall 10 
be payable to the C cntral Government by the producer of such fUm 
within a peTiod of one month from the date of inotice of demand issurd 
I 
by that Government for such payment. ! • 
i 1 
5. The proceeds or the duty of exci~e levied iunder section 3 .hall be 
credited to the Consolidated Fund of India. I' 15 
I. 
i I 
I 
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in ihis Act, if the Central 
Government, having regard to the content of a rcp.ture film, its technical 
quality and other factors, is of opinion that it I is necC'ssary so to do, it 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette and ~ubject to such terms and 
conditions as may be specified in the said no~fication, exempted such 20 
feature film from all or any of the provisions ~f this Act. 
i 
7. If any duty (If excise pnyable by the producer of a feature film I to 
the Central Government unrlcr section 4 is nut Ipaid to that Government 
within the period !lpccJfied thereunder, it shall be deemed to be in 
arrears nnd the aulhority prescribed in this behalf may, after such 25 
inquiry nR it deems fit: impose on the producer, a penalty not exceeding 
fiffy rupceR for every month during which the duty of exciso Is in , llrrCt\rs: , I 
Provided thnt hdore impn~inr. :my Ruch p(!Onlty, HlICh prnrillrrr "hnll 
be Hlven 8 f(,IISOIWblu opportunity ur being hcurd nnd, it oltt'r Ruch 30 
hearing. the said authority is satisfied th:lt the default was for nny good 
and sufficient reason, no penalty shall be imposed under thill section. 
37 of 
1903 
8. Any amount due undE.'r this Act (lncbding the }'X'nnlty, ft any, 
payable under section 7) from any producer of a feature fllm may be 
recovered by the Central Government in the same mnnnqr tl8 an arrear 3' '. 
ot land ruvcnuc. 
P. No suit, prosf'cuUon or othl'r ]egn] proceeding shall lie agalnat the 
Central Government or any officer or other employee ot tho Central 
Government for anything which is in good faitp done or intended to be 
done under this Act or the rules made thereunder. 
; , 

3 
10. (1) The Cen.tral Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may prov~de for-
S (a) the assessme~t and collc:ction of the duty of excise under 
section 3,· 
7' , 
. I i 
(b) the a,tthority which may impo5c any peualty under section 
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, pres-
10 cribed. : 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it iii. in 
ges~ioll, for a total period oC thirty days which may bo ('omprised in one 
session or in two or more successivc 'sessions, and if, before the expiry 
1,5 of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
seso;ions aforesaid, both Houses am-ee in mnkin;:r :my modification in the 
rule or both Houses Llf!rce th:lt the rule should not be made, the rule 
shRU thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such mOdification or 
20 annulment shall be without prejudice f.ct the validity of anything pr~ 
vlously done under that rule. 
Power tc 
to 
make 
Mel. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
L~ine artistes, like artistes in other performing arts, wither owing to 
changes in style and trends or due to ageing. . There are cases where 
great artistes, who once enthralled the populaJce with their creative 
talents, have fallen into utt~r poverty and dist~ess. In order to provide 
E.ssic;tance in cases of extreme hardship, it is : proposed to establish a 
welfare fund. For this purpose, it is proposed to levy. as a cess, a duty 
of excise at the rate of one thousand rupees on; every fe:ltur~ film c€ rti-
tied for public exhibition under section 5A of l the Cinematograph Act, 
l!)52. Tile chJty of excise to be levi,~ shall ~ In odcllUon to any eea 
Or duty leviable on ~ cinematograph films under any other law for the 
timE> being in force·.~ 
I The 3~;s to achieve the above object."} 
NEW DEun; 
The lstMa'll, 1981. VASAN'l' SATHE. 
PHESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 
OF THE COSNTITUTION OF INDIA 
LCopy of letter No. 3/3/74-FPC Vol. IV, dated the 30th AQril, 1981 
from Shri Vasant Sathe, Minister of Information and Broadcasting to the 
Secretary. Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of th~ subject matter of the 
Cine Workers WeUare Cess Bill, 1981 hereby recommends unrler article 
117 (1) and (3) of the Constitution, the introduction in and consideration 
by Lok Sabha of the said Bill. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
. Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the l~vy and collection of a. welfare 
cess as a duty of excise at the ratc of one thoUfmnd rupees on every 
featur~ film certified for public exhibition under sectJon 5A of the Cine-
matograph Act, 1952. Clause 10 (2) (a) of the Bill provides lor the asSCIl8-
mcnt un,l collection oC such duty of excisQ And undt!r Lhla prllviHion, rule. 
wlil be mude to provide, inter aha. for the machinery lor tho UII8CIISmcnt 
and cullection of the cess. For this purpose, it will be nccest ary to pro-
vide a skeleton machinery at the fUm centrel where the Regional omcn 
of tho DOllret CIt Jo1 Hm ConHorll arc loC'otod. 
The expenditure on account of such machinery is not likely to exceed 
rupees forty thousand per annum. [In this connection, it may be 
mentioned that the total collection of cess with reference to the number 
of feature films produ'Ced is estimated to be of the order of Ri. 7.50 lakhs, 
per annum.] 
The Bill does not involve any other expenditure whether of a recur-
ring or Don-recurring nature. I 

I 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clanse lEI ~f the Bi114!'mpowers the C~tr'l Govct'nrnent tc> make 
rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislatfon. The 
rnllttets in tespeet of which such rules may be made relnte to the 
DSSt!Sml~t and col1cctiun oif the duty of cxci!le, the authority which may 
Impose! any pen-aJty in eases where the cess payable is in arrears and 
any other matter which is reqtlircd to be ar may be prescribed by rulH 
uncle-to the legislation. The matters wfth tC!spcct 'to which rules may be 
tMt'Je 'are matters of proeedure 'Or t\etail. 
2. The delegation of legislative power, is, therefore, of a normal 
~. 
: , . " I 
,": ',L., ')"1 , 
I 