· "~~"--"-."-- ""-~-... ----------
to 
THE DANGEROUS MACHIN:ES (REGTJIATION) BILL, 1983 
(To be/As introducen in 10k Sabha) 
1. Page (1i), after clause 33,-
o.m1.t ".34. Appeals." 
2. Page (1i), before clause 35,-
insert "34. A.ppeals. 'J 
3. Page 1, 1n the long title of the Blll,-
!Qr,"way" ~ "any" 
4. Page 2, line 17,-
!Q.!: "such mach~nes" ~ "any sUc{l machine" 
5. Page 2, line 22,-
!c.I:. "machines" ~ "machine" 
6. page~, line 1~,-
I 
q, filer "f1 t " in S er t "a 1 so " 
7. Pa ge "i line 24,-
fQi "l'ea~y" ~ "carry" 
".,. I " 
8. Pag~ -l", :in the mar ginal heading to clause 16,": 
.(Ql: "Dec~ara tion to be made" 
~ "Certificate and guarantee" 
9. Page 9, against line 43 in the margin,-
cun1:t. "8 of"; 9 23. " 
10. page 18, line 4,-
!Q.r. "employment " ~ "employer" , 
11. Page 10, against line 17 in the margin,-
"insert '~8 of 1923." 
12. page 10, line 48,-
.!oJ:. ''member'' ~ "members II 
13. page 11, against line 1 in the margin.-
~ "take out insurance poJi.~es. " 
14, Pa ge 11, in t be mar ginal heading to clause 26,-
" . !2.r. "death of" ~ "dea.th or" 
NEH' DElliI; 
May 9, "1983 Vaisakha 19, 1905' (saka~) _______ ~ __ .... __ _ 

As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
y, Bill No. 71 of 1983 
.' 
THE DAr,lGEROUS MACHINES (REGULATION) BILL, 1983 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CI,AUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by Union. 
3. Definitions. 
4. Act to override all other enactments. 
CHAPTER II 
, < 
ADMINISTRATION OF THF, ACT 
5. Appointment and functions of Controllers. 
A 
6. Power of Controller to issue orders. 
7. Appointment of Inspectors. 
S. Controller. etc., to be public servants. 
CHAPTER III 
., .. 
ISSUE, RENEWAL AND CANCELLATION OF I.ICENC~ TO MAr.TUFACTURERS 
AND DEALERS 
9. Licensing of manufacturers and dealers. 
10. Suspension and cancellation of licences. 
11. Cancellation of licence on application by manufacturer or 
dealer. 
12. Licence to a firm to be invalid on the change of partnership. 
CHAPTER TV 
DUTIES AND RESPON~IBILlTIE6 OF THF MANUFACTURER OR DEALER 
OF A DANGEROUS MACHINE 
]3. Manufacturer to ensure that every part of a danger:>us machine 
conforms to prescribed standards. 
14. Particulars to be specified on every dangcl'o';.ls machine. 
15. Duties of the manufacturer to) suppl~r operator's manual with 
each dangerous machine. 
16. Certificate and guarantee by manufacturers and dealers. 
17. Liability of the manufacturer for rl~imbursement. 
18. Manufacturers and dealers to maintain records. 

.~" (1'1')' :~ 1 " 
CHAPTER V 
D'UTIIIS AND OBLIGATION~ OF USERS OF DANGEROUS X.\CIWlES 
CJ.AUSBS 
, ,19 .. User to get each dangerous machine registered. 
~O. Matters to be ensured by users. 
21. Modification of existing dangerous machine. 
22. Employer's liability f'or comptmsatiim. 
23. Notice of accident. 
24. Duty of employer to take out insurance policies. 
25. Omission or failure of the employer to take out insurance 
policies. 
CHAPl'ER VI 
INSPECTION. SEARCH AND SEIZURE 
26. Examination of machine causing jeath or injury. 
l ~7. Inspection of rf!C"ordR. et.c. 
28. Power to enter and search, 
29. Power of seizure. 
30. Search and seiz'ure to be made in accordance with the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
CHAPTF.R VII 
OFFJ!:N~ AND '.l'HEIR TilIAL 
31. Punishment for contravention of the provisions of the Act. 
~2. Offences by companies. 
33. Cognizance and trial of offences. 
34. Appeals. 
CHAPTER VUI 
MISCELlANEOUS. 
35. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
36. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
37. Power of State Government to make rules. 
3S. Power to give dire~tions. 

· . , BiD No. 71 of 1.83 
THE DANGEROUS MACHINES (REGULATION) BILL, 1983 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the reguZatiorn oJ trade and commerce in, and produc-
tion, wpp'ty, distribution and use Of, the product elf a.ny indus'tTY 
producing darngeroo.s mackilnes unth a view to securing the 
welfare of labour operating any sti.ch machine and for paymant of 
compensation for the death or bodily injury suffered by· 'LV'izy 
lAbourer while operating anY' such machine, and for matters con-
nected therewith Or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the 'l"'hirty·fourth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
'J~.,. 
CHAPTER I 
PltELrMI:NARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Dangerous Machines (Regulation) 
Act, 1983. 
(2) It ex~ends to the whole of India. 
(3) This section and clause (c) of section 3 shall come into force at 
once i~ all the States and the remaining provisions of this Act shall 
Je) come into force in a State on such date as the State Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and' different dates may 
be appointed for different provisions of this Act; and any reference in 
.my provision of this Act, to the commencement of this Act shall in 
relation· to any State be construed as a reference to the commencement 
J 5 of that provision in that State. . 
Short 
title, 
extent 
and 
com-
mence. 
ment. 

Declara_ 
tloa 
asfo 
e.xpt'-
diencyof 
control 
by Union. 
Defini-
tions. 
."J " 
Z. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest 
that the Union should take un~er its control the industries engaged in 
the manufaoture or production of power threshers or any other machines 
which are intended to be' u'sed in the agricultural or rural sector and 
which are of such nature that any accident in the course of operation 5 
thereof may cause its operator death, dismemberment of any limb or 
other bodily injury. . 
3. In this Act, unle~s the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "child" means a person who has not completed his four-
teenth year of age; 10 
(b) "Controller" means the person appointed by the State Gov-
ernment to give effect to the provisions of this Act, and includes 
every Additional, Deputy or Assistant Controller' who may 'be 
authorised by the Controller under sub-section (3) of section 5 
• to exercise any power under this Act; •. 15 
(e) "dangerous mac.hine" means '8 power-thresher, an:d includes 
such machines intended to be used in the agricultural or rural 
sector as the Central Government, being of opinion that it is of such 
a nature that any accident in the course of operation thereof is likely 
to caUse to its operator death, dismemberment of any limb or 20 
other bodily injury, may, by notification in the Offictal Gazette, 
specify as dangerous machines; 
(d) "day" means a period of twenty-four hours beginning at 
midnight; 
(e) "dealer", in relation to any dangerous machine or any part 25 
thereof, means a person who, or a firm or a Hindu undivided family 
which, carries on, directly or otherwise, the business of buying, 
selling', supplying or distributing any dangerous machine or any 
part thereof, whether fot cash or for deferred payment or for 
commission,- remuneration or other valuable consideration, and 3t) 
includes-
(i) a commISSIon agent who carries on such b'usiness on • behalf of any principal; 
(ii) an importer who sells. supplies, distributes or other-
wise delivers any dangerous machine to any user, manufac- ~5 
turer, repairer, consumer or any other person, 
but does not include a manufacturer who sells, supplies, distri-
butes or otherwise delivers any dangerous machine or any part 
thereof to any person or category of persons referred to in, this 
clause. 
Explana.tion.-For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared 
that a manufacturer who sells, supplies, distributes, or otherwise 
delivers any dangerous machine or any part thereof to any person 
other than a dealer, shall be 'deemed to be a dealer, and shall in 
addition to his liability to comply with the provisions of this Act 45 
relating to manufacturers, also be liable to comply with the pIO-
visions of this Act relating to dealers; 
(I) "employer". in relation to the operator of any dangerous 
machine, means the person by whom such operator has been 

• 
3 
employed, whether for any remuneration or otherwise, for opera-
ting such machine; 
(g) "family", in relation to an operator, means his wife and 
dependent children and includes his dependent parents; 
5 (h) "Inspector" means an Inspector appointed under this 
10 
45 
Act; 
(i) "machine" inc1ude~ prime movers, transmission machinery 
and all other appliances whereby power is generated, transferred, 
transmitted or applied to a dangerous machine; 
(;) "manufacturer". in relation to any dangerous machin'e or 
any part thereof, means a person who, or a firm or a Binet.! 
undivided family which,-
(i) makes or manufactures such dangerous machine or part 
thereof, 
(ii) makes or manufactures one or more parts, and acquires 
the other parts of such dangerous machine and, after assembling 
those parts, claims the end product to be a product manufac-
tured by himself, or itself, as the case may be, 
(iii) does not make or manufacture 'any part of such 
dangerous machine but assembles parts thereof made or manu-
factured by others and claims the end product to be a product 
manufactured by himself, or itself, as the case may, be, 
(iv) puts, or causes to be put, his or its own mark on any 
complete dangeroUs machine made or manufactured by any 
other person and claims such product to be a product made or 
manufactured by himself, or itself, as the case may be; 
(k) "operator" means a person employed directly or by or 
through any agency (including a contractor), whether as 'a regular 
worker or as a casual worker, with or without the knowledge of 
the principal employer, whether for remuneration or not. in the 
operation or cleaning of any dangerous machine or any par:t thereof 
or jn any other kind of work incidental to, or connected with, the 
operation or cleaning of any dangerous machine or any part thereof; 
(l) "power" means electrical or mechanical energy, or any 
other form of energy which is mechanically transmitted into a 
dangerous 'macbine; 
(m) "power thresher" means a machine, operated with the aid 
of power, for threshing one or more kinds of agricultural produce; 
(n) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(0) "prime mover" means an engine, motor or other appliance 
which generates or otherwise provides power to a dangerous machine; 
(p) "transmission machinery" means any shaft, wheel, drum, 
pulley, system of" pulleys, coupling, clutch, driving belt or other ap-
pliance or device by which the motion of a prime mover is transmit-
ted to, or received by, any dangerous machine. 

Act. 
to over-
" ride aU 
other en-
actments. 
Appoint-
ment 
and func· 
tions of 
Contro-
llers. 
Power 
of Con. 
tro)]er 
to issue 
orders. 
Appoint. 
ment of 
Ins. 
pectors. 
Con. 
troller, 
etc., lobe 
public 
servants. 
4 
C. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any-
thing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law fOr the time 
being in force or in any contract or instrument having effect by virtue of 
any law other than this Act or any decree or order of 'aDy court, tribunal 
or authority. . 5 
CHAPl'ER II 
ADMINISTRATION OF mE ACT 
5. (1) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, oppoint a Controller for carrying out the provisions of this Act, 
and may also by the same or subsequent notification apppint such number 10 
of Additional, Deputy or Assistant Controllers as it may deem ftt. 
(2) The Controller shall discharge his functions under this Act subject 
to the general control and directions of the State Government. 
(3) The Controller may authorise such persons as he thinks fit to -
exerci-se all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act 15 
other than the powers under sub··section (5) and different persons may 
be authorised to exercise different powers. 
(4) Subject to any general or special direction given or imposed by 
the Controller, any person authorised by the Controller to exercise any 
powers may exercise those powers in the same manner and with the 20 
same effect as if they have been conferred on that person directly by this 
Act and not by way of authorisation. 
(5) The Controller may also-
(a) perform all or any of the ft,mctions of, and 
(b) exercise all or any of the powers conferred by this Act or 25 
any rule or order made thereunder on, 
any officer lower in ran~ than himself. 
6. The Controller may, if he thinks fit, make orders, not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act, for carrying out the provisions of this 
Act. 
7. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, "ppoint as many Inspectors as it deems fit to carry out the pro-
visions of this Act relating to inspection, search, seizure of dangerous 
machines and l"xamination of tbe records of manufacturers, dealers and 
users relating to 8uch machines. "35 
(2) Every Inspector shall discharge his functions subject to the general 
direction and control of the Controller. 
8. The Controller and any person authorised by the State Govern-
ment or the Controller to perform any' functions under this Act, 
and every Inspector, shall be deemed to be public servants within the 
meaning of section 21 df the Indmn Penal Code. 40 
45011860. 

5 
CHAPTER III 
ISSUE, RENEWAL AND CANCELLATION OF LICENCES TO MANUFACT'URERS 
AND .DEAI.ERS 
9. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall 
5 manufacture, or commence or carryon business as a manufacturer or 
dealer of, any dangerous machine unless he holds a valid licence issued 
in this behalf by the Controller: 
Provided that a person engaged in the manufacture of, or carrying on 
business as a manufacturer or .dealer of, any dangerous machines of any 
10 class immediately before the appointed day in relation to dan~rous 
machines of such class may continue to manufacture such machines or 
carryon such business without such' a licence for a period of one month 
from that date, and if he makes an application for such lice~ce under 
this section within the said period of one month, till the communication 
J 5 to him of the order of the Controller disposing of such application. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this proviso, "appointe j day" 
means,-
(i) in relation to the class of dangerous machines being power 
threshers, the date of commencement of this Act; 
20 (ii) in relation to any other class of dangerous machines, the 
date with effect from which such machines have been specified to be 
dangeroU's machines by the Central Government by notification 
under clause (c) of section 3, or in the case 'of a State in which this 
section has come into force with effect from a later date, such later 
25 date. 
(2) A licence issued under this section-
(a) shall be valid for a period of five years; 
(b) may be renewed from time to time, for a like period; and 
(c) shall be in such form, and shall be subject to such conditions, 
30 as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(3) A person who intends to commence the manufacture, or carryon 
business as manufacturer or dealer of any dangerous machine shall make 
an application in such form and on payment of such fees, not exceeding 
five hundred rupees, as may be prescribed, for the issue of a licence: 
35 (4) No application for the issue of a licence to commence the manu-
facture, or to carryon business as a manufacturer Or dealer, of any 
dangerous machine shall be granted unless the Controller, after making 
such inquiry as he thinks fit, is satisfied-
45 
(a) in the case of a manufacturer carrying on business at the 
commencement of this Act, of manufacturing any dangerous machine, 
that such machine complies with the standards prescribed under 
section 13; and 
(b) in the case of a person who intends to commence business, 
after such commencement, as a manufacturer of a dangerous machine, 
that the applicant has declared that he would manufacture such 
machine in accordance with the standards laid down by or under thfa 
Act. 
Licensing 
of manu-
facturers 
and 
dealers. 

Suspen-
sionand 
cancel-
lation of 
licen_ 
ces. 
, (5) &1 application for the renewal of a licence issued under this ~ee· 
tion shall be made not less than forty-five days before the date of expiry 
of the period of validity thereof and shalr be accompanied by such fees, 
not exceeding two hundred rupees, as 'may be prescribed. 
(6) No application for the renewal of a licence for the manufacture, 5 
or for the carrying on the business a's a manfacturer, of a dangerous 
machine shall be reject-ed unless-
(a) the holder of such licence has been given a reasonable op-
portunity of presenting his case; and 
, ". (b) the Controller is satisfied that- 10 . 
(i) the application for such renewal has been made after 
the' expiry of the period specified therefor: 
. 
Provided that an application for the rene')Val of a licence 
made after the expiry of the specified period may be entertained 
on, payment of such late fees, not e)ICeeding one hundred rupees, r 5 
as may be prescribed; \ 
(ii) any statement made by th~ applicant at the time o~ the 
issue or renewal of the licence was incorrect or false in material 
particulars; 
(iii) the applicant has omitted 'or failed to manufacture any 20 
dangerous machine in accordance with the prescribed standards; 
or 
(iv) the applicant has contravened any term or condition of 
the licence or any prov;sion of this Act, or any rule or order 
made thereunder or of any law for the time being in fOTee in so 25 
far as such law prohibits the bringing into or taking But of India, 
any dangeroUs machine. 
(1) Every person to whom a licence has been issued or renewed under 
this section sh.all comply with the terms and conditions specified in the 
licence and the provi;;ions of this Act and the' rules and orders made 30 
thereunder. 
(8) Every person to whom a licence has been granted or renewed 
under this section shall ensure that every person employed by him com-
plieS, in the course of such employment, with the provisions of this Act 
Or any rule or order made thereull'det. 35 
(9) Every order granting Or rejecting any application for the issue 
or renewal of a licence under this section shall be made in writing. 
(10) Every licensed dealer. and every licensed manufacturer shall 
display his Ucence at a conspicuous place of the premises in which he 
carries on business as such licensed dealer or manufacturer. ' 
10. (1) The Con'roller may, if he has any reasonable cause io believe 
that the holder of Ii licence granted under section 9 has made a statement 
in, or in relation to, any application for the issue or renewal of a licence, 
which is incorrect or false in material. particulars or has contravened any 
40 
. , 
proviSion of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder or 01 any other 4S 
law for the time being in force which regulates the bringing into or taking 
out of India any dangerous machine, suspend such licence pending the 

,.. '1 ., 
I 
completion of any inquiry or trial against the holder of such licence for 
making such incorrect or false statement or for such contravention ~ the .. , case may be: 
Provided that no such licence shall be suspended for a period exceeding 
5 ten days unless the holder thereof has been given a reasonable opportu-
nity of showing, cause against the proposed action. 
(2) The Controller m'IlY, if he is satisfied after making such inquiry 
as he may think fit, that the holder of any licence issued or renewed 
under this Act has made such incorrect or false statement as is referred to 
JO in sub-section (1). or has omitted or failed to manufacture any dangerous 
m'8chine in accordance with the prescribed standards or has contravened 
the provisions of such law, rule or order, as is referred to in that sub-
section, cancel such licence: 
Provided that no licence shall be cancelled unless the holder thereof 
15 has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against toe 
proposed action. 
'(3)' Every person whose licence has been suspended or cancelled shall, 
immediately after such su,spension or cancellation, stop functioning as 
such licensee and shall not resume business as such licensee until the 
20 order, of such suspension or cancellation has been vacated. 
(4) Every person who holds a licence which is suspended or canoelled 
shall, immediately after such suspension or cancellation, surrender such 
licence to the Controller. 
11. A person licensed to manufacflure or cary on business as a Cacel-
25 manufacturer or dealer of any dangerous machines who discontinues laUon of 
such manufacture or business or who intends to discontinue such manu- ~ 
facture or business, may make an application to the Controller for the cation by 
cancellation of his licence, and thereupon, the Controller may cancel maDU-
h Ii " facturer spc cenee. 
30 12. Where any firm has been licensed under thfs Act to manufacture 
or carry on business '8S a dealer or manufacturer of a dangerous machine, 
such Ucence shall. notwithstanding anythin~ contained in this Act, be-
come invalid on and from the date on which there is a chan~ in the 
partnership of such firm. unless such change in the partnership of the 
35 ftrm has been ~pproved by the Controller. 
I~ ... • f 
fl"' • CIIAPrER IV 
DtrrJES AND RESPONSIBn.tTJES OF THE MANUFACTURER OR DEALER 
OF A DAlITI'lFJ!OTTS MACHtN'F. 
13. (1) Every manufacturer of a (langerous machine shall ensure that 
411 such machine and every part thereof complies with such standards, con-
forming to the ,stand2lrds laid down therefor by the Indian Standards 
In!ltitution, as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
.,regoing l>rovisions, the manufacturer of a dangerous machine shall 
or 
dealer.. 
Licence . 
toa 
ftrm 
to be 
invalid 
ontbe ' 
chanleof 
pu1:nel\. 
,ship. 
Manu. 
facturer 
to ensure 
that 
every 
part of 
a dan-
lerou. 

machine 
conforms 
to 
pres-
cribed 
stan-
dards. 
Parti-
cularsto 
bespeci-
ftedon 
every 
daD-
gerous 
machine. 
Duties 
of the 
manu-
lacturer 
tosuwJy 
opera1Qr's 
man~ 
with 
each 
dan-
gerous 
machine. 
Declara-
tio to be 
made 
by manu-
facturers 
and 
dealers. 
Liability .. 
oftbe 
m8nQ-
facturer 
forre-
imburse-
ment. 
I 
ensure that the following parts are secured by safeguards of SUbstantial 
construction, namely:-
(a) the prime mover and every part thereof, 
(b) the transmission machinery and every part thereof, 
(c) every other dangerous part, such as, rol1ers, blowers, sieves, 5 
elevator and the like. 
(3) Every manufrdcturer of a dangerous machine shall also clearly and 
legibly pro~ide such machine with danger ~ignals indicating the point 
beyond which no limb shall be inserted for the purpose of feeding the 
machine or for any other purpose. 10 
14. ~e manufactlJJ:er shall ensure that the following particulars are 
legibly and conspicuously marked or inscribed on every dangerous machine 
by such method as. would make it indelible, namely:-
(0) the direction of the rotation and the number of rotatiQDS per 
minute; '5 
(b) its power requirement; and 
(c) the name and correct address of the manufacturer,the year 
of its manubcture, and the date, number and other particulars of the 
licence of the manufacturer. 
15. Every manufacturer shall supply along with each dangeroU$ .machine 20 
a manual containing general instructions regarding. the operation of such 
machine, and shall also include therein such cautions, as may be 
prescribed. 
16. Before transferring the possession of any dangerous machine, 
whether by sale, lease, hire or otherwise, every manufacturer and :every a5 
dealer shall deliver, to the person acquiring the possession .of IUch 
machine, ~ declaration to the effect that the machine conforms to the 
standards laid down by or under this Act and. also complies with in aU 
respects, the provisions of this Act and the rules an~ .orders made 
thereunder. 30 
17. Whenever any person operating a dangerous machine suffers death 
or dismemberment of any limb or any other ~ly injury-
(i) by reason of any manufacturing defect in the machine where-
by such death, dismemberment or injury was caused, or 
I 
(ii) by reason of the omission of tbe manufacturer to comply 35 
with the provisions of this Act and the rules and orders made 
thereunder, 
such manufacturer shall be liable to reimburse the person by whom com-
pensation had to be paid under this· Act to the members of the family 
of the person whose death was caused by such maChine, or, as the case 40 
may be, to the person by whom such dismemberment or bodily injury 
was suffered. .. 

Sot 1923. 
18. Every manufacturer and. every dealer shall maintain such regiS-
ters, records and accO'Unts as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER V 
Dt1'1'IES AllD OJR,IGATIONS OF USERS OF DA'NGEROUS MAClIlNES 
5 19. (1) Every person who owns a dangerous machine or acquires 
control over such machine, whether B$ a lessee or hirer or otherwise 
(in this Act referred to as the, user) shall make, before begin-
ning to operatE, such machine, an application to the Controller, on payment 
of such fees, not exceeding five rupees, as may be prescribed, for the 
10 registration of such machine . . 
(2) On receipt of an application made under sub-section (1), the 
Controller shall, if he is satisfiied that the machine complies with, in all 
respects, the provisions of this Act and the rules and orders made there-
under, register' the same and grant to the applicant a certificate showing 
15 such registration. • 
(3) The Controller shall maintain a register containing the particulars' 
of the dangerous machines registered by him and the names and addres-
ses and other particulars of the pel'sons on whose application such regis-
tration has been made. 
20 (4) No dangerous machine shall be operated until it has been register-
ed in accordance with the proVisions of this section. 
20. Every user of a dangerous machine shall ensure that-
(a) such machine conforms to the standards laid down by or 
under this Act and also complies with, in all respects, the provisions 
25 of this Act and the rules and orders made thereunder; 
(b) no child is employed for the operation of such machine; and 
(c) adequate arrangements exist for rendering first aid to any 
person who may suffer any injury while operating any such machine. 
21. (1) Every person who has, immediately before the commence-
30 ment of this Act, in his custody or control, any' dangerous machine which 
does not comply with, in all respects, the provisions of this Act and the. 
rules and orders made thereunder, shall, within SUch time, not being less 
than one lrundred and eighty days from such commencement, as the State 
Go\Iemment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, get the 
35 same modified. in accordance with such rules as may be made by the 
i. Central Government an this behalf. 
(2) No such machine shall be used or operated, after the expiry of 
the period specified under sub-sectiQn (1), unless the modifications refer-
red to in sub-section (1) have been made. 
40 22. '(1) If, during his employment as an operator of a dangerous 
machine, death or dismemberment of any limb or any other bodily injury 
is caused to such operator, his employershalJ be" liable to pay 
compensation-
(a) in the case of death of the operator, to his family, and 
45 (b) in any other case, to the operator: 
Manu-
facturers 
and 
dealers 
to main-
tain 
records. 
User to 
get each 
dan- f.i' 
gerous 
machine 
regis. 
teredo 
Matters 
to be 
ensured. 
by 1 
users. 
Modifica-
tionof 
existing 
dan-
gerous 
machine. 
Em-
ployer's 
liabi-
lity for 
compen-
sation. 

Notice 
of 
accident. 
Duty of 
employer 
to take 
OUt Insu-
rance 
policies. 
Omission 
or 
failure 
of the 
em.. 
ployerto 
1ake out 
InsunulCe 
policieS. 
10 
Provided that where the operator does not have a family, the «:om .. 
pensation shall be paid to the person or persons nominated. in this behalf 
by the operator in writing and notift~ to the Controller. 
Provided further that the employment shall not be so Uabl&-
(i) in respect of any injury which does not result in the total 5 
or partial disablement of the operator for a period exceeding three 
days; or 
(ii) in respect of any injury, not resulting in death, caused by 
an accident which is directly attributable to-
(a) the operator having been at the time thereof under the 10 
inO.uence of any intoxicant or drug, or 
(b) the wilful removal by the worker of any safety guard or 
other device which he knew to have been provided in the machine 
for the purpose of securing the safety of the operator . 
. (2) The amount of the compensation payable under sub-section J 5 
(1) shall be determined and paid in accordance with the provisions of 
the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 as if the operator were a workman 
within the meaning of that Act, and for this purpose, the provisions of 
the said Act shall apply to him as they apply to a workman within the 
meaning of that Act. 20 
2:1. (1) Where the death or dismemberment of any limb or any other 
bodily injury has been caused to an operator, during the course of his 
empl'oyment, notice of such death, dismembennentl or indury shall 
be given to the employer within three days from the date on which 
such death, dismemberment or injury was caused. . 25 
(2) Such notice shall be given by the operator if he is alive or by . 
any member of his family or any other person interested in him. 
(3) Omission to give the notice referred to in sub-section (2) shall 
not disentitle the operator or the members of his family, as the case 
• may be, to receive the compensation payable under this Act. 30 
24. (1) Every employer shall take out, as soon as may be practicable 
after the commencement of this Act, one or more insurance policies 
providing for contracts of in!)'.lrance whereby he is insured against any 
liability arising out of sUb-section (1) of section 22 to make payment 
of compensation to any operator of a dangerous machine and such 35 
contract of insurance may provide for the payment of annuities to the 
operator, or in case of his death, to the members of his family or to his 
nominee, if he does not have a family. 
(2) Every employer shall' get the insurance policy referred to in sub-
section (1) renewed from time to time before the expiry of the period 40 
of validity thereof so that the policy of insurance may remain in force 
throughout the period during which any person is employed by him to 
operate any dangerous machine. 
25. (1) In the event of the omission or failute of the employer to take 
out an insurance policy referred to in section 24 or in the event of the 45 
omiSSion, failure or inability of the employer to keep such insurance policy 
in force Or to obtain, from the insurer, any amount required to 1?e paid 
as compensation to an operator, or to the member of his family or 

," 
11 
nominee, as the case may be, the employer shall make payment of com-
peDsation from his own funds, to the operator, or to the members of his 
family or his nominee, as the case may be as soon as possible after the 
date on which the operator S'Ufters death ~r dismemberment of limb or 
5 other bodily injury but not later than thirty days trom such date and 
on such payment the employer's liability for payment of compensation to 
the operator or to the members of his family shall stand fully discharged. 
.. 
(2) The discharge of the liability referred to in sub-section (1) shall 
not take away or abridge the right of, the employer to receive from the . , 
10 msurer, such payment 8cS may be due to him under the policy of inSurance 
taken out or renewed by him. 
20 
CHAPrER VI 
INSPECTION, SEARCH AND SEIzURE 
26. (1) As soon as the employer comes to know, whether on receipt 
of a notice under section 23 or otherwise, that the operator has suffered 
death, dismemberment of any limb or other bodily injury during the 
operation of any dangerous machine, he shall forthwith give notice of 
such death or injury to the Inspector. 
(2) Whenever an Inspector comes to know about any death or injury 
whether on receipt of a notice referred to under sub-section (1) or'other-
wise, he shal1, as soon as practicable, enter in~o the premises where the 
dangerous machine whereby such death, dismemberment of limb or other 
25 bodily injury has been caused, is located and examine the machine with 
a view to finding out whether the machine conforms to the standards 
.aid down by or under ttti's Act and contains all the prescribed safety 
devices, and, where, after such examination, he is of the opinion that the 
machine is unsafe, he shall, by an order, prohibit the Use of such machine 
30 until it is certified by 'him to be safe. 
(3) No machine shall be operated during the period of operation of 
'the prohibitory order made under sub-section ,(2). 
27. Every register, record and accounts maintained under this Act and 
every licence issued or renewed under this Act ~ be open to the iDs-
35 pection df the Inspector. 
28. An Inspector authorised in this behalf by the Controller may, if 
he has any reason to suspect that any provision of this Act has been, or 
is being, or is about to be, contravened, enter and search, at any reason-
able time of the day, any premises in which any dangerous machine is ' 
40 operated. . ,l£!; ,"'.~ .f. 
Z9. Whenever the Inspector is statisfied that any dangerous machine, 
which does not comply with, in aU ~spects, the provisions of this Act or 
the rules Or orders made thereunder, i~ being operated in contravention 
of the provisions of this Act, he may seize such dangero'U3 machIne and 
45 the records and registers connected therewith. 
take 
out 
insurance 
policies. 
Examina-
tion of 
machine 
causing 
death of 
injury. 
Inspec_ 
tionoi 
records, 
etc. 
Power 
to enter 
and 
search. 
Power of 
seizure. 

Search 
and 
seizure 
to be 
made in 
accord. 
ancewith 
the Code 
oferi. 
minal 
Proce-
dure, 
1m. 
Punish· 
mentfor 
contra. 
vention 
of the 
provi. 
sions ot 
the.Act. 
Offences 
by 
com-
panies. 
12 
30. Every search and seizure made under this Act shall be made in 
accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19'13. 
CHAPTER VII 
OFFENCES AND THEIR TRIAL 
31. Whoever, in contnlvention of the provisions of this Act, or any rule 5 
or order made thereunder-
(a) manufactures, or carries on business as a manufacturer or 
dealer of, any dangerous machine without being in possession of a ' 
valid licence issued or renewed under this Act; 
(b) employs a child in the operation of any dangerous machine; 10 
(c) causes any person to operate a dangerous machine which 
does not conform to the standards specified by or under this Ac.t; 
'-
(d) causes any person to operate any dangerous machine refer- ' 
red to in section 21, without carrying out the prescribed modifications; 
(e) omits to take out or renew an insur~ce policy as required 15 
by section 24; , 
(1) sells or otherwise transfers any dangerous machine which 
does not conform to the provisions of this Act or the rules made-
thereunder; 
(g) operates or causes any person to operate any dangerous gO 
machine during the period of operation of a prohibitory order made 
under sub-section (2) of section 26; or 
(h) contravenes any other provision of this Act, or rule Or order 
made thereunder, t' 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to gs 
six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or 
with both, and in the case of a second or subsequent offence, ahall be 
pwushable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
three months and also with fine which shall not be less than five hundred 
rupees but not more than one thousand rupees. 
3~. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was 
go 
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the 
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
gUilty of the offence and shall be, liable to be proceeded agmnst and 35 
punished accordingly: 
201 19'14. 

2 of 19'14. 
" 13 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence wu 
committed without his knowledge Or that he had exercised aU due dili-
gence to· prevent the commission of such offence. 
5 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an 
oifence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved 
that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, 
or is attributable to any neglect on' the part of, any director, manager, 
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, sec:r~ 
10 tary or other officer shall also be deemed to he guilty of that offence and 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "colJ1pany" means any body corporate and includes a firm 
or other association of individuals; and 
15 (D) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
33. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, no court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable 
under this Act except on a complaint .in writing made by the Controller 
or any person authorised by him in this behalf. . 
ao (2) Every offence under this Act may be tried summarily by a 
Magistrate. 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Cogni-
zance 
aDd. 
trial 
of 
offences. 
st. (1) Any person aggrieved by any order granting or refusing to Appeals. 
115 issue or renew a licence under this Act or refusing to register a dangerous 
machine, may prefer an appeal against the order to the State Government. 
(2) Every such appeal shall be flIed within thirty. days from the date 
of the order: 
Provided that the State Government may entertain the appeal af+..er 
So the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the 
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within 
the said period. 
35. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the 
State Covernment, the Controller, any Inspector or any other person 
35 authorised by the Controller for exercising any powers or discharging 
any functions under this Act for I anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made 
thereunder. 
36. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
40 Gazett-e, make rules to carry out the provisions of SUb-section (2) of 
Hetion 9, and the provisions of sections 13 and 21. 
Protec_ 
tion 
of 
action 
taken 
in good 
faith. 
Powerot 
;Central 
Govern. 
mentto 
:make 
rules. 

Power 
of state 
Govern-
:mentto 
make 
rules. 
Power 
&0 give 
direc. 
tions. 
14 
(2) Every notification made by the Central Government under clause 
(c) of section 3, and every rule made by it under sub-section (1), shall 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia-
• ment, while it is in session. for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two ot' more successive sessions, and if, 5 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions' aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifica-
tion in the notification or rule, or both Houses agree that the notification 
or rule should not be made, the notification or : rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 10 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be. without pre-
judice to the validity of anything previously done under that notifica-
tion or rule. 
37. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act other than 15 
those specified in sub-section (1) of section 36. 
(2) In particular, :md witho\1t prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide lfor all or any of the following 
matters .. namely:-
. (a) the forms of licences to be issued under this Act and the ~o 
conditions and restrictions subject to which such licences may be held 
under section 9; 
(0) the fees ·(including late ~s), within the li'mits specified in 
section 9 for the issue and renewal of licences under that section 
and for the Te,gistration of dealers, as provided in section 19; !l5 
(c) . the caution'S to be specified in the manual of instnlction3 as 
required by section 15; 
(d) the re~sters, reCOT'ds and accounts which are l"f'quired to be 
maintained under section 18; 
(e) the arrane;ement required to be made under section 20 for 30 
rendering first aid to any injured operator of a dangerous machine; 
and 
• (f) any other matter which is required to be, or may ~,,, 
prescribed. 
(2) Every rule made by the State Government under this section 35 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such 
Legislature conSists of one House, before that House. 
38. The Central Government may giv·e directions to any State Govern-
ment as to the C'8rrying into execution in the State of any of the provi- 40 
sions of t!1is Act or of any rule or order made thereunder. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
A large number of accidents OCCUI' every year during the threshing 
season injuring persons operating power threshers, many of whom are 
pennanently disabled. A major contributory factor is the unsafe design 
of power threshers and lack of safety features. It is necessary to regulate 
trade and commerce in and production, supply, distribution and use of 
power threshers to ensure that they conform to prescr:ibed standards of 
safety in the interest of welfare of persons operating such threshers. Since 
chaff cutters, cane crushers, etc., are also dangerous machines used in agri-
culture, it is considered necessary to have legisl'8tion which can be 
extended to cover other dangerous machines, apart from power threshers 
used in the agricultural or rural sector. The Bill seeks to achieve these 
objectives. 
NEW DELHI; . RAO BIRENDRA SINGH. 
The 26th April, 1983. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[COpy of letter No. 12-1!79-My(Plg)Pt. IV, dated the 30th April, 1983 
from Rao Birendra Singh. Minister of Agriculture to the Secretary, 
Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Dangerous Machines (Regulation) Bill, 19,83, recommends the considera-
tion of the Bill in Lok Sabha under article 117 (3) of the Constitution. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the State Government to appoint a 
Controller and such number of Additional, Deputy or' Assistant Control-
lers as it may deem fit. Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the State Govern-
ment to appoint as many Inspectors as it deems fit to carry out the pro-
visions of this Bill. In the case of Union territories, these appointments 
of Controllers· and Inspectors, etc., are to be made by the Central Gov-
ernment and consequently the Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
2. It is estimated that the Bill, if enacted, would involve a non-recurring 
expenditure of the order of Rs. 55,000 and recurring expenditure of the 
order of its. 1,73,800 per annum. In addition, the Bill, if enacted, would 
involve a non-recurring expenditure of the order of Rs. 5,000 and recurrin,z 
expenditure of the order of Rs. 33,600 per annum by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. . 
16 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 36 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules 
for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Bill in respect 
of matters falling within the purview of that clause. 
Likewi'se, clause 37 empowers the State Governments to make rules in' 
respect of matters not falling within the purview of clause 36 . 
. ' 
These matters pertain to procedure, form or administrative detail. 
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
17 

LOK SABHA 
• 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the regulation Of trade and commerce in, and production, 
• supply, distribution and use of, the product of any industry producing 
dangerous machines with a view to securing the welfare of labour 
operating any such machine and for payment of compensation. for 
the death or bodily injury suffered by any labourer while operating 
any such machine, and for matters connected therewith or inciden-
tal thereto. 
• 
:., 
(Rao Birendra Singh, 
MiniBter of Agriculture.) 