As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
1 ~ AUG 1~16 
Bill No. 71 of 1116 
rHE INDIAN IRON AND STEEL COMPANY (ACQUISITION) 
OF SHARES) BILL, 1976 
BILL 
to provide JOT the acquisition of certain shares of the Indian Iron and 
Steel Company Limited with a view to securing the proper manage. 
ment ot the affairs of the Company and the continuity and develop-
ment of the production of goods which are vital to the needs of the 
country and for mtJtters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
WHEREAS the management of the undertaking of the Indian Iron and 
Steel Company Limited was taken over by the Central Government for 
a limited period under the Indian Iron and Steel Company (Taking Over 
50 ot 1972. of Management) Act, 1972, in order to secure the proper management ot 
5 iuch undertaking; 
AND WHEREAS the top management of the Company was guilty of 
mismanagement of the affairs. of the Company and restoration, after the 
expiry of the limited period aforesaid, of the management o~ the affairs 
of the Company to such top management would be prejudicial to the 
10 interests of the Company and to the public interest; 
AND WHEREAS investment of a large amount is necessary for the main-
tenance and development of the production of the undertakdngs ot the 
CompanYi 

Short 
title 
and com-
mence-
ment. 
Deftnl-
tlons. 
AND WHEREAS acquisition by the Central Government of an effectiv~ 
control over the affairs of the Company is necessary to enable it to make 
the investment aforesaid; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-seventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follow!.: - S 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Iron and Steel Company 
(Acquisition of Shares) Act, 1976. 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 17th day of 10 
July, 1976. 
21- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed day" means the 17th day of July, 1976; 
(b) "bank" means a banking company within the meaning of the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949; IS 10 of 1949. 
(c) "Company" means the Indian Iron and Steel Company 
Limited, being a company within the meaning of the Companies Act, 
1956, and having its registered office at lISCo House, 50, Chowrlnghee 1 of 1856. 
Road, Calcutta; 
(d) "CQrnmissioner" means the Commissioner of Payments 20 
appointed under section 5; 
.. (e) "notification" means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette; 
(f) "prescribed" means prest.'1'ibed by rules made under this Act; 
(g) "share" means a share, whether equity or preference, in the 25 
capital of the Company, and includes a share pledged by any share· 
holder with any bank or other creditor, but does not' inc10de any 
-share in the capital of the Company held by-
(i) any State Govemment; 
(it) the State 'Bank of India, established under sedion 3 of 30 
tile State Bank of India Act, 1955 and its subsidiary banks; 23 of 1955. 
(iti) the Steel Authority· of India, a company formed and 
registered under the CompaniesAcl.. 1956, and· haYing . its reps. 1 of 1956. 
tered· ()tftce at Hiadu8t8n Times HOU8e, Ka8turba Oaadhi Mug, 
New Delhi; , g5 
(iv) the Life Insurance Corporation of India, established 
under .sectio,n 3 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956; 81 of 1956. 
'(tI) the Unit ,Trust of ,1Ddia, establisbed under gettion 3 of 
the ,Unit Trust of :India Act, 1963; 52 of 1868. 
(vi) any corresponding new bank, within the meaning of the 40 
. Banking Companies (Acquisition and Tramfer of Undertllidftgs) 
Act, 1970; 6 of 1970. 

57 of 1972. 
10 
3 
(vii) any general insurance company nationalised· by the 
General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972; 
(h) "shareholder" means a person, who, immectiately, heWr •. the 
appointed day, was registered by the Company as the holder of any 
share; 
(i) "specified date" means such date as the Central GOVErmJlent 
may, for the purpose of any provision of this Act, by notification.; 
specify. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISITION OF THE SHARES OF THZ COMPANY 
3. (1) On the appointed day, all the shares of the Company shall, by 
virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and vested in, the CentraJ 
Government. 
(2) The Central Goverwnent shall be deemed, on and from the 
IS appointed day, to have been registered in the Register of members of 
the Company as the holder of each share which stands transferred to, 
and vested in, it by virtue of the provisions of sub-section: (1). 
(3) All the shares which have vested in the Central QovemmeJ1t 
under sub-section (1), shall by force of such vesting, be freed and dis-
20 charged of all trusts, liabilities, obligati4>ns, mortgages, charges. liens and 
other incumbrances affecting them, and any attachment, injunction or 
any decree or order of the court, tribunal Or other authority restricting 
the use of such shares in any manner, shall be deemed to have been 
withdrawn. 
25 (4) For the remo~al of doubts, it is hereby declared that the provisfons 
of sub-Meiion9 (1) and (2) shall not be deemed to a1fect-
(~ any right of the Compally subsisting, immediately before the 
appointed day, against any shareholder to rec~ver from such share-
holder any sum of money on the ground that the shareholder has not 
30 paid or credited to the Company the whole or any part of the value 
of the shares held by him, or on any other ground wbatloeYer; or 
(b) any right of the shareholder subsisting, immediately before 
the appointed day, against the Company to receive any dividend or 
other payment due from the Company. 
3S 4. (1) For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Govemment, 
under seetiOQ 3, of th~ shares of tbe Comptm1, there shall. liven by 
the Central GovernJDellt to the sharehoYers of the Company, in e.sh .... 
in the mllDD8r spectfted in seetfen 6, an anlotlftt· cI rupees leftll eRr_, 
twenty-three lakhs, ninety-8ve thousand aad.ae hdbdred aDd thlrty-
4Dseven aPd ftfteen paise. 
(2) 'Ihe 1IIIlOIIIIi, refer.Nd .. ia sub-~ticm. (1), .... carr, simDJe 
interest .t the rate of four per cent. per IPUIUDl for the periocl C .... ~dD. 
Transfer 
and 
vesting of 
shares 
of the 
Company 
in the 
Central 
GoYe~ 
menlo 
Pa,.-
ment-Gf 
amounts. 

Appoint-
mentof 
Commis-
sioner 
of Pa7-
menta. 
Payment 
bytbe 
Central 
Govern-
ment 
to the 
Commil-
lioner. 
Claims 
to be 
made 
to the 
CmnmJa., 
aiODer. 
4 
on the aPJ!Olnted day and ending on the date on which payment of such 
amount is made by the Central Government to the Commissioner. 
S. (1) The Ceatral Government shall, for the purpose of disbursing 
the amounts payable to the Company under section 4, by notification, 
appoint a Commissioner of Payments. S 
(2) 'Ibe Central Government may apPOint sueh other persons a5 it 
may think fit to assist the Commissioner and theftUPOn the Commw.;OIler 
may authorise ODe or more of such persons also to exercise all or any 
of the powers exercisable by him under this Act, and different persons 
may be authorised to exercise different powers. 10 
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of 
the powen exercisable by tbe Commissioner may exercise those powers 
in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have been con-
ferred 011 that person directly by this Act, and not by way of authorisa-
tio~ 15 
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other per-
SODS appointed under this section shall be defrayed out of the Consolidat-
ed Fund of India. 
6. (1) The Central Government shall, within thirty days from .the 
specified date, pay, in cash, to the Comm1ssioner, for payment to the 20 
shareholders of the Company,-
(&> an amount equal to the amount Specified in sub-section (1) 
of section 4; and 
(b) an amount equal to the amount determined under sub-sec-
tien (2) of section 4. 2S 
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in 
favour of the Commissioner, in the Public Account of India, and every 
amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be deposited by 
him to the credit of the said deposit aceount and the said deposit account 
shall be operated by the Commissioner. 30 ., 
(3) The interest accruing on the amount standing to the credit of the 
deposit account, referred to in sub-section (2), shall ensure to the benefit 
of the shareholders of the Company. 
'7. (1) Every shareholder, having a cla~m in relation to any share 
acquired by this Act, shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner 35 
within thirty days from the Specified date: 
Provitled that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was 
prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the claim within the period 
of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further period of 
thirty days and not thereafter. 
(2) Every shareholder of a preference share shall have a preferential '. 
claim with regard to the amount paid by the Central Government to the 
Commissioner. 

5 
8. On receipt of the claims made under section 7, the Commissioner 
shall separately arrange the claims in relation to preference shares ami 
in relation to the equity shares and examine the claims in relation to each 
such share. 
5 9. (1) After e!Xamining the claims, the Commissioner shall fix a 
certain date on or before which every claimant shall file the proof of his 
claim or be excluded from the benefit of the disbursements made by the 
Commissioner. 
(2) Not less than fourteen days' notice of the date so fixed shall be 
10 giveon by advertisement in one issue of the daily newspaper ~n the 
English language and in one issue of such daily newspaper in the 
regional language as the Commissioner may consider suitable, and every 
such notice shall call upon the claimant to file the proof of bis claim with 
the Commissioner within the time specified in the advertisement. 
IS (3) Every claimant, who fails to file the proo~ of his claim within 
the time specified by the Commiss~oner, shall be excluded from the 
disbursement made by the Commissioner. 
(4) The Commissioner sball, after such investigation as may, in his 
opinion, be necessary, and after giving the Company an opportunity of 
20 refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a reasonable opportunity 
of being heard, in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole or in part. 
(5) The CGmmissioner shall have the power to regulate his own 
procedure in all matters arising out of the discharge of his functions, 
including the place or places at which he will hold his sittings and shall, 
25 for the purpose of making an investigation under this Act, have the same 
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
5 of 1908. 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness 
and examining him on oath; 
30 (b) the discovery ani production of any document or other 
material object producible as evidence; 
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of 
witnesses. 
35 (6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deoemed to 
be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of 
45 of 1860. the Indian Penal Code and the Commissioner f;hall be deemed to be II 
civil court for the purposes of section 345 and Chapter XXVI of the Code 
2 of 1974. of Criminal Procedure, 19n. 
, , 
40 (7) A claimant, who is dissatisfieod with the decision o~ the Com-
missioner, may prefer an appeal against the decision to the principal 
civil court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the registered ofBce of the Company is situated, 
Exami-
nation 
ot claims. 
Admis-
sion or 
rejection 
of claim •. 

Disburse-
ment ot 
money by 
the Com. 
missioner 
to claim-
ants. 
Undis. 
bursed 
or un-
claimed 
amount 
to be de-
posited 
to the 
general 
revenue 
account. 
Power of 
inspec. 
tion. 
Act 
to have 
overrid. 
ing effect. 
Penalties. 
6 
18. (1) After admitting a claim under this Act, the amount due in 
respect of each share acquired by virtue of this Act ShAll be paid by the 
Commissioner at the rate of rupees thirty-two and paise seventy-five per 
preference share, and at the rate of rupees four and paise seventy per 
equity share to the person or persons to whom such sums are due, anti, S 
on such payment. the liability of the Central Government in respect of 
the share so acquired shall stand discharged. 
(2) The Commissioner shall also apportion amongst the shareholders, 
the amount paid to him by way of interest under sub-section (31) of 
seetion 6. and such apportionment shall be made OD the basis of the 10 
amount due to each shareholder. 
11. Any money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed 
or unclaimed for a period of three years from the last day on which 
the disbursement was made, shall be transferred by the Commissioner 
to the general revenue account of the Cen.tral Government; but a claim IS 
to any money so transferred may be preferred to the Central Govern-
ment by the person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with a. 
if such transfer had not been made, the order~ if any; for payment of the 
claim being treated al'l an order for the refund of revenue. 
12. For the purposes of ascertaining whether any person claiming 20 
payment under this Act is a shareholder, the Commissioner shall have the 
right to- . 
(a) require any person. havinll the possession, cu!:;tody or control. 
of any register or record of the Company, to produce such register 
or record before the Commissioner. 2S 
\b} require any person to make any statement or furnish any 
information which may be required by the Commissioner. 
CHAPTER III 
MISCElLANEOUS 
13. The provisions of this Act shall han efteet notwithstanding 3'0 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any law, other than this 
Act, or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law, other than 
this Act. 
101. If any. persoD,-
(a) makes any claim for any payment under this Act, knOWing 3S 
or having reason to believe that such claim is false er without any 
basis; or 
(b) when required under this Act so to do,-
(i) omits or fans to produce any register or record of th~ 
Company; or 40 
Hi) makes any statement or furnishes any information whicla 
t!'l false in any material particular and which he knows or believe. 
to be raIse or does not believe to be· true; or 

, 
(c) makes any such statement as aforesaid dn any book, acc(luht, 
record, register, return or other document, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a tenn which may extend 
to two years, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or 
S with both. 
1&. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company,evoery person who, at the time -the offence was committed, was 
inehar,ge of, and was responsible to, the' company for the conduct of the 
business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
10 IUUty of the otfence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished .accordingly: 
Provided that nothing 'contained in ·this 9ub-aeetion shall -render any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his -knowledge or that he had-er:ercised all due 
r, diligence to prevent the commission of such offenee. 
(2). Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
any Oftence under this Act 'has -been committed with the consent or con-
nivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer, such direetor, manager, secretary or 
10 other ofticer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offen.ce an.d shall be 
liable to be proceeded ~gain.qt and punished accordingly. 
E%plcmation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(11) 'Icompany" means anybody corporate and includes a' firm or 
other association of individuals; and 
2; (b) ''director'', in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
,16. No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under 
this Act, except with the previous sanction of the Central Govern-
ment or of an officer authorised by that Government in this behalf. 
17. (1) The Central·Government may, by aotification, make rules to 
30 carry out 'the provisions of this Aet. 
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Padia-
ment, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty daya which· may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sesSions, and if, 
35 before the expiry of the session immediately folloWing the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifica-
tion in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, 
the rule shall thereafter have effeet only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, . however, that any such modil1cation 
40 or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that fule. 
;18. The Itldian Iron and Steel Company (Acquisition of Shares) 
10 of 197ft. Ordinance, 1976, is hereby repealed: 
Provided that notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any 
4S action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done 
or taken under the corresponding provision of this Act. 
Menees 
by com-
panies 
Limita_ 
tion of 
cogniz-
ance of 
offences. 
Power 
to make 
rules. 
Repeal 
and 
saving. 

S·,tATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Due to mismanagement, there was a progressive decline in the pro-
duction of the uudertakings of the Indian Iron and Steel Company 
Umited. The condition of the plant and equipment was also not satis-
factory and required immediate replacement. Financial difficulties faced 
by the companYj were also such that the company was not in a position 
either to make the necessary replacements or to undertake any plant" 
rehabilitation scheme. In the circumstances, the management of the 
undertakings of the company was taken over by the Central Government 
in the public interest for a limited period under a Parliamentary legisla-
tion. 
There was considerable improvement in the performance of the 
undertakings of the company after the management thereof had been 
taken over by the Central Government and the company, for the first 
time, achieved the target of production in 1975-76. I~ the circumstances, 
restoration of the management of the company to the same top manage-
ment which had been responsible for the sad state of affairs would have, 
been prejudicial to the public interest. 
The financial condition of the company was very unsatisfactory. The 
burden of interest on loans and advances made to the company had 
reached the level of rupees 10 crores per year and was expected to reach 
rupees 14 crores per year within the next three years. It was not, there-
fore, p~sible to make the undertakings of the company viable without 
financial assistance from the Central Government. Direct financial 
assistance of the order required by the company could not be made 
available by the Central Government unless it had acquired a 
controlling intere,t in the company, to enable ,it to restructure the 
capital base of the company to make the necessary replacements and 
planned rehabilitation of the machinery and equipment. Since the com-
pany was engaged in the production of goods vital to the needs of the 
country, liquidation of the company (for insolvency) would have been 
against the public interest. 
Having regard to these facts and the mounting burden of interest 
charges, the Indian Iron and Steel Company (Acquisition of Sharee) . 
Ordinance, 1~76 (10 of 1976) was promulgated by the President to provide 
for the acquisition of the privately held shares in the company. The 
Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance. I 
NEW DELHI; CHANDRAJIT YADAV. 
'fM 4th August, 1976. 
PRSIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. IND. 11-(49) 176, dated the 6th August, 1976 from 
Shri Chandrajit Yadav, Minister of Steel and Mines to the Secretary-
General, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the above 
Bill for acqUisition of certain shares of Indian Iron and Steel Company 
Ltd., has recommended under article 117 (1) and 117 (3) of the Constitu-
tion, the introduction and consideration by Lok Sabha of the said Bill. 
J 8 

Bt theIndiaA bOb. alIid Sfeel- ~y (AcqUbdt.i.oD of SliaNs) 
'Ordinance, 1976 (10 of 1976), the privately held shares of the Indian Itoll 
.and Steel Company Limited were acquired by the Central Government 
·on the 17th day of July, 1976. The Bill leeks to replace the said 
. Ordinance. 
Clause 4: of the Bill provides for the payment, in cash, te the share--
holders, through the Commissioner of Payments, and amount of 
Rs. 7,23,95,137.15 for the acquisition of the said shares. The clause also 
provides that the said amount shall carry simple interest at the rate of 
4: per cent. per annum commencing on the 17th day of July, 1976, and 
ending on the date on which payment is made by the Central Govern-
ment to the Commissioner of Payments. The amount to be so paid by 
way of interest is likely to be of the order of Rs. 4,83,000/-. 
Clause 5 of the Bill makes proviSion for the appointment of a Com-
missioner of Payments. The estimated recurring expenditure with 
regard to the salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and his 
staff is likely to be of the order of R8. 10,0001- per mensem. 
The Bill, if enacted, would not involve any other recurring or non-
recurring expenditure. But the purpose of acquisition of the privately 
held shares is to enable the Central Government to make additional 
investment of the order of rupees 60 crores (including rupees 23.25 
crores for which provision has already been made in the Budget esti-
mates for the year 197~77). Such expenditure will, however, be 
incurred after due appropriation by Parliament by law . 
........... . . ',. tl" " 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 17 of the Bill seeks to confer on the Central Government tlae· 
general rule-making power for carrying out the provisions of the Bill 
when enacted. The power of maltin.g rules is confined to matteN of 
detail and procedure. 
2. The delegation of legislative power, is, therefore, of a normal 
character. ") 
.' 

Memorandu.m explaining the modifications made in the Bm to replGCe 
the Indian Iron and Steel Company (Acqu.isition of Shares) OrdiMftlet, 
1976 (10 of 1976) 
Section 9 (7) of the Ordinance confers a right on the claimant, who is 
dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner of Payment., to 
prefer an appeal against such decision to the principal civil court of 
original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the 
registered office of the oompany is situated. There was, however', a 
proviso to the said 'Sub-section to the effect that where a person, who 
is a Judge of a High Court, is appointed to be the Commissioner of 
Payments, such appeal shall lie to the High Court at Calcutta and web 
appeal shall be heard and disposed of by atleawt two Judges (tf the 
High Court. Since a decision has been taken to appoint the IrOil an(~ 
Steel Controller as the Commissioner of Payments. the said pr~vUe fs 
not neceSISary and, as such, is being omitted. 
Section 12 of the Ordinance confers a power on the Central a.vel1l-
ment to require any person to produce any regiater or documeat .. 14-
make any statement. It is proposed to confer that power OIl the c..-
misaioner of Payments instead of the Central Governmmt. 
. , .. ~ ... - ......... 

LOK SABHA 
&·)l)!q'n. ()~ IH~I ~)\s 1\)' 1")1"\~ " ",,~:,i.\I'11 ,.!,<.:1::,,1;,.,,·) )1117i.l\)\ .... "i;)t". 
,,')!'I)i !)ltHn 0 (?,'H\)(\'2. to lI')t ~h~ i\i~)J \) '" ',! \;,. ,) "j ~<)l) ~'?, ;~ ill • ;(J ,'II •. )\( \ lit 1'11\ \' 
(lh'i)f t·) Ii!; 1h'11 
lib od.w ..l'n.31l11Hb t)dt H'} ilI!liI IJ Q .'J'll~,·,,"oll:(li!n.U lid) ill (\', l! f~oU';e8 
oj ,a.hl'tl1'(t\·:! ~,) ·i·)11Qi~?rl'ilff[()') ·"rr 1.-) f(r,;",j.·y)f) ~lIlj ,ilt·:t ~J'JrhiJf'~<d:, 
10 hw)') [i'/t-) fnqblli'l({ '.H[t ,~t (l4):"';' ·,f; rl~)I;'~ 1;l'i;~:~I: :·!;"'q'l.': p;\ ',,../b'J,(( 
ad1 I'tt)ihlb?(·w( '~;:()rf'lf t,) aJiI;rif (!\,~,\i ,;,[, "Uiill g':'iJQ/i)dillt LHri:)L',i:'l 
~} \:lI;)v';)'/iolf ,"Wft ')'J,:d'J,' .f~')ir.fjt: .. ,; '/n,::c{,,;;,) ';rfj (1) 9"i1(.: [)')i·}t;d~J'lI 
odw ,110?"!\)(L )~ lrr'}~hi J't<".rU· j\~'}'1b ,."1 iii ([,)th~~;.d;~~ .bi.;~:lHlt ot O~i'101'i 
1'0 'J.')Clf)i-=?Jmrl1')~) f)J{t ,)d of b~"tlf:I;I.i;;:' :',r ,)"wl') d~~rH H h D:~bJJ'~ :: "( 
If~)lJa tWB 11)JIJ'lf,<) JIl j djt!) rigel{ ,;ilt 1)1 .Ii! 'i';.!? fF'~''i'[fl rf'JIl'-\ ,:dWJ(I{".';': 
cdt 10 c:agf)IIT, uV/f j"'i'l')~t!! 'I,d 11) ij':)-'I.I~~i;) hrm h!f'~J,( ~Hr 1[;],1'1 r'~':'lqr: 
bWl n01! '.int jHloq<{'I ot W)}Cflt (I'Hr' "'Id Hu[,!,i'v)b ;l ~)'JiI;;~ ,hll!)') rhll i 
:j~ 08t\fO'J(~ blp.~ 9tH ,?tn·Jn1'~flcr 1'1 ')'lIu);,,:~iil["((l) :HIJ ~.(, ·;·)trnI1J")~) fn')j:; 
J}!)ttilll') .\)r1i'id :l( rhl "I ~j'l ,fllPI \t;II;"::~'i'l<jn I'll' 
'i,i'I";IVOO I.e'lhl90 edl no 'J:~'ltoq 11 .... l·,'ln,)') '.:'jll!wibC) ')d) 1·) ~:I lil)jh~~ 
:¢J ';(} JIl!.lfJtlJxb '10 i9jei},}~" '(W~ ar)lJbuI! oJ nO;<s'l'j(f V;IW Q1i1'1"fl oj j(I:)/;1 
-moO, elf]; no 'If)WO~ jmfl 'l91Eto~ 01 o';',::Cq()'Il{ d tf Jfl'){ll':>tI'!J:.\ 'I,un OAlJilf 
.tLHHtfU'l9VoD IJl'ljcr9~ 'left 10 hS';')Md ~tCl.~!H'l..a'{ 10 'r~){1ora::!ill' 
A 
BILL 
tG provid~ tor the acquisition ot certain .hares of the Indian Iron and 
Steel Company Limited with a view to securing the proper manage-
ment of the aftairl of the Company and the continuity and develop-
JDent of the production of goods which are vital to the needs of the 
eountry and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto . 
. ! 
. ,,: .. y':' ; 
, 