Bill No. 71 of 19S'-
THE ADMINISTRATION OF 
EVACUEE PROPERTY 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1956 
A" ."".,.""t'l 'by trw, LAt. 8tI'6'IHJ 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 

LOK SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1956 
1" Pd.lle4, "" tIM ull ~ (As introducedn Lok Sabhe) 
1. Page 2,- . 
for line 33, read -
"(2A), the following sub-sections 
shall be substituted, namely:-
2. Page 3, 1 ine 2,-
after "force" insert 
3. Page 4, line 4,-
., " , 
after "sub-s ection (1) " omit 
4. Page 10, line 11,-
for "reason" read "person" 
" " , 
5. Page 10, lines 5 and 6 from bottom,-
for "Custod and" ~ "Custodian" 
6. Page 12, lines ,5 and 6 from bottom,-
for "revisiting" ~ "revising" 

7. Page 13, line 14,-
ill "parities" ~ "parties" 
J 
NEW DELHI, 
, The. 21st. November, 1956. 

8W No. 71 or 1'5'-
THE ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPE1<TY 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1956 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Administration of E!~Je''''~'''J'M:l'!~ftJ''''tI 
BE it enacted by Parliament In the Seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Administration of Evacuee Short title 
Property (Amendment) Act, 1956. ~c:em~~ 
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the twenty-
second day of Octo~er, 1956. 
2. In section 6 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, Amendment 
1950 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),- ofaecUOIl 60. 
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
10 substituted, namely:-
"(1~ The Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint for any State a Custodian and 
as many Additional, Deputy or Assistant Custodians of 
Evacuee Property as may be necessary for the purpose of 
IS discharging the duties imposed on the Custodian by or under 
this Act, and the same person may be appointed as the 
Custodian, or as the case may be, Additional, Deputy or 
Assistant Custodian of Evacuee Property for two or mon 
States."; 
20 (b) in sub-:section (3),-
(i) for the words "State Government", the words 
"Central Government" shall be substitutedj 

\ 
(ii) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:-
"Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be 
deemed to empower the Custodian to question any order 
made by an Additional, Deputy or Assist.ant Custodian .S 
in respect of any matter which the Additional. Deputy 
or Assistant Custodian is empowered by or under this 
Act to determine. f '. 
~e4men~ 3. In sub-section (3) of section 8, sub-section (3) of section 15, 
~,.-; OD!od saction 38 and sub-section (1) of section 51, of the principal Act, for 10 
$1. the words ClState Government", whert:ver they occur, the words 
ClCentral Government" shall be substituted. 
Amendment 
of ICCtioD 10. 
4. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),-
(a) clauses (1), (g), (h), (k) and (p) and the proviso 
clause (q) shall be omitted; 
to 
I, 
(b) in clause (m), the words Clor of any amounts due to any 
employee of the evacuee or of any debt due by the evacuee to 
any person" shall be omitted. 
~f-~ 5. In section 11 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the o .0,,; .. 011 II... ' 
follOWIng sub-sectlon shall be substituted, namely:- 20 
Amendment 
of teCtio!I 16. 
"(1), Where any evacuee property which has vested in the 
Custodian is property in trust for a public purpose of a religious 
or charitable nature, it shall be lawful for the Central Govern-
ment, notwithstanding anything contained in the instrument of 
trust or any law for the time being in force, to appoint, by general 25 
or special order, new trustees in place of the evacuee trustees 
and the property shall remain vested in the Custodian only until 
such time as the new trustees are so appointed; and pending the 
appointment of such new trustees the trust property and the 
income thereof shall be applied by the Custodian for fulfilling, 30 
as far as possible, the purpose of the trust.". 
6. In section 16 of the principal Act, for sub-sections (l). (2) and 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the twenty-
"(1) Subject to such rules 81 may be ~ in this behalf, any 
evacuee or any person claiming to be an heir of an evacuee may 35 
apply to the Central Government· or to any person authorised by 
the Central Government in this behalf (hereinafter in this 
section referred to as the 'authorised person') that any evacuee 
property which has vested in the Custodian and to which the 

3 
applicant would have been entitled if this Act were not in 
force may be restored to him. 
(2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the 
Central Government or the authorised person, as the case may 
5 be, shall cause public notice thereof to be given in the prescribed 
manner, and after causing an inquiry into the claim to be held 
in such manner as may be prescribed, shall-
10 
(a) if satisfied-
(i) that the conditions prescribed by rules made in 
this behalf- have been satisfied; 
(ii) that the evacuee property is the property of 
the applicant: and 
(iii) that it is just or proper that the evacuee 
property should be restored to him; 
IS make an order restoring the property to the applicant, ~ , 
(b) if not so satisfied, .reject the application: 
Provid~ that where the application is rejected on the 
ground that the evacuee property is not the property of 
the applicant, the rejection of the application shall not 
20 prejudice the right of the applicant to establish his title to 
the property in a civil court, or 
(c) if there is any doubt with respect to the title of the 
applicant to the property, refer him to a civil court for the 
determination of his title: 
25 Provid~d that no order for the restoration of any 
evacuee property shall be made under this sub-section unless 
provision has been made in the prescribed manner for the 
recovery of any amount due to the Custodian in respect of 
the property or the management thereof.". 
30 7. In section 24. of the principi.l Act, for sub-3ection (1), the AlDClDdment 
following suh-Rctions shall be substituted, namely:- of leCtioa ~ 
"(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made uQder section 7, 
section 40 or. srction 48 may prefer an appeal-
1 . 
(a) to the Custodian, where the original order has been 
35 passed by a Deputy or Assistant Custodian and the amount 
or the valu.e of the property which is the subject-matter 
of the order does not exceed two thousand rupees; 
I 

4 
(b) to the Custodian-General, in any other c'ase. 
(1 A) An appeal shall lie to the Custodian-General from any 
order made on appeal by the Custodian under clause (a) of 
sub-section (1), on the ground that the order is contrary to law. 
(lB) An appeal under this section shall be made in such S 
manner and within such time as may be prescribed.". 
O~IIiOll '" 8. Sect:ons 25, 26,29, 30, 31, 33, 35, 42 and sub-section (2) of 
=;~.3~~' section 55 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
33.3'>42 IUd 
" (a). 
Amendment 
of eectiOD 37. 9. In section 27 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), the words "district Judge or" shall be 10 
omitted; 
(b) sub-sections (lA), (2) and (3) shall be omitted. 
Amendment '0. In section 28 of the principal Act, the word3 "district Judge" 
of IecUOO a8. shall be omitted. 
Amendment 
of lection 40. 11. in section 40 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (2), in clause (b), the words "or does not 
leave" shall be omitted; 
(b) sub-section (8) shall be omitted, 
IS 
Sub.titution 12. For section 48 of the principal Act, l.'lC following section 
d~~fo:::c- shall be substituted, namely;- 20 
tiOD 48. 
Recovery of 
c:cnain aum. 
a. urea r. of 
land revenue 
"48 (1) Any sum payable to the Government or to the 
Custodian in respect of any evacuee property, under any agree-
ment, express or implied, lease or other document or otherwise 
howsoever, may be recovered in the same manner as an arrear 
of land revenue. 25 
(2) If any question aris'es whether a sum is payable to the 
Government or to the Custodian within the meaning of sub-
section (1), the Custodian shall, after making such inquiry as 
he may deem fit, and giving to the person by whom the sum 
is alleged to be payable an opportunity of 1:1eing heard, decide 30 
the question; and the decision of the Custodian shall, subject to 
any appeal or revision under this Act, be final and shall not 
be called in question by any court or other authority. 
(8) For the purposes of this section, a sum shall be deemed 
to be payable to the Custodian, notWithstanding that its recovery 35 

S 
is barred by the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, or any other law 
for the time being in fo~ relating to limitation of actions." 
U. In section 56 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),-
(4) sub-clause (0) shall be omitted; 
(b) for sub-clause (8), the following sub-clauses shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(,) the terms and conditions of service of the Custodian 
and other officers appointed under this Act and for the 
furnishing of security by them; 
10 (t) the work to be performed by the Custodian, aDd the 
Additional, Deputy Or Assistant Custodians; 
(u) the delegation of powers of the Custodian t;=t6e 
Additional, Deputy or Assistant Custodians; 
(v) the fees payable to the Custodian for the manage-
IS ment and disposal of any property vested in him and the 
manner in which such fees shall be paid; 
(w) the persons by whom and the time at which books 
of accounts maintained under this Act may be inspected 
and audited; 
20 (x) any other matter which has to be or may be pres-
cribed under this Act."; 
(c) sub-section (3) shall be omitted. 
14. Any appointment or order made under section 6, and any ~ ap-
rule made under sub-section (3) of section 56 of the principal Act ordcn~ 
2~ before the commencement of this Act which is in force at such com- = to c't 
mencement shall be deemed to have been made by the Central Gov- fan:e. 
ernment and shall continue in force accordingly until and ur.less it 
is superseded by ar.y appointment, order or rule made under section 
6. or, as the case may be, section 56 of the principal Act, as amended 
30 by this Act. 
15- The provisions of sub-section (1) of section 24 of the principal =:0:', t~f 
Act, as substituted by section 7 of this Act, shall apply to all appeals aPP2!!n f n rcsa-_ 0 a instituted after the commencement of this Act. appeal .. 
16. (1) The Administration of Evacuee Property 
3' Ordinance, 1956 is hereby repealed. 
(Amendment) Repeal of . 
tl~e Adm!Dis-
tratioa of 
Encuee Pro-
perty 
(AmeDd-
ment) Ordi-
1Wlce, 19.56. 

6 
(2) Notwithstar,dins such repeal, anything done or aay aetion 
taken in the exercise of any powers conferred by or under the said 
Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken in the exer-
. eise of the powers conferred by or under this Act, as if this Act were 
tn force on the date on which such thir.g was done or adiem was , 
taken. 

STA~MENT OF OBJECts AND REASoNa 
The evacuee property law has been in operation for over eight 
years. Certain provisions of the law were repealed in 1953. With 
the decision to acquire the right, title and interest of evacuee owners 
in their properties in India and utilise such properties for payment 
of compensation to displaced persons, it was felt that there was DO 
reason to continue the evacuee property law as it then existed. 
Accordingly, certain sections of the law were abrogated by the Ad-
ministration of Evacuee Property (Amendment) Act, 1954. Further, 
it was provided that no notice for declaring a property as evacuee 
property should be issued after April 8. 1955. 
2. After April 8, 1955, the judicial work of the Custodians has 
been largely confined to the disposal of cases pending on that date. 
Although by now the number of pending cases has been brought 
down substantially, it was felt that unless the procedure was simpli-
fied their ctisposal would take considerable time causing hardship to 
the affected parties. Further, such of the properties as may be 
declared evacuee properties in the pending cases would not become 
available for utilisation under the Compensation Scheme until these 
cases are finally disposed of. 
3. Under the simplified procedure:-
(1) Inquiry into the title of applicants for restoration of 
property under section 16 will be made along with the prelimi-
nary inquiry and not after the grant of a certificate as hitherto 
(clause 6). 
(2) The Custodian's powers of review and revision, and the 
Custodian General's power of review have been withdrawn 
(clauses 8 and 9). 
(3) Custodians have been debarred from reopening, in ex-
ercise of their power of general superintendence and control, 
cases already decided by them [clause 2 (b) (ii)]. 
(4) Appeals in regard to properties up to the value of 
Rs.- 2,000 would lie to the Custodian, and those exceeding that 
limit to the Custodian-General. A second appeal has, however, 
been provided to the Custodian-General on a point of law in 
the case of proceedings relating to properties of the value not 
7 

• 
~xceeding RI. 2,000., The provision for appeal to the Diltrict 
Judge has been deleted (clauses 7 and 8). 
(5) Fresh trustees for properties of a religious and chari-
table nature vested in the Custodians can now be appointed by 
the Central Government (clause 5). 
4. Judicial pronouncements have held that powers under section 
48 are not wide enough to enable Custodians to recover dues relat-
ing to evacuee property arising out of leases, etc., granted by them. 
The section is being suitably amended in order to carry out its real 
intention (clause 12). 
5. In order to facilitate the integration of the Custodians' Orga-
nisation with the machinery set up by the Central Government for 
payment of compensation to displaced persons, the Central Govern-
ment have assumed the power to appoint Custodians (clause 2). 
6. Opportunity has also been taken to delete certain provisions 
which have now become obsolete. 
CALCUTTA; MEHR CHAND KHANNA. 
The 11th N(1)ember, 1956. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THI! ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT, 1950 
(31 OF 1950) 
• • • • 
6. (1) The State Government may, in consultation with the Cus- ~~u::c 
todian-General, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint for Custodians, 
the State a Custodian, and as many Additional Deputy or Assistant etc:. 
Custodians of evacuee property as may be necessary for the purpose 
of discharging the duties imposed on the' Custodian by or under 
this Act. 
• • • • 
(3) Subject to the provision of sub-section (2), Additional/De-
puty/and Assistant Custodians shall discharge the duties imposed 
on them by or under this Act under the general superintendence 
and control of the Custodian for the State, but the State Govern-
ment may, by general or special order, provide for the distribution 
of work among them. 
• • • • 
8. (1) 
• • • • 
Ve tiDg of 
evacuee pm-
pe.ty in the 
(3) Where any property in a State belonging to a joint stock Custodian. 
company had vested in any person exercising the powers of a Cus-
todian under any law previously in force, then nothing contained in 
clause (f) of section 2 shall affect the operation of sub-section (2), 
but the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that the Custodian shall be divested of any such property in 
such manner and after such period as may be specifted in the notifica-
tion. 
• • • • 
10. (1) Powen aud 
•• du.ics of the 
• • Custodian 
(2) W'th t . d' t th al't f th . . lencrally. 1 ou preJu Ice 0 e gener I y 0 e prOVIsIons con-
tained in sub-section (1), the Custodian may, for any of the purposes 
aforesaid,-
• • • • 
(1) require any person, notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force 
relating to the disclosure of any information by a public servant 
or any other person, to furnish such returns, accounts or other 
9 

S~al pro-
VWoDI with 
respect 10 
certain trust 
propertic . 
10 
information in relation to any property and to produce IUch 
documents in his possession as the Custodian considers necessary 
for the discharge of his duties under this Act; 
(g) require any banking company to furnish such informa-
tion as the Custodian may require with respect to remittances 
made after the 14th day of August, 1947, to any such area outside 
India as may be specified by the Custodian, either generally, or 
with reference to any person or class of persons; 
(h) search any building or place in which the Custodian 
has reason to believe that any evacuee property or any docu-
ment tending to show that any reason is an evacuee or that any 
property is evacuee property is being kept or concealed and 
take possession thereof; 
• • • • 
(k) raise on the security of the evacuee property such loans 
as may be necessary; 
• • 
(m) incur any expenditure, including the payment of taxes, 
duties, cesses and rates to Government or to any loeal authority 
or of any amounts due to any employee of the evacuee or of any 
debt due by the evacuee to any person; 
• • • • 
(p) invest any money held by him in any of the securities 
approved by the Central Government or in the prescribed 
manner; 
(q) delegate, by general or special order, all or any of his 
runctio~ under this Act to such officers or person3 as he thinks 
tit: 
Provided that the Custodian 5lhall T.ot delegate any of his func-
tions under clause (g) or clause (h) to any officer or person below 
t.he rank of an Assistant Custodian. 
11. (1) Where ar.y evacuee property which has vested in the Cus· 
todian is property in trust for a public purpose of a religious or 
charitable nature, the property shall remain vested in the Custodian 
only until such time as fresh trustees are appointed in the manner 
provided 'by law, and pending the appointment of fresh trustee:. the 
trust property and the ir.come thereof shall be applied by the Cus-
tod~an for fulfilling, as far as possible, the purpose of the trust. 
Explant,Jtion.-In this sub;'section 'property in trust for a public 
purpose of a religiOUS or charitable nature' ir.cludes a public wakf and 
the expression 'trustee' includes a mutawaZ1i of such wakf· 
• • • • 

II 
15. (1) 
• • • • 
(3) The State Government shaM cause the accounts maintained 
under thh sectior .. to be inspected and audited at such intervals and 
by such persons as may be prescribed. 
Maintenance 
of accounts 
bf Custo-
dian. 
16. (1) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, the :r~= 
Central Government or any person authorised by it in this behalf property. 
may, on application made to it or him 'by an evacuee or by any 
person claimiLg to be the heir of an evacuee. and. on being satisfied 
that it is just or proper so to do grant to the applicant a certificate 
stating that any evacuee property, which has vested in the Custod~ 
and to which the applicant would have been entitled if this Act were 
not in force, shaH be restored to him. 
• • • • 
(2) If the evacuee or, as the case may be. the heir to whom a 
certificate has been granted under sulrsection (1) applies to the 
Custodian in writing for the restoration of the evacuee property 
which has vested in the Custodian and in respect of which the certi-
ficate has been granted. the Custodian shall. on the production by the 
applicant of the certificate and subject to the other provisions con-
tained in this section and in any rules that may be made in this be-
half, restore the evacuee property to the applicant. 
(2A) On receipt of an application under sulrsection (2), the Cus-
todian shaH cause public notice thereof to be given in the prescribed 
manner and after holding a summary inquiry into the claim in such 
manner c.S may be prescribed shall-
(a) if he is satisfied with respect to the title of the applicant 
to the property, make a formal order restoring the property to 
the applicant; or 
(b) if he is not so satisfied, reject the application, without 
prejudice to the right of the applicant to establish his title to 
the property in a civil court; or 
(c) if he entertains any doubt with respect to the title of 
the applicant to the property, refer him to a civil court for the 
determination of his title thereto: 
Provided that no order for the restoration of any evacuee pro-
perty shall be made under this section unless provision has been 
made in the pre~cribed manner for the recovery of any amount due 
to the Custodian in respect of the property or the management 
thereof. 
• • • • 

12 
CHAPTER V 
ApPEALS, REvIEW AIID REVISION 
Appeals from U .. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 7, 
~=~~~~ section 16 or section 40 may prefer an appeal in such manner and 
and -4Q. ' within such time as may be prescribed,-
(a) to the Custodian, where the 'original order has been 
passed by a Deputy or Assistant Custodian; 
('b) to the Custodian-General, where the original order has 
been passed by the Custodian. an Additional Custodian or an 
Authorised Deputy Custodian: 
Provided that where the appeal is preferred on the ground that 
the person aggrieved is not an evacuee within the meaning of sub-
clause (iii) or sub-clause (iv)' or sub-clause (v) of clause (d) of 
section 2, the appeal shall be preferred in the manner prescribed in 
section 25. 
• • • • 
Appeal from 25. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order under section 7 declar-
other orde~. ing his property to be evacuee property on the ground that he is an 
evacuee within the meaning of sub-clause (iii) or sub-clause (;1') or 
sub-clause (v) of clBuse (d) of section 2 may preIer an appeal, in 
such manner and within such time as may be prescribed, to the dist-
rict judge nominated in this behalf by the State Government. 
Power ofre-
view or revi-
,iOD of 
Cua~o:!im, 
etc. 
(2) For the purpose of hearing any appeal under sub-section (1) 
the State Government shall nominate one or more district judges 
nnd define the local limits of their jurisdiction. 
26. (1) The Custodian, Additional Custodian or Authorised 
Deputy Custodian may at any time, either on his own motion or Oil 
application made to him in this behalf, call for the record of any pro-
ceeding under this Act which is pending before, or has been disposed 
of by, an officer subordinate to him for thc purpose of satisfying 
himself as to the legality or propriety of any orders passed in the 
said proceeding, and may pass such order in relation thereto as he 
thinks fit: 
Provided that the CUstodian, Additional Custodian or Authorised 
Deputy Custodian shall not pass an order under this sub-section re-
visiting or modifying any order prejudicial to any person without 
giving such person a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
Provided further that if one of the ofticers aforesaid takes action 
under this sub-section, it shall not be com~tent for any other oftlcer 
to do so. 

13 
(2) The Custodian, Additional Custodian or Authorised Deputy 
Custodian (but not a Deputy .oran Assistant Custodian) may, after 
giving notice to the parties concerned, review his own order. 
27. (1) The Custodian-General may at any time, either on his own Po~ of 
motion or on application made to him in this behalf, call for the re- ~:!;~~~ 
C!ord of any proceeding in which any district judge or Custodian has General. 
passed an order for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legal-
lity or propriety of any such order and may pass such order in rela-
tion thereto as he thinks fit: 
Provided that the Custodian-General shall not pass an order 
under 'this sub-section prejudicial to any person without giving him 
R reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(lA) The Custodian-General, a Deputy Custodian-General or an 
Assistant Custodian-General may after giving notice to the parities 
concerned review his own order. 
(2) NotWithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
where in respect of any proceeding called for under sub-section (1), 
the Custodian-General is of opinion that the district judge is in error 
in holding any person not to be an evacuee or any property not to be 
p.vacuee property, he shall not pass any order in relation thereto but 
~hall refer the matter, with his own opinion thereon. to the High 
Court to which the district judge is otherwise subordinate. 
(3) Any reference made under sub-section (2) shall be heard by 
a Bench of the High Court consisting of not less than two Judges, 
'lnd the Custodian-General shall dispose of the proceeding in accord-
:mce with the decision of the Hig~ Court. 
28. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Chapter, every FinalitY of 
order made by the Custodian-General, district judge, Custodian, ~~ec~~~~ 
Additional Custodian, Authorised Deputy Custodian. Deputy Cus-
todian or Assistant Custodian shall be final and shall not be called in 
question in any court by way of apneal or revision or in any ori~inal 
suit, application or execution proceeding. 
CHAPTER VI 
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE 
29. Any person who fails to comply with a notice or demand by Penalty for 
(lr on behalf of the Custodian under the provisions of this Act to f~~1° . . s .... ~er 
surrender possessIOn of any evacuee property shall be punishable posses'i"Jl of 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months. or evacuee pro.. 
with fine, or with both. perty. 

Penalty for 
wrongfully 
paying or 
recei,ing 
rents, etc. 
Penalty for 
concealing 
evacuee pro-
eny. 
Penalty for 
fal e declara-
tion in cer-
tain ca~e~. 
Pcna!ty for 
offences 
committed 
by com-
panies. 
Proc: .. dure 
for prosecu-
tion. 
14 
30. Any person who pays to or receives from any other }lerson 
any sum of money in respect of any property which he knows or 
has reason w believe to be evacuee property shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or 
with fine, or with both: 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply t., 
render punishable any payment made to or received by the Custo-
dian. 
31. Any person who wilfully conceals any property which he 
knows or has reason to believe to be evacuee property shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine, or with both. 
• • • .. 
33. Any person who-
(i) for the purpose of obtaining an allotment or lease of any 
evacue~ property, makes a declaration or statement which Lc; 
false or which he either knows or has reason to believe to be 
false, or does not believe to be true, or 
(ii) furnishes any return, account of information which is 
material to any of the purposes of this Act and which is false or 
which he either knows or has reason to believe to be false or 
does not believe to be true. 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extenrl 
to three year~. or with fine, or with both. 
• • • .. 
35. If the person charged with an offence under this Act is a 
company or other body corporate. the director, manager, secretary, 
or other officer of the company or other body corporate directly con-
cerned in the management thereof shall, unless he proves that the 
offence took place without his knowledge or that he exercised due 
diligence to prevent such contravention. be deemed to be guilty of 
such contravention. 
• • • • 
38. No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act shall 
be instituted except with the previous sanction of the State Govern-
ment or of any officer authorised in this behalf, by general or special 
order, by the State Government. 
. . .' . 

15 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
40. (1). Validity of 
tr&n'fers 
• • • • respec.ing prop'rty 
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to the trans- d~~I:I~~en~y 
fer for valuable consideration of any such property as is referred to be e ac:uee 
therein in any of the following cases, namely:- pNpeny • 
• • • • 
(b) where the transferor has not left or does not leave India 
for Pakistan within a period of two years from the date of the 
transfer: .-
Provided that in the case of a transfer made before the 
commencement of the Administration of Evacuee Property 
(Amendment) Act, 1953, the transferor had not left India for 
Pakistan before such commencement, notwithstanding that a 
period of two years had already elapsed before such commence-
ment; 
• • • • 
(8) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that every 
property transferred in contravention of the provisions of this section 
which does not confer any rights or remedies in relation to the trans-
fer on the parties thereto shall be deemed to be property declared to 
be evacuee property within the meaning of sub-sction (1) of section 
7 and to have vested in the Custodian in accordance with the provi-
sions of section 8. 
• • • • 
42. AI; soon as may be but not later than sixty days from the Submi~~iOD 
commencement of this Act. every person who is occupying, super- o.f iDtformaC -uon 0 us-
vising or managing any property without the approval of the Cus- todia'1 in 
todian which he knows or has reason to believe to be evacuee Pro- respect of evacuee pro-p!?rty, shall submit to the Custodian or to any person authorised by peny. 
him in this behalf full information relating to such property, includ-
ing the date from which or the period during which he has been 
occupying, supervising or managing it, and a detailed accounts of 
the rents, profits, income or other benefits received from the said 
property from the date from which or for the period during which 
he has been occupying, supervising 0 .. ' managing it. 
• • • • 
48. (1) Any sum due to the State Government or to the Custo- Recovery of 
dian under the provisions of this Act may be r:?covered as if it were anars. 
an arrear of land revenue. 

16 
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1). the decision of the 
Custodian as to the sum due to the State Government or to the Cus-
todian shan be final. 
• • • • 
Pees ~yablc 51. (1) The State Government may fix the fees payable to the 
~~ Cus- Custodian for the management or disposal of any property vested in 
him. 
Delegation of 
powers. 
PCJW('rto 
make rule!. 
• • • • 
55. (1) 
• • • • 
(2) The State Government may, by general or special order, 
direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act shall, in such 
circumstances and under such conditions. if any, as may be specified 
in the order, be exercised by an officer !lubordinate to the State Gov-
ernment. 
• • • • 
58. (1) 
• • • • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
• • • • 
(0) the nature of cases and the circumstances in which 
the Custodian may refer an applicant under section 16 to a 
civil court; 
• • • • 
(8) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed 
under this Act. 
(3) The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules providing for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:-
(0) the terms and conditions of service of the Custodian 
and other officers appointed under this Act and for the furnish-
ing of security by them; 
(b) the work to be performed by the Custodian 'and the 
Additional, Deputy and Assistant Custodians; 

17 
(c) the delegation of powers of the Custodian to the Addi-
tional, Deputy or Assistant Custodian; 
(d) the fees payable to tlw Custodian for the management 
and disposal of any property vested in him and the manner in 
which such fees shall be paid; 
(e) the persons by whom and the times at which books of 
accOunt maintained under this Act may be inspected and audited. 
• • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Administration of 
Evacuee Propeny Act, 1950 
(Shri Mehar Chand Khanna, 
. Minister of Rehabilitation) 