THE VISVA-BHARATI (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1961 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LOI< SABHA) 

o sm No. 1~ of ~?!I 
THE VISVA-BHARATI (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1961 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Visva.-Bharati Act. 1951. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Visva-Bharati (Amendment) Act, Short title. 
1961. 
of 1951. 5 2. In the Visva-Bharati Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred. to as the ~.:=~~ 
principal Act), in section 2, the following words shall be added and 
o 
shall be deemed always to have been added at the end, namely:-
"and is as such hereby constituted as a University.". 
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, for clause (e), the following Amendment 
10 clause shall be substituted, namely:- oflec:tioJi 3· 
'(e) "Bhavana (College)" means a hall or a unit of resi· 
dence, with provision for tutorial instructions for students, pro-
vided or recognised by the University;'. 
4. In section 4 of the principal Act,. after the words "body corpo- Amendment 
I, rate", the words "as a unitary, teaching and residential University" of lection 4. 
shall be inserted and shall be deemed always to have been inserted. 
5. In section 5 of the principal Act, for clause (ii), the following Amendment 
clause shall be substituted and shall be deemed always to have been of lCCtion 5· 
substituted, namely:-. ' 
20 "(ii) all property. assets, rights and liabilities of the said 
Society shall be th~ property, assets, rights and liabilities of the 

Amendment 
of leCtion 6. 
Insertion of 
new section 
7A. 
Maintenance 
ofcumina-
don centres 
outside 
territorial 
limits. 
University and any will, deed or other document, whether made 
or executed before or after the commencement of this Act, which 
contains or purports to contain any bequest, gift, trust, payment of 
money or transfer or assignment of any right or property, movable 
or immovable, in favour of the said Society shall be construed' 
as if the University was therein named instead of the said 
Society." . 
6. In section 6 of the principal Act,-
(i) in clause (b), for the words and brackets "Bhavans 10 
(Halls)" wherever they occur, the words and brackets "Bhavanas 
(Colleges)" shall be substituted; 
(ii) after clause (j), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(jj) with the approval of the Central Government, to 
borrow, on the security of properry of the University, money 15 
for the ~urposes of the University;". 
7. After section 7 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"7A. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 7, the 
University may establish and maintain, at any place in India 20 
examination centres for home study courses conducted by its Loka 
Shiksha Samsad (People's Educ'3tion Council) and recognise, for 
such purposes as may be provided in the Ordinances, the certifi-
cates awarded by the said Loka Shiksha Samsad (People's Educa-
tion Council) on the results of examinations conducted by it.". 25 
Ame~ment 8. In section 13 of the ptincipal Act, in sub-section (3), after the of secuon 13. words and brackets "Samsad (Court)", the words and brackets "and 
the Karma Samiti (Executive Council)" shall be inserted. 
Amendment 9. In section 19 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), under the 
of section 30 19. heading "Class I--Ex-officio members" for items (v) and (vi), the 
Amendment 
of scc:tion 
23· 
following items shall be substituted, namely:-
"(v) Adhyakshas (Principals) of Bhavanas (Colleges), 
(vi) Adhyakshas (Directors) of Vibhagas (Departments),". 
10. In section 23 of the principal Act,-
(i) to clause (e), the following proviso shall be added, 35 
namely:-
"Provided that no action shall be taken by the Karma 
Samiti (Executive Council) in respect of the number, quali-

fications and status of teachers, otherwise than on the recom-
mendation of the Shiksha Samiti (Academic Council) ;"; 
(ii) the prC!viso to clause (j) shall be omitted. 
11. In section 27 of the principal Act, in clause (g), for the ~~mcnt 
5 words and brackets "Bhawanas (Halls) ", the words and brackets ~7.· Ion 
·'Bhavanas (Colleges)" shall be substituted. 
10 
l~ 
12. In section 29 of the principal Act,- Alncndmcnt 
ofscction 
(i) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, Z9. 
namely:-
"(ee) the purposes for which certificates awarded by 
the Loka Shiksha Samsad (People's Education Council) of 
the University may be recognised by the University;"; 
(ii) in clause (g), for the words and brackets "Bhawanas 
(Halls) ", the words and brackets "Bhavanas ·(Colleges)" shall 
be substituted; 
(iii) in clause (k), for the words "of teachers", the words 
"of studies" shall be substituted. 
13. In section 32 of the principal Act,- ~;.~::nt 
(i) after the words "the University", the words and 3Z. 
brackets "other than a student of its Loka Shiksha Samsad (Peo-
ple's Education Council)" shall be inserted; 
(ii) for the words and brackets "Bhavan (Hall)", the 
words and brackets "Bhavana (College)" shall be substituted. 
14. In section 36 of the principal Act, for sub-sections (2) and (3), Amcn~mcnt 
2~ the following sub-sections shall be substituted, nam~ly:- ~tacct1on 
"(2) The accounts of the University shall, once at least in 
every year and at intervals of not more than fifteen months, 
be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India 
or any person authorised by him in this behalf. 
~ 
30 (3) The accounts, when audited, shall be published in the 
Official Gazette and a copy of the accounts, together with the 
auditor's report shall be submitted to the Samsad (Court) and 
to the Paridarsaka (Visitor) .". 
15. To section 38 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall Amcn~mcnt 
of section ~5 be added, namely:- 38. 
"Provided that nothing in this section shall be construed as 
taking away or affecting the right of the University to terminate 
• 

Amendment 
« leCtion 
,,~. 
4 
the services of any of its officers or teachers in accordance with 
the provisions of the Statutes governing the terms and condi-
tions of service of officers and teachers of the Univ~rsity.Jt. 
16. In section 40 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for 
the words and brackets "till the next meeting of the Samsad 5 
(Court)", the words "until his successor enters upon his office" 
shall be substituted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Experience of the administration of the Visva-Bharati Act, 1951, 
has revealed the need to amend it in certain respects. It is felt that 
the scope of clause (ii) of section 5 may be enlarged to cover all 
tansfersincluding transfer or assignment of any property. Clause 5 
of the Bill seeks to achieve this object. At present no power exists 
in the university to borrow money on the security of its property. 
The Bill makes the necessary provision in this regard. The Loka 
Siksha Samsad which is part of the university conducts certain 
examinations for home study courses not only within the territorial ---
limits of the university but outside such limits also. It is consider-
ed necessary that the university should be enabled to establish 
and maintain at any place in India examination centres for such 
examinations. Clause 7 of the Bill makes pr,ovision accordingly. 
Section 36 of the Act is being amended so as to make specific provi-
sion for the audit of the accounts of the university by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India as in the case of other 
Central universities. Opportunity is also being taken to make a 
few more amendments whch are either consequential or clarifi-
catory in nature. 
NEW DELHI; K. L. SHRIMALI. 
The 28th November, 1961. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 12 of the Bill which seeks to amend section 29 of the 
Visva-Bharati Act, 1951 confers on the Visva-Bharati University 
the power to frame Ordinances providing the purposes for which 
the certificates awarded by its Loka Shiksha Samsad (People's 
Education Council) may be recognised by the University. These 
are matters of detail and the delegation of legislative power with 
respect to them is of a normal character. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE VISVA-BHARATI ACT, 1951 (29 OF 1951) 
• • • • ... 
PBELIMINARY 
... ... ... ... ... 
2. Declaration of Visva-Bharati as an institution of national 
lmportance.-Whereas the late Rabindranath Tagore (Thakur) found-
ed an institution known as Visva-Bharati ot Santiniketan in the dis-
trict of Birbhum in West Bengal the objects of which are such as to 
make the institution one of national importance, it is hereby declared 
that the institution known as "Visva-Bharati" aforesaid is an institu-
tion of national importance. 
3. Definitions.-In this Act and in all Statutes· made hereunder, 
unless the context otherwise requires,-
• ... • • ... 
(e) "Bhavan" (Hall) means a unit of residence with provision 
for tutorial instruction for students provided or recognised 
by the University; 
• • • • • 
THE UNIVERSITY 
4. Incorporation.-The first Acharya (Chancellor) and Upa-
charya (Vice-Chancellor) of the University who shall be the persons 
appointed in this behalf by the Central Government by notification in 
the Official Gazette, and the first members of the Samsad (Court), 
and all persons, who may hereafter become or be appointed as such 
officers or members, so long as they continue to hold such office or 
membership, are hereby constituted a body corporate by the name of 
Visva-Bharati, and shall have perpetual succession and a common 
seal, and shall sue and be sued by that name. 
5. Effect of Incorporation of the University in certain cases.-
On and from the commencement of this Act,-
'. • • ... • 
(ii) any will, deed or other document whether made or executed 
before or after the commencemnt of this Act, which 
contains any bequest, gift or trust in favour of the said 
Society shall, on the commencement of this Act be construed 
"' 

8 
as if the University was therein named instead of the said 
Society; 
• • • • • 
6, Powers of the University.-The University shall exercise the 
following powers and perform the following duties, namely:-
• • • • • 
(b) to maintain schools, colleges and Bhavans (Halls) or 
r(.'COgnise schools, colleges and Bhavans (Halls) not main-
tained by the University and to withdraw such recognition; 
• • • • • 
OFJl'ICI!:RS OF THE UNIVERSITY 
• • • • •• 
13. The Acharya (Chancellor) ,-
• • • • • 
(3) The Acharlla (Chancellol') shall, if present, preside at the 
Convocations of the University and at meetings of the BamBoo. 
(Court). 
• • • • • 
AtTTHORITIES OF THE UNIVERSITY 
• • • • • 
19. The Samsad (Court),-(l) The Samsad (Court) shall consist 
of the following persons, namely:-
Class I-Ex-officio members 
• • • 
(v) principles of colleges, 
(vi) heads of departments, 
• • • 
• 
• 
• 
• 
23. Powers and duties of the Karma-Samiti (Executive Council) ,-
The Karma-Samiti (Executive Council)-
• • * • • 
(c) subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, shall 
appoint the officers [other than the Acharya (Chancellor), 
the Upacharya (Vice-Chancellor), and the Artha-Sachiva 
(Treasurer)] teachers and other servants of the University, 
and shall define their duties and the conditions' of their 

9 
service, and shall provide for the ftlling of temporary 
vacancies in their· posts; 
• • • • • 
(;) shall exercise such other powers and perform such other 
duties as may be conferred or imposed on it by this Act 
or the Statutes: 
Provided that no action &hall be taken by the Karm4-Samiti 
(Executive Council) in respect of the number, qualifications 
and status of teachers, otherwise than on a recommendation 
of the Siksha·Samiti (Academic Council); 
• • • • • 
STATUTES, ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS 
27. Statutes.---Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes 
may provid~ for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
• • • • • 
(g) the institution and maintenance of Bhavanas (Halls) and 
Cha.travasas (Hostels); 
• • • • • 
29. Ordinances.-Subject to the provisions of this Act and the 
Statutes, the Ordinances may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
• • • • • 
(g) the conditions of residence of the students of the University 
and the levying of fees for residence in Bhavanas (Halls) 
and Chatravasas (Hostels) and .of other charges; 
• • • • • 
(k) the formation of departments of teachers; and 
• • • • • 
32. Residence.-Every student of the University shall reside in a 
Bhavan (Hall) or Chatravasa (Hostel) or under such conditions as 
may be prescribed by the Statutes and the Ordinances. 
• • • • • 
ANNUAL REPoRTS AND ACCOUNTS 
• • • • • 

10 
36. Annwd Accounts.-(l) 
• • • • • 
(2) The audit of the accountS of the University ahall be carried 
out according to the directions of the Central Qovoemment. 
(3) Copies of the audited. accounts together with copies of the 
audit report, if any, shan be submitted. to the Samaad (Court) and to 
the Paridtlrl4k4 (Visitor). 
• • • • • 
St1PPLDIDfTAltY PRoVISIONS 
• • • • • 
38. Tribunal of A7!bitration..-Every dispute arising out of • 
contract between the University and any of its ofBcers or teachers 
shall be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one mem-
ber appointed by the Karm.a-Samiti (Executive Council), one mem-
ber nominated by the oftlcer or teacher concerned and an umpire 
appointed by the Paridarsaka (Visitor), and the decision of the Tribu-
nal shall be final. 
• • • • • 
40. Fillin.g of casual vacancies.- (1) Subject to any provision 
in this Act and in the Statutes, the Kannca.-Samiti (Executive 
Council), shall appoint witli the approval of the ParidarBaka (Visitor) 
a person to ftIl a casual vacancy in the oftlce of the Upacha",a (Vice-
Chancellor), and the pel'lOl1 10 appointed lIhall hold oftlee till the next 
meeting of the SamBad. (Court) . 
• • • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Visva-Bharati Act, 19SI. 
(Dr. K. L ShrimDli, 
MinUter of Education.) 