THE ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES (SECOND 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 19)7 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

100(19SS· 
5 
THE ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES (SECOND AMEND-
MENT) BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Essential Commodities Act, 1955. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Essential Commodities (Second Short tide. 
Amendment) Act, 1957. 
2. In sUb-section (2) of section 3 of the Essential Commodities Amendment 
Act, 1955, for clause (f), the following clause shall be substituted and of section 3. 
shall be deemed always to have been substituted, namely:-
"(f) for requiring any person holding in stock any essential 
commodity to sell the whole or a specified part of the stock to 
10 the Central Government or a State Government or to an officer 
or agent of such Government or to such other person or class 
of persons and in such circumstances as may be specified in the 
order;". 

STATEMENT. OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under section 3 (1) of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, orders 
can be made to regulate the production, supply and distribution of 
any essential commodity and trade and commerce therein. As an 
illustration of this power, clause (f) of sub-section (2) states that 
an order may be made requiring any person holding in stock any 
essential commodity to sell the whole or a specified part of the stock 
to wch person or class of persons and in such circumstances as may 
be specified in the order. Orders have been made by Government 
from time to time requiring sales of essential commodities to itself 
or to any officer or agent of the Government. Doubts have now 
been raised as to whether the expression "person or class of penons" 
includes the Government or any officer or agent of the Government. 
The proposed amendment seeks to remove such doubts ex abunda1tti 
cautela. 
A. K. SEN. 
NEW DELHI; 
'The 9th September, 19S'1, 
2 

• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES ACT, 1955 
(10 OF 1955) 
• • • • • • 
3. (1) If the Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary Powers to 
ped . t t d f . t . . . . I· f control or ex len so 0 0 or mam ammg or mcreasIng supp les 0 any productiou, 
essential commodity or for securing their equitable distribution and s~~pl~. dis-
availability at fair prices, it may, by order, provide for regulatin~ or :.~~f~~­
prohibiting the production, supply and distribution thereof and trade .entia! . . commo(b-and commerce thereIn. ties. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred 
by sub-section (1), an order made thereunder may provide-
• • • • • • • 
(f) for requiring any person holding in stock any essential 
commodity to sell the whole or a specified part of the stock to 
such person or class of persons and in such circumstances as may 
be specified in the order; 
• • • • • • • 
. 3 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
funher to amend the Essential Commodities Act, J 955. 
GIPD-III SHIFT-30 M. of Law~-9-57-1,650. 
(Shri Asoke K. Sen, 
Minister j{)f' Law.) 