8W No. 71 of 1"2 
THE ADVOCATES (THIRD AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LolC SABRA 
ON 13m AUGUST 1962) 
~ ARlIAMENT LiaRAJIfY 
................... _ .. _-
D&te •• ~~.~Jl.:~!::;-_ 

lib Ne. 'fi " ... 
THE ADVOCATES (THIRD AMENDMENT) BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Advocates Act, 1961. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Repub­
lic of India as follows: -
1. This Act may be called the Advocates (Third Amen dment) Short dtle.
Act , 1962. 
5 Z. In section 58 of the Advocates Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred Amendment
to as the principal Act), in sub-section (4),- oflOCdoa SI. 
IO 
IS 
20 
(i) for the words "relating to the admission and enrolment
of legal practitioners, the provisions of those Acts", the words 
"or of any other law relating to the admission and enrolment 
of legal practitioners, the provisions of the Acts and law afore-
said" shall be substituted and shall be deemed always to have 
been substituted; 
(ii) after the words "aforesaid Acts" , the words "or of the
other law" shall be inserted and shall be deemed always to 
have been inserted. 
3. After section 59 of the principal Act, the following section shall lmcrtion of 
be inserted, namely:- =., a.do n
"60. (1) Until rules in respect of any matter under this =.orao­Ac t are made by a State Bar Council and approved by the Bar venunm1 to 
Council of India, the power to make rules in respect of that mat- male l'ldea. 
ter shall be exercisable by the Central Government. 
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make rules under sub-section (1) either · for 
any State Bar Council or generally for all State Bar Councils 

~ 
and the rules so made shall have effect, .notwithstanding any .. 
,thing contained in this Act. 
(3) Where in respect of any matter any rules are made by 
the Central Government under this section for any State Bar S 
Council, and in respect of the same matter, rules are made by 
the State Bar Council and approved by the Bar Council of India, 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that the rules made by it in respect of such mat-
ter shall cease to be in force in relation to that Bar Council with 
effect from such dat~ as may be specified in the notification and 10 
on the issue of such notification, the rules made by the Central 
Government shall, accordingly, cease to be i.n force except as 
respects things done or omitted to be done before the said date.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the Advocates Act, 1961 a State Bar Council has been 
empowered to enrol qualified persons as advocates on its roll. In 
order that a person who has obtained a degree in law may be eligible 
for such enrolment, he has to undergo a course ot training in law 
and pass an examination thereafter as required by section 24(1) (d) 
of the Act. The State Bar Councils are required to frame rules for 
the purpOse but they do not have effect, unless they are approved 
by the Bar Council of India. The persons who passed the final law 
examination before the 28th February, 1962 were exempted from 
undergoing the prescribed course of training and examination main-
ly because all the Bar Councils were not constituted by that time 
and effective rules for the purpose could not be framed. The Bar 
Councils have now been constituted but no effective rules for the 
purpose of prescribing the course of training and examination have 
yet been made. It may still take some considerable time for all the 
State Bar Councils to make the necessary rules and get them approv-
ed by the Bar Council of India. 
2. Difficulties have arisen on account of the inordinate delay in 
framing the necessary rules. The persons who have passed their 
final Law examination after the 28th February, 1962 are not able to 
undergo the necessary training in the absence of proper rules. This 
is causing undue hardship to them. Representations have been 
received from various States and Universities urging upon the Gov-
ernment to undertake immediate steps for removing the diftlcultiea 
experienced by these Law graduates. 
3. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Act empowering the 
Central Government to make rules for State Bar Councils to pro-
vide for a course of practical training in law and the examination 
to be passed after such training. This would be an enabling provi-
sion and the Central Government would exercise the power only 
when it is necessary to do so. When, however, any State Bar COUIl-
cil makes any effective rules for the purpose, the rules made by 
the Central Government would cease to be in force on a notification 
issued in this behalf. 
4. There are some practising lawyers in Tripura, Manipur and 
other parts of India who are not legal practitioners under the Legal 
Practitioners Act, 1879 or the Bombay Pleaders' Act, 1920. While 
the Act provides for the issue or renewal of certificates of practice 

4 
to legal practitioners under these Acts, difficulties have arisen in 
the case of lawyers to whom oth_er laws apply. Opportunity is 
being taken to remove this difficulty by making a minor amend-
ment in section 68(4) of the Act. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve these objectives. 
Nftr Da.mj 
!"he 8th August, 1962. A. K. SEN. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Under sections 15 and 28 of the Advocates Act, State Bar Councils 
have been empowered to make rules in respect of the matters speci-
fied therein. Under the proposed section 60, the Central Government 
is being vested with powers to make rules in respect of any Of those 
matters. This ii an enabling and transitional proviSion. The Central 
Government may exercise the power in respeet of any matter until 
rules in ntspect of that matter have been made by the State Bu 
COWlCil and the rules made by the Central Government would r81habi 
in foree ollly -so long as eftective rUleS are not made by the State Bat 
Council. 
2. ~e delegation of legislative power is thus of a normal <:;hv~. 
ter. 

• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE ADVOCATES ACT, 1961 
(25 OF 1961) 
• • • • 
58. (1) Where a State Bar Council has not been constituted under Special 
this Act or where a State Bar Council so constituted is unable to ~:i=d! 
perform its functions by reason of any order of a court or otherwise, ~.itional 
the functions of that Bar Councilor of any Committee thereof, in period. 
so far as they relate to the admission and enrolment of advocates, 
shall be performed by the High Court in accordance with the pro-
visions of this Act. 
(2) Until Chapter IV comes into force, a State Bar Council or a 
High Court performing the functions of a State Bar Council may 
enrol any person to be an advocate on a State roll, if he is qualified 
to be so enrolled under this Act, notwithstanding that no rules have 
been made under section 28 or that the rules so made have not bP.en 
approved by the Bar Council of India, and every person so enrolled 
shall, until that Chapter comes into force, be entitled to all the 
rights of practice conferred on an adv~3te under section 14 of the 
38 of 1926. Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, every per-
~ who, immediately before the 1st day of December, 1961, was 
an advocate on the roll of any High Court under thE' Indian Bar 
38 of 1926. Councils Act, 1926 or who has been enrolled as an advocate under 
this Act shall, until Chapter IV comes into force, be '!!nt.itled as of 
right to practise in the Supreme Court, subject to the rules made 
by ~e Supreme Court in this behalf. 
(4) Notwithstanding the repeal by subo-section (2) of section 50 
18 of I879. of the provisions of the Legal Practitioners Act, 1879 or of the Bom-
~ kc bay Pleaders Act, 1920, relating to the admission and enrolment of 
~. of legal practitioners, the provisions of those Acts and any rules made 
thereunder in so far as they relate to the issue and renewal of a 
certificate to a legal practitioner authorising him to practise shall 
have effect until Chapter IV comes into force and, accordingly, every 
certificate issued or renewed to a legal practitioner (who is not 
enrolled as an advocate under this Act) which is or purports to be 
issued or renewed under the provisions of either of the aforesaid 
Acts during the period beginning with the 1st day of December, 
1961 and ending with the date on which Chapter IV comes into force 
shall be deemed to have been validly issued or renewed. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
Bll.L 
further to amend the Advocates Act, 1961
(Shri Jawaharla/. Nehru, Prime Minister.) 
•