AB INTRODUCED. IN LoK SABHA ON 
• 3 OC1 196~ 
Bm No 71 of 1961 
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL. 1964 
BILL 
further to amend the Representation of the 'People Act, 1951. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the- Fifteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Representation of the People Short 
(Second Amendment) Act, 1964. title. 
43 of 1951. 5 !. In Part VIn of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, Insertion 
after section 145, the following Chapter and sections shall be inser- of new 
ted namely: _ Chapter 
10 
20 of 1963. IS 
, and sec. 
tions after 
section 
"CHAPTER IV 145. 
Powers of Election CommiB.rion in connection with lnquirie.'f as to 
Disqualifications of Member, 
146. (1) Where in connection with the tendering of any Powers Of 
opinion to the President under article 103 or, 8.& the case may Election 
be, under sub-section (4) of section 14 of the Government of Commis. 
Union Territories Act, 1963, or to the Governor under article sion. 
192, the Election CommiBsioil COD.IiderB it neceuary or proper 
to make an inquiry, and the Commtaaton Is sat1dad that on the 
basis of the aftldavits filed and the documents produced in such 
inquiry by the parties concerned of their own accord, it cannot 

State-
metlta 
made by 
persoDS 
to the 
Election 
Commis-
sion. 
2 
come to a decisive OpInIOn on the matter which is being in-
quired into, the Commission shall have, for the purposes of such 
inquiry, the powers of a civil court, while trying a suit under 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. in respect of the following 
matters, namely:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any 
person and examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any docu-
ment or other material object producible as evidence; 
5 of 1908. 
5 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 10 
(d) requisitioning any public record or a copy thereof 
from any court or office; 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of wit-
nesses or documents. 
(2) The Commission shall aIeo have the power to require 15 
any person, subject to any privilege which may be claimed by 
that person under any law for the time being in force, to fur-
nish information on such points or matters as in the opinion 
of the Commission may be useful for, or relevant to, the s~bject 
matter of the inqUiry: l 20 
(3) The Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court 
and when any such offence as is deeeribed in section 1'75, 
section 178, section 179, section 180 or section 228 of the Indian 
Penal Code, is committed in the view or presence of the 45 of 1860, 
Commission, the Commissian may,', aftier recording the facts 2S 
constituting the oftence and the statement of the accused as 
provided for in the Code of CrimiDalProcedure, 1898,forWard 5 of 1888. 
the case to a magistrate having jurisdiction to try the same and 
the magistrate to whom any such case is forwarded shall ''Pro-
ceed to hear the complaint against the accused. as if the case 30 
had been forwarded to him under section 482 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898. 
(4) Any proceeding before the Commission shan be deemed 
to be a judi,cial proceeding within the meaning of section 193 
and section 228 of the Indian Penal Code. 35 
14M.. No .tatemeat asde .,. a ,pemm in the -coane of 
pvmg eYidenee before 1IIe Electtcm C-,,".lMicm 8bal1 abject 
him to, or ~ URd. .- him m, 0, eiri err erimiDa1 pro-
eeecHng tEIICePl II pN d II ,tioa for fPving.fa!le wJlleue by such 
sta' lit: ,,' 

3 
Provided that the statement-
(11) is made in reply to a question which he is required 
by the Commission to answer, or 
(b) is relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry. 
S 146B. The Election Commission shall have the power to re- Procedure 
10 
IS 
gulate its own proeedUl'e (includiRg the fixing of places and to be 
time.- 11f1ts sittings and deeiding whether to sit in public Ql' in followed 
) by the 
private . Election 
Commis-
sion. 
146C.No suit, prosecution or other lelal proceeding shall lie Protection 
against theCommiseion or any person acting W)der the direction of acti?n 
()f the Commission in respect of anything whioh is in good faith =n 10 
done or intended to be done in punllance of the fofeaoing pro- faith. 
visions of this Chapter or of any order made thereunder 01' in res-
pect of the tendering of any opinion by the Commission to the 
President or, as the case may be, to the GovemeN' or in respect 
of the publication, by or under the authority of the Commiasion 
of any such opinion, pape.r or proceedings.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
If any question arises as to whether a member of Parliament or 
of a State Legislature (including the Legislature of a Union territory) 
has become subject to any disqualifications specified in article 102 
(Parliament) or article 191 (State Legislature) or section 14(1) of the 
Government of Union Territories A~t, 1963 (Union Territory Assem-
bly), the question is referred to the President under article 103, or 
under section 14(3) of the Government of Union Territories Act, or 
to the Governor under article 192 for decision and the President or, 
as the case may be, the Governor is required to obtain the opinion 
of the Election Commission on the question and decide it in accord-
ance with such opinion. 
Before the Election Commission can give a considered opinion on 
such a reference, the Commission may naturally require further rele-
vant materials besides the bare averments made by the person who 
has raised the question and other interested parties. But neither the 
Constitution nor the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963, nor 
the Representation of the People Act, 1951, prescribes the procedure 
to be followed by the Commission in this regard. While the Commis-
sion has been charged with the responsibility of tendering a binding 
opinion on the question of disqualification of a member, it has not 
been vested with the necessary legal powers which would enable it 
to hold an adequate inquiry into the issues involved. The allega-
tions made in such cases are of serious consequence to the parties 
concerned and often involve questions of great public importance. 
In the absence of the necessary legal powers in this behalf the Elec-
tion Commission is very often handicapped in the matter of finding 
out the true state of affairs in relation to an alleged disqualification. 
The Commission has experienced this difficulty in several cases in-
cluding a recent one in which the Commission has expressly recom-
mended that it should be vested with the powers of a civil court as 
under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952, such as the power to 
summon witnesses and examine them on oath, the power to compel 
the production of documents, the power to issue commissions for the 
examination of witnesses, etc. A similar recommendation was made 
by the Commission in Chapter XXIV of its Report on the Second 
General Elections in India, 1957, Vol. I. 

5 
The recommendation of the Election Commission appears quite 
reasonable. It is accordingly proposed that when in any inquiry in 
connection with the disqualification of a member of Parliament or of 
a State Legislature the Election Commission is satisfied that it can-
not come to a .decisive opinion on the .basis of· the ~davits filed and 
documents produced in the inquiry by the parties concerned of their 
own accord, then, the Commission shall have th~ powers of a civil 
court as mentioned in the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952. 
The Bill is intended to give effect to this proposal by inserting a 
new Chapter IV in Part VIII of the Representation of the People Act, 
1951. . . . 
NEW DELHI; A. K. SEN. 
The 29th September, 1964. 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 195 I. 
(Shri Asoke K. Sen, 
Minister of LaID) 