~13 of 1978. 
As INTRODUcm IN LoK SABHA ON 
BID No. 71 of 1979 
THE HINDUSTAN TRACTORS LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND 
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) AMENDMENT BILL, 1979 
A 
BILL 
to .umend the Hindu.stan TractOT8 Limited (Acqu.is~tion and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Actl 1978. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year Q'f the Republic of 
. India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Hindustan Tractors Limited (AcquiSltion Short 
ana Transfer of Undertakings) Amendment Act, 1979. title. 
S I. In section 5 of the Hindustan Tractors Limited (Acquisition and Amend. 
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1978 (hereinafter referred to as the ment of 
principal Act), in sub-section (2), in clause (b), the following shall be, sectionS. 
and shall be deemed always to have been, inserted at the end. n~mely:-
10 
", but excluding loans advanced, on or after such date, by a 
bank to the Company to the extent such loans have been utilised by 
the Company for the re-payment of, Or the payment of interest on, 
secured loans advanced to the Company by a bank at any time before 
such date". 
3. In the Schedule to the principal Act, in CategdtrY III. aJter the 
'15 wo~ "Secured loans", the following shall be, and shall be deemed al-
ways to have been, inserted, namely:-
", including loans advenced, on or after the date of taking over, 
by a bank to the Company to the extent such loans have been utilised 
by the Company for the re-payment of, or the payment of interest 
on, secured loans advanced to the company by a bank at any time 
before the date of taking over". 
Amen!-
mentof 
theSehe-
dule. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Government of India assumed the management of Hindustan. 
Tractors Limited, Vishwamitri, Baroda in March, 1973 under the Indus-
tries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, and appointed. Gujarat . 
Agro Industries Corporation as its Authorised Controller for a period of 
five years. The undertakings of the Company were acquired by the . 
Central Government with effect from the 1st April, 1978, on the enact-· 
ment of the Hindustan Tractors Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1978. The undertakings were vested on the same 
date in the State Government of Gujarat and a new company in the 
name of Gujarat Tractor Corporation Ltd. has also been formed to carry 
on the activity. \ 
2. Section 5 of the Act specifies the manner in which the liabilities 
of the Hindustan Tractors Limited prior to the taking over of the' 
management of the Company and after the taking over of the manage-
ment of the Company should be taken care of. According to this section, 
liabilities arising in respect inter alia of secured. loans advanced' by a 
bank to the Company before the date of taking over shall be enforceable 
against the Company_ According to Part B of the schedule to the Act, 
secured loans relating to the pre-take over management period fall 
within Category III priority and the intention of the Act was that the 
secured loans advanced by banks to the Company before the take over 
of the Company should be met from out of the amount payable to the 
Company for the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government 
of the undertakings of the Company 'LUlder section 8 of the Act. It was 
envisaged that the secured loans advanced by the State Bank of· India 
to the Company before the take over of the Company would qualify for 
payment under Category III of Part B of the Schedule and this consi-
deration was taken into account \in determining the amount which has 
been specijied in section 8 as the amount payable to the Company. On 
further examination, it has been discovered that in view of the account-
ing treatment given in the books of the State Bank of India by reaaoD 
of the adjustment of the loans given by the bank after the take over 
against the secured loans given by the Bank to the COJnp8Jly before the . 
take over, all the amounts due to the ,State Bank have to be traate4 JB . 
post-take over loana. The post-take over loaDS which were -advanoeci 
by the State Bank Of India to the extent they wer.e utiliaed tor meeting 
the pre-take over secured loans advanced by the bank to the Company 
shaubl be entitled. to the same treatment to which the pre-take over ... 
seclIcJled lams whtch were so defrayed wouid ha\le been entitled. 'nle 
amendments ,roposed in the Bill He for the purpose Of securing this 
pnation. 
NEw DzLJU; 
i'he 7th May, 1979. 
1 
GEO.RGE FERNAND.ES., 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS .!tOM THE HINDUSTAN TRAC'l'OBS l..IM:rrED (ACQUISITION AND 
TRANsFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1978. 
_ (13 OF 1978) 
II! ~. 
• • • 
S. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Any liability arising in respect of-
• • • • • 
(b) loans advanced by a bank to the Company (together wit'l 
interest due thereon) on or after the date o~ taking over; 
'. • • • 
shall, on and from tbeappointed day, be the liability of the Central 
Government, or the State Government, or the Government company 
aforesaid and shall be discharged by the Central Government or the 
State Government, or the Government company aforesaid as and when 
repayment of such loans becomes due or as and when S'Ueh wages, sala-
ries and other dues and debt become due and payable. 
• • • • • 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See sections 5, 20, 21, 22, 24 and 26) 
ORDER OF PBIOIUTIES FOR THE DISCHARGE OF LIABILITIES OF THE COMPANY 
• • 
Category III _ 
Secured loans . 
• • 
I 
, 
/ 
• * • 
• • • 
Company 
to be 
liable for 
certain 
prior 
liabiIi-
ties. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Hirniustan. Tractors Limited (Acquisition and Transfer, ot 
Undertakings) Actl 1978. 
\ 
\ 
(Shri George Fernandes, 
Minister of Industry.) 