10K SABHA 
CORRIGE~A 
to 
THE INLA~ STEAM-VESSELS (.AMENDMENT) BILL, 1977 
eIo baas introduced In Lok Sabha 7 
1. Page~, line 29,-
~ "(tii)" read "(lil)" 
2. Page 3,-
for lines 2 and 3, -
read II (ii) after sub-section (2), the following 
---- sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-" 
3. Page 4, in the marginal heading to clause 13,-
after "Insert ion" insert "of" 
4. Page 4, line 10,-
for "prope lId" ~ "prope lled" 
5. Page 7, in the marginal heading to section 44C. ,-
~~ "ReCO\i.1ry" insert "of" 
6. Page 8, lines 31 and 32,-
for "grammer" read "grammar" - -
7. Page 17, line 21,-
8. 
i2! ·steam-vessels" ~ "steam-vessel" 
Page 20, line 4,-
for "stem-vessels" read "Steam-vessels" -
9. Page 22, in the marginal heading to section 25,-
m ·Certicates" ~ "Certificates" , 
10. Page 21; line 17,-
~ n steam-vassels" read "steam-vessels· -
11. G,orrect line numbers on pages 14 and 15. 
NEW DELHI, 
Ju la 19. 1977 
Asa ha 28, 1899 (Saka) 

1 of 1917. 
As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA ON 
: ~~ 
, .. 
........ 
"'.('~. ~ ~ 
.. ' 
Bill No. 11 of 1977 
THE INLAND STEAM-VESSELS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1977 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Inland Steam-vessels Act, 1917 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India as fQIlows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Inland Steam-vessels (Amendment) Short 
Act, 1977. title and 
commence-
ment. 
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govemment 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and difterent dates 
may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. 
Z. In the Inland Steam-vessels Act, 1917· (hereinatter referred to as 
the principal Act), in the long title, for the words "Inland Steam-vessels", 
10 the words "Inlaru;l Vessels" shall be substituted. 
3. In the preamble to the principal Act, for the words "inland steam-
vessels", the words "inland vessels" shall be substituted. 
4. In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub-section "(1), for the words 
"Inland Steam-vessels", the words "Inland Vessels" shall be substituted. 
IS 5. Throughout the principal Act, except in the long title, preamble and 
section I, for the words "steam-vessel" and "steam-vessels", wherever they 
occur, the words "mechanically propelled vessel" and "mechanically pro-
pelled vessels" shall, respectively, be substituted. 
lunend-
ment of 
long 
tiUe. 
Amend-
ment of 
preamble. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 1. 
Substitu-
tion of 
references 
to steam-
vessel by 
mechani-
clIUy pro-
pelled 
vessel. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 2. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 7. 
Amend-
ment of. 
section 
19& 
Omission 
ot' 
sectiOn 
19G. 
Amend· 
mentof 
section 
)9 t. 
2 
t. Section 2 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section 
(1) thereof, and-
(i) in sub-section (1) as so renumbered-
(a) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, S 
namely:-
'(a) "inland vessel" or "inland mechanically propelled 
vessel means a mechanically propelled vessel which ordina-
rily plies on any inland water;'; 
(b) clause (2) shall be lettered I1S clause (b); 
(c) after clause (b) as so lettel'ed, the following clause shall 10 
be inserted, namely:-
I (e) "mechanically propelled vessel" means every des-
cription of vessel propelled wholly or in part by electricity, 
steam or other mechanical powerj'; 
(d) 'clauses (3) and (4) shaU be lettered as clauses (d) and IS 
(e) respectively; 
(e) clause (5) shall be omitted; 
(f) clauses (6), (7) and (8) shall be lettered as clauses (1) 'I; 
(g) and (h) respectivelyj , 
(ii) after sub-section (1) as SO renumbered, the following sui 20 
section shall be inserted, namely: - .1 
"(2) Any reference to the Inland Steam-vessels Act, 1917, in' 10f 1917, 
any law for the time being in force or in any instrument or other 
document shall be construed as a reference to the Inland V~ssels 
Act, 1917.". 25 
7. In section 7 of the principal Act,-
(i) in item (iii), the word ~'and" occuring at the end shall be 
omitted; 
(ii) after item (tii) , ,the following item shall be inserted, name-
~:- 30 
"(iiia) the nature and quantum of cargo whi~h themechani-
cally propelled vessel is, in the judgment of the surveyor, fit to 
carry; and". 
8. In section 19E of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words 7 of 1913. 
and figures "registered under the Indian Companies Act, 1913", the 35 
words .and figures "within the meaning of section 3 of the Companies Act. 1 of 1956. 
1956" shall be substituted. . 
'.Section 19G of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
10. In section 19 I of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (2)- ' 40 
(a) for the words "inland waters of more than one State", the 
words "inland waters of any other State" 3hall be substituted; 
~ . , ' 

" 3 
(b) the proviso shall be omitted; 
(ii) after item (iii), the following item shall be inserted, name';' 
serted, namely:-
"(3) When an inland mechanically propelled vessel registered 
in one State has been kept in another State for a period exceeding 
twelve months, the owner or master of the vessel shall make an 
application under section 19K to the registering authority, within 
whose jurisdiction the vessel then is, for the transfer 01 registry' 
from the regj.gtering authority of the place where the vessel ii 
10 registered.". 
15 
11. In section 19K of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "the registering autho'ity of 
theplaee where the vessel is registered", the words "the register-
ing authority of the State in which the vessel is kept" shall be subs-
tituted; . 
(ii) in sub-section -(2), for the words "the registering authority 
of the intended place of registry with a copy of aU particulars relating 
to the vessel", the words "the registering authority of the place where 
the vessel is registered" shall be substituted; 
20 (iii.) for sub-sections (3) and (4), the following sub-sections shall 
.as 
35 
be substituted, namely:-
"(3) The certificate of registration in respect of the vessel 
shall be delivered up to the registering' authority of the intended 
place of registry along with the application. 
(4) On receipt of the application under sub-section (1) and 
the prescribed fee, if U.1Y, the registering authority 0.£ the intended 
place of registry shall enter in its register book all the particulars 
relating to the vessel and grant a fresh certificate of registration, 
in respect of the vessel and thenceforth such vessel shall be con-
sidered as registered at the new place of registry. 
(5) A State Government may make rules under section 19R 
requiJ;'ing the owner or master of an inland mechanically propelled 
vessel not registered within the State which is bro~ght into or is, 
for the time being in the State, to furnish to a,prescribed authority 
in the· State such information with respect· to the inland mechani~ 
cally propelled vessel and its registration as may be pre~cribed.". 
12. In section 19M of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in the pro-
v.iso, ,fo~ the words and figures "also registered under the Merchant Ship-
5? and 68 ping, Act, i'894, as amen,ded by any subsequ~nt enactment", the words and 
V1ct., c. 80 40 ftgures "registered. or deemed to be registered under the Merchant Ship-
oM of li58. ping Act, 1958" shall be substituted. 
Amend· 
ment of 
section 
19K. 
Amend~ 
,m,nt, of 
~.tctlon 
~UM. 

insertion i:i. After section 19Q of the principal Act, the following section lihall 
new He- be inserted, namely:-
tion after 
Bection 
19Q. 
Mortg.ge 
01. mecha· 
nicall,. 
propelled 
venel 
:Ir share; 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
19B. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
ilrt'er 
section 
19R. 
Certain 
certi1lc-
ates iasued 
under 
Merchant 
Shipping 
Act to be 
valid 
under 
this Act. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
:22. 
'I9QA. The provisions of sections 47, 48, 49, 50, 51,· 52 and 53 of 
the MerChant Shipping Act, 1958, shall mutatis mutandis apply, in 
relation to the mortgage of a mechanically propelled veq,1el as they 
apply in relation to ships, subject to the following modifications, 
namely:-
(a) in sections 47, 48. 49, 50. 51, .52 and 53, references to 
"ship", "registrar" and "register book", wherever they occur, shall, 
respectively, be construed as references to "mechanically propelld 
•• of 1915. 
S 
vessel", "registering authority" and "book of registration"; 10 
(b) in section 47, in sub-section (1), for the words "the 
registrar of the ship's port of registry shall record it in the 
register book", the words "the registering authority shall record 
it in the book of registration" shall be substituted.'. 
14. In section 19R of the principal Act! in sub-section (2) ,- IS 
(a) after clause <1), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(Ja) prescribe the authority and provide for furnishing to 
such authority the information with respect to the inland mecha-
nically propelled vessel and its registration under sub-section (5) ~o 
of section 19K;"; 
(b) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(ga) provide for the form of instrument creating a mortgage 
of a mechanically propelled vessel or a share therein or transfer 2S 
of any lIuch mortgage;". 
15. After section 19R of the prinCipal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"198. Every certificate of registry and every certiftcate of survey 
issued in respect of a mechanically propelled vessel under the 30 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, shall be valid and effective as a certift- '" of 1958. 
cate of registration and certificate of survey, as the case may be, 
issued under this Act and the relevant provisions of this Act shall 
apply in relation to such vessel as they apply to an inland mechani-
cally propelled vessel registered under this Act.". 35 
16. In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words 
and figures "before the first day of April, 1890", the words and ftgures 
"for a period of three years before the first day of November, 1956" shall 
be SUbstituted. 40 

-. 
7 of 1884-
41 of 1958 
1 of 1859. 
57&58 
Viet., e. eo. 
44 of 1958. 10 
7 of 1884. 
57&58 
Viet., e. eo. 
44 Of 1958. 
7 of 1884. 
44 of 1958. 
10f 1859. 
57&58 
V1ct., e. GO. 
44 of 1958. 
7 of 1884. 
57&58 
Viet., c 60. 
44 of 1958. 
IS 
20 
2S 
30 
35 
i1.fa seetion 22A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in claUse (b), 
for U. words and figures "certificate granted under the Indian Steam-
ships &t, 1884", the words and figures "certificate granted or deemed to 
be grated uncier the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958" shall be substituted. 
II. In seetion 25 of the principal Act,-
(i) in clause (4), for the words and figures "certificate granted 
under the Indian Merchant Shipping Act, 1859, or granted under, or 
continued in force by, the Merchant Shipping Act, 1894", the words 
and figures "certificate granted or deemed to be granted under the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958" shsll be substituted; 
(ii) in clause ('b), for the words a'nd figures "or the Indian 
Steam-ships Act, 1884, or granted under, or continued in forcE' by, the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1894", the words and figures "or granted or 
deemed to be granted under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958" shall 
be substituted. 
19. In section 26 of the principal Act, in clause (b), for the words and 
figures "certificate granted under the Indian Steam-ships Act, 1884", the 
words and figures "certificate granted or deemed to be granted under the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958" shall be substituted. 
20. In section 28 of the principal Act,-
(i) in clause (4), for the words and figures "certificate granted 
under the Indian Merchant Shipping Act, 1859, or granted under, or 
continued in force by, the Merchant Shipping Act, 1894", the words 
and figures "certificate granted or deemed to be granted under the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in clause (b), for the words and figures "certificate granted 
under the Indian Steam-ships Act, 1884, or an engineer's certificate 
granted under, or continued in force by, the Merchant Shipping Act, 
1894", the words and figures "certificate granted or deemed to be 
granted under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958" shall be SUbstituted. 
21. In sub-seel'lon (1) of section 33 of the principal Act, for the por-
tion beginning with the words "If a, formal investigation" and ending with 
the words "the State Government may", the follOWing shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"Whenever the State Government is satisfied that it is necessary 
or expedient to have a formal investigation into the faCts of any case 
reported under section 32 01' otherwise brought to its notice, the State 
Government may". 
Amend.-
IUIlt of 
JflCtiOD 
22A. 
AsDeau:l-
met of 
.ectiOD 
25. 
Amend. 
ment of 
H:Ction 
28. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
28. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 33. 

lr.aerUon 
of MW 
Chaptu 
IVA. 
~, 
ot 'OJ' 
reD\o ... al 
ot' Wreck 
imped~ 
ing 
naviga-
tion, etc. 
Rellloval 
of obs-
truction 
iniDland 
wa~er. 
Z2. After Chapter IV of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall 
be iliserted, namely:- . 
"CHAPTER IVA 
REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTIONS AND SIMILAR HAZARDS IN NAVIGATION 
44A. (1) If any mechanically propelled vessel or other vessel is S 
WTecked, stranded or sunk in any Llland. watec is or is:likely,to be-
come obstruction, impediment or danger to the safe and convenient 
n~vigation or use of inland wa,ter or the landing place or embarkment 
or par.t thereof, any officer empowered by the state Government by 
notification in the Official Gazette in this behalf (h~reinafter' in this 10 
Chapter referred to as competent officer) shall cause the veSsel to be 
raised, removed, blown up or otherwise destroyed as the circum-
stances may warrant. 
(2) If any property recovered by a competent officer acting under' 
sub-section (1) is unclaimed or the person claiming it fails to pay IS 
reason_ble expenses incurred by the competent officer under that sub-
section and a further sum of twenty-five per cent. of the amount of 
such expenses, the competent officer may sell the property by public 
auction, if the property is of a perishable nature, forthwith, and if 
it is not of a perishable nature, at any time not less than .two months 20 
after the recovery thereof. 
(3) The expenses and further sum aforesaid shall be payable to 
the competent officer out of the sale proceeds of the property, and 
the balance shall be paid to the person entitled to the property re-
covered, or, if no such person appears and claims the balance, shall 2S 
be held in deposit for payment, without interest, to the peno'n there-
after establishing his right thereto: 
Provided that the person makes his claim within three yesrs 
from the.date of the sale .. 
(4) Where the sale proceeds of the property are Dot suftlcient to 30, 
meet the expenses and further' sum aforesaid, the owner of the vessel 
at the time the vessel was wrecked, stranded or sunk shall be liable 
to pay the deficiency to the competent officer on demand, and if the 
deficiency be not paid within one month of such demand, the compe-
tent officer may recover the deficiency from such owner as if it were 3S 
an arrear of land revenue. 
4413. (1) The competent oftlcer may remQve, or, cause to be re-
moved, any timber', raft or other thing, fioating or being in any part 
of the inland water, which, in his opipion, obstructs or impedes the 40 
free ,navigation thereof or the lawful use of any land1ng:place or 
embarkment or part thereof. 
r 
(2) 1'he owner of any such timber, raft or other things~al1 be 
liable to pay the reasonable expenses of the removal thereof, and if 
such owner' or any other person has without lawful excuse caused 4S 
any such obstruction or impediment, or . cause . any public nuisan.ce 
affeotmg or' likely to effect luch, free navigation or ·lawful use, he 
shall also be 'punishable with fine wbichmay extend to one hundred 
. rupees. 

s 
10 
IS 
20 
52 
7 
(3) The competent officer or any magistrate having jurisdiction 
over the offence may cause any such nuisance to be abated. 
44C. If the owner of any such timber', raft or other thing, or the 
person who has caused any such obstruction, impediment or public 
nuisance, 'neglects to pay tbe reasonsble eXpenses incurred in the 
removal thereof, within one week after demand or within fourteen 
days after such removal has been notified in the OffiCial Gl;tzette or 
in such other manner as the State Government may, by general ot' 
special order, direct the competent officer may cause such timber, raft 
or other thing or the ma1'erials of any public nuisance, so removed, 
or so much thereof as may be necessary, to be sold by public auction 
and may retain all' the expenses of such removal 'and sate out of the 
'proceeds of the sale, and shall pay thesui'plus of snchproceeds or 
deliver so much of the thing or materials as may remain' un~ld, to 
the person entitled 1'0 receive the same nnd if no such person appears, 
shall caUSe the same to be kept and deposited in such manner as the 
State Government directs, and may, if necessary, from time'tO time, 
realise the expenses of keeping the same, togethet'wit'h tlu,{expenses 
of sale, or further sale of so much of the thing or materials as may 
remain unsold. 
44D. (1) If any obstruction Or impediment to the navigation of 
any inland water has beenlawftilly made or has become lawful by 
reason of the long continuance of such obstruction or impediment or 
otherwise, the competent officer sh111 report the !lame foJ" the infor-
mation of the State Government and shall, with the sanction of the 
State Government, cause the same to be removed or altered, making 
reasonable compensation to the person suffering damage by such 
removal or alteration. 
(2) Any dispute arisin~ out of or conrernin[! such compen~ation 
30 shall be determined accort:Hn~ to the law relatin~ to like disputes in 
the ca.c;e of land required for public purposes. 
44E. (1) If any mechanically propelled vessel hook,. or arts fouled 
.in any of the buoys or mooringc;laid down by or hv the 1'luthority of 
the State Government in any part of inland water, the mast'er of such 
35 vessel shall not, 'nor shall any other person, €'xcept in the case of 
emergency,lift the buoy ot' moorin~ for the purpose orunhookine; or 
getting clear from the !lame without the assisttmee of the- competent 
officer. 
(2) The competent officer immediatelv on receivinrt il'lformatinn 
40 of such accident, shall assist and superintend the clearfnrt of such 
vessel and the master of the vessel shall. on demand, pay such re,· 
sonable expenses as may be incurred in dearing the same. 
(3) Any master or other person offending altainst the provisions 
of this section shall, for every such ('"enee be punishable with fine 
45 Which may extend 'to one hundred rupees.". 
23. Tn section 45 of the principal Act, after clause (b), the fonowing 
clausc'sllnllbe inserted; namely:-
"(bb) if the holder of such certificate is proved to have deRert.,d 
his vessel or has absented himself, without l~ave and without sufficient 
50 reason, from his vessel or from his duty; or". 
Recovery 
expenae& 
Of remo. 
val. 
Removai 
of lawful 
obstruc. 
tion. 
Fouling -
otGovern-
ment 
moortnp. 
Amend-
ment of 
sectlon 43. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 53. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
ft4A. 
Insertion 
of new 
Chapter 
VIA. 
Applica-
tion of 
Chapter 
VIII 
of the 
Motor 
Vehicles 
Act, 1939, 
in 
relation 
to the 
insurance 
ofmeeha-
nically 
propelled 
vessels. 
8 
.-.~~ .. 
24. In section 53 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), for the words 
and figures "section 59 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898", the 5 of 1898. 
words and figures "section 43 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973" 2 of 1974. 
shall be substituted. 
25. In section 54A of the principal Act,- S 
(i) in sub-section (1), in clauses (a), (b) and (c), for the words 
"per mile", the words "per kilometre" shall be substituted; 
(it) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be in-
serted, namely:-
"(3) In case of any dispute relating to the fixa.tion of the 10 
maximum or the minimum rate per kilometre which may be 
charged in respect of any class of passengers or of freight on 
goods of any description carried in inland mechanically propelled 
vessel between any stations lying in two States, anyone of the 
States ma~ report the matter to the Central Government who IS 
shall decide the same.". 
28. After Chapter VI of the princ-ipal Act, the following Chapter shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"CHAPTER VIA 
INSURANCE OF MECHANICALLY PROPELLED VESSELS AGAINST THIRD PARTY RISKS 20 
Me. The provisions of Chapter VIII of the Motor Vehicles Act, 
1939, shall mutatis mutandis apply, in relation to the insurance of 4 of 1939. 
mechanically propelled vessels al;{ainst third party risks as they apply 
in relation to motor vehicles, subject to the following modifications. 
namely:- 25 
(a) throughout in Chapter VIII,-
(i) references to "motor vehicle" or "vehicle" shall be 
construed as references to "mechanically propelled vessel"; 
(ii) references to "public place" shall be construed as re-
ferences to "inland water", 30 
and such other consequential amendments as the rules of gram-
mer may require shall also be made; 
(b) in section 94,-
(i) in sub-section (3), for clause (e), the following 
clause shall be substituted, namely:- 35 
II (e) any State Water Transport Undertakin/it pro-
viding inland water transport service, where such Under-
taking is carried on by-
(i) the Central Government or a State Govern-
ment; 40 
(ti) any local authority or. any corporation or· 
company owned by the Central Government or one 
or more State Governments or by the Central Gov-
ernment and one or more State Governments:"; 

10 
IS 
35 
• 
(ii) in the E3:planation, in item (iii), for the wordS 
IIState Transport", the words "State Water Transport" shall 
be substituted;. 
(C) in section 95,-
(i) in Bub-section (J),-
(A) in clause (b), in sub-clause (ii), for the words 
"of a publi;c service vehicle", the words and brackets 
"of a mechanically propelled vessel used or adapted to 
be used for the carriage of passengers for hire or reward 
(hereinafter referred to as a public service vessel)" mall 
be substituted, 
(8) in the proviso, in c14use (i), for su5-ciausei 
(b) and (c), the following sub-clauses shall be substi .. 
tuted, namely:-
"(b) if it is a public service vessel, engaged as 
a conductor of the vessel or in examining tickets on 
the vessel, or 
(e) if it is a vessel used or adapted for the car-
riage of goods solely or in addition to passenger. 
(hereinafter referred to as goods service vessel) , 
being carried in the vessel, or"; 
(it) in sub-s~tion (2) ,-
(A) in clause (a), for the words "goods vehicle, a 
limit of fifty thousand rupees", the words "goods service 
vessel, a limit of two lakhs and fifty thousand rupees;' 
.hall be substituted, 
(8) in clause (b),-
(1) in sub-clause (i), for the words "flft)' 
thousand rupees", the words "two lakhs and fifty 
thouS81l'd rupees" shall be substituted; 
(2) in 8ub-clause (it) ,-
(a) in paragraph (3), for the words "one 
lakh··, the words "five lakhs" shall be substituted; 
(b) in paragraph (4), the words uwhere the 
. vehicle is a motor cab, and five .thousand rupees 
for each individual passenger in any other case" 
shall be omitted; 
(e) in clause (d), for the words~'a limit of rupees 
two thousand", the words "a limit of_ thousand rupees" 
shall be substituted; 

Duty of 
drlverin 
case of 
lICCldent 
and 
Injury 
to_ 
penon. 
, ' 
to 
(') in Section :96,-
(i) in sub-section (2), in clause (b) ....... 
(A) for sub~lause (i). the following sub-clause 
ahall be substituted, namely:-
"(i) a condition e:xcludiftg the use of the, 
mechanically propelled vessel-
(u) for hire or reward. Where the vessel 
it on the date of the contract of insurance, a 
vessel not covered bya certificate of registra-
tion, or 10 
(b) for organised racine or speed testing; 
or 
(c) for a purpo~e not. 'allowed by :the 
certificate of registtation litlder which the 
vessel is used, where the vessel is a public ser- IS 
vice vessel or a goods service vessel, or"; 
(B) in sub-<:laule (ii)-
(1) for the wolrds "not 'duly licensed". the worda 
and fiaures "not holdine a cer,tiftcate granted uncler 
Chltpter XII of the Inland Vessels Act, 1917" shall 20 101191'7. 
be substituted, 
(Z) for the wdrd's ". driving licence", the 
words and figures "a certificate granted under 
Chapter III of the 'Inland Vessels Act, 1917" shall 1 of 181'7. 
'be substituted; 25 
(ii) in sub-section (2A) ,after the 'words "obtained 
from a Court", the words "in the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir or" shall be 'inserted; 
(iii) ,in the proviso to sub.section (2A) and in sub· 
'section (6), after the words "corresponding law", the words 30 
"of the State of Jammu and Kashmir or" shall be inserted; 
(e) after section 105, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"105A. 'When any perSOR is injured or any property of 
third 'patty is damaged as a result of an accident in which 3' 
an inland mechanically propelled vessel is involved, the 
maSter or the driver of the vessel or other person in charge 
of the' vessel shall-
(4) take all reasonable steps to secure medical 
attention for the injured person, and, if necessary, con- 40 
vf!Y him to the neatest hospital, unless the injured 
~!<SOiIl' or his guardian in eaae he "is ' a minor. desires 
otherwise; 

S 
1:l 
(b) give on demand by a police officer any infor-
mation required by him, or, if no police officer is present 
report the circumstances of the occurrence at the nearest 
police station as soon as possible, and in any case within 
twenty~foul' hours of the occurrenc."j 
(f) in section 106,-
(A) in sub-section (2), for the word and figures "section 
89", the word, figures and letter ''section l'05A" shall be subs-
tituted; 
[0 (8) in sub-section (2A) , in the proviso, for the words 
"transport vehicle", the words "public service vessel or goods 
aervice vessel" shall be substituted; 
(g) in section 107, for the words "whether by payment of a 
tax or otherwise for authority to use the vehicle in a public place 
IS to produce such evidence ~ s may be pre::;cI'ibed by those rules to 
the effect that either", th~ words "for a certificate of surveyor a 
certificate of registration in respeet of such vessel to produce 
IlUCh evidence as may be prescribed to the effect that either" shall 
'he substituted; 
20 (h) in section 108,-
(A) for the words "transport veh.i£le",wberever they 
occur, the words "public service vessel or goods service 
veuel" shall be substituted, and such other consequential 
,Jmendments as the rules of grammar may require shall also 
25 'be ,made; 
35 
(B) in sub-section (1), in clause (.) ,-
(1) for the words "twenty-five thousand rupees for 
the first ftfty vehicles", ,the words U oae lakh rupees for 
the ftrst ftfty mechanically propelled vessels" shall 
be substituted, 
(2) for the words "one hundred and, fifty thousand 
rupees", the words Utwo lakhs and ftfty thou~and rupees" 
shall be substituted; 
(i) for section 110 to section 110B, the following secttons 
,shall" -respectively, be substituted, namely:-
"110. (1) The State Government may, by notification in 
the omcial Gazette, constitute one or more Inland Vessels 
.t"'"(!idents Claims Tribunals (hereinafter referred to as the 
Claims Tribunals) for such area as may be specifted in the 
notification for the purpose of adjudicating upon claims for 
compensation in respect of accidents involving the death of, 
or bodily injury to, persons arising out o~ the use of mechani-
cally propelled vessels or damage to any property of a third 
party so arising, or both: 
Clailnl 
Tribu-
naIs • 

AppUca~ 
tion fot' 
compen. 
satlon. 
.\J 
12 
\ Provided that where such claim includes a claim for 
compensation in respect of damage to property exceeding 
rupees ten thousand the claimant may, at his option, refer 
the claim to a civil court for adjudication and where a refer-
ence is so made, the Claims Tribunal shall have no jurisdic- S 
tion to entertain any question relating to such. claim. 
(2) A Claims Tribunal shall 'Consist 01 such number of 
xnembers as the State Government may think fit to appoint 
and where it consists of two or more members,. one of them 
shall be appointed as the Chairman thereof. 10 
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as 
a member of a Claims Tribunal unless he-
(a) is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court, or 
(b) is, or has been, a District Judge, or 
(c) is qualified for appointment as a Judge of the IS 
High Court. 
(4) Where two or more Claims Tribunals are constituted 
for any area, the State Government may, ,by general or spe-
cial order, regulate the distribution of business among them. 
BOA. (1) An application for compensation arising out of 20 
an accident of the mture specified in sub-sectiO"n (1) of sec-
tion ·110 may be made-
«(I) by the person who has sustained the injury, or 
(b) whee c1eath has resulted from the accident, by 
all or any of the legal representatives of the deceased, or 25 
(c) by any agent duly authorised by the person in-
jured or all or any of the legal representatives of the 
deceased, as the case may be: 
Provided that where all the legal representatives of the 
deceased have not joined in any such application for com- 30 
pensation, the application shall bE! made on· behalf of or for 
the benefit of all the legal represeniatives of the deceased 
and the legal representatives who have not so joined, shall 
be impleaded as respondents to the application. 
(2) Every application under sub.section (1) shall be 35 
made to the Claims Tribunal having jurisdiction over the 
area in which thE! accident occurred, and shall be in such 
form and shall contain su~h particulars as may be prescribt'd. 
(3) No application for compensation under this section 
shall be entertained unless it is made within six months of 40 
the occurrence of the accident: 
Provided. that the Claims Tribunal may entertain the 
application after the expiry of the "Said period of six months 
if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented. by sum~ent 
caU$e from making the .-pplication m tilll~: - 45 
, 

1011923. 
I of 1898. 
20f 19'14. 
S 
10 
IS 
IJ 
llOAA. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Work-
men's Compensation Act, 1923, whare the death or bodily 
1njury to any person gives rise to a ~aim for compensation 
under this Act and also under the Workmen's Compensation 
Act, 1923, the person entitled to compensation may. claim 
such compensation under either of those Acts but not under 
,·both. 
llOB. On receipt of an application for compensation .made 
under section llOA, the Claims Tribunal shall, after giving 
the parties an opportunity of being heard, hold an inquiry 
into the claim and may make an award determining the 
amount of compensation which appears to it to be just and 
specifying the person Or persons to whom compensation shall 
be paid; and in making the award the Claims Trihunal shall 
specify the amount which shall be paid by the insurer OT 
'. owner or Il'luteror ·driver of the vessel involved in the acci-
dent or by all or any of them. as the case may b!."; 
(;) in section 1HlC, for the words, figures and letters llsection 
195 and Chapter XXXV of the Code of CriminDI Procedure, 1898", 
the words, figures and letter "section 195 and Chapter XXVI of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973" shall be substituted.". 
M. In section 58 of the principal Act, for the words Clten rupees", the 
words "Olle hundred rupees" shall be substituted. 
Z8. After section 58 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
as inserted, JWl1ely:-
30 
3S 
"58A. If an inlan i mechanically propelled vessel has on board or 
In any part thereof cargo which is in excess of the cargo set forth 
in the certificate of survey as the quantity of cargo which the vessel 
or the part thereof is, in the judgment of the surveyor, fit to carry, 
the owner and the master shaa, each, in addition to the penalty to 
Which he may be liable under the provisions of section 58, be punish-
able with fine which. may extend-
(a) in the case of first offence, to five hundred rupel!s; 
., 
(b) in the case of any second. or subsequent offence, to one 
tbOlUland rupees.". 
•. After section 62 of the principal Act, the following sections shall 
be. inserted, na"l'lely:-
"62A. If the master or the driver or other person ineharge of 
the inland mechanically propelled vessel fails to report· an accident 
in which hi1'l vessel is involved as required under Chapter VIA, he 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to Ulree . months, or with fme whicb may e~tend 'tQ five hundred 
Option 
regarding 
claim 
for 
compen-
sation 
in 
c~." 
cases. "I. 
Am~d­
ment at,. 
section 68. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
58A. 
PenaUY· 
fOr 
earryin, 
excessive 
quantity 
01 carlo 
on boai'd. 
Insertion 
of new 
sections 
after 
section 112. 
Punish-
ment for 
offences 
relating 
to 
accident. 

Pen. 
for 
usln, 
uainIur-
edmec:ba-
nlcally 
propelled 
vellet. 
Penalty 
for 
neelect 
or 
refusal 
t. 
live 
infor-
mation 
.. to 
inBurance 
or to 
produee 
cert&-
ftcate of 
insur-
ance. 
In~ 
of new 
aect10D1 
after 
sec:ticlftG. 
Deaer-
tion 
and 
absence 
without 
leave. 
14 
. flWees, or with both, or, if having been previously convicted of an 
oftence under this section, he is again eonvicted of an offence under 45 
tkis seetion, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
mOnths, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or 
with both~ 
62B. If any person uses a mechanically propelled vessel or causes 
or allows a mechanically propelled vessel to be used without a policy 
of insurance complying with the requirements of Chapter VIA, he 
shall bepunishllble with fine which may exteDd to one thousand 
rupees. , 
62C. If any person without reasonable cause neglects or refuses 
to give information as to insurance or to produce the certificate of 
insurance under t.hf! provisions contained in Chapter VIA, he shall 
be plfllishable with fine which, may 'extend to one hundred rupees.". 
30. Section 63A of the prjncipal Act shall be renumbered· as· eeetion ro 
ti3D and before section 63D as so renumbered, the following sections shall 
be inserted, namely:-
··63A. If any perllon employed or engaged in any cl[lpacity on 
board a mechanically propelled vessel commits any of the fo11o,,",inl 
offences, he shall be lia hIe to be punished summarily as followa:- 15 
(a) if he deserts from his mechanically propelled vessel, he 
shall be guilty of thp. offence of desertion and be liable to forfeit 
all or any of the property he leaves on board of the vessel and 
of wages he has thp.n earned and also to imprisonment which 
may extend to three months; zo 
(b) if he neglects· or refuses, without reasonable cause, to 
join his mechanically propelled vessel or to proceed on any 
voyage in his vessel or is absent without leave at any time within 
twenty-four hours of the vessel sailing from a port or ghat either 
at the commencement or during the progress of a voyage ·or is 25 
absent at any time without leave and without sufficient 'reason (. 
from his vessel or from his duty, he shall, if offence does ·not 
amount to desettiol1 nr is not treated as such by the malllter, be 

15 
Quilty of the offence of absence without leave and be liable tc) 
3b forfeit out of his wages a sum not exceedmg two 'Clays 'pay and 
in addition for every twenty-four hours of absence either a sum 
not exceeding six days payor any expenses properly incurred in 
hiring a substitute and also to imprisonment which may extend 
to two months. 
s 
10 
IS 
20 
25 
3S 
4' 
63B. If any person employed or engaged in any capacit.y on board 
a mechanically propelled vessel commits any of the followiagoftences. 
he shall be guilty of an 'offence against discipline and he shall be liable 
to be punished summarily as follows:-
(4) if he quits the mechanically propelled vessel without 
leave after her arrival at the port or ghat or port or ghat oil deli-
very, he shall be liable to forfeit out of his wages a sum not 
exceeding one month's pay; 
(b) if he is guilty of wilful disobedience to any lawful com-
mand or neglect of duty, he shall be liable to forfeit out of his 
wltges a sum not exceeding two days pay; 
(c) if he is guilty of continued wilfuldisobedienC9 to law-
ful command or continued wilful neilect of duty, he shall be 
liable to imprisonment which may extend to one month and also 
to forfeit over every twenty-four hours continuance of disobe-
dience or neglect either a sum not exceeding six days payor any 
expenses properly incurred in hirini a substitute; 
(d·) if- ,he BSsaultsthe master or any other Officer of the 
vessel, he shall be liable to imprisonment for a tenn which· may 
extend to three months or with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees, or with both; 
(e) if he combines with any of the officers to disobey to law-
ful commands orta neglect duty or to impede the navigation 
of the vessel or retard the progress of the voyage, he shall be 
liable to imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
months or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or 
with both; 
(t) iif .he wilfully ,damages his mechanically.propelled vessel 
or; commits ,eriminal,miaappropriaiion or breach of trust in respect 
of or wilful damages to any of her stores or . cargo, he .hall be 
liable to forfeit out of his wages a sum equal to the los8 sustained 
and also imprisonment which may extend to threcmonths. 
S3C. If any offence within the meaning of this Act of desertion or 
absence without leave or against discipline is committed or if any 
act of misconduct is committed for which the offender's agreement 
imposes fine and it is intended to enfdrce the fine.-
(4) an entry of the offence ,or acts shall be made in the 
·official log book and signed by the . master and one ol.tbe person 
employed or 'engaged in any capacity on baud of the mechani-
cally propelled vessel; 
(0) the offender shall ·be furmsbedwith a.copy of the entry 
ami have the same read over distincrtly and 811Cti'bJy'to him and 
may thereupon 'make sueh reply:thereto as :berthlnklt ,ftt; 
(c) a statement of a copy of the etttry havinjf been so fur-
nished and entry having been so read over 'Bnd the repty, ;f any, 
General 
offences 
against 
disci-
pline. 
Entry of 
offence 
in 
oftlclal 
logbook. 

Substitu-
tion of 
new 
section 
for 
section 
69. 
Exemp-
tion to 
Govern-
ment 
vessels 
from 
fees. 
Amend-
ment ot 
section 
72A. 
Omission 
ot sec-
tion 78. 
Amend-
ment of 
sectiOb 74 
.; . 
16 
made by the offender shall likewise be entered and signed tn the 
manner aforesaid; 
(d) in any subsequent legal proc'eedings the entries by this 
section required shall,' if practicable, b~ produced or proved, and; 
in default of such production or proof, the court hearing the case ~ 
may in its discretion refuse to receive evidence of the offenee or 
act of misconduct.". 
n. For section 69 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
M1bstltuted, namely:;..... 
"69. 'the State Gov,ernment may, by notification in the Ofttcial to 
Gazette, exempt all or any mechanically propelled vessel belonging 
to or in the service of Governmen1 from payment of any fees pay-
able by or under this Act.". 
32. In section 72A of the principal Act,-
(i) for the words "of a province in Pakistan", the words "of I' 
~ladesh" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "that Dominion", the words "that country" 
shall be substistuted. 
,33. Section 73 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
34. In section 74 of the principal Act,- 20 
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "on a State .Government", 
the words "on the Central Government or It State Goverlll'Dent" shall 
be substituted; 
(it) after sub~section (2), the following sub-section, shall be in-
.-ted, n"mely:- 2, 
"(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under 
this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it jgin session, .for a toud 'period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two 
. or more successive sessions, and if ·before the expiry of the sassioD 30 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making .any modification in the 
rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the· 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be.; so, however, 'that any such 35 
modification or annulment s11a.11 be without prejUdice to the 
validity of anythil'\i previously done ~nder that rule.". 
; 1-

) . !, : , : I'. . \' : , ...• ~:, 
STATEMENT OF OBjECT~ ANi) REASON~ 
With t1ae~g~ of time, operation of power vessels in. U\~, ~n.\~ 
waters of the country has undergone considerable ch~nge with th~.'reS~lt 
that the provisions contained in the Indian Steam-vessels' Act, ltn', are 
not found to be adequate effectively to regulate the operation of the in-
land vessels. A committee was set up by the Government of India under 
the Chairmanship of Shri B. Bhagavati, Member of Parliament to con-
sider the problems relating to the development of inland water transport 
and to suggest phased programme for development of this mode of trans-
port. Recommendations for the amendment of the Act were made by the 
Committee. Certain other legislative changes are also considered neces-
sary in the light of practical experience. The amendments proposed in 
the Bill are intended to make the legislation more effective and useful in 
regulating the operation of inland vessels having regard to the present 
day needs. 
2. The principal Act was enacted when steam-vessels were in vogue. 
With the advent of oil-fired vessels steam-vessels have become 
scarce and even the short title to the Act would be misleading 
in the present context. Accordingly it is proposed to modify the short J 
title of the Act as "Inland Vessels Act" and to substitute the expression 
"steam-vessels" by the expression "mechanically propelled vessel". There 
is no provision now enabling the mortgage of vessels by owners for secur-
ing financial assistance for the construction or repair of vessels. Provisions 
in that regard on the lines of those contained in the Merchant Shipping 
Act, 1958 (44 o~ 1958) are proposed in order to overcome the difficulty. 
In the case of wreck, etc., the State Government is authorised to appoint 
a court of investigation only on a report to that effect from the master 
of the vessel. It is considered necessary to provide for the appointment 
of a cour!! of investigation on the report of persons other than the master 
also. At present there is no provision in the Act enabling the State Gov-
ernment to take action to clear navigable channels blocked by wreck or 
other obstruction or by the grounding of an overdrafted vessel though 
such proviSions do find a place in the Indian Ports Act, 1908 (15 of· 1908). 
It is proposed to empower the State Government to clear up the navigable 
channels so blocked or obstructed. Compensation to passengers travelling 
in inland vessels involved in accidents is a public necessity. It is, there-
fore, proposed to provide for the obligatory insurance of passengers against 
risk and the burden is cast on licensed carners by adopting provisions 
analogous to those applicable in the case of motor vehicles accidents. In 
view of the danger involved in carrying passengers or cargo or both in 
excess of what is set forth in the certificate of survey granted to a vessel, 
it is considered necessary to enhance the penalty for exceeding the set 
limits. In case of. desertion, wilful absence from duty. negligence, etc., by 
personnel employed in inland mechanically propelled vessels there are no 
provisions for the taking of disciplinary proceedings. Provisions analogous 
to those in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 are proposed to be included 
17 

60 .. -.,. 11'"- ,.. II is 
io u to ensure discipline among the pertJonnel. Opportunity is also being 
taken to amend the rule laying formula to bring it in conformity with the 
recommendation of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation. 
3. The Bill seeks to give effect to the objects mentioned above. 
N.w Dam; MORARJI DESAI. 
The 28th J'II:n.e. 1977. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to amend section 19R of the Act which re-
lates to the rule making power of the State Government. In sub-l8Ction 
(2) thereof, new clauses (fa) and (ga) are being inserted to empower the 
making of rules for prescribing the authority and for furnishing to such 
authority the information with respect to the inland mechanically pro-
pelled vessel and its registration and for prOviding the form of instrument 
creating a mortgage of a mechanically propelled vessel or a share therein 
or transfer of any such mortgage. Clause 26 of the B1ll seeks to apply 
Chapter VIII of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 in relation to the insurance 
of mechanically propelled vessels against third party risks as they apply 
in relation to motor vehicles subject to the modifications contained in that 
clause. Sections 111 and ilIA of the Motor Vehicles Act, which are made 
applicable by this clause, relate to the rule making powers of the Central 
Government and the State Government respectively. 
2. The matters with regard to which the Central Government Ol' the 
State Government, as the case may be, is proposed to be empowered to 
make rules are matters of detail. The delegation of legislative power :II, 
therefore, of a Dormal character. 

Short 
title and 
extent. 
De1ini-
tiona. 
Declara-
tion of 
surveyor. 
ANNEXURE 
, ',: {~: tROM ''l!IIt. ,iNLOD SftJia-VW!LSN:r. 1917 
(l cw1li17) 
~ '. : r' 
~ti Arit ~' 'e'on'Sdifda1e . the el1actm~ relating to'tn-Iand SteM-\Pessels.' 
'IW~ft Is ex~l~nt tocon:sotidate the enactments relating to 
iiil~n'Ct!stea'l1'l;:,ve$s'eis j'lt fshetetiy· cnactedas fOnaws:-
-... " 
.".. '., " CHAPTER I 
J' 
Paa.lMI~"Y 
.L' 'i)'t~ ACtmarY be ~called the Inland Steam-vessels Act. 191'7. 
.. .. • • 
Z .. 'In tHis Ad, uriless thE!l'e is anything repugnant ttl the' subject or 
canleii ~ ',' ' 
.~; ~~ . 11:"; " 
(1) "inland steam-vessel" means·a ·8teamJVill8l which Otdiaerily 
plies on any inland water; 
(2) "inland water" means any canal, river, lake or other navig-
able wa,ter; 
(3) "passenger" includes any person carried in a steam-vessel 
other than the master and crew and the owner, his family and 
servants; 
(4)"prescribed" means prescribed by any rule under this Act; 
(5) "steam-vessel" means every description of vessel propelled 
wholly or in part by the agency of steam; 
(6) "survey" means the survey of a steam-vessel under this Act; 
(7) "surveyor" means a surveyor appointed under this Act; and 
(8) "voyage" includes the plying of a steam-vessel at or about 
any place. 
• • • • • 
7. When the survey of a steam-vessel is compieted, if the surveyor 
making it is satisfied that-
.. • • .. • 
(iii) the number of passengers (if any) which the steam-vessel 
is, in the judgement of the surveyor, fit to carry, specifying, if neces-
sary, the respective numbers to be carried on the deck and in the 
cabins, and in different parts of the deck and cabins: the number to 
be subject to sucll ~onditions and variations, according to the time 
. 20 
:,,",- "'-

7 of 1913. 
57 and 
58 Viet. 
e. 60. 
:2t 
of year, the nature ot the 'voyage, the cargo carried or other cfrcum-
stances, as the case requires; and 
• • • • • 
19E. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Where the owner applying for a certiftcate of registration is a 
company registered u·.lder the Indian Companies Act, 1913, the appUc:a-
tio'n may be made to a registering authority within the local limits of 
whose jurisdiction the principal office of the company is situate . 
• • • • • " . 
190. Where an application is made under this Act for the registra-
tion of an inland steam-vessel registered under the Merchant Shipping 
Act, 1894, as amended by any subsequent enactment, the regisfering au-
thority shall, on receipt of such application and any fee that may be pres-
cribed, and on being furnished with satisfactory proof of the fact of such 
registration, grant to the applicant a certiftcate of registration under tilts 
Act. ' 
• • • • • 
191. (1) • • • • • 
(2) A certificate of registration in respect of an inland steam-vessel 
issued by a registering authority in one State shall be valid for that 
State only, but where any such vessel plies tn inland waters of 'more 
than one State, nothing in this section shall be deemed to J'equire the 
owner or master of the vessel to obtain a fresh certiftcate of registration 
in relation to the State or ,States in which the vessel is not so registered: 
Provided that the owner of the \tessel has not ceased to reaide or 
'carryon business in the State in which the vessel was originaUyregis-
teredo 
• • • • • 
19K. (1) The registry of an inland steam-vessel may be transferred 
from one place in a State to another place in another State on the 
application by the owner or master of the vessel to the registering au-
thority of the place where the vessel is registered. 
(2) On receipt of such application, the registering authority shall 
transmit notice thereof to the registering authority of the intended place 
of registry with a copy of all particulars relating to the vesSel. 
(3) The certiftcate Of registration in respect of the ves8elshall be 
delivered up to the registering authority either of the existing 01' 
intended place of registry. and, if delivered up to the former, shall be 
transmitted to the registering authority of the intended place of regisfry. 
(4) On receipt of the documents, referred to in sub·se~tions '(2) and 
(3) and the prescribed fee, if any, the registering authOrity of the Inten-
ded place of registry shall enter in its register book all the particulars 
so transmitted as aforesaid and grant a fresh certificate of regist'ration 
in respec~ of the vessel and thenceforth such ~essel shall be considered 
as registered at the new place of tegistry. 
• .. '" III' 
PI~of 
registra-
tion. 
Automatic 
re,istra-
tion of 
inland 
steam-
vessels 
registered 
under the 
Merchant 
f)hipping 
Acts. 
Prohibi-
tion 
a,ainst 
transfer 
of certi-
Reate ()f 
registra-
tion. 
Transfer 
of regis-
try. 

Prohibi-
tion 
against 
transfer 
of owner-
ship of 
registePed 
vessel. 
Grant of 
masters', 
serangs', 
engineers' 
and 
engine-
driver's 
certifi-
cates of 
serviCe. 
Licences. 
Certi-
cates to 
be held 
by master 
and 
engineer 
of vessel 
of one 
hundred 
or more 
horse-
power. 
19M. (1) An inland steam-vessel registered under this Act in one 
State shall not be transferred to a person resident in another State in 
India or in any country outside India, without the previous approval of 
the Government of the State in which the vessel is registered: 
Provided that where an inland steam-vessel is also registered under 
the Merchant Shipping Act, 1894, as amended by any subsequent enact-
ment, this sub-section shall have effect as if for the words "the Govern-
ment of the State in which the vessel is registered" the words "the Cen-
tral Government" had been substituted. 
'" '" 19K. (1) '" '" '" '" '" • '" '" 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may-
'" '" '" '" '" 
22. (1) The State Government may, if it thinks fit, grant without 
examination to any person whO! has served as a master, or as an engineer, 
of an inland steam-vessel before the first day of April, 1890, a certificate 
(hereinafter called a certificate of service) to the effect that he is, by 
reason of his having so served, competent to act as a first-class ma~:ter, 
seCQlld-class master or serang, or as an engineer, first-class engine-<iriver 
or second-class engine-driver, as the case may be, on board an inland 
steam-vessel. 
• '" '" '" • 
22A. (1) The State Government may, also if it thinks fit, grant-
• • • '" • 
(b) to a person who is in possession of a first-class engine-driver's 
certificate granted under section 21 or section 22, or an engine-driver's 
57 and 
58 Viet., 
c. 80. 
Fower to 
Dlake 
rules. 
certificate granted under the Indian S'team-ships Act, 1884, and has, 7 of 1884, 
by virtue of such certificate, served as an engine-driver of an inland 
steam-vessel having engines of not less than seventy nominal horse-
power for five years, for not less than two and a' half years of which 
period he has been the engine-driver of such vessel within the mean-
ing of section 26, 
a licence authorising such person to act as master or engineer, as the case 
may be, of any inland steam-vessel having engines of one hundred and 
seventy nominal horse-power Or o.f such less nominal horse-power as such 
Government may deem fit. 
• • • • • 
25. An inland steam-vessel having engines of one hundred or more 
nominal horse-power shall not proceed on any voyage unless she has-
(a) as her master a person possessing a ftrst-cla~s master's certi-
ficate granted under this Act, or a master's certificate granted under 
the Indian Merchant Shipping Act, 1859, or granted under, or conti-
nued in force by, the Merchant Shipping Act, 1894, or a master's 
licence granted. under section 22A and applicable to such vessel and 
voyage, and 
(b) as her engineer a person possessing an engineer's certificate 
granted under this Act, or the Indian Steam-sbips Act, 1884 or gran~ 
1 of 1859. 
57 • 68 
Vict., c. 
80. 

57 &: 58 
Vict., c. 
60. 
7 of 1884. 
lot 1859. 
57 Ie 68 
Viet., c. 
80. 
7 of 1884. 
57 &: 88 
Vict., c. 
SO. 
23 
under, or continued in force by. the Merchant Shipping Act, 1894 or an 
engine-driver's licence granted under section 22A and applicable to 
weh vessel and voyage. . 
.. An inland steam-vessel having engines o~ forty or more· nominal 
horae--power. but of less than one hundred nominal horse-power, shall not 
proceed on any voyage unless she has-
• • • • • 
(b) as her engineer a person possessing a first-class ~gine­
driver's certificate granted under this Act, or an engine-driver's certi-
ficate granted under the Indian Steam-ships Act, 1884, or any certificate 
referred Ito in. claUle (b) of section 25:. 
Provided that a steam-vessel shall be deemed to have complied with 
this section if she has as her master and engineer a person possessing both 
a certi1icate referred to in clause (G), and a certificate referred to in clause 
(b), ~ this section. 
• • • • • 
•. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, the State Government 
may, by general or special order, direct that a person possessing-, 
(G) a master's certificate granted under the Indian Merchant 
Shipping Act. 1859, or granted under, or continued in force by, the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1894, or 
(b) an engineer's or engine-driver's certificate granted under the 
Indian Steam-ships Act, 1884, or an engineer's certificate granted 
under, qr continued in force by, the Merchant Shipping Act, 1894, 
shall 11:0t act as master or engineer, as the case may be, of an inland 
steam-vessel unless he also possesses--
(i) in case (G). such a master's or serang's certificate granted 
under this Act as qualifies him under this Chapter to act as master of 
the steam-vessel. or 
(ii) in case (b), such an engineer's or engine-driver's certificate 
granted under this Act as quali1les him under this Chapter to act as 
engineer of the steam-vessel: 
Provided that, fqr the purposes of this section, the State Government 
may if it thinks fit, grant to any person. without examination, a master's 
or serang's or an engineer's or engine-driver's certificate of competency 
under this Act, and such certificate shall have the same effect as a certi-
ficate of competency granted under this Act after examination . 
• • • • • 
33. (1) If a formal investigation into the facts of any case reported 
under section 32 appears to the State Government to be expedient, the 
State Government may-
(4) appoint a special Court and direct the Court to make the 
investigation at such place as the State Government may fix in this 
behalf, or 
(b) direct any principal Court Qf ordinary criminal jurisdiction 
or the Court of any District Magistrate to make the investigatiOll. 
• • • • • 
CerWi~ 
cates ~ 
be held. 
by muter 
and· 
engineer 
ofveaael 
of Qet. 
ween 
forty and 
cne 
hundred 
horse-
power. 
Power 
for State 
Govern· 
mentto 
require 
master 
Or engi-
neer to 
hold eer-
tifllcate 
granted 
underAct 
in addi~ 
tion to 
other 
certifi-
cate. 
Power 
for State 
Govern-
ment to 
appoint 
Court of 
investf'-
gaUon. 

Power 
for State 
Govern-
mentto 
suspend 
orcanael 
cer.tift.. 
c.-in 
certain 
caStel. 
Power 
for State 
Govern-
mentto 
make 
rules as 
to carriage 
of paSlell-
gersin 
inland 
steam-
vessels 
Power Of 
State 
G.overn-
menUo 
fix maxi-
mum and 
minimum 
rates10r 
paSBenier 
fares.and 
beWht 
for 
goode. 
Penalty 
for carry-
ingex-
C'~ssive 
number 
of panen-
gerson 
board. 
Exemp-
tion of 
Govern-
ment 
vessels. 
Endorse-
mentor 
cerWl-
catea,and 
licences 
granted 
in Pakis-
tan. 
45. Any certificate granted or any endorsement made under Chaptet 
III may be suspended or cancelled by the Government of the State in 
which the certificate was granted or, as the case may be, in respect of 
which the enciorsement was made, in the following cases •. JWIle1y-
• '" ... ... . .. 
53. (1) ... ... '" ... • 
(5) The procedure prescribed by section 59 of the· Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898, in the case of arrest by priv.ate .persons shall Wly to 
every arrest made under this section. 
• '" '" '" '" 
MA. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Oftidal, 
Gazette, after such inquiry as it may consider necessary, in respect of any 
system of inland waterways, or of any stretch of inland waterway. or of 
the run between any two stations on an inland waterway,-
(~) fix the maximum or minimum rate per mile which may be 
charged for ·passenger fares for passengers of any class travelling on 
inland steam-vassels; 
(b) fix the maximum rate per mile which may be charged for 
flIeight on goods ·of any description carried in inland steam-v.essels; 
(c) fix the minimum rate per mile Which may be charged for 
freight on goods of any description carried in inland steam-vessel: and' 
• '" ... 110 ... 
58. If an inland steam-vessel has on board or in any part thereof a 
number of puaengers which is greater than the number set forth in the 
certifioate of aumey as the number of passengers whic:hthe vessel or the 
part thereof is, in the judgement of the surv.eyar,.fit:to carry. the owner 
and the master shall each be punishable with fine which may extend to 
ten rupees for every passenger over and above that number. 
• ... ... ... • 
69. Save in so far QS the State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette otherwise direct nothing in this Act, or any rule made 
thereunder, shall apply to any inland steam-yessel belonging to, or in the 
senrice of Government. 
• • • * • 
7ZA. Any certificate or licence granted by the Government of a Pro-
vince in Pakistan in accordance with the provisions of any law for the 
time being in force in that Dominion corresponding to the provisions of 
Chapter II or Chapter III of this Act may, on payment of the fees pres-
cribed for the grant of a similar certificate Or' licence under this Act, be 
endorsed hy-
(a) the Government of any State in India, or 
5 of 1898. 

... ~ ... --.. --.,.. .. ~ '" 
(b) with the general or special sanction ot the Government of 
such State, by any authority competent to grant a similar certificate 
or licence under this Act, 
and upon any such certificate or licence being so endorsed, it shall have 
effect as if it had been granted under this Act. 
73. The provisions of this Act shall also apply to all vessels which ordi-
narily ply on inland waters and are propelled by electricity or other 
mechanical power (except steam): 
Provided that the' State Government may, by notification in the Offi-
cial Gazette, declare that any provision of this Act shall, in its applica-
tion under this section to such vessels, be subject to such modifications, 
for the purposes of adaptation. as may be specified in the notification. 
Appli_ 
cation of 
Act to 
vessels 
propelled 
byelectri-
city Or 
other 
mechani. 
cal 
power. 
74. (1) The power to make rules conferred on a State Government by Publica-
thilil Act is subject to the condition of the rules being made after previous tlon of 
publication. rules . 
• • • • • 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Inland Steam-vessels Act, 1917. 
$ 
(Shri 1f0000tlt';i R. Dea~li. 
Prime Minilt.,-.) 