As INTRODUlCBD IN LOK SABRA 
BW No. 71 of 1871. 
1HE MAINTENANCE OF INTERNAL SECURITY BILL, 1971 
BILL 
~ provide fOT detention in certain cases for the purpoae of mointen4nd 
of internal security and matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-second Year of the 
Republic of India 88 followl:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Maintenance of Internal Security Short 
Act, 1971. title 
anel' 
extent. 
S (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
~ 
10 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appropriate Government" m~ans, as respects a detention 
order made by the Central Government or a person detained under 
such order, the Central Government, and as respects a detention 
order made by a State Government or by an officer subordinate to a 
State Government or as respects a person detained under such 
order, the State Government; 
(b) IIdetention order" means an order made under section 3; 
(c) "foreigner" has the same meaning as in the Foreigners Act, 
1946; 
(d) "State Government", in relation to a Union territory, meanl! 
the adminjstr~tor t.h~eof. 
Defini-
tions. 

?owerto 
Dab 
,rden 
ieta1Din1 
!el1a1n 
)el'lODl. 
3. (1) The Central Government or the State Government may,-
(a) if satisfied with respect to any person (including a foreigner) 
that with a view to preventing him from acting in any manner pre-
judicial to-
(i) the defence of India. the relations of India with foreign 5 
powers, or the security of India, or 
(ii) the security of the State or the maintenance of public 
order, or 
(iii) the maintenance of supplies and services essential to 
the community, or 
(b) if satisfied with respect to any foreign'er that with a view to 
regulating his continued presence in India or with a view to making 
arrangements for his expUlsion from India, 
it is necessary so to do, make an order directing that such person be 
10 
detained. IS 
(2) Any of the following officers, namely:-
(a) district magistrates, 
(b) additional district magistrates specially empowered in this 
behalf by the State Government, 
(c) the Commissioner of Police for Bombay, Calcutta, Madras or 20 
Hyderabad, 
may, if satisfied as provided in sub-clauses (ii) and (iii) of clause (a) of 
sub-section (1), exercise the power conferred by the said sub-section. 
(3) When any order is made under this section by an officer men-
tioned in sub-section (2), he shall forthwith report the fact to the State 25 
Government to which he is subordinate together with the grounds on 
which the order has been made and such other particulars as in his 
opinion have a bearing ~n the matter, and no such order shall remain 
in force for more than twelve days after the making thereof unless in 
the meantime it has been approved by the State Government: 30 
Provided that where under section 8 the grounds of detention are 
communicated by the authority making the order after five days but 
not later than fifteen days from the date of detention, this sub-section 
shall apply subject to the modification that for the words "twelve days", 
the words "twenty-two days" shall be substituted. 
(4) When any order is made or approved by 'the State Government 
under this section, the State Government shall, as soon' as may be, report 
\he fact to the Central' Government together with the grounds cn which 
35 

5ofl .... 
5 of 1888. 
~ 
~ order has DeeD made and luch other particLllars as In the opinion 01' 
the State Government have a bearing on the necessity for the order. 
4.. A detention order may be executed at any place in India in ~h. 
manner provided for the execution of warrants of arrest under the Code 
5 of Criminal Procedure, 1898. 
5. Every person in respect of whom a detention order haos been made 
shall be liable-
(a) to be detained in such place and under such conditions. 
including conditions as to maintenance, discipline and punishment 
10 for breaches of discipline, as the appropriate Government may, by 
general or special order, specify; and 
(b) to be removed from one place of detention to another place 
of detention, whether within the same State or in another State, by 
order of the appropriate Government: 
15 Provided that no order shall be made by a State Government under 
clause (b) for the removal of a person from one State to another State 
except with the consent of the Government of that other State. 
6. No detention order shall be invalid or inoperative merely by 
reason-
20 (a) that the person to be detained thereunder is outside the 
limits of the territorial jurisdiction of the Government or ofticer 
making the order, or 
(b) that the place of detention of such person is outside the 
said limits. 
25 7. (1) If the Central Government or the State Government or an 
3.° 
35 
officer specified in sub-section (2) of section 3, as the case may be, has 
reason to believe that a person in respect of whom a detention order has 
been made has absconded or is concealing himself so that the order can-
'not be executed, that Government or officer may-
(a) make a report in writing of the fact to a PreSidency Magis-
trate or a Magistrate of the fil'st class having jurisdiction in the place 
where the said person ordinarily resides; and thereupon the provi-
sions of sections 87, 88 and 89 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, 
shall apply in respect of the said person and his property as if the 
order directing that he be detained were a warrant issued by the 
Magistrate; 
(b) by order notified in the Official Gazette direct the said person 
to appear before such officer, at such place and within such period 
as may be specified in the order; and if the said person falls to 
comply with such direction he shall, unless he proves that it wu DOt 
Ezecut.lan 
otdeten-
tion 
orders. 
Power to 
regulate 
place and 
conditions 
otdeten-
tion. 
Detention 
orders not 
to be 
JnvaUd 
or 
inopera. 
tlve on 
certain 
grounds. 
Powers in 
relation 
to abeon 
din, 
pel'lOlJl. 
I. 
i 
( 
I 
• I 
" 
:1 
'. 
f, 
( 

Grounds 
of'Order 
ofdeten-
tion to 
be dis-
closed to 
persons 
a1!ected 
by the 
order. 
Constitu-
tion of 
Advisory 
Boards. 
Reference 
to Advi-
sory 
Boards. 
Procedure 
Of 
Advisory 
B\lardJ. 
.,. 
possible for him to comply therewith and that he had, within the 
period specified in the order, informed the o11icer mentioned in the 
order of the reason which rendered compliance therewith impos-
sible and of his whereabouts, be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to one year or with fine or with both. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898, every offence under clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall 
be cognizable. 
8. (1) When a person is detained in pursuance of a detention order, 
the authority making the order shall, as soon as may be, but ordinarily 10 
not later than five days and in exceptional circumstances and for reasons 
to be recorded in writing, not later than fifteen days, from the date of 
detention, communicate to him the grounds on which the order has been 
made and shall afford him the earliest opportunity of making a represen-
tatitln against the order to the appropriate Government. IS 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall require the authority to disclose 
facts which it considers to be against the public interest to disclose. 
9. (1) The Central Government and each State Govenuneat shall, 
whenever necessary, constitute ODe ore more Advisory Boards for the 
purposes of this Ad. 20 
(2) Every such Board shall consist of three pe.r&ons who are,or have 
been, or are qualified to be appointed as, Judges of a Hi4rh Court, and 
such persons shall be appointed by the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the easc may be. 
(3) The appropriate Government shall appoint one of the members 25 
of the Advisory Board who is, or has been, a Jude. of a RiP Court to 
be its Chairman, and in the ease of a Union territory the appointment to 
the Advisory Board, of any person who is a Judie of the IIiIh Court of a 
State shall be with the 1)reviou5 approval of the State Govemmeat eon-
cerned. 30 
10. Save as otherwise expressly prOVided in this Act, in every case 
where a detention order has been made under this Act, the appropriate 
Government shall, within thirty days from the date of detention under 
the order, place before the Advisory Board constituted by it under see-
tion 9 the grounds on which the order has been made and the represen- 35 
tation, if any, made by the person affected by the order, and in case 
where the order has been made by an officer, also the report by such 
officer 'under sub-section (3) of section 3. 
11. (1) The Advisory Board shall, after conSidering the materials 
placed before it and~ after calling for such further information as it m-r 40 
deem necessary from the appropriate Government or from I\ny person 
called for the purpose through the appropriate Government or from the 
person concerned, and if, in any particular case, it considers it essential 
so to do or if the person concerned desires to be heard, after hearing him 
,in person, submit its report to the appropriate Government within teD 45 
weeks from the date of detention. 
5 of 1888 

, 
,(2) The report of the Advisory Board shall specify in a leparate part 
thereof the opinion of the Advisory Board as to whether or not there is 
!lufllcient cause for the detention of the person concerned. 
(3) When there is a difference of opinion among the members forming 
, the Advisory Board, the opinion of the majority of such members shall 
be deemed to be the opinion of the Board. 
(4) Nothing in this section shall entitle any person against Whom a 
detention order has been made to appear by any legal practitioner in any 
matter connected with the reference to the Advisory Board, and the pro-
10 .ceedings of the Advisory Board and its report, excepting that part of the 
.report in which the opinion of the AdviSOry Board is specified, shall be 
conftdential. 
12. (1) In any case where the Advisory Board has reported that there 
is in its opinion sufficient cause for the detention 'C1f a person. the appro-
I, priate Government may confirm the detention order and contin'le the 
detention of the person concerned for such period as it thinks fit. 
(2) In any case where the Advisory Board has reported that there is 
in its opinion no sufficient cause for the detention of the person concerned, 
the appropriate Government shan revoke the detention order and cause 
ao the person to be released foTthwith. 
13. The maximum period for which any person may be detained ill 
pursuance of any detention order which has been confirmed under section 
12 shall be twelve months from the date of detention: 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall affect the power 
25 01 the appropriate Government to revoke or modify the detention order 
at any earlier time. 
14. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 21 of the General 
Clauses Act, 1897, a detention order may, at any time, be revoked or 
10 of 1887. modified-
(a) notWithstanding that the order has been made by an officer 
mentioned in sub-section (2) of section 3, by the State Government 
to which that officer is subordinate Or by the Central Government; 
(b) notwithstanding that the order has been made by a State 
.~emment, by the Central Government. 
35 (2) The revocation or expiry of a detention order shall not bar the 
making of a fresh detention order under section 3 against the same person 
in any case where fresh facts have arisen .after the date of revocation or 
expiry on which the Central Government or a State Government or an 
o~e.r, as the case may be, is satisfied that sl,lch an order should be made. 
40 -15. (1) The appropriate Government may, at any time, direct that any 
person detained in pursuance of a detention order may be released for any 
speclfied period either without conditions fir upon such conditions sped-
~e.cl Sntbe cUrection as that person accepts, and lI\ay, at any time, cancel 
hil releue, 
Action 
upon the 
report of 
Advilory 
Board. 
N~-
JD,lolQl 
period 
of 4eten-
ikmJ 
~oca-
tiono! 
detention 
orden. 
"0 
~;, 
\) 
t 
• • 
, 
.~ 
~ 
Tempo- ,/. 
rary i'l 
relea. 
o!penona 
detained 

Protec-
tion of 
action 
taken 
in good 
faith. 
Duration 
ofdeten-
tion in 
eertain 
cues of 
foreilD-
era. 
6 
(2) In directing the release of any person under sub-section (1), the 
appropriate Government may require him to enter into a bond with or 
without sureties foT the due observance of the conditions specified in the 
direction. 
(3) Any person released under sub-section (1) shall surrender him- 5 
self at the time and place, and to the authority, specified in the order 
directing his release or cancelling his release, as the case may be. 
(4) If any person fails without sufficient cause to surrender himself in 
the manner specified in sub-section (3), he shall be punishable with im-
prisonment for a term which may extend to two years, 'Or with fine, or 10 
with both. .. 
(5) If any person released under sub-section (1) fails to fulfil any of 
the conditions imposed upon him under the said sub-section or in the bond 
entered into' by him, the bond shall be declared to be forfeited and any 
person bound thereby shall be liable to pay the penalty thereof. 
16. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Gov-
ernment or a State Government, and no suit, prosecution or other legal 
proceeding shall lie against any person, for anything in good faith done 
or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act. 
IS 
17. (1) NotWithstanding anything contained in this Act, any foreigner 20 
in respect of whom an order of detention has been made under this Act 
may be detained without obtaining the opinion (1f the Advisory Board for 
a period longer than three months, but not exceeding two years from the 
date of his detention, in any of the following classes of cases ar undet 
any of the follOWing circumstances, namely:-
(a) where such foreigner enters or attempts to enter the terri-
tory of India or is found therein with arms, ammunition or explosives, 
or 
2S 
(b) where such foreigner enters or attempts to enter a notified 
area or is found therein in contravention of section 3 of the Criminal ~o 
Law Amendment Act, 1961, ar -
(c) where such foreigner enters or attempts to enter the local 
limits or is found within the local limits of such area adjoining the 
borders of India as may be specified in an order made under section 
139 of the Border Security Force Act, 1968, without a vaild travel 3S 
23 of liMn. 
document, or 167 of 1988. 
(d) where the Central Government has reason to believe that 
such foreigner commits or is likely to commit any offence lUlder the 
Official Secrets Act, 1923. 19 of 11m. 

Ord.1 
of 
1971. 
7 
(2) In the case of any foreigner to whom sub-section (1) applies, sec-
tions 10 to 13 shall have effect subject to the following modifications, 
namely:-
(a) in section 10, for the words "shall, within thirty days", the 
words "may, at any time prior to but in no case later than three 
months before the expiration of two years" shall be substituted; 
(b) in section 11,-
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "from the date of deten-
tion", the words "from the date on which reference is made to it" 
to shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "the detention of the 
person concerned", the words "the continued detention of the 
person concerned" shall be substituted; 
(c) in section 12, for the words "for the detention" in both the 
IS places where theY' occur, the words "for the continued detention" 
shall be substituted; 
(d) in section 13, for the words "twelve months", the words "three 
years" shall be substituted. 
18. (1) The Maintenance of Internal Security Ordinance, 1971, is here-
20 by repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken 
under the corresponding provisions of this Act as if this Act had come 
into force on the 7th day of May, 1971. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In view of the prevailing situation in the country and the develop-
ments across the border, there is need for urgent and ef"ecHve pre:ventive 
action in the interest of national security. It is, thercfor~~. considored 
essential to have powers of preventive detention to deal effectively with 
threats to the defence of India and to the security of India, especiaUy 
from external sources and espionage activities of foreign agents. Since 
the existing laws available t-~ deal with the situation have not been found 
to be adequate, the Maintenance of Internal Security Ordinance, 1971, 
has been promulgated. It is now proposed to replace the Ordinance by 
an Act. 
K. C. PANT. 
NEW D&HI; 
The 24th May, 1971. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F. 55\3 \ 71-Poll. I (B), dated the 27 May, 1971 from 
Shri K. C. Pant, Minister of State in the Ministry of Home Affairs (Grih 
Mantralaya men Rajya Mantri) to the Secretary, Lok Sahha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the pro-
posed Bill recommends to the Lok Sabha under article 117 (3) of the 
Constitution of India the consideration of the Maintenance <If Internal 
Security Bill, 1971. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Under clause 9 of the Bill, the Central Government and the State 
Governments are required to appoint Advisory Boards. There is no 
provision in the Bill regarding the payment of any salary. allowances, 
etc., to the Members of the Advisory Boards. The Central Government 
may, however, have to incur some expenditure in connection with the 
functioning of the Advisory Boards. It if>' not possible to make an accurate 
estimate of the expenditure which may be involved, but ordinarily the 
amount is not likely to exceed Rs. 5,000 annually. There will be no non-
recurring expenditure. 
9 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for detention in certain cases for the purpose of maintenance of internal 
security and matters connected therewith. 
[Shri K. C. Pant, 
Minister of State in the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, (Grih 
Mantralaya men Rajya Mantr;.)] 