THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Dr. A.D.K. JevASEELAN, M.P.
ce
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.
Bg it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-First Year of the Republic of India as follows:—-
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000. Short title.

2, For article 120 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted, Substitution of
namely:— . new article for
article 120.

“120. Business in Parliament shall be transacted in Hindi or in English: Languages in
which Business in

Provided that the Chairman of the Council of States or Speaker of the House of Parliament to be
the People, or person acting as such, as the case may be, shall— transacted.

(8 permit a member to give notice under different class of business in accordance
| with the Rules of Procedure framed under article 118, in any of the languages specified
in the Eighth Schedule;

(4) permit any member who cannot adequately express himself in Hindi or in
English to address the House in one of the languages specified in Eighth Schedule;

(iii) cause all business transacted in Parliament translated into all languages
specified in the Eighth Schedule and circulate them to members; and


Substitution of
new article for
article 343.
Official languages
of the Union.

Amendment of
article 344

Substitution of
new article for
article 346

Official language
for communica-
tion between one
State and another
or between a State
and the Union.

Amendment of
article 348.

() make available simultaneous interpretation facilities in all languages
specified in the Eighth Schedule if and when any member addresses the House
either in Hindi or in English or in any other language.”,

3. For article 343 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted,
namely:—
“343. The official languages of the Union shall be the languages specified in the
Eighth Schedule.”.

4, In article 344 of the Constitution, for clause (2), the following clause shall be
substuted, namely:—

“(2) It shall be the duty of the Commission to make recommendations to the
President as to—

(a) the progressive use of the languages specified in the Eighth Schedule
for the official purposes of the Union;

(b) restriction on the use of the English language for all or any of the
official purposes of the Union;

(c) the languages to be used for all or any of the purposes mentioned in
article 348;

(d) the form of numerals to be used for any one or more specified purposes
of the Union;

(e)any other matter referred to the Commission by the President as regards
the official languages of the Union and the languages for communication between
the Union and a State or between one State and another and their use.”.

5. For article 346 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted
namely:—
“346. The language used for the official purposes in a State shall be the language

used for communication between the Union and that State and between the State and
another State:

Provided that a translation in the English or Hindi language, as the case may be,
of the communication shall also accompany original communication.”

6. In article 348 of the Constitution, —
(0) का clause (1),—
(a) in sub-clause (a), the words “and in every High Court” shall be omitted;
(6) the following provisos shall be added at the end, namely:—

Provided that the President shall cause to be published under his authority,
the translation in the languages specified in the Eighth Schedule of all Acts passed
by Parliament or of all Ordinances promulgated by the President and of all
orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued under this Constitution or any
law made by Parliament and such translation shall be deemed to be, for all
purposes, the authoritative texts thereof in the languages specified in the Eighth
Schedule:

Provided further that a copy of the judgement, decree or order passed or
made by the Supreme Court shall be made available in the language of choice of
the parties concerned.

(ii) in clause (2), the proviso shall be omitted.”.


3

7. For article 351 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted,
namely:—

“351. It shall be the duty of the Union to promote the spread of all languages

specified in the Eighth Schedule and to develop them so that they may serve as alee GC an Iai
a medium of expression for all the elements of the composite culture of India.”. 24497 35०८
the Eighth Sche-

dule.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

India isa Union of States. Thousands of dialects and languages are spoken .
the country.

Our Parliament consists of representatives of all States and Union territories. People

of one State, for lack of adequate opportunities, do not understand the language of another
State.

In Parliament, by virtue of article 120, all business is conducted in English or Hindi,
Members who do not understand these two languages or are not able to express themselves
adequately find it very difficult to function effectively as Parliamentarians,

Whenever a member addresses the House, his speech should be simultaneously
interpreted and verbatim reports thereof be translated into all languages specified in the
Eighth Schedule to the Constitution so that other members may understand what the member

is speaking about, This will not only enable members to function effectively, but also help in.
fostering unity among different States.

At present, members are required to table notices under different provisions of the
Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha either in English or
in Hindi, Since they are not well versed in either language, they are deprived from
participating meaningfully in the debates.

With a view to upholding sound democratic and parliamentary system and to afford
an opportunity to members to participate in the debates and function as true Parliamentarians,
it is proposed that—

(0 translation/interpretation facilities should be provided in ail |
mentioned in the Eighth Schedule;

(0 members may be permitted to tabie notices in all languages in the Eighth
Schedule; and

(id official languages of the ‘Union should be the languages specified in the
Eighth Schedule.

The Bill seeks to fulfil a long standing demand and aspiration of majority of people
of the country.

‘New Dewi;

A.D.K. JEYASEELAN
March 16, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

The Bill seeks to provide for simultaneous interpretation and also translation facility
in all languages specified in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution. It also enables members
to table notices in those languages. The Bill further seeks to provide that official languages
of the Union shall be the languages specified in the Eighth Schedule.

This was involve some expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India in respect of
appointment of interpreters, translators, etc. It is likely that an annual recurring expenditure
of about rupees ten crore is to be involved.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved
for making necessary arrangements in Parliament for simultaneous interpretation and making
available translation in all languages.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * . *

Language to be 120. (/) Notwithstanding anything in Part XVII, but subject to the provisions of article
“sedinPariament. 345, business in Parliament shall be transacted in Hindi df in English :

Provided that the Chairman of the Council of States or Speaker of the House of
the People, or person acting as such, as the case may be, may permit any member who
cannot adequately express himself in Hindi or in English (0 address the House in this
mother-tongue,

(2) Unless Parliament by law otherwise provides, this article shall, after the
expiration of a period of fifteen years from the commencement of this Constitution,
have effect as if the words or in English were omitted therefrom.

* . . * *

Official language 343. (1) The official language of the Union shall be Hindi or in Devanagari script.
of the Union.

‘The form of numerals to be used for the official purposes of the Union shall be the
international form of Indian numerals.

(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), for a period of fifteen years from
the commencement of this Constitution, the English language shall continue to be
used for all the official purposes of the Union for which it was being used immediately
before such commencement :

Provided that the President may, during the said period, by order authorise the
use of the Hindi language in addition to the English language and of the Devanagari
form of numerals in addition to the international form of Indian Numerals for any of
the official purposes of the Union,

(3) Notwithstanding anything in this article, Parliament may be law provide for the
use, after the said period of fifteen years of —

(०) the English language, or

(8) the Devanagri form of numerals for such purposes as may be specified
the law.

* के * * *

Commission and 344. (1) The President shall, at the expiration of five years from the commencement of
Commie this Constitution and thereafter at the expiration of ten years from such commencement, by
official Ianguage. _ OTder constitute a commission which shall consist of a Chairman and such other members

representing the different languages specified in the Eighth Schedule as the President may

appoint, and the order shall define the procedure to be followed by the Commission...

(2) It shall be the duty of the Commission to make recommendations to the President
as to—
(a) the progressive use of the Hindi language for the official purpose of
the Union;
(0) restrictions on the use of the English language for all or any of the
official purposes of the Union;
(c) the language to be used for all or any of the purposes mentioned in
article 348;

(४) the form of numerals to be used for any one or more specified purposes
of the Union;


7

(e) any other matter referred to the Commission by the President as regards
the official language of the Union and the language for communication between
the Union and a State or between one State and another and their use,

(3) In making their recommendations under clause (2), the Commission shall have due
regard to the industrial, cultural and scientific advancement of India, and the just claims and
the interests of person belonging to the non-Hindi speaking areas in regard to the public
services.

(4) There shall be constituted a Committee consisting of thirty members, of whom
twenty shall be members of the House of the people and ten shall be members of the Council
of States to be elected tespectively by the members of the House of the People and the
members of the Council of States in accordance with the system of, Proportional representation
by means of the single transferable vote.

(5) It shall be the duty of Committee to examine the recommendations of the
Commission constituted under clause (1) and to report to the president their opinion thereon.

(6) Notwithstanding anything in article 343, the President may, after consideration of
the report referred to in clause(5), issue directions in accordance with the whole or any part
of that report.

* * * * *

346. The language for the time being authorised for use in the Union for official Purposes
shall be the official language for communication between one State and another State and
between a State and the Union:

Provided that if two or more States agree that the Hindi language should be the
official language for communication between such States, that language may be used
for such communication.

. * * * . *

348. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, until
Parliament by law otherwise provides—

(a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High Court,
(b) the authoritative texts—

(4 of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto be moved in either
House of Parliament or in the House or either House of the Legislature of a
State,

(४) ofall Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of a State and ofall
Ordinances promulgated by the President or the Governor of a State, and

(ii) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued under this
Constitution or under any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of a State,

shall be in the English language.
न . हर नि « *

02) * * * . * .

Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to any judgement, decree or order
Passed or made by such High Court.

* * . * * *

Official language
for communica-
tion between one
‘State and another
or between a State
and the Union,

Language to be
used in the
Supreme Court
and in the High
Courts and for
Acts, Bills, etc.


Directive of,
development of the
Hindi language.

351. It shall be the duty of the union to promote the spread of the Hindi language, to
develop itso that it may serve as a medium of expression forall the elements of the composite
culture of India and to secure its enrichment by assimilating without interfering with its
genius, the forms, style and expressions used in Hindustani and in the other languages of
India specified in the Eighth Schedule, and by drawing, wherever necessary or desirable, for
its vocabulary, primarily on Sanskrit and secondarily on other languages.

. . * * . .


A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Dr. A.D.K. Jeyaseelan, M.P)