1
Short title and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL,  2020
By
DR. THOL. THIRUMAA V ALA V AN,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)  Act,  2020.
(2) It shall come  into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 124 of the Constitution, in clause (2), after the existing  proviso, the following
proviso shall be added, namely:—
‘‘Provided further that the President shall ensure fair representation of backward
classes, minorities, women and different regions in making appointment of Judges
other than the Chief Justice of India.’’.
3. In article 145 of the Constitution, in clause (1),—
(a) in sub-clause (c), for the word "conferred", the word "guaranteed" shall be
substituted; and
Bill  No.  71 of  2020
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of article
124.
Amendment
of article
145.
5
10

2
Amendment
of article 217.
5
(b) after sub-clause (i), the following sub-clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘(ia) rules as to the rights of litigants;
(ib) rules as to the extraordinary relief or payment of compensation for
inordinate delays of the court,’’.
4. In article 217 of the Constitution, in clause (1), before the existing proviso, the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘Provided that the President shall ensure fair representation of backward classes,
minorities, women and different regions in making appointment of Judge of a High
Court other than the Chief Justice of a High Court:’’.

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Having ratified THE CHARTER OF THE UNITED NATIONS, and the ratification of
International Bill of Human Rights viz. Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948;
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966; International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 1966; and other treaties like International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 1965; Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, 1979; Convention on The Rights of the
Child, 1989 [and optional protocol 25 May, 2000 thereunder]; Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities, 2006. Also ILO Convention No. 107 concerning Indigenous Tribal
Populations Convention, 1957 and other Conventions No. 29, 100, 105, 111, 138, 182 as
ratified by Indian State, it has become necessary in view of the principles of Jus Cogens, Jus
Strictum and Pacta Sunt Servanda of international law and scope of Article 51(c), 263 and
entries 12 and 13 of Union List of Seventh Schedule to make the provisions of human rights
and fundamental freedoms an inalienable part of our Constitution.
This Bill seeks to amend articles 124, 145 and 217 of the Constitution with a view to—
(a) providing for representation of backward classes, minorities and women etc.
in appointment of Judges of Supreme Court;
(b) imposing an obligation on the Supreme Court to make rules as to the rights of
litigants and extraordinary relief or payment of compensation for inordinate delays of
the Court; and
(c) providing for representation of backward classes, minorities and women etc.
in appointment of Judges of High Court.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; THOL. THIRUMAAV ALAVAN
February  11, 2020.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * *
124. (1)*  *  *
(2) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant
under his hand and seal after consultation with such of the Judges of the Supreme Court and
of the High Courts in the States as the President may deem necessary for the purpose and
shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-five years:
Provided that in the case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the
Chief Justice of India shall always be consulted:
Provided further that—
(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his
office;
(b) a Judge may be removed from his office in the manner provided in clause (4).
* * * *
145. (1) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the Supreme Court
may from time to time, with the approval of the President, make rules for regulating generally
the practice and procedure of the Court including—
* * * *
(i) rules providing for the summary determination of any appeal which appears
to the Court to be frivolous or vexatious or brought for the purpose of delay;
* * * *
217. (1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant
under his hand and seal after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, the Governor of the
State, and, in the case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief
Justice of the High Court, and shall hold office, in the case of an additional or acting Judge,
as provided in article 224, and in any other case, until he attains the age of  sixty two years:
Provided that—
(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his
office;
(b) a Judge may be removed from his office by the President in the manner
provided in clause (4) of article 124 for the removal of a Judge of the Supreme Court;
(c) the office of a Judge shall be vacated by his being appointed by the President
to be a Judge of the Supreme Court or by his being transferred by the President to any
other High Court within the territory of India.
* * * *
Establishment
and
constitution
of Supreme
Court.
Rules of
Court, etc.
Appointment
and
conditions of
the office of
a Judge of a
High Court.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Thol. Thirumaavalavan,  M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5374LS(S3)—02-03-2020.