10

As INTRODUCED IN Lok 50888

17 DEC 200

THE RAPID ACTION FORCE BILL, 2004

Suet 1084, AHMED Saran, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for constitution of a Rapid Action Force to control communal riots in the
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

BE itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1, (7) This Act may ७६ called the Rapid Action Force Act, 2004.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. The Central Government shall constitute a Force to be known as the Rapid Action
Force for controlling communal riots in the country or in any part thereof and performing
such other duties as may be entrusted to it from time to time.

3. The Central Government shall deploy the Force constituted under section 2 of this
Act at the time of communal riots or where there is an apprehension of occurrence of
‘communal riots in any part of the country on a request from the concerned State Government.

Constitution
of Rapid
‘Action Force.

Deployment
of Rapid
Action Force.


2
Duty of 4. Every member of the Force shall be empowered to apprehend all persons |
member or 18 legally authorized to apprehend and for whose apprehension sufficient grounds exist.
Rapid Action
Force
Act not to be 5. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any ०
in derogation Jaw for the time being in force.
of other laws,
Power to 6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for the purpose

make rules. carrying out the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, s
rules may provide, for—

(a) the constitution, governance, command and maintenance of ‘discipline of
Force;

(6) the enrolment of persons to the Force and the recruitment of other members
of the Force;

(c) the conditions of service of members of the Force; and

(4) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which
provision is to be, or may be, made by rules,

(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, fora total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session or immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be. However, any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Even in the fifty-fifth year of Independence, communal riots continue to break out in
the country. Of late there has been some improvement, but our country is still facing the
‘menace of communal riots. India isa secular country and all people irrespective of their caste,
colour or creed have been guaranteed equal rights under the Constitution. Involvement of
external forces in inciting communal disturbances is one of the reasons for the. occurrence of
such incidents. The poor and innocent people easily fall prey to their evil design. The
outbreak of communal riots at one place affect the other parts of the country becaisse of false
propaganda and also due to rumours. Sometimes State Government machinery is unable to
act swiftly and control such communal riots. It is therefore necessary to constitute a separate
force to be known as Rapid Action Force to Prevent and control the communal riots in any
part of the country. The Bill seeks to make provision accordingly.

Hence this Bill.

New Dewan; IQBALAHMED SARADGI
August 1 8, 2004.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Rapid Action Force to control
‘communal riots in any part of the country. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. Itis likely to involve a recurring expenditure
of about rupees three hundred crore per annum.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore is also likely to be involved,



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. These rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
| power is, therefore, ofa normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for constitution of a Rapid Action Force to control communal riots in the
country and for matters connected therwith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—2321LS—17.09.2004.