1
Bill No. 71 of  2018
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
THE BETEL GROWERS (REMUNERATIVE PRICE AND WELFARE)
BILL, 2018
By
SHRI KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for payment of remunerative price to betel growers, insurance of betel crop
free of cost, comprehensive welfare of betel growers and setting up of betel research
centre and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Betel Growers (Remunerative Price and Welfare)
 Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN  LOK SABHA

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "betel" means the leaf of a plant grown in South and South East Asia and
chewed as mild stimulant;
(b) "betel grower" means a person who cultivates betel;
(c) "Centre" means Betel Research Centre established under section 3;
(d) "Fund" means Betel Growers Welfare Fund constituted under section 7; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Centre to be known as Betel Research Centre to study, research and suggest measures to
increase the productivity and quality of betel farming in the country.
(2) The headquarters of the Centre shall be at Mahoba district in the State of
Uttar Pradesh and the Centre may, with the previous approval of the Central Government,
establish branches of the Centre in different parts of the country.
(3) The Centre shall consist of such number of experts, officers and employees to be
appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of experts,
officers and employees of the Centre shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The Centre shall be operated by such rules as may be prescribed.
4. The Central Government shall procure the entire betel crop from the betel growers
in the country through such agency and in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. The Central Government shall after considering the following, determine the
remunerative price of betel every year—
(a) expenditure on construction of structures including bajra, mandap for betel
farming;
(b) increase in the price of pesticides, fertilisers and other inputs;
(c) total investment of betel growers; and
(d) such other factors as may be prescribed.
6. The entire betel produced by the betel growers shall be compulsorily insured free
of cost by the Central Government against natural calamities, fall in the productivity of
betel, fall in the price of betel and such other eventualities as may be prescribed.
7. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a fund to be known as the Betel
Growers' Welfare Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government and the State Government shall contribute to the Fund in
such ratio as may be prescribed.
8. The Fund shall be used for the following purposes, namely:—
(a) to provide financial assistance to betel growers for the expenditure on
construction of structures like bajra, mandap for the betel farming, loss to crop due to
pesticides, fertilisers, storm, excessive rain, hailstorming, flood, drought or in condition
of loss of productivity of betel;
(b) for the payment of compensation to the next kin of betel growers in the event
of their death;
(c) to provide free medical services to betel growers and their families;
(d) to provide assistance to betel growers in the event of disability; and
(e) for such other purposes as may be prescribed.
Definitions.
Betel Research
Centre.
Procurement
of betel crop.
Fixation of
remunerative
price of betel.
Insurance.
Betel Growers
Welfare Fund.
Utilisation of
Fund.
2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before
each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid both Houses
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
3

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Agriculture is the main source of income in the Bundelkhand region of the country.
Since many decades, condition of agriculture economy is fragile in Bundelkhand region due
to climate change and people are forced to migrate from this region due to unavailability of
other employment alternative. There is a need to upgrade the agricultural technology,
agriculture infrastructure development, investment, easy loan availability and simple
agriculture insurance scheme in Bundelkhand. With the continuous and integrated efforts,
the condition of agriculture may be improved in Bundelkhand.
Betel farming is being done in the Mahoba district of Bundelkhand region and also in
various parts of the country since ancient times. Mahoba betel is famous in the world. Betel
farming in fully controlled manner is very expensive but it creates employment opportunities
at very large scale. In Mahoba, betel farming is done in a co-operative manner which is done
by five to ten families collectively and surprisingly, this is very successful in this region
since long time. The structures like bajra and mandap are constructed to control the
humidity and temperature for betel farming. They are rare examples of scientific and technical
application of Indian traditional agriculture which has been used since 2000 years and
probably this is the most revolutionary application in India after the use of iron in agriculture.
However, betel, which has religious, cultural, medicinal and economic significance, is
fighting for its existence today, particularly in Bundelkhand region. On one hand, new
research is required for protection of betel farming, on the other hand, special provisions are
very much necessary for the welfare of betel growers.
This Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for improvement in betel production methods
through new research and special provisions for the welfare of betel growers.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL
January 22, 2018.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of Research Centre to study, research
and suggest measures to increase the productivity and quality of betel farming. Clause 4
provides for procurement of betel from betel growers by an agency to be set up by the
Central Government and fixation of remunerative prices for betel by the Central Government.
Clause 6 provides for compulsory free insurance by the Central Government of betel against
natural calamities. Clause 7 provides for constitution of a Betel Growers Welfare Fund to
which the Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute. Clause 8
provides for contribution of the Central Government and the State Government to the Betel
Growers Welfare Fund.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore will be
involved per annum.
A non-recurring annual expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for payment of remunerative price to betel growers, insurance of betel crop
free of cost, comprehensive welfare of betel growers and setting up of betel research
centre and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4168LS(S3)—28-02-2018.