THE  CONSTITUTION  (AMENDMENT) BILL,  2009
By
SHRI BAIJAY ANT PANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called  the Constitution  (Amendment) Act, 2009.
2. In  clause (1) of article 275 of the Constitution, after the second proviso, the following
provisos shall be added, namely:—
“Provided also that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as grants-
in-aid of the revenues of a State such capital and recurring sums as may be necessary to
enable that State to meet the costs of implementation of various welfare schemes or
developmental works undertaken by the State for the welfare of the people if that State is
unable to implement such schemes or works due to severe financial crisis:
Provided also that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India a sum of
rupees fourteen thousand crore as one time grants-in-aid of the revenues of the State of
Orissa and a sum of rupees five thousand crore every year to that State.”.
Short title.
Bill No.  71 of  2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of article 275.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Orissa is one of the economically, educationally, industrially and socially backward
and underdeveloped States of the Indian Union mainly due to consistent neglect by the
Centre. Moreover, nature too has not been kind to the State as many areas are drought prone
in the State. KBK districts have become synonymous with drought, hunger and backwardness.
The coastal areas are vulnerable to cyclones or super cyclone or even Tsunami. The State is
inhabited by tribals and poor people and it is faced with numerous problems such as severe
unemployment, lack of industrial development due to poor infrastructure, lack of healthcare
facilities resulting in high incidence of various diseases mainly the vector borne diseases like
malaria, waterborne diseases, T.B., Cancer and AIDS. The road network is in bad shape.
There is lack of educational facilities. This has resulted in severe poverty in the State.
Frequent cyclones and super cyclone in the recent past have hit the economy of the State
very hard. Present State Government is doing its level best to turn around the economy of
the State and bring prosperity there but this will require huge Central assistance.
The State Government of Orissa had recently demanded a Special Economic Package
of rupees fourteen thousand crore for implementation of various development projects and
welfare schemes for the people of Orissa. Thereafter, special funds to the tune of five thousand
crore rupees will be required every year. Article 275 of the Constitution provides for payment
of grants-in-aid of the revenues of various States which are in need of financial assistance
for various purposes. To enable the Centre to release funds to Orissa, amendment of this
article has become necessary.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BAIJAYANT PANDA
June 5, 2009.
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for grants-in-aid of the revenues of the State facing severe
financial crisis. It also provides for one time grant-in-aid to the tune of rupees fourteen
thousand crore and five thousand crore rupees as recurring annual expenditure. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve a recurring expenditure of rupees five thousand crore per
annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fourteen thousand crore would also be involved.
3

ANNEXURE
(EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA)
* * * * * *
* * * * * *
275.  (1) Such sums as Parliament may by law provide shall be charged on the
Consolidated Fund of India in each year as grants-in-aid of the revenues of such States as
Parliament may determine to be in need of assistance, and different sums may be fixed for
different States:
Provided that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as grants-in-aid
of the revenues of a State such capital and recurring sums as may be necessary to enable that
State to meet the costs of such schemes of development as may be undertaken by the State
with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of promoting the welfare of
Scheduled Tribes in that State or raising the level of administration of the Scheduled Areas
therein to that of the administration of the rest of the areas of that State:
Provided further that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as grants-
in-aid of the revenues of the State of Assam sums, capital and recurring, equivalent to—
(a) the average excess of expenditure over the revenues during the two years immediately
preceding the commencement of this Constitution in respect of the administration of the
tribal areas specified in Part I of the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule;
and
(b) the costs of such schemes of development as may be undertaken by that State with
the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of raising the level of administration
of the said areas to that of the administration of the rest of the areas of that State.
(1A) On and from the formation of the autonomous State under article 244A,—
(i) any sums payable under clause (a) of the second proviso to clause (1) shall, if
the autonomous State comprises all the tribal areas referred to therein, be paid to
the autonomous State, and, if the autonomous State comprises only some of
those tribal areas, be apportioned between the State of Assam and the autonomous
State as the President may, by order, specify;
(ii) there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of  India as grants-in-aid of
the revenues of the autonomous State sums, capital and recurring, equivalent to
the costs of such schemes of development as may be undertaken by the
autonomous State with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose
of raising the level of administration of that State to that of the administration of
the rest of the State of Assam.
(2) Until provision is made by Parliament under clause (1), the powers conferred on
Parliament under that clause shall be exercisable by the President by order and any order
made by the President under this clause shall have effect subject to any provision so made
by Parliament:
Provided that after a Finance Commission has been constituted no order shall be made
under this clause by the President except after considering the recommendations of the
Finance Commission.
* * * * * *
* * * * * *
4
Grants from
the Union to
certain
States

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
————
(Shri Baijayant Panda, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4083LS(S5)—31-10-2009.