AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

8 DEC: 208

Bill No. 71 of 2006

THE CINEMA ARTISTS WELFARE BILL, 2006
By
SHRIMATI JAYAPRADA, M.P.
A

BILL
to provide for measures for the welfare of cinema artists and for matters connected
therewith or incider:tal thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Cinema Artists Welfare Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

5 (3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “artist” means any person engaged in cinema industry and performing either
as an actor, dancer, singer, producer, photographer, editor or distributor of films or any
work connected with the production, editing and distribution of films and includes

10 casual workers employed from time to time;

(8) “cinema” means a feature film or a documentary or a short film;

Short title,
extent and
commencement.

Definitions.


2)
(c) “Fund” means the Cinema Artists Welfare Fund constituted under section 3
of the Act; :
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under the Act.

Cinema 3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a fund to be known as the Cinema Artists
Artists Welfare Fund.

Welfare Fund. 5
(2) The Fund shall consist of contributions made by Central Government, film
producers and donations received from individuals or organisations.

(3) The Fund shall be administered by a Board consisting of—
(i) the Minister of Information and Broadcasting as the ex-officio Chairman;

(ii) two representatives of film producers, as members to be nominated in such
manner as may be prescribed; and

(iii) two representatives of cinema artists as members to be nominated in such
manner as may be prescribed.

(4) The details regarding conditions of service and terms of appointment of members
of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed by rules to be made under this Act.

(5) The Cinema Artists Welfare Fund shall be utilized for the following purposes:

(i) payment of compensation in case of death or accident of an artist while
performing the job;

(ii) payment of premium of life insurance of artists;

(iii) payment of old age pension after an artist has attained the age of sixty
years and is not gainfully employed;

(iv) payment of disability assistance in case any artist is disabled due to any
reason while working in cinema industry;

(v) free health care facilities for the artists and their family members; and
(vi) housing facilities to the artists at subsidized rate.

Power to The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
make rules. —_carrying out the purposes of this Act.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Artists engaged in film industry fall in the category of unorganized workers and face a
lot of problems. They entertain the people but a great deal of personal risk is involved in their
work. Accidents occur frequently during shooting of the films and as a result many artists
sustain injuries while performing. They get a meagre amount as compensation for the loss or
injury suffered by them. They do not have proper facilities like health care, education for
their children, etc.

Today, the cinema industry generates considerable revenue for the country but nothing
is being done by the Government for the welfare of persons engaged in this profession.
Therefore, it becomes necessary to provide certain measures for welfare of the persons
engaged in the cinema industry.

The Bill seeks to provide for setting up of the Cinema Workers’ Welfare Fund providing
for insurance cover, educational facilities for the children of cinema workers, old age pension,
free health care and housing facilities to the workers engaged in the cinema industry.

Hence this Bill.

New De.ut; JAYAPRADA
July 25,2006.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM #8

>
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up the Cinema Artists Welfare Fund by the
Central Government for the welfare of workers engaged in cinema industry. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It
is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about Tupees five hundred crore per annum.

A non-recurring expenditure of about Tupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause4of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.


- LOK SABHA

A

BILL
to provide for measures for the welfare of cinema artists and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shrimati Jayaprada, M.P.)