"95 DEC 209 |

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

808 330 $0

Bill No. 71 of 2002

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002
By
‘Sues Priva RANIAN DasMunst, M.P.
A
BILL
{further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be itenacted by Parliament in the Fify-third Year of the Republic of India a follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2002. Short title and
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.

2. After article 371-1 of the Constitution, the following article shall be added, Insertion of
5. namely:— new article

371-3, Notwithstanding anything in the Constitution, the President may by Special
order made with respect tothe State of West Bengal, provide for special responsibility Provision wit
of the Governor for— respect


z

(a) the establishment of separate development board for the areas comprising
Darjeeling, Uttar Dinajpur, Dakshin Dinajpur, Cooch-Behar, Jalpaiguri and Malda to be
called Uttar Banga in the State of West Bengal with the provision that a report on the
working of the board so constituted will be placed each year before the State Legislative
Assembly.

(8) the equitable allocation of funds for development expenditure over the said
areas, subject to the requirements of the State as a whole; and

(©) creating adequate infrastructure for economical, educational, technological,

social and overall progressive development under the control of the State Government
in respect of all the said areas, subject to the requirements of the State as a whole.”.

10



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The State has to ensure that various sections and segments of the society under its
administrative control get an equitable consideration and opportunity for all around growth
and development. This requires creation of adequate infrastructure for overall progressive
development especially economical, educational, technical and social development under
the control of the State Governments subject to the requirements of the State as a whole.
However, the geo-physical and logistic location of certain areas warrant and necessitate a
special consideration. The Districts of Darjecling, Uttar Dinajpur, Dakshin Dinajpur,
Cooch-Behar, Jalpaiguri and Malda are such areas in the State of West Bengal which merit
special consideration. The present Bill is intended to give these districts a separate
nomenclature of “Uttar Banga” and provide for the establishment of a separate Development
Board to ensure its proper growth and development.

New Deut, PRIYA RANJAN DASMUNSI.
November 1, 2002.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Priya Ranjan’ Dasmunsi, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—3697LS—13-11-2002.