As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
Bill No. 72 of 1976. 
THE BURN COMPANY AND INDIAN STANDARD WAGON 
COMPANY (NATIONALISATION) BILL, 1976 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title &nd commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISITION OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE TWO COMPANIES 
3. Transfer and vestin'g in Central Government of the undertakings of 
the two companies. 
4. General effect of vesting. 
5. Owners of the two companies to be liable for certain prior liabilities. 
6. Power of the Central Government to rUrect vesting of the undertak-
ings of the two companies in a Government company. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
7. Payment of amount. 
8. Payment of further amount. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THr: TWO COMPANIES 
9. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the two campanies. 
10. Duty of persons in charge of management of the undertakings of 
the two companies to deliver all assets, etc. 
11. Accounts and audit. 
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF THE TWO COMPANIES 
12. Employment of certain employees to continue. 
13. PrOVIdent and other funds . 
.. --- -

CHAPTER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
CLAUSES 
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments. 
15. Payment by the Central Government to the. Commissioner. 
16. Certain powers of the Central Government or Government 
company. 
17. Claims to be made t() the Commissioner. 
18. Priority of claims. 
19. Examination of claims. 
20. Admission ()r rejection of claims. 
21. Disbursement of money by Commissioner to claimants. 
22. Disb:.1rsements of amounts to the two companies. 
23. Unctisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited with the general 
revenue account. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
24. Assumption of liability. 
25. Act to have overriding effect. 
26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central 
Government or Government company. 
27. Penalties. 
28. Offences by companies. 
29. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
30. Delegation of powers. 
31. Power to make rules. 
32. Power to remove difficulties. 
33. Declaration as to the policy of the State. 
34. Repeal and saving. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 

BID No. 72 of 1976. 
THE BURN COMPANY AND INDIAN STANDARD WAGON 
COMPANY (NA TIONALISATION) BILL, 1976 
A 
BILL 
to pTovide fOT the acquisition of the undeTtakings of the Bum 'and Company 
Limited and the Indian Standard Wagon Company Limited with a vieW 
to ensuring the continuity of the production of goods which aTe vital 
to the needs of the economy of the c01mtTY and fOT the fulfilment of 
the Co-ntTacts fOT the supply of railway wagons abr.oad and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-seventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
S 1. (1) This Act may be called the Burn Company and Indian Standard Short 
Wagon Company (Nationalisation) Act, 1976. title and 
com-
(2) The provisions of sections 27 and 28 shall come into force at once 
and the remaining provisions of this A~t sQall be deemed to have come 
into forc~ on the 1st 4ay of April, 1975. 
mence-
ment. 

Deftnitions. 
Transfer 
and vesting 
in Central 
Govern-
ment of 
the under-
takings of 
the two 
companies. 
General 
e1fectof 
vesting. 
2. In this Act, unless the cootext otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointen day" means the 1st day of April, 1975; 
(b) "Burn and Company Limited" includes its wholly owned 
subsidiary company, namely, Coburn Properties Limited, having its 
registered office at 10 C, Hungerford Street, Calcutta-17; 5 
(c) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Payments 
appointed under section 14; 
(d) "Custodian" means the Custodian appo,inted under sub-section 
(2) of section 9 to take over, or carry on, the management of the 
undertakings of either or both of the two companies; 10 
(e) "Ordinance" means the Bum Company and Indian Standard 
Wagon Company (Nationalisation) Ordinance, 1976; 8 of 1976. 
(f) "notification" means al notification published in the Official 
Gazette; 
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; IS 
(h) "specified date" means such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification, specify for the purpose of any provision of this 
Act, and different dates may be specified for different provisions of 
this Act; 
(i) "two companies" means BUrn and Company Limited and 20 
Indian Stannard Wagon Company Limited, being companies as defined 
in the Companies Act, 1956, and both having their registered offices 
at lO-C, Hungerford Street, Calcutta-17; 
1 of 1956. 
(j) words and expressions used herein and not defined but 
defined in the Companies Act, 1956, have the meanings, respectively, 25 1 of 1956. 
assigned to them in that Act. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUIsmoN OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE TWO COMPANIES 
3. On the appointed day, the undertakings of each of the two companies, 
and the right, title and interest of each of the two companies in relation 30 
to such undertakings, shall stand transferred to, and shall vest absolutely 
in, the Central Government. .... 
4. (1) The undertakings of each of the two companies referred to in 
section 3 shall be deemed to include aU assets, rights, lease-hOlds, powers, 
authorities and privileges and all property, movable and immovable, includ- 3S 
ing lands, buildings, workshops, stores, instruments, machinery and equip-
ment, cash balances, cash on hand, reserve funds, investments and book 
debts and all other rights and interests in, or arising. out of, such property 
as were immediately before the appointed day in the ownership, possesaion, 
power ()r control of either of the two companies, whether within or outside 40 
India, and all books of account, registers and all other documents of what-
ever nature relating thereto, and shall also be deemed to include the liabi-
lities and obligations spe:ified in sub-section (2) of section 5. 
(2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Gov-
ernment under section 3 shall, by force of such vesting, be freed and 4S 

3 
d'i~charged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and all 
other incumbrances affecting it, and any attachment, injunction or decree 
01' order of any court restricting the use of such properties in any manner 
or appointing any receiver in respect of the whole or any part of such 
S property shall be deemed to have been withdrawn. 
(3) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Act 
in the Central Government and every person holding any charge, lien or 
other interest in, or in relation to, any such property shall give, within 
such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the 
10 Commissioner of such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest. 
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee 
of any property referred to in sub-section (3) or any other person holding 
any char~e, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such property 
shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and interests, pay-
IS ment of the mortga'ge money or other dues, in whole or in part, out of the 
amount specified, in relation to the company owning such property, in the 
First Schedule, but no such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest shall 
be enforceable against' any property which has vested in the Central 
Government. 
20 (5) If, on the appointeci. day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of 
Whatever nature in relation to any matter specified in sub-section (21) of 
section 5. in respect of any undertaking of either of the two compariies, 
instituted or preferred by or against either of the two companies, is pend-
ing, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be. in any way, prejudi-
2S cially affected by reason of the transfer of the undertakings of either of 
the two companies or of anything contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal 
or other proceeding may be continuerl, prosecuted or enforced by or against 
the Central Government, or, where the undertakings of the two companies 
are directed, under section 6. to vest in a Government company, against 
30 that Government company. 
5. (1) Every liability, other than the liability specified in sub-section 
(2), of each of the two companies in respect of any period prior to the 
appointed day, shall be the liability of the concerned company and shall 
be enforceable against it, and not against the Central Government, or, 
35 where the undertakings of the two companies are directed, under section 
6, to vest in a Government company, ,against that Government company. 
(2) Any liability arising in respect of-
(a) the loans advanced by the Central Government, or a State 
Government, or both, to either of the two companies, or to both (to-
40 gether with interest due thereon) after th,c. management of the un-
dertakings of the concerned company had been taken over by the 
Central Government; 
(b) the wages, salaries and other dues of employees of each of the 
two companies in respect of any period after the management of the 
4S undertakings of the two companies had been taken over by the Central 
Government, 
shall, on and from the appointed day, be the liability of the Central Gov-
ernment or of the Government company aforesaid and shall be discharged 
bv that Government or Government company, as and when repayment of 
50 s~cb loans or amounts becomes due or as and when such wages, salaries Or 
other dues become due and payable. 
Owners 
of the 
two com-
panies to 
bellable 
for certain 
prior 
liabilities. 

Pow-erof 
the Central 
Govern-
mentto 
direct 
vesting of 
the under-
takinis of 
the two 
companies 
in a 
Govern-
ment 
company. 
" (3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that,-
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this section or in any 
other provision of this Act, no liability, other than the liability specified 
in sub-section (2), of either of the two companies in relation to its 
undertakings in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall S 
be enforceable against the Central Government, or, where the under-
takings of the two companies are directed, under section 6, to vest in a 
Government company, against that Government company; 
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other 
authority in relation to the undertakings of either of the two com- 10 
panie!t, passed after the appointed day, in respect of any matter, claim 
or dispute, not being a matter, claim or dispute in relation to any 
matter referred to in sub-section (2), which arose before that day, 
shall be enforceable against the Central Government or, where the 
undertakings of the two companies are directed, under section 6, to IS 
vest in a Government company, against that Government company; 
(c) no liability incurred by either of the two companies before the 
appointed day, for the contravention, of any provision of law for the 
time being in force, shall be enforceable against the Central Govern-
ment, or, where the undertakin'gs of the two companies are directed, 20 
under section 6, to vest in a Government company, against that 
Government company. 
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, the 
Central Government may, if it is satisfierl that a Government company is 
willing to comply, or has complied, with such terms and conditions as that 25 
Government may think fit to impose. direct, by notification, that the 
undertakings of the two companies and the right, title and interest of 
the two companies in relation to their respective undertakings which have 
vested in that Government under section 3, and such of the liabilities of 
the two Companies as are specified in sub-section (2) of section 5, shall 30 
instead of continuing to vest in the Central Government, vest in the 
Government company either on the date of the notification or on such 
earlier or later date (not being a date earlier than the appointed day) as 
may be ~pecified in the notification. 
(2) Where the right, title ann interest, and the liabilities referred to in 35 
SUb-section (2) of section 5, of each of the two companies, in relation 
to its undertakings, vest in a Government company under sub-section 
(1), the Government company shall, on and from the date of such 
vesting, be deemed to have become the owner in relation to 1<uch 
undertakings, and all the rights and liabilities of the Central Govern- 40 
ment in relation to such undertakings shall, on and from the date of 
such vesting, be deemed to, have becpme the rights and liabilities, res-
pectively, of the Government company. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
4S 
Payment 7. For the trans.fer to, and vesting in, the Central Government, under 
of amount. section 3, of the undertakings of eaeh of the two companies and the right, 
title and interest of each of th,~ two com~anies in relation to suc:h under-
takings, there shall be given by the Central Governm",nt t. each of 

· .) i., "-: ~.' :~ ¥-," .. ,,\ I 
·I'dl-"", 
the two companies, in cash and in the manner specified in Chapter VI, 
an amount equal to the amount specified against the name of such com-
panyin the First Schedule. 
8. (1) In consideration of the retrospective operation of the provisions 
S of sections 3, 4 and 5, there shall also be given, in cash, by the Central 
Government to each of the two companies an amount equal to an amount, 
calculated at the rates specified in section 5 of the Burn Company and 
Indian Standard Wago,p Company (Taking Over of Management) Act. 
57 of 1973. 1973. for the period commencing on the appointed day and ending on the 
IOdate of promulgation of the Ordinance. 
(2) The amount specified in section 7, and the amount determined 
under sub-section (1), shall carry simple interest at .tbe rate of four per 
ceDt. per annum for the period commencing on the date of promulgation 
.f the Ordinance and ending on the date on which payment of such 
IS amount is made by the Central Government to the Commissioner. 
(3) The amounts netermined in accordance with the provisions of Slb-
sections (1) and (2) shall be given to each of the companies in addition 
to the amount specified against its name in the First Schedule. 
CHAPTER IV 
20 MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE TWO COMPANIES 
9. (1) The general superintendence, direction, control and management 
of the affairs and business of the undertakings of each Of the two com-
panies. the right, title and interest in relation to which have vested in 
the Central Government under section 3. shall,-
2S (a) where a direction has been made by the Central Government 
under sub-section (1) of section 6, vest in the Government companY 
specifie(\ in such direction, or 
(b) where no such direction has been made by the Central Gov-
ernment, vest in one or more Custodians appointed by the Central 
30 Government under sub-section (2), 
and thereupon the Government company so specified or the Custodian so 
appointed, as the case may be, shall be entitled to exercise all such powers 
and do all such things as either, or both, of the companies is or are 
authorised to exercise and do in relation to its or their undertakings. 
3S (2) The Central Government may appoint one or more individuals or 
a Government company as the Customan of the undertakings of either, or 
both. of the two companies in relation to which no direction has been 
made by it under sub-section (1) of section 6. 
10. (1) On the vestin'g, of the management Of the undertakings of the 
40 two companies in a Government company or on the appointment of a 
Custodian, all persons in charge of the management of the undertakings 
of either of the two companies immediately before such vesting or appoint-
ment, shall be bound to deliver to the Government company or the Custo-
dian, as the case may be, all assets, books of account, registers or other 
4S documents in their custody relating to the undertakings of such 
company. 
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may deem 
desirable in the circumstances of the case to the Government company 
Payment 
of further 
amount. 
Mana8'e-
ment. etc., 
of the 
under-
taldnpof 
the two 
companies. 
Duty of 
persons in 
charge of 
man&ie-
mentof 
the under-
takings of 
the two 
companies 
tod~liver 
all assets. 
etc. 

Accounts 
and audit. 
Employ-
mentof 
certain 
employees 
to con-
tinue. 
or the Custodian as to its or his powers and rluties and the Government 
company or Custodian may also, if it or he so desires, apply to the Central 
Government at any time for instructions as to the manner in which the 
management of the undertakings of the two companies shall be conducted 
by it or him or in relation to any other matter arising in the course of 5 
such management. 
(3) The Custodian shall receive from the funds of the undertakings, in 
relation to which he is the Custodian, such remuneration as the Central 
Government may fix and shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central 
Government. 
11. The Custodian of the undertakings of either, or both, of the com-
panies shall maintain an account of the undertakings of the concernen 
company or companies in such form and manner and under such conditions 
10 
as may be prescribed and the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956, shall 1 of 1966. 
apply to the audit of the account so maintained as they apply to the IS 
audit of the accounts of a company. 
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF THE TWO COMPANIES 
lZ. (1) Every person who is a workman within the meaning of the 
Inrlustrial Disputes Act, 1947, and has been, immediately before the appoint- 20 14011947. 
ed day, employed in any undertaking of either of the two companies shall 
become, on anrl from the appointed day, an employee of the Central Gov-
ernment or, as the case may be, of the Government company in which the 
right, title and interest of the two companies in relation to their under-
takings have vested under this Act, and shall hold office or service under 25 
the Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be, 
with the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other 
matters as would have been admissible to him if there had been no such 
vesting and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment under 
the Central Government or the Government company, as the case may 30 
be, is duly terminated or until his remuneration and other conditions of 
service are duly altered by the Central Government or the Government 
company, as the case may be. 
(2) Every person who is not ,a workman within the meanin'g of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, and who has been, immediately before 35 14: of 11147. 
the appointed day, employed in any unnertaking of either of the two 
companies shall become, as from the appointed day, an employee of the 
Central Government or the Government company, and shall hold office or 
service therein by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon 
the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as 40 
to pension and gratuity and other matters as would have been admissible 
to him if the undertakings of the company in which he was employeci had 
not been transferred to, and vested in, the Central Government or the 
Government company and shall continue to do so unless and until his 
employment in the Central Government or the Government company is 45 
duly terminated or until his remuneration, terms and conditions of emPloy-
ment are duly altered by the Central Government or the Government 
company, as the case may be. 

, 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Oiaputel 
14 of 194". Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer of 
the services of any officer or other person employed in any undertaking of 
either of the two companies, to the Central Government or the Govern-
5 ment company shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any 
compensation under this Act or any other law for the time being in force 
and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other 
authority. 
(4) Where, under the terms of any contract of service or otherwise, 
10 any person whose services become transferred to the Central Government 
or the Government company by reason of the provisions of this Act is 
entitled to any arrears of salary or wages or any payments for any leave 
not availed. of or other payment, not being payment by way of gratuity 
or pension, such person may, except to the extent of such liability which 
IS has been taken over by the Central Government or the Government com-
pany under sub-section (2) of section 5, enforce his claim against the 
company by which he was employed immediately before such transfer, 
but not against the Central Government or the Government company. 
13. (1) Where either of the two companies have established a p!'ovi- Provident 
20 dent fund, superannuation, welfare or other fund for the benefit of the and other 
persons employed in any of its und~'gs, the monies relatable to the funds. 
officers or other employees, whose services have become transferrecl by or 
under this Act-to the Central Government or the Government company 
shall, out of the monies standing, on the appointed day, to the credit of 
25 such provirioent fund, superannuation, welfare or other fund, stand trans-
ferred to, and vest in, the Central Government 'Or the Government com-
pany, as the case may be. 
(2) The monies which stand transferred under sub-section (1') to the 
Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be, 
shall be dealt with by that Government or Government company in such 
30 manner as may be prescribed. 
CHAPrER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
14. (1) The Central Government shall, for the purpose of disbursing the 
amounts payable under seeiion 7, section 8, and sub-section (2) of section 
35 15, to each of the two companies, by notification, appoint a commissioner 
of Payments. 
(2) 'lbe CeD.tral Government may appoint such other persons as it 
may think fit ,to assist the Commissioner and thereupon the Commill-
sioner may authorise one or more of such persons abo to exercise all 
40 or aDy ef the powers exercisable by him under this Act and different 
persoIlII lI18y be authorised to exercise different powers. 
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of 
the powers exercisable by the Commissioner may exercise those powers 
in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have been eon-
45 ferred on that person directly by this Act and not hy way of authorisa-
tion. 
Appoint-
mentol 
Comma-
sionerol 
Payment •. 

Payment 
by th'e 
Central 
Govem-
mentto 
the Com-
millioner. 
Certain 
powers 
of the 
Central 
Govem-
mentor 
Govern-
ment 
eompany. 
8' 
(4) The salaries and allowances of .the Commissioner and other pe1'01 
SODS appointed under this section shall be defrayed out of the Consolida-
ted Fund of India. 
15. (1) The Central Government shall, within thirty days from the 
specified date, pay in cash to the Commissioner, for payment to each of j 
the two companies,-
(a) an amount .~ual to the amount specified against the name of 
such company in the First Schedule; and 
(b) an amount equal to the amount payable to each of the two 
companies under section 8. 
(2) In addition to the sums referred to in sub-section (1), there shall 
be paid by the Central Government to the Commissioner, in cash, such 
amount, payable under section 5 of the Bum Company and Indian Stand-
10 
ard Wagon Company (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973, to each 67 of 19'18. 
of the two companies in relation to the period commencing on the date IS 
on which the management of the undertakings of each of the two eom-
panieji was taken over by the Central Government and ending on the 
appointed day, as remains unpaid. 
(3) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in 
favour of the Commissioner, in the Public Account of India, and f!!Very 20 
amount pain under this Act to the Commissioner shall be deposited by 
him to the credit of the said deposit account and the said deposit account 
shall be operated by the Commissioner. 
(4) Separate records shall be maintained by the Commissioner in 
respect of the undertakings of each of the two companies in relation to 25 
which payments have been made to him under this Act. 
(5) Interest accruing on the amounts standing to the credit of the 
deposit account referred to in sub-section (3) shall enure to the benefit 
of the two companies. 
16. (1) The Central Government or the Goverrlment company, as the 30 
case may be, shall be entitlen. to receive, up to the specified date, to the 
exclusion of all other persons, any money due to either of the two com-
panies, in relation to ~he undertakings which have vested in the Central 
Government or the Government company, ,ealised after the appointed 
day, notwithstanding that the realisation pertains to a period prior to the 35 
appointed day. 
(2) The Central Government or the Government company, as the case 
may be, may make a claim to the Commissioner with regard to every 
payment made by that Government after the appointed day for discharg-
ing any liability of either of the two companies, not being any liability 40 
specified in sub-section (2) of section 5, in relation to any peri-od prior to 
the appointeri. day, and evfYrY such claim shall have priority, in accordance 
with the priorities attaching, under this Act, to the matter in relation 
to which such liability has been discharged by the Central Government 
or the Government company. 
(3} Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of either of 
the two companies in respect of any transaction prior to the appointed day 
which have not been discharged on or before the specified date shall be 
tile liabilities of the respective company. 
45 

, 
17. Every person having a claim against either of the two compa-
nies shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thirty days 
from the specified date: 
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was 
S preventect by sufficient cause from preferring the claim within the said 
period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further period 
of thirty days, but not thereafter. 
18. The claims arising out of the matters specified in the Second Sche-
liule shall have priorities in accordance with the following principles, 
10 namely:-
(a) Category I shall have precedence over all other categories 
and Category II shall have precedence over Category ill, and so on; 
(b) the claims specified in each of the categories, except Category 
IV, shall rank equally and be paid in full, but, if the amount is insufti-
IS cient to! meet such claims in full, they shall abate in equal propor+:ions 
and be paid accorciingly; 
(c) the liabilities specified in Category IV shall be discharged, 
subject to the priorities specified in this section, in accordance with 
the terms of the secured loans and the priority, inter se, of such loans; 
20 and 
(d!) the question of dischargin'g any liability with regard to a 
matter specified in a lower category shall arise only if a surplus is 
left after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately higher 
category. 
25 19. (1) On receipt of the claims made unner section 17, the Commis-
sioner shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in the 
Second Schedule and examine the same in accordance with such order 
of priorities. 
(2) If, on examination of the claims,· the Commissioner is of opinion 
30 that the amount paid to him under this Act is not sufficient to meet the 
liabilities specified in any lower category, he shall not be required to 
examine the claims in respect of such lower category. 
20. (1) After examining the claims with reference to the priorities set 
out in the Second Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a certain date on 
3S or before which every claimant shall file the proof of his claim or be 
excluded from the benefit of the rUsbursement made by the Commissioner. 
(2) Not less than fourteen days' notice of the date so fixed shall be 
given by advertisement in one issue of the daily newspaper in the English 
language and one issue of such daily newspaper in the regional language 
40 as the Commissioner may consider suitable, and every such notice shall 
call upon the claimant to file the proof of his claim with the Commissioner 
within the time specified in the advertisement. 
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the 
time specified by the Commissioner shall be excluded from the disburse-
45 ments marie by the Commissioner. 
Clalmsto 
bemacte 
to the 
Comma-
_OIler. 
Priority 
olClalml. 
~na­
tionol 
claJma. 
AdmiaBion 
fir reJec-
tionot 
clalmI. 

Diaburae-
mentof 
money by 
Commia-
aioD8I'to 
claimants. 
,l)Ubarse-
ments of 
amounts 
to the 
two 
companies. 
10 
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his 
opinion, be necessary and after giving the COJlcerned company an oppor-
tunity of refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole 
or in part. 5 
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own pro-
cedure in all matters arising out of th~ discharge of his functions, includ-
ing the place or places at which he will hold his sitting and shall, for the 
purpose of making any investigation under this Act, have the same powers 
as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while 10 5 of 1908. 
trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:-
(4) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness 
and examining him on oath; 
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other 
material object producible as evidence; 15 
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of 
witnesses. 
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be 
a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the 20 
Indian Penal Code and the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a civil 45 of 1860. 
court for the purposes of section 345 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973. 2 of 1974. 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commis-
sioner, may prefer an appeal against the decision to the principal civil 25 
court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction 
the registered office of the concerned company is situated: 
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is 
appointed to be a Commissioner, such appeal shall lie to the High Court 
at Calcutta and such appeal shall be heard and disposerl. of by not less 30 
than two Jud'ges of that High Court. 
21. After admitting a claim under this Act, the amount due in respect 
of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or persons 
to whom such sums are due and on such payment. the liability of each 
of the' two companies in respect of such claim shall stand discharged. 3S 
ZZ. (1) If, out of the monies paid to him in relation to the undertak-
ings of either of the two companies, there is a balance left after meeting 
the liabilities as specified in the Second Schedule, the CommiSSioner shall 
disburse such balance to the concerned company. 
(2) Where the possession of any machinery, equipment or other pro-
perty, has vested in the Central Government or a Government company 40 
under this Act, but such machinery, eqUipment or other property does not 
belong to either of the two companies, it shall be lawful for the Central 
Government or the Government cOjIllpany to continue to possess such 
machinery or eqUipment or other property on the same terms and condi-
tions under which they were possessed by either of, or both, the companies 4S 
immediately before the> 1st day of April, 1975. 

11 
23. Any money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed 
or unclaimed for a period of three years from the last day on which the 
disbursement was made, shall be transferred by the CommiSSioner to the 
gE'neral revenue account of the Central Government; but a claim to any 
S money so transferred may be preferred to the Central GQvernment by the 
person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such transfer 
had not been made,the order, if any, for payment of the claim being treat-
ed as an order for the refund o'f revenue. 
10 
CHAPTER VII 
MIscELLANEOUS 
24. (1) Where any liability Oif either of the two companies arising out 
of any item specified in Category I of the Second Schedule is not discharged 
.fully by the Commissioner out of the amounts paid to him under this Act, 
the Commissioner shall intimate in writing to the Central Government 
IS the ext.ent of the liability which remains undischarged, and to that e;:tent 
the liability shall be assumed by the Central Government. 
(2) The Central Government may, by order, direct the Government 
company to take over any liability assumed by that Government under 
sub-section (1) amI on receipt of such direction, it shall be the duty of 
ao the Government company to discharge such liability. 
25. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any-
thing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force or in any instrument 'having effect by virtue of any law, 
other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
2S other authority. 
26. (1) Every contract entered into by either of the two companies 
in relation to any of its undertakings which have vested in the Central 
Government under section 3 for any service, sale or supply, and in force 
immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry of. 
30 one hundred and eighty ~ys from the date of promUlgation of the Ordin-
ance, cease to have effect unless such contract is, before the expiry of 
that period, ratified, in writing, by the Central Government, or Govern-
ment company, and in ratifying such contract the Central Government 
or Government company may make such alteration or modification therein 
35 as it may think fit: 
Provided that the Central Government or Government company shall 
not omit to ratify a contract and shall not make any alteration or modi-
fication in a contract unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly 
onerous or has been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental to the 
40 interests of the Central Government or the Government company. 
(2) The Central Government or Government company shall not omit 
to ratify a contract, and, shall not make any alteration or mcwtiftcation 
therein, except after 'giving to the parties to the contract a reasonable 
op~ortunity of being heard and except after recorciing in writing its rea-
45 sons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any alteration or 
modification therein. 
Undis-
burSed ot 
unclaimed 
amount to 
be 
deposited 
with the 
general 
revenue 
account. 
Assump-
tion ot 
liability, 
Act to 
have 
over-
riding 
effect. 
Contracts 
to C'ease 
to have 
eftect 
unless 
ratified by 
the Cenkal 
Govern-
mentor 
Govern-
ment 
company. 

Penalities. 
Offences 
by com-
panies. 
12 
27. Any person who,-
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property 
forming part of any undertaking of either of the two companies, 
wrongfully withholds such property from the Central Government or 
Government company; or 
(b) wrongfully obtains possesion of, or retains, any property 
forming part of any undertaking of either of the two companies, 
or wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Government 
or Government company or any person or body of persons specified 
5 
by that Government or Government company, any document relat- 10 
ing to such undertaking, which may be in his possession, custody or 
control, or fails to deliver to the Central Government or Government 
company or any person or body of persons specified by that Govern-
ment or Government company, any assets, books of account, registers 
or other documents in his possession, custody or control relating to 15 
the undertakings of either of the two companies; or 
(c) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part 
of any undertaking of either of the two companies or prefers any 
claim which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be false 
or grossly inaccurate, 20 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to two years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, 
or with both. 
28. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time when the offence was committed 25 
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of 
the business of the co,mpany, as well as the company, shall be deemed to 
be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 30 
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due dili-
gE:nce to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 3S 
pr~ved that· the offence has been committed with the consent or conni-
vance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, 
manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 40 
accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 45 

13 
19. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the Central Government or any officer of that Government or the Custo-
dian or the Government company or other person authorised by that 
Government or Government company for anything which is in good 
S faith done or intended to ,be aone under this Act. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
Government or any of its officers or other employees of the Governmen~ 
company or any officer or other person authorised by that company for 
any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good 
to faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
30. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all 
or any of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the 
power conferred by section 31, may also be exercised by such person 
or persons as may be specified in the notification. 
IS (2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub-section 
(1), the person to whom such power has been delegated shall act under 
the direction, control a~d supervision of the Central Government. 
31. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules 
for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
Protection 
of action 
taken in 
good 
faith. 
Delegation 
of powers. 
Power 
to make 
20 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the rules. 
foregoing powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
mAtters, namely:-
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an inti-
mation referred to in sub-section (3) of section 4 shall be given; 
25 (b) the form and the manner in which and the conditions 
under which the Custodian shall maintain the accounts as required 
by in section 11; 
(c) the manner in which the monies in any provident fund or 
other fund, referred to in section 13, shall be dealt with; 
30 (d) any other matter which is required. to be, or may be, 
prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which, 
3S may be comprised in one seS'Sion or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should 
not be made, the rule shal1 thereafter have effect only in such modified 
40 form or he of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule. 
32. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the prOVISIOns of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the 
45 provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty: 
~rovided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of 8 
perIod of two years from the date on which this Act receives the assent 
or the President. 
Power to 
remove 
difflcultiea. 

f>eciara. 
tion as 
to the 
policy 
of the 
State. 
Repeal 
and 
saving. 
14 
33. It is hereby declared that this Act is for giving effect to the poiiey 
of the State towards securing the principles specified in clause (b) of 
article 39 of the Constitution. 
ExpZanation.-In this section, "State" has the same meaning as in 
article 12 of the Constitution. 
:M. (1) The Burn Company and Indian Standard Wagon Company 
(Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973, and the Bum Company and 
Indian Standard Wagon Company (Nationalisation) Ordinance, 1976, are 
hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal,-
(a) anything doOne or any action taken by the Custodian in 
exercise of the powers of the Board of Management of the two! com-
panies at any time within the period during which the management 
s 
10 
of the undertakings of the two companies remained vested in the 
Central Government or at any time before the date on which this Act IS 
receives the assent of the President, shall be deemed to have been 
done or taken in accordance with law; 
(b) anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance so 
repealed shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corres-
ponding provisions of this Act. 20 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See sections 7, 8 and 15 (2)] 
S1. Name of the company 
No. 
1. Burn and Company Limited 
2. Indian Standard Wagon Company Limited 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See sections 18, 19, 20 and 24) 
Amount 
(Rupees in lakhs) 
1,388.00 25 
1,135.00 
ORDER OF PRIORITIES FOR THE DISCHARGE OF LIABILITIES OF THE TWO COMPANIES 
PART "A" 
Post-take-over management period 
CategO'l'Y 1-
(a) Loans advanced .by banks. 
(b) Loans advanced by the Industrial Reconstruction Corporation of 
India. . 35 
(c) Credit availed of for purposes of trade or manufacturing 
operatioll'B. 
Category 11-
(a) Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other dues of Central Govern-
ment or a State Government. 40 
<b) Sales tax; rates and taxes; contributions to be made to the 
Employees' State Insurance Fund, and Additional .Dearness Allowance 
payable to employees. 
57 of 1973. 
8 of 1976. 

15 
PART "B" 
Pre-take-over managemen.t period 
Ct1t~gory 111-
ArrellI'l in relatioR to provident fund, salaries and wages and other 
5 amounts due to employees. 
Category IV-
Secured loaM. 
Category V-
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or any other dues to the Central Govern-
]0 ment, a State Government, a local authority or a State Electricity Board. 
Category VI-
(a) Any credit availed of for purpose of trade or manufacturing 
operations. 
(b) Any other dues. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bum and Company Limited and the Indian Standard Wagon 
Company Limited are inter-linked, both financially and production-wise. 
These two Companies were engaged in the production of goods which are 
vital to the needs of the economY of the country, such as, railway wagons 
and components thereof, steel structurals, iron castings, forgings and the 
like and also other goods needed by the iron and steel industry. 
2. Both the Companies were functioning reasonably well till 1966-87. 
after which, due to mismanagement, there was a steady decline in the 
production of the Companies. Towards the middle of 1973, the Companies 
reached a stage at which their undertakings were on the verge of closure. 
As the closure of the undertakings of the two Companies woUld have 
adversely affected the production of commQdities vital to the needs of the 
country and also would have prejudicially affected the commitment of 
the Government of India with regard to the export of railway wagons. 
the Central Government took over the management of the undertakings 
of the Companies, pending nationalisation of such undertakings, by I a Par-
liamentary legislation with effect from the 19th December. 1973. 
3. The liabilities of both the Companies far exceeded the value of their 
assets at the time when the management of the undertakings of the 
Companies was taken over. After the taking over of the management 
of the undertakings of the Companies, the Central Government took a 
number of steps to improve the operation of such undertakings; and, as 
a result of such steps, both the Companies have shown satisfactory up-
ward trends in production. However, the liabilities of both the Com-
panies with regard to the payment of interests on loans advanced by 
banks, particularly in relati~ to the credit facilities made available 
to them by the banks, came up to as high as Rs. 1.5 lakhs per day. 
The liqUidity position of the Companies was, consequently, going down 
steeply. In the circumstances, the Burn Company and Indian Standard 
Wagon Company (Nationalisation) qrdinance, 1976 (8 of 19(6) was 
promulgated by the President to provide for the acquisition of the un-
dertakings of the two Companies. 
4. The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance and also to repeal the 
Parliamentary legislation by which the management of the undertakings 
of the two Companies was taken over by the Central Government. 
NEW DELHI; T. A. PAl. 
The 4th August. 1976. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No.3 (2) /76/HM-nI, dated the 5th August, 1976 from 
Shri T. A. Pai, Minister of Industry and Civil Supplies to the Secretary-
General, Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the Bill 
to provide for the replacement of the Ordinance 'The BUrn Company and 
Indian Standard Wagon Company (Nationalisation) Ordinance, 1976 
(No.8 of 1976), by Act of Parliament, recommends, under clauses (1) and 
(3) of article 117 of the Constitution, the introduction of the said Bill 
~d iUi consideration by Lok Sabha. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM' 
Clause 7 of the Bill provides for payment, in cash and in the manner 
specified in Chapter VI, an amount equal to the amount specified against 
the name of each of the two companies specified in the First Schedule to 
the Bill for vesting in the Central Government, the right title and inte-
rest of such company in relation to the undertakings owned by it. The 
Bill, if enacted, would thus involve an expenditure of the order of Rs. 
1388.00 lakhs in respect of Burn and Company Limited; and Rs. 1135.00 
lakhs in respect of Indian Standard Wagon Company Limited. 
The total expenditure which will thus be involved will be of the order 
of Rs. 2523.00 lakhs. 
2. Sub-clause (2) of clause 5 of the Bill provides that the liability 
arising in respect of (a) the loans advanced by the Central Government 
or State Government or both, to the two. companies (together with 
interest due thereon) after the management of the undertakings of the 
concerned company had been taken over by the Central Government and 
(b) the wages, salaries and other dues of employees of each of the two 
companies in respect of any period after the management of the under-
takings of the two companies had been taken over by the Central Govern-
ment, shall on and from the appointed day, be the liability of the Central 
Government ~ of the Government company aforesaid and shall be dis-
charged by the Government Or Government company as and when repay-. 
ment of such loans or amounts becomes due or as and when such wages, 
salaries or other dues become due and payable. It is estimated that the 
eXpenditure on this account will be of the order of Rs. 1318.00 lakhs. 
3. Sub-clause (1) of clause 8 provides for payment of further amount 
in cash, in consideration of the retrospective operation of the provisions 
of clauses 3, 4 and 5 to each of these two companies, an amount equal to 
an amount, calculated at the rates specified in section 5 of the BUrn Com-
pany and Indian Standard Wagon Company (Taking Over of Manage-
ment) Act, 1973, for the period commencing on the appointed daY and 
ending on the da~ of promulgation of the Ordinance viz., 23rd June, 
1976. It is estimated that the expenditure on this account will be of the 
order of Rs. 1. 00 lakh. 
4. Sub-clause (2) of clause 8 provides for payment of simple interest 
at the rate of 4 per cent. per annum for the period commencing from 
23rd June, 1976 and ending on the date em which the payment of the 
amounts specified in 'Clause 7 are made by the Central Government to 
the Commissioner of Payments. It is estimated that the interest pay-
ment in terms of the provisions of the said sub-clause is likely to be of 
the order of Rs. 4.62 lakhs per month for Burn and CMlpany Limited and 
Rs. 3.781akhs per month for Indian Standard Wagon Company Limited. 
The total expenditure which is likely to be involved on this account is 
estimated ~ be of the order of Rs. 8.40 lakhs per month. 
5. Under clause 14 of the Bill, Commissioner of Payments will be 
appointed by the Government with adequate staff to assist him for the 
purpose of disbursing the amounts, payable to these two companies. 
17 

18 
The salary and allowances of the Commissioner of Payments and hia 
staff and the expenditure of office and establishment will be defrayed 
out of the Consolidated. Fund of India. The esti~ted expenditure on 
this account is likely to be of the order of Rs. 20,000 pe~ month. 
6. Under sub-clause (2) of clause 15 of the Blll, the Central Gov-
ernment shall pay to the Commissioner, in cash. such amount, payable 
under section 5 of the Burn Company and Indian Standard Wason Com-
pany (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973, to each of th~ two 
companies in relation to the period commencing on the date on. which, 
the management of the undertakings was taken over by the Central 
Government and ending on the appointed day, N., 31st March, 1975, as 
remains unpaid. : The amount is estimated to be of the or~er of Rs. 1.00 
lakh. I 
II 
7. After the takeover of management of the two companies, tbey 
have operated the banking transactions through the United BaDk of. 
India. Th~ United Bank of India bas fully co-operated with the Gov.-
ernment during the post-takeover period in extending credit fadUtiet. 
to these two companies at a point of time, when not even the lIliw.auro 
finance required to keep the units going could be made available. Tlwty 
were assured by the -Government in February, 1974 that in the ev~tl of 
nationalisation, the Government would ensure that the interest of the 
Bank does not suffer. The total export packing credit for Y~v.ia 
Wagon deal obtained from the United Bank of India wa. Be. 20.oa 
crores in the case of Burn and C~pany Limited and Rs. 8.14, cro,::es in U.ut 
case of Indian Standard Wagon Company Limited, both dUring the pre-
takeover and post-takeover of management periods. The United Bamk. o~ 
India packing credit extending during the pre-takeover, as well as post-
takeover management period, is a separate and distinct arrangement and 
the Government have to ensure that the credit is paid back even though 
receivables might fall short of thie credit, on account of the reduction 
in the size of the order and the amounts payable to the companies 10lnder 
clause 7 might be inadequate. The Government are therefore r~quired 
to pay back to the United Bank of India the shortfall, whlch approxi-
mately works out to Rs. 6.60 ClOre!> in the cases of both, Burn a.nd, 
Company ~nd Indian Standard Wagon Company. Th~ ~ill does not, 
however, contain any provision regarding the said payment. The said 
payment will be made after due appropriation by lrarliament by law. 
8. Funds will also have to be provided to th8tle undertakings, for 
the modernisation and expansion. The expenditure on modern1tt"Uon 
and expansion is necessary to make these undertaIQRIS ftflUl,(;:ially 
viable. The total investment during the remainipg Fifth· P1&Jl periild: 
has been estimated at Rs. 900.00 lakhs. This expenditure wUl also be ,ill-
curred after due appropriatiOtn by Parliament by law. 
9. The Bill, if enacted, is not likely to involve any other r~.u~_ 
or non-recurring expenditure. 

Clause 31 of the Bill empowers, 'tbe CeBtral Government to make 
rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill. Such rules may provide 
for IIUltlten, -b lUI-
~o) the time within which. and the manner in which, an inti-
mation referred to in sub-clause (3) of clli1lse 4 df the Bill shall be 
given; 
(b) the form ,nd the manner in which and the conditions under 
which the Custodian shan maintain the accounts as provided in 
clause 11; 
(c) the manner in which monies in any provident fund or other 
fundr referred to In clause 13. shall be deak with. 
2. The matters In respect of which such rules may be made are aat-
terr. of procedure and administrative detail and it is harcl1y practicable 
to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of the legislative 
power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
it 

Memorandum ezpla.inmg themociijlcGtioM C01Ufli1Wd ,. tM Bill to re-
place the Burn Compa.ny and Indian Standard Wagon Company 
(NatiOnaZisation) OTdinance, 1&76. 
Apart from changes of a formal, drafting and consequential nature. 
two changes have been made in the Bill, namely:-
(i) it has been clarified that Burn and COJnP~y Limited includes 
Coburn Properties Limited, which is its wholly owned subsidiary, 
and 
(i~) sub-section (2) of section 22 at. the Ordinance 'has been 
modified to enable the Central Government or a Government com-
pany t~ possess machinery, equipment or other property, which 
though not belonging to the twpcompanies, were ~r thQir posses-
sion or control, on the same terms and conditions lB'lcier which it was 
possessed by the two companies immediately before the 1st day of 
April, 1975. 
'-' 
ao 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition of the undertakings of the Bum and Com-
pany Limited and the Indian Standard Wagon Company Limited with 
a view to ensuring the continuity of the production 01. goods which 
are vital to the needs of the economy of the country and for the ful-
filment of the contracts for the supply of railway wagQlll abroad and 
for matrers connected therewith or incidental thereto, 
(Shri T. A. Pai, 
Mmtater of Induatry.) 