HOUSE OF 'rHE PEOPLE. 
00 RRIGENDUM 
to 
THE PREVENTION OF OORRUPTION(SEOOND AMENUVIENT) BILL. 
(1) In page 1~ line 1~, ~ -numbered" 
subst1tli1"& wre-nUlslbe red·; and 
. . 
(2) In pabe 2, line 20, i£r "numbered· 
substitute "re-n~b\red· 
NEW DElliI, 
T.h~ 5th July,1952. 
M.~. KAUL, 
SEC RET A R Y 

BW No. 72 of 1962. 
!. 
j' :1;; 'TH~ PREVENfION OF' CbitttuPTION (~ECO~D • 
AMENDMENT) Bl~L, 1952 
(As INTRODUOED IN 'l'HE HOUSlD OJ!' 'l'lIE PEOPLE) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend thB PrBvention of Oorruption Act, Hl47. 
Bli it enacted by l>arliamentas f911ows:~ 
1. Short tltle.-This Act may be called the Pl'ev(>ntil)ll of Corruption 
(Second Amendment) Act. 1952. 
2. Amendment of section 3, Act II of 19'7.-Ir: section 3 of the 
'; 
Prevf1ntion of Corruption Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the principal 5 
Act) ,"7"" 
(a) after the word and figures "section 165" the words, figures 
and letter .. or section 165A" shall be inserted; aDd 
(b) the proviso shall be omitted. 
a. Amendment of section " Act II of IH7.-The proviso to section 4 10 
of the principal Act shall be omitted and the said 1Ilw.tioll shall be numbered 
aa sub-section (1) thereof Qnd after Bub-section (1) as so ri:lnumbered, the. 
following sub-sections shall be inserted, nameJy:- ' 
"(:!) Where in any trial of an off Alice punil:lhable uuder 8e~tion 165A 
of the IlJdian PenRI Code (Act XLV of 1860), it is proved that 16 
any grAtification (uther than legal remuneration) or any valuable 
thing hilS been given or offered to be given or nttemJ~ted to be given 
by an accllsed perSall, ,it shall be presumed unless the contrary ill pro.:ved 
that he gllvc or offpred to give or attempted to give that gratification 
or t,hat vlIlunble t.hing, as the case maybe, as 8. motive or reward such 2() 
all is IUel1tioll~d in se~~tion 161 of the Indian Penal CoJe or. a8 the case 
may he. without consideration or for a consideration which htl knows 
to be inadequate. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2). 
the court may decline to draw 'the presumption refell'ed to in either 25 
of the said sub-sections, if the gratification or thing aforesaid is, in 
its oph~ion, so trivial that no inference of corruption may fairly be 
drawn." 
,. Amendment of section 5, Act II of 1947.-For sub-secti,on (4) of 
section 5 of the principal Act. the follawing sub-section shall be substituted. 3() 
namely:-
"U) The provisions of this section shall be in ad,litioll to. nnd Jlot 
in derogation of. I1lly other law for the time being in force, and nothing 
contained herein Bhnn exempt any publie servant from rmy proceeding 
which lUi~ht, apart fr:om this section. be institut~d against him." 35 
.• 5. Insertion of new section 5A. in Act II of 19U.-After section 5 of the 
principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, nnmely:-
'·5A. Investigation into cases under this Act.-Notwithstanding 
an:vthing contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 
1898), no police officer belaw the rank- 4() 
(a) in the presidency towns of Madras and Calcutta, of (\11 
8ssistunt commissioner of police. 

10 
15 
2 
(b) in the preaicleuoy toWD of Bombal •• f a .uperintencJeal .. 
pollee. and 
(0) elsewhere. of a deputy superintendent of police, 
.hall jnvestigate any offence punishable under sec*ion 161, section 165 
or section 165A of the Indian Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860) or under 
8ub-section (2) of section 5 of this AC,t, without the order of a presjdency 
magistrate 01' a magistrate of the first-class, as the C:1Se may be, cr make 
Bny arre,!>t therefor without a warrant: 
Provided that a police officer of the DeIhl Special Police Establish-
ment, not below the rank of an inspector of ,police, who is specially autho-
rised by thE' ~nspector-General of Police of that Establishment may. if he 
has reasons to belieye that, on account of the delay involved in obtaining 
the order of 11 magistrate of the first-class, Rny valuable evidence relating 
to such offence is likely to be destroyed or ('oncealed, investigate the 
offence without such order j but in every case whers he makes Buch 
investigation, the inspector shall, as 80011 as may be, send a report of 
the S8rru:~ to a magistrate of the first-class, wgether with the circum-
stances in which the investigation was made." 
6. Amendment of section 6, Act U of 19''1.-Section 6 of the prinoipal 
.Act shall be numbered as sub-section (1) thereof and after'sub-section (1) al 
so re-numbered, the following sub-sectian shall be inserted, Il!lmely:-
.. (2) Where for Ilny reason whatsoever Pony doubt arises whether 
:tho previous Blmction as required under sub-section (1) should be 
given by the Central or State Government or any. other authority, 
such sanction shall be given by that Government or authority which 
would have ·been competent to remove the public servant from hi. 
office at the time when the offence was alleged to have been 
committed. " 

8 
STATEMENT OF OBJEeTS AND REASONS 
The Government of India set up a Committee of Members of Parliameo.t 
>under the chairmanship of Dr. Bakshi Tek Chand to r~view the working of 
the !:)pecial Police Establishment and to make recommendations for the 
.improvement oftlle laws relating to bribery and corruption. The amencl-
ments proposed in the .BilL are based on the r~commendations of that Com-
.mittee. The amendments are intended to olarify some doubts about the 
application of ctlrtaiu sections and to rectify cprtain drafting omissions 
in the Act. The Bill also deals with some other minor difficulties disclosed 
by the working of the Aot. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 6th May. 1952. 
KAlL.S NATH KATJU. 

.. " ,.~ ~ 
4 
ANNEXURE ," . 
ilPN,ors nOli ruB ~VBRTION OF COllBUPTION A.QT, 1947 (II OJ' 1947} 
:u 880tion 8 
AD offence punishable under section 161 or section 165 of the Indian . 
.P~ Code shall be deemed to be a. cognizable offence for the lJurposes 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, notwithstanding anything to the 
oontra!'Y contained tllerein: 
Provided that a police officer below the rank of Deputy E:uperinteudent 
of Police shall not investigate sny such offence without the order (,f a 
Magistrate of the first class or make any arrest therefor without a 
warrant. 
8ection 4 
* ... * ... * 
Provided that the Court may decline to draw such presumption if th& 
patification or thing aforesaid is in its opinion so triviul that 110 inference 
of corrupt.ion may fairly be drawn. 
8ection !i( 4) 
• • ... ... ... 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contKinpd ill thp Col(, of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1898 (V of 1898), a police officer below the rank of Deputy 
Superintendent of Police, sha.ll not investigate all,v offencl' plllIishuble under 
sub-section (2) without the order of El Mllgistrate of the tir,;t class or make 
any arrest therefor without a warrant, 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
BILL 
further to amend the Prevention of Corruption ~Aot, 194:7, 
---
(8Ari Kailas Nat'" Katj"" 
M iniBter Jar H &me Affairs, 