LOK SABHA 
OORJiIG~jDA 
to 
.. , ,. I t 
r 
TH:~ D~nJ~II ADt·UTTldTHATION BILL, 1965 
(rQ bp./As intrQ.quced in Lok Sabha) 
1 • :Page 5, line 1 3. -:-
fQr "l::t te It A?cd " nato" 
2 • Png(' 5, line 20,-
3. Page 5, :i'le 37,-
4. Page 13, lines 17 ~nd 18,-
5. P~ge 14, line 26,-
aftp.r "Ao ttl insq rt " tI • 
6 • Page 1 5, li~l e 1 7, -
"J!o S1,~ .ry: ._~!l.t)1~.J!,r~') f GQ.i" 
solcm_Ylly nffinn 
7. Page 15, line 33,-
fQ..r "JlQ S1XC=tr i.'1 the nru;le of God",~..ad­
e nly ffi m 
Udo s~'le:lr _i.n.~l~nome of God" 
sOlC'!i1~'lly affj rill 
8. PRt;E! 21, linf'" I) fror.l bottOTO,-
for "non-rpcurrin'C:)" r~~\d "(non-recurrine)" 
9. Correct line rWr;1'be rs on r I '1. "1'(~ ... 15. 
NEW DBL1II; 
Ii O'flem be r 1 7 • 1 96 5 
Kartikn 26, 1887 (;jf\l,:·-~) 

As INTRODUCED IN Lox: SABRA 
'I" 1'1 Nor 1965 
Bill No. 72 of 1963 
THE DELI-II ADMINISTRATION BILL, 1965 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
PART II 
METROPOLITAN COUNCn. 
3. Constitution of Metropolitan Council. 
4. Delimitation of constituencies. 
5. Power to rectify printing mistakes, etc. 
6. Qualification for membership. 
7. Electors and electoral rolls. 
8. Right to vote. 
9. Election to Metropolitan Council. 
10. Duration of Metropolitan Council. 
• 
11. Sessions of Metropolitan Council, prorogation and dIssolu-
tion. 
12. The Chairman. 
13. Chairman not to preside while a resolution for his removal 
from office is under consideration. 
14. Right of Administratur to attend and address meetings of 
Metropolitan Council. 
15. Oath or-'amrmation by members. 
16. Voting in Metropolitan Council 
17. Vacation of seats. 
18. Disqualifications ·for membership. 
19. Powers, privileges, etc., of members. 
1688(B) ~1. 
• 

,ov (ii) 
CLAUS. 
-
~20. symes and allowances of members. 
21. F~ctions of Metropolitan Council. 
22. Right of-memllento-ask:-questions. 
23. Rules of procedure. 
24. Language to be used in Metropolitan Council. 
25. Restriction on discussion in Metropolitan Cotmcil. 
26. Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Metropolitan 
Coun'cil. 
PART ITI -., 
TIm ADMINISTRATOR'S EXECUTIVE C.OUKCIL 
27. Executive Council. 
28. Other provisions as to members of Executive Council. 
29. Conduct of business. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
M. 
35. 
36. 
37. 
PART IV 
MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 
Relation of Administrator and members of Executive 
Council to President. 
Provision in case of failure of constitutional machtneI"Y. 
Provisions as to Interim Metropolitan Council. 
Interim Executive Council. 
• Contracts and suits. 
Amendment of Act 43 of 1950. 
Amendment of Act 20 of 1963. 
Powers of President to remove difBculties. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

8m No, 73 011"5 
THE DELHI ADMINISTRATION BILL, 1965 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the administration of the Union territory of Delhi 
and for matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
S 1. (1) This Act may be called the Delhi Administration Act, 1965. ~ ~~. 
• menee-
(2) It shall·come into force on such date as the Central Govern- ment. 
ment may, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, appoint: 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different 
provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to 
10 the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to 
the coming into force of that provision. 

Deftni-
tions. 2. In this Act, unless the conteXt otherwise requires,-
(4) "Administrator" means the Administrator of Delhi 
-------- appointed by the President under article 239; 
Constitu-
tion ot 
Metro-
politan 
Council. 
(b) "article" means an article of the Constitution; 
(c:) "constituency" means a constituency provided by order S 
made under section 4 for the purpose of elections to the Metro-
politan Council; 
(d) "Delhi" means the ~nion territory of Delhi; 
(e) "Election Commission" means the Election Commission 
~ppointed by the President under article 324; 10 
(f) "member" means a member of the Metropolitan 
Council; 
(g) "Metropolitan Council" means the Metropolitan Council 
of Delhi constituted under section 3; 
(h) "New Delhi" means such area in Delhi as the Central IS 
GOVl:rnment may, by notification in the Offtclal Gazette, specify; 
( i) "Official Gazette" means .the Officiel Gazette of 
(j) "scheduled castes" means any of the sch~uled 
speciiied in Part I of the Schedule to the Constitution 
duled Castes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951. 
PARTll 
METROPOLIT~ COUNCIL 
3. (1) ~here shall be a Metropolitan Council for Delhi. 
Delhi; 
castes 
(Sche-
20 
(2) The total number of seats in the Metropolitan Council to be 
:il!ed by persons chosen by direct election from territorial consti- 25 
tuencies f:hall be forty-two. 
(3) The Central Government may nominate not more than five 
pcrso!lS, not being persons in the service of Government, to be 
members of the Metropolitan Council. 
(4) Seats shall be reserved for the scheduled castes in the Metro- 30 
politan Council and the. number of such seats shall bear, as nearly 
as mlly be, the same proportion to the total number of seats in the 
M.2tropolitan .... Council as the population of the scheduled castes in 
Delhi bears to the total population of Delhi: 
Provided that the reservation of seats for the scheduled castes 35 
in the Metropolitan Council shall ceese to have effect on the lame 

3 
date on' which the reservation of leats for' the lCheduled cutes In 
the House of th~ People ahall cease to have effect under article 334, 
but such cesser shall not affect any representatlon-ofthe--Bcheduled--'.------
castes in the Metropolitan Council untU the dUsolution of the then 
, existing Metropolitan Council. 
(5) For the purposes of this section and section 4, the expression 
"population" means the population as ascertained at the last pre-
ceding census of which the relevant figures have been pubHshed. 
4. (l) For the purpose of elections to the Metropolitan Council, Delimit.-
10 Delhi shall be divided into single-member constitu~ncies in such ::~r:wu: 
manner that the population of each of the constituencies shall, so cies. 
far 88 practicable, be the same throughout Delhi. 
(2) For the purpose of giving eftect to the provisions of su'b-
section (1), the, Election Commission shall determine in the manner 
IS hereinafter prowded-
20 
(a) the constituencies into which Delhi shan be divided 
and the extent of each of such constituencies; 
(b) the number of seats to be reserved for· the scheduled 
castes in the Metropolitan Council having regard to the provi-
sions of Bu~section (4) of section 3 and the constituencies in 
which these seats shan be so reserved. 
(3) For the purpose of assisting the Electio~ Commission in the 
performance of its functions under sub-section (2), the Commission 
shall associate with itself such three persons, being persona who are 
2S members of the Interim Metropolitan Council, 88 the Central 
Government shall by· order specify: 
. Provided that none of the said associate members shall have a 
right to vote or to sign any decision of the, Election Commission. 
(4) The Election Commission shall-
30 (a) publish its proposals in regard to matters mentioned 
in sub-section (2) in the Ofti~ial Gazette together with a notice 
specifying the date on or after which the proposals will be fur-
ther considered by it; 
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may 
,3S have been received by it before the date so specified, and for 
the pU~Be of such consideration, hold one or more public 
sittings at such place as it thinks fit; 
(c) make an order delimiting the constituencies specifying 
therein the constituencies in which seats shall be reserved for 
40 the scheduled castes; and 

'. 't tTl , 
Power to 
rectify 
printinl 
mistakel, 
etc. 
::. _,,,{liftea-
tion for 
member-
Ihip. 
(d) send an authenticated copy of the order to the Central 
Government. 
---
(5) ,An order made by the Election Commission under this sec-
tion shall not be called in question in any court. 
5. The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notifica- S 
tion in the Official Gazette, correct any printing mistake in any 
order made under section 4 or any error arising therein from an 
inadvertent slip or omiuion . 
• I 
6. A person shall not be qualifted to be chosen to ftll a seat in -
lhe Metropolitan Council unless he- 10 
(a) is an elector for any constituency and makes and subs-
cribes before some person authorised in that behaH by the 
Election Commission an oath or affirmation according to the 
form set out for the purpose in the Schedule; 
'(b) is not less than twenty-five years of age; and 
(c) in the case of a constituency reserved for the scheduled 
castes, is also a member of any of those castes. 
IS 
Electors 7. (1) The persons entitled to vote at election of members shall 
and elec- be the persons entitled, by virtue of the prOvisions of the Constitu-
toral rolls. tion and the Representation of the People Act, 1950, to ,be registered 20 43 of 
Right to 
\:.:l1;e. 
Election 
to Metro-
. poUtan 
Council. 
as voters at elections to the House of the People. 1950. 
(2) So much of the electoral roll for any Parliamentary consti-
tuency for the time being in force as relates to the areas comprised 
within a constituency formed under section 4, shall be deemed to be 
the electoral roll for that constituency for the purposes of this Act. zS 
.~ ~ .. . .' .. 
8. Every person whose name is, for the time being, entered in 
the electoral roll of a constituency shall be entilJ.ed to vote at the 
election of a member from that constituency. 
9. The provisions of Part I and Parts III to XI of the Representa-
tion of the People Act, 1951 and of any rules and orders made 30 43 of 
thereunder, for the time being in force, shall apply in relation to an 1951. 
election to the Metlropolltan Council, as they apply in relation to an 
election to the Legis~tive Assembly of a State, subject to such 
modifications as the Central Government may, after consultation 
with the Election Commission, by order direct. 35 

10. The Metropolitan Council, unless sooner dissolved, shan Duration , of Metro-continue for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting poJitan 
• __ and no 10nge!',JllldJhe J~l[piration of the said period of five years shall Councll. 
operate as a dissolution of the Metropolitan Council: 
S Provided tb4t the said period may, while a Proclamation of 
Emergency issued under clause (1) of article 3~2 is in operation, be 
extended by the President by order for a period not exceeding one 
year at a time and not extending in any case beyond a period of 
six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate. 
10 11. (l ~ The Administrator shall, frClm time to time, summon the ~=-
MetropolItan Council to meet at such time and place as he thinks poUtan 
fit, but six months shall not intervene '~een its last sitting in Council. 
one ,seSSion and the late appointed for its first sitting in the next ~~ 
session. diUolu-
tiOll. 
IS (2) The Administ4-ator may, from time to time.-
(a) prorogue the Metropolitan Council; 
I' .. • . (b) with the approval of the PreSiden~, dissolve the Metro-
politan Council. 
12. (1) The Metropolitan Council shall, as soon as may be, choose The Chair-
20 a member to be the Chairman thereof and, so often as the office of man. 
Chairman becomes vacant, the Metropolitan Council shall choose 
another member to be the Chairman. 
(2) A member holding office as Chairman-
(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be such a member; 
2S (b) may at any time by writing under his hand addressed 
to the Administrator resign his oftlce; 
(c) may be removed from his oftlce by a resolution passed 
by a majority of all the then members of the Metropolitan 
Council: 
3() Provided that no resolution for tbe purpose of clause (c) 
shall be moved unless at least· fourteen days' notice has been 
given of the intention to move the resolution: 
Provided further that whenever the Metropolitan Council is 
dissolved, the Chairman shall not vacate his office until immedi-
3S ately before the first meeting of the Metropolitan Council after 
the dissolution. 
(3) While the office of the Chairman is vacant, the duties of the 
office shall be performed 'by such member as the Administrator may 
appoint for the purpose. 

6 
. (4) During the absence of the Chairman from any sitting of the 
Metropolitan COUDcil, such person as may be determined by the rules 
.- of procedure of the' Metropolitan -Councll, or, if no such person is 
present, such other person _ may be deterDlined by the MetropolI-
tan Councll, shall act as Chairman. , 
(5) The Chairman shall ·be a whole-time functionary and shall 
be entitled to such salary and allowances as the President may, by 
order, determine. 
Chairman 13. (1) At any sitting of the Metropolitan Council, while any 
:~lde resolution for the removal of the Chairman ~rom his office is under 10 
while a consideration, the Chairman shall not, though he is present, preside 
r~u~ . for his and the provisions of sub-section (4) of section 12 shall apply m re-
:v!At lation to every such sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from 
ia under ce which the Chairman is absent. 
conaidera-
tion. 
~~fnff a-
trator to 
attend and 
addresa 
meetings 
of Metro-
politan 
(2) The Chairman shall have a right to speak in, and otherwise IS 
to take part in the proceedings of, the Metropolitan Council while 
any resolution for his removal from oftlee is under consideration and 
shall, notwithstanding anything in section 16, -be entitled to vote only 
in the first instance on such resolution or on any other matter .during 
such proceedings, but not in the case of an equality of votes. 
14. The Administrator may attend and address any meeting of the 
Metropolitan Council. 
, 
20 
Council. Oath or 15. (1) Every member shall, before taking his seat, make and 
afIlrmation subscribe before the Administrator, or some peMon appointed in that 
~~em- behalf -by him, an oath or aftirmation according to the form set out 2S 
Voting 
in 
Metro_ 
politan 
COUDcll. 
for the purpose in the Schedule. 
(2) If a person sits or votes as a member before he has complied 
with the requirement of sab-s~ction (1), or when he knows that he is 
·not qualified or that he is disqualified for membership thereof, he 
shall be liable in respect of each day on which he so sits or votes to a 30 
penalty of' five hundred rupe5 to be recovered as, a debt due to the 
~~ . 
16. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all questions at 
any sitting of the Metropolitan Council shall be determined by a 
majority of votes of the members present and votihg other than the 3S 
Chaimlan or person acting as such. 

, 
(2) The Chairman or person acting as' such shall not vote in the 
ftrst instance, but shall have and exercise a casting vote in the case 
--of an equalitY' of votes. ' 
'(3) The Metropolitan Council shall have power to act notwtth .. 
, 5 standing any vacancy in the membership thereof, and any 'proceedings 
in the Metropolitan Council shall be valid notwithstanding that it iii 
discovered subsequently that some person who was not entitled 80 
to do, sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings. 
(4) The quorum to constitute a meeting of the Metropolitan 
10 Council shall be fifteen. -
- 15 
(5) If at any time during a meeting of the Metropolitan Council 
there is no quorum, it shall be the duty of the Chairman, or person 
acting as such, 'either to adjourn the Metropolitan Council or to suS.. 
pend the meeting until there is quorum. . 
17. (1) No person shall be a member- Vacation' 
I' of eats . (a) both of Parliament and of the Metropolitan Council, or I • 
(b) both of the Metropolitan Council and of the Delhi Muni-' 
cipal Corporation, . 
and if a person is so chosen, then at the expiration of fourteen days 
20 from the date of publication in the Gazette of IDdia or in the om.dal 
Gazette, whichever is later that he has been so chosen,-
(i) in a case referred to in clause (a), that person's seat in 
Parliament shall become vacant unless he has previously resigned 
his seat in the Metropo~itan Council. and 
2S (ii) in a case referred to in clau~ (b), that person's seat 
30 
in the Metropolitan Council shall become vacant unless he has 
previously resigned his seat in the Delhi Municipal Corporation. 
(2) If a member-
(a) lbecomes subject to any disqualification mentioned in 
sub-section (1) of section 18, or • 
(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to 
the Chairman ~ . , , 
his seat shall thereupon become vacant. 
(3) If during a period of six successive months, a member is, with-
35 out permission of the Metropolitan Council, absent from all meetings 
thereof, the M~ropolitan Council may declare his seat vacut. 
1688 (B) LS 2. 
'-
.). 
"): 
! !I. 
, 
I. 

fHlqua- ~. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being choten _, ad fot 
_ :"~_beinl' aJ:llember of the Metropolitan Council if he II for the time 
Hnhip. being c:Usqualified for being Chosen as, and for being, °a member of 
either House of Parliament under any of th~ provisions of article 102 
fir ~t any law ttlade in pursuance of that article. 5 
(2) For the purpoael of this section, a person shall not be deemed 
to bold an ollee of profit by reason only that he is a member of the 
Executive Council 
~ 
(3') If any question arises as to whether a member has become 
dJsquaHfied for being such a membex: under the provislOll8 of sub- 10 
aect!on (1), the question shall be referred far _ tM ~.~ of the 
. Preaident and his decision shall be final. 
(4) Before giving any decision on any such question, the Presi-
dent shall obtain the opinion of the Election C(~)ulInission and shall 
act according to such opinion. J S 
=-.. 19. (l) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules and 
.. eta..~ _._ .~~Ing orders regulating the procedure of the Metropolitan Council, 
m~J;ier& there shall be freedom ~f speech in the Metropolitan Council. 
I'uDc-
tiou of 
Metro-
poUtan 
Coundl 
(2) No member shall be liable to any proceedings in any court 
in reipeet of anything said or any vote given by him in the Metropo- 20 
Utan Council or any committee thereof, and no person shan be 80 
~ in respect of the publication by or under the autbority of the . 
I!Jetropolitan Council of any report, paper, votes or proceedings. 
ZOo Memben .haD be entitlecl to receive sueh salaries and aDow-
~es ~ the President- may, by order, determine. 2S 
2L (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Metropolitan 
Council shall have the right to discuss, and make recommendations 
with respect to, the following matters in so fflr as they relate to Delhi, 
namely:-
(a) proposals for undertaking legislation with respect to any 30 
of the matters enumerated in the State List or the Concurrent 
List In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution in so far as any 
such matter is applicable in relation to Union territories (here-
after referred to as the State List and the Concurrent List); 
(b) proposals for extension to Delhi of any enactment in 3S 
force in a State relatable to any matter enumerated in the State 
List Or the Concurrent List; 

• 
r. ,r 
(e) proposals jor legislation referred to It hi the A_'nl. 
tratOl'- with respect to any of the matten enumerated in the 
.~-State..List or the_Concurrent List; 
(d) the estimated receipts and expenditure pertaining to 
, Delhi which are to be credited to, or is to be met from, the Con-
solidated Fund of India; 
(e) matters of administration involving general poliey and 
schemes of development in so far as they relate to mattera enu-
m~rated in the State List· or the Concurrent List; 
10 (f) any other matter referred to it by the AdministratOr . 
..: I~~ Therecommendatiol'1l of the Metropolitan Council, after hav-
ing been duly coDlidered by the Executive COWlCU, shaU, wherever 
aeceuary, be forwarded by the Administntor tb the' Cen~ 
. Government with the views, if any, expressed thereon. by ~ i:Ke-
IS cutive Council. 
22. Subject to the rules regulating the procedure of the Metropo- =: 
lltan Council, a member shall have the right to ask questions on any _"ro,-
matter In so far as It faDs within the purvi~ of the Metropolitan ..... 
Council under su·b-section (1) of sJ!ctlon 21. . ' 
2C> 23. (1) The MetropoU!an Council may make rules for reguiatb)g, RuleI at 
sllbjec. to the provisions of tl-ls Act, its proc.edure and the cQnduet of Procedure. 
its business: 
Provided that the Administrator shall, with the approval' of the 
President, make rules for prohibiting the discussion of, or regulatlng 
as. the asking of questions on, any matter which affects the diseli8rp of 
his funetions in so far as he is required by or under this Act to act in 
his discretion, or by or under any law to exercise judicial or. qu8if-
judicial functions and, if and in so far as any rule so made bY the 
Administrator is inconsistent with any rule made by th~ MettopoUtan 
30 Council, the rule made by the ~dministrator shall prevail. 
(2) Until rules are made under 8U~tion (1), the proceclJ,lre 
and conduct of business of the Metropolitan Council shall be It:gU-
lated by such rules as the Administrator may make In this behalf. 
.1'. 
Z4. The business in the Metropolitan Council shall be transacted ~ 
3S in HIndi or in English: . t:Ve: 
Previded that the Chairman of the Metropolitan Councilor penon ~, 
acting as such, as the case may be, may permit any member who can-
not adequately express himself in either of t~ I~~guages afg~~c1 W 
address the Councll in his x:nQt~~~ .. tonfUet ' , 

10 
-BeItric- .' ill. No discussion ihall take place in thE! Metropolitan C~ci1 
tlon on . with respect to the conduct of any Judge of the Sup~me Court or of 
!:tOD-a_~gh Court in the discharge of his duties. • __ 
III '.'.; ~'nl' , 
JIetItopc)- ~ I I 
1ltan CoUD 
d.-
CouIt. Z6. (1) The vaUdity of any proceedings in the Metropolitan Coun-
=~ clt shan not be called in question on the ground of any alleged irre- S 
=e ~rity of ~ure1 ,. 
ot Metro- (2) No ofticer or member of the Metropolitan Council in whom 
~=. . powers are vest~'" hy or under this Act for regulating procedure or 
· the"Conduct of business, or for maintaining order in the .Council shall 
be.'lUbject to the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercISe 10 
by him of those powers. . 
PARTm 
J'.". Tm: ADMINISiRATOR's EDCUTIVE COUNCIL 
=ve ..... .; ... ~~t(l). ~ere:.~haU he .• ~,.~ttve Cou~I, eGDsistm, of not 
· more than' four members. to assist and advise th.~ Administrator In 15 
the exerdse of his fundioDS. in relatioD to matters eaamerated In 
I • : the State List or the Concurrent List, n:~ept In so far al he is required 
Ii.· ,IIY or Under this Ad to exercise his functions or any of them In hb 
. diK:ietion or hy or antler any law to exerdse aDY judldal or quaal. 
J-, ",' "It 
. \ '.' 
judldal fan~tlODS: ' . ":'. . 20 
'. -:" Provided that, in case of difterence of opinion between the Ac:Imi-
i ,n1s1ntor ~d the'members of the Executive Council en any matter, 
other tban a matter in respect of which he is required by ~ under 
this Act to act in his discretion, the Administrator shall refer it to 
the President for decision and act according to the decision given _25 
thereon by the President, and pending such decision, it shan be com-
petent for the Administrator in any case wh~re the matter is in his 
opinion so urgent that it is necessary 'for him to take immediate 
action, to take such action or to give such direction in the matter as 
he' deems neceSsa!):' '{ 30 
~ ~.. ' 
.. 
Provided further that every decision taken by a member of the 
Executive Council or by the :mxecutive Council in relation to any 
matter concerning New Delhi shall be subiect to the concurrence of 
the Administrator, and nothinlt in this sub-section shall be construed 
AS prhTenting the Administrator In case of any difference of cminion 35 
· b~tween him and the members of the Executivp. Council from taking 
any action in respect of the administration of New Delhi as he, in 
his discretion, considers necessary. 

11-
• (I) The Administrator shall preside at every meeting of the Exe-
cutive CouncU, but if he is obUged to absent himself from any meet-
____ , __ tng of the Council owing to illness or any other c,uSe, the senior-most 
member of the Executive CouncU shall preside at the meeting of the 
5 Council. 
(3) The functions of the Administrator with respect to law and 
order in Delhi including the organization and discipline of police 
foree, and with respect to such other matters as the President may 
from time to time specify in this behaif, shall be exercised by him 
10 in his discretion. 
(4) If any question arises as to whether any matter is or is not 
a matter as respects which the Administrator is by or under this Act 
required to act in his discretion, the decision of the Administrator 
thereon shall be final. . 
15 . (5) If any question arises as to whether Rny matter is or is not a 
matter as respects which th~ Administrator is required bv or under 
any law to exercise any judicial or Quasi-judicial functions, the deci-
sion of the Administrator thereon shall be final. ' 
(6) If any question arises as to whether any matter is or Is not 
20 a matter c<'Dcerning N ew Delhi,~ lhe decision of the Administrator 
thereon shall be final. 
(7) The questibn. whether any, and if so, .what advice was tender-
ed by. any member of tire Executive Council to the Administrator 
shall not be enquired into in any court. 
25 28. (1) 'l11e members of the Executive Council shall be appointed ~o:r-
by the President. si.ons as tomem-
(2) The members of the Executive Council shall hold oftlce dur- ~ 
ing the pleasure of the Preside~t. _ Counc:11:ve 
(3) Before a member of the Executive Council enters upon his 
30 oftlce, the Administrator shaH administer to him the oaths of oftlce 
and of secrecy according to the forms set out for the purpose in the 
Schedule. 
(4) A member of the Executive Council who for any period of 
six consecutive months is not a member of the Metropolitan Counen 
35 shall at the expiration of that period, cease to be a m~mber of the 
) ~utiv~ C()W1!CU. 

Ccmduct 
olbUoli-
Dell. 
f' ( 
12 
(5), The .. lades u. a1lowane. of the memben of the Bsec:utivc 
Comadl Ihall be such, as the Presiclent IDAY, by order, determine. 
29. (1) The Preiident shall inake rules- --- --- ----- -- -
(4) for the allocation of business to the members of the 
Executive Council in so far as it is not business with respect to 5 
which the Administrator is required by or under this Act to act 
in his discretion; and 
(b) for the more convenient transaction of business with the 
members of the Executive Council, including the procedure to 
be adopted in the case of a difference of opinion between the 10 
Administrator and the members of the Executive Council or a 
member of that Council. ' 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all executive action 
of the Administrator, whether taken in his discretion or otherwise, 
shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the Administrator. IS 
(3) Orders and other instruments made and executed In the name 
of the Administrator shall be authenticated in such manner as may 
be specified in the rules to be made by the Administrator, and the 
validity of an order or instrument which is so authenticated shall 
. not be called in question on the ground that it is not an oraer or 20 
instrument made or executed. by the Administrator. 
PART IV 
Relation 30. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, ~he Administrator and 
~j!1!tra- the members of the Executive Council shall be under the general 25 
wrand . control of, and comply with such particular directions, If any, as may 
ot~bers from time to time be given by, the President. 
~ecu-
tiveCoun_ 
dUo 
President. 
Provision -
incaseot 
failure of 
constitu-
tional 
maclrl-
DMY. 
3L If the President, on receipt of a report from the Administrator 
or otherwise, is satisfted-
(a) that a situation has arisen in which the administr:atlon 30 
of Delhi cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions 
of this Act; or • 
(b) that for the proper administration of Delhi it is neces-
sary or expedient so to do, 
the President, may, by order, suspend the operation of all or any of 35 
the provisions of this Act for such period as he thinks ftt I and make 
• 

13 
such incidental and consequential provisions ~ may appear to him 
to be necessary or expedient for administering Delhi in accordance 
------with the provisions of article 239. , 
3Z. (1) Until a MetropoUtan Council has been duly constituted Pr~OD8 
5 and summoned to meet for the flnt aeuion under the provWODI of ~terJm 
Pari D ., thil Act, there shall be aD Interim .Metropolitan CoUDCU tt:po-
coull" af- Councll 
(4) forty-two members elected· by the members of the elec-
toral college fol""'1)elhi, as in existence immediately before the 
10 commencement of this Act, in accordance wit~ T.'\! las. made by the 
Central Govermnent in thi~ behalf, such elections being held in 
'accordance with' the sy.tem of proportional !l"epresentation by 
mt:ans of the single transferable vote, and 
(b) not more tha~ five members, not being persons in the 
IS service of Government, nominated by the Central Government. 
(2) No person &hall be qualified to be chosen as a member of the 
Interim Metropolitan Council unless he is an elector for any parlia-
mentary constituency in Delhi, and is not less than twenty-five years 
of age. 
20 (3) The term of office of the members of the Interim Metropolitan 
Council shall expire immediately before the first meeting of the Met-
ropolitan Council duly constituted under this Act. 
(4) Election by the members of' the electoral collete for Delhi 
under sub-section (1) shall not' be called in question on the ground 
25 merely of the existence of any vacancy in the membership of such 
college. ',: !} 
(5) In other respects, the provisions of Part II shall, so far as may 
be, apply in relation to .the Interim Metropolitan Council as they 
, applr in relation to the Metr'lpolitan Council con.c:tituted under and 
30 in accordance with the provisions of that Part. 
33. (1) Notwithstandinl any thin, contained in P.art 01, the Interim 
President may appoint such memben of the Interim MetropoUtan Executive 
CouncU, not exceedina- four In number, as he thinks fit to be the CounciL 
members .of the Interim Executive Councu. 
3' (2) The members of the Interim Executive Council shall hold 
ofBce during the pleasure of the President . • 

14 
I 
(3) A member of the Interim Executive Council shan cease to 
hold office as such if he ceases to be a member. of the Interim 
Metropolitan Council. ------.----- __________ . ______ _ .,-- -
(4) Subject to the foregoing provisions, the members of the 
Interim Executive Council shall-
(a) exercise all the powers and perform all the duties con-
ferred by the' provisions of this Act on the members of the 
Executive Council, 
5 
(b) be entitled to lueh sa1aries and .Uowane81 .. the 
Pl'esid&~' . may, by order, determine. 10 
Contracts 
andsuiU. 
Amend-
mentof 
Act 4301 
1900. 
Amend-
JIU. .... ;t of 
Act 20 of 
1963. 
H. For the removal of doubts it is hereby d~ that-
(a) all contracts in connection with the administration of 
Delhi are contracts made in the exercise of the executive power 
of the Union; 
(b) all suits and proceedings in connection with the admin- 15 
istration of ~elhi shall be instituted by or against the Govern-
ment of India. . 
35. In the Rl:presentation of the People Act,. 1950, in section 27A, 
for sub-section (3), the follOWing sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(3) The electoral college for the Union territory of Delhi 
shall consist of the elected members of the Metropolitan Coun-
20 
cil constituted for that territory under the Delhi Administra-
tion Act, 1965 and until that Council is constituted, the electoral 
college shall consist of the elected members' of the Interim 2S 
Metropolitan Council constituted under that Act". 
36 .. 1n the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963, In dause 
(a) of sub-section (2) of section 41, for the words "the total namber 
thereof remaininl .the same;" the words and ftpres "the number 
heln, 7, 4, 2 and 2;" shall be substituted. 
Powers . 37. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
of Presi- this Act and, in particular in relation to the constitution of the 
dent to Interim Metropolitan Council, the President may, by order, do. remove . . 
difBculties. anything not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act which 
appear to him to be necessary or expedient for the purpo~e . of 35 
removing the di1Rculty. , : . _ :._' _ i..~;_ i. ~ ._~~ L 

TIll SCBIDt1LI 
[See ,actions 6(4), lS(l)-and28(8)] --------------
FORMS OF OA'J'HS OR AFFIRMATIONS 
I 
S FORM or OATH OB ArnuIATION TO BE MADE BY A CANDIDA'l'II POll 
ELBcTION TO TIll: Ml:TaOPOLlTAX 
CoUNCIL 
-uI, A.B., having been nominated as a candidate to flll ~ seat in 
10 the Metropolitan Council of Delhi ~WCIr in the DIDlC of God that I w.Ul 
:.r - lOleD1Dly iIiIir. 
bear true faith and allegiance tOUle' Constitution of India as by law 
established and that I wilf uphold the sovereignty and lntepity of 
India." 
n , . 
15 FORM or OATH OR A.lIT:tBMATION TO BE MADE BY A Mana or 
TIll: METaoPOLITAN COUNCIL 
, , ' 
cel, A.B., having been el~t~d (or nominated) a member of the 
Metropolitan Council of Delhi in the' eo God that I wll1 
h) 1 emIlly IdIirm 
20 bear true faith and illeg.lance to the Constitution of India as by law 
established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and Integrity of India 
and that I will faithfully discharge th~ duty upon which I -am, about 
to enter." 
m 
25 FolU\4 OF OATH or OrnCII: FOB A MDoBll OF THE ExBclrrIvB CoUNCIL 
uI. A.B., do .W:==OfGocl that I will bear true faith and 
allegiance to the Constitution of India as by laWl established, that I 
wm uphold the sovereign~ and integrity of India, that I will faith-
30 fully and conscientiously di:seharge my duties as a member of the 
Executive Council, and that I will do right to all manner of people 
in accordance with the Constitution and the law without fear or 
favour, affection or ill-will." 
~" , -
IV 
35 FORM OF OATH OF SECRECY FOB A MDoa or TIlE EXIlCUTl'VB CoUNca. 
"I A.B. do.wear hi. the IWD '1~,O~ God i· that 1 will not dJ.rectly or 
" JC nly fIl Cd 
indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persoill any matter 
which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become 
40 known to me as a member of the Executive Council except u may 
be required for the due dfseharge of my duties aa BUeb. member." 
15 
1188 (B) La I. 

.... ; ,r.,., 
, Thta BiU has been bJioughtforward with the object of provld1Dl 
for a larger measure of 8IIOciatiob of the repreI8Dtattvea of the peo-
ple of the UDion territory -01 Delhi with the administration oftha 
territori. It leeka ,to ·eltablish a Metropolitan Council for the entire 
territory and also an Executive Councll to a .. fIt and advise the Ad-
miDfltrator of the territory. -. 
2. It t. intended that el~oPl to.:2.~.Metropolitan Council Ihould 
beheld· at),the ,tilne of the Dext general elections. The Bill, therefore, 
~vid .. for an Interim Metropolitan EJouncU -and an Interim Exe-
cutive Council being constituted until the next general electioll8 are 
helcL 
3. The BDl also leeks to provide that for the, purposes of next 
general elections. the number of Par~entary constituenciee for 
tilel1lliOlL>temtory of-DeJhi.'lhaU-be raised ':frOtilftft to RVeD. 
4. At present, the electoral ~llege for Delhi, wbich eleetsthe re-
preieDtatives of the territory in the Hajya Sabha, 'CGDSiata of 90 memr 
bers, (e., 80 councJ)lors elected to the·Delhi Municipal Corporation and 
10 perSODS elected to the college from the New Delhi and Delhi 
Cantonment areas. The Bill providee that in :future the elected 
members of the Metropolitan Council and, until the Metropolitan 
Council is constituted, the elected members of the Interim'MetropoU-
tan Council &ball constitute the electoral college. 
5. ' The 'provisiOns of the Bill are further nplafned in the note. on mu... . 
Nsw DJ:LIII; G. L. NANDA 
~hc 3n:l N ovembn I 1965. 
'. ~" .•. " .......... i' It·· ._ 

·.: 
--u--- ...... -
ezau.. S.-This clause providett for the coDStttutlon of. IIetropo-
JiWl. COW,leil for Delhi. It fa proposed that the num~ of' _18 In 
the Council to be ftlled by persona chosen by direct eleetiOD Ihall be 
forty-two which fa multiple of the seven Parliamentary coDlUtual-
des I.nto which Delhi is proposed to be divided under cIa.,.. Fur .. 
tber., provision hu been made to empower the Central Government 
to nominate not more than five members to the ·e.::..mclL Provfalon 
has also been made in this clause for reservation of seats for memberl 
of· the scheduled cast. In' the Metropolitan Coundl on population 
baIia according to the last preceding census of which the ~~t 
ft,ure.'have been published. . ' . 
Cl4uae, 4 and 5.-These clauses provide for the dWfmitatioD of 
the C lingle-member Metropolitan CouncU constituenciel and du· 
m.nattoa.t the, ftUftlbet·of- -.eats to"te reservecffor scheduled castel 
and the constituencies in which these seats are to bereserYect. . ThII , • f'. 
function is sought to be entrusted to the Election COJqmission who 
will' be assisted ~y 'three memben of the Interim Metropolitan COUD-
eD. • 
• Claua e.-The quali1lcations for membership of the Metropolltul 
Council prescribed in this clause are the 88lPe as those presc:rlbe4 
for membership of the Legislative Assemblies constituted in certafn 
Union ~torlea under the Gove~ent of Union Territoriaa Act, 
1863;' ' . 
ClAuaa , Clnd I.-These clauses provide that persons entftIecJ te 
vote at elections to the Lok Sabha shall be the voters· at the e1ectfcm 
to the Metropolitan ·CouncU. and that the relevant portion of, the !'On· 
for the Parliamentary constituency shall be the electoral roD for a 
Metropolitan· Council conltitu~ey. 
CI4uIe I.-This elauae provides for the R.epreleatatioo of the. p.,. 
- pie Act, 1951, and r-ules thereunder. beiDI· followed with nee ... r:v 
adaptations for the purpose of elections to the Metropolitan C~. 
ezcmae lO-The term of the Metropolitan Council prescribed tB 
this clause is the same as that prescribed in respect of Legillati ... 
Assemblies of Union territories· constituted under the Government 
of Union Terrltonea Act, 1M3. 
17 

II 
CZcaua. 11.-Tbia uua. empowers thC' AdmlnJstrator to IUJDmOD 
the JrletropoUtan COUDell from time to time and to prorolUe it. . He 
can alIo d1uolve the Counc11 with the approval of the Pre8idept. --.. --, ---.--------- ---. 
CZaUle. 12 And 13.-Clause 12 provide. for the election of a mem-
ber of the Council as it. Chairman and other terms of his omce. 
C1a~ 131ays down the procedure for considering any resolution for 
the removal of the Chalrman. These clauses follow the correspond-
ing provisions relating to the Speaker made in the Government of 
U~on Territories Act, 1963. 
ClaUie 14.-Thls clause enables the Administrator to attend and 
ad4ress .meetlaga..r~ : ~he Metropolitan Council 
Cl4UBea 15 And 16.-These relate to oath or aftlrmation by the 
memb~ and the voting procedure in the Metropolitan Council and 
follow eorTespondlng provisions made tU respect of Legislative A&-
semblies under the Government of Union Territories Act, 1983. • 
C'Z4u.e 17.-This clause apart from prohibiting simultaneous mem-
. ~p o( Parliament. and Metropolitan Council also prolUbita simul-
taneous membership of Metropolitan Council and the Delhi Munici-
pal CorporatiOn. Sub-clauses (Z) and (3) of this clause further 
specify the circumstances In which a member's seat may fall vacant. 
Cl4U1e lB.-This clause lays down the c:UsquallftcatloDl for mem-
bership of the Met~opolitan Counc;1l and generally follows the rele-
vant provisions of section 14 of the Government of Union Territories 
Act, 1963. 
CZ4use 19.-This clause provide. for the right of· freedom of 
speech to, and other privileges of, the members of the Metropolitan 
Counell.. . 
CZ4use 20.-This clause provides for the salaries and allowances 
of the members being determined by the President. 
-,* ' CZaUle 21.-Thls; anumerates the various matters which will come 
up for discussion before the Metropolitan Council and also provides 
that' the recommendations made by the Metropolitan Counell shall 
be duly considered by the Executive CouncU. Wherever necessary, 
the Administrator will forward the recommendations to the Central 
Government with the views, if any, expressed thereon ·by the Execu .. 
tive Council . 
. CI4U1e 22.-'l'h1s clause defines the scope' of interpeUatiOlll in the 
MetropoUtan Council. 

I, 72,1" 
. CIa.",. 23.-Thil clllUle empowen the MettOlK»UWl . Co\Uldl to 
make rules regulating ita procedure and the conduct of ita buIlnea. 
__ 'l'heA.dmlnlltrator iI.- however, empowered to make rulel with the 
approval of the President for prohibitinJ the ,ilIcuIa1on of, or regu-
lating the asking of questions on, matters which affect the d1Icharge 
of his functions in 10 far as he 1a required to act in hiI diIcret1on, 
or. to exercise under the law judicial or quasi-judicial . fuDcttoDa. 
Until rules are made in this bebaH, the procedure and conduct of 
the business of the Metropolitan Council will be regulated by the 
rules made by the Administrator. 
Clauae 24.-This relates to the language in which the bwdn ... 
of the Metropolitan Council shall be tranJaeft;~ 
C'Jauae 25.-This clause prohibita discuuion in the Metropolitan 
Counell in respect of the conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court 
or 01 a High Court in the cUseharge of his functioDa and fonows the 
coU'esponding provision in the Government of Union Territories 
Act, 1963~ , 
.' ClClUft 26.-This clause provides that Courts shall not enquire into 
the proceedings of the Metropolitan Council and follows the pro-
visions of section 37 of the Government of Union Territories Act, 
1963: 
C'lauae. 27 to 29.-Clause 27 provides for the constitution of an 
Executive Counell to assist and advise the Administrator In the ser-
cise of his functions except when he is required to act in his dis-' 
cretion or in a judicial or quasi-judicial capacity. Clause 28 contains 
other provisions regarding members. of the Executive Councfl and 
clause 29 relates to the procedure in regard to conduct of It. busi-
ness. 
Cl4uaes 30 and 31.-These clauses provide that the AdmInistrator 
and the members of his Executive COUDCn shall be under the general 
control of, and comply with the directions given by, the President, 
It also empowers the Prestdent to suspend th~ 9peration of all or 
any of the provisions of the Act when It Is neeessary or expedient 
to do so and make other arrangements tor the administration of th. 
Union territory of Delhi. ........ ,.~ . 
·Clauae. 32 and ~.-These clauses provide that peiufing the -con-
stitution of the Metropolitan Council and the Executive Council, an 
Interim Metropolitan Council and an Interim Executive Council 
shall be established. The Interim Metropolitan CouncU w111 coDlllt 
ot fort)'-two members to be elec;ted by the memben of the preaent 
electoral college for Delhi and not more thAD ftft ~berI to .,.. 

30 
~ by' the Prestcfent. The Interim Executive COUDCil wiD 
cOnsist' of "not more than four members of the Interim Metropolitan 
-,.~oundl 'to be' ~ppolnted by tI1e'~dent. -
. CUu&ae K-Ttda, clauie aeeb to make It clear that contracts, suits 
mcl-proceedbtp. in connection with the administration of Delhi! are 
contracts, made In the eXercise of the executive power of the Union 
and suits and, proceedings instituted 'by or against the Central Gov-
ernment. It 'follows the corresponding provtmon In section 5& of the 
Government of Union Territories Act, 1983. 
Claue 35.-The electoral college for Delhi'.t ~t eontlst8 of 
eighty eleeteC1' members of the Delhi Municipal Corporation and 
ten persons elected from the ~aa within the New, De1b1I1UD1c1pal 
Comlnittee and' the Delhi Cantonment Board. The clauae provides 
that ~e electoral college for Delhi shall, conaist of the elected mem-
bers of the Met,ropolitan Council and that until theMatropoUtaD 
Councll is constituted, it shall consist of the elected members of the 
Interim Metropolitan Council. 
, "' il.'rcmie 3&:~"this claus'e'"'provides for an amendment of section 
41 (2) (4) of the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 with • 
view to raise the number of Parliamentary constituencies for Delhi 
from flve to seven. 
CZaue 3'i.-This elauee provides for the removal of dlftlcultlel 
which may arise in giving ettect to the provisions of the' Act. 

~ANCIAL MEM~UM 
Clause 3 (1) of the Bill provides for theaetUng up of a Metro-
poUtan' Counc1l '~or .DeJ.bI., and clause' 27 (1) for coDltttutiOn ~' an 
JlXtieUttYe Co\Dlcll. Clauses 12(5),' 20 and 28(5) provide, respective-
ly, 'for payment of salaries and allowances to the Chairman and the 
members of 'the Metropolitan Councll and tbe members of the ~ 
c:uUve Council .. Clauses 32 and 33 provide that until a Metropolltan 
Council has been duly constituted and summOned to meet for the 
ftrst_~ ~'71. an Interim Metropolitan Counell and an Interim BEe-
cutive CoUDcll shall be cODf;ituted. These clauses also provide for 
paYment of alariel and allowances to the members Qf the ID.terim 
MetrijpOlitan CounCil and the Interim Executive Council, Xhe em-
p6h"BltUre ~ wehialartes and' allowances and other ltxpenditure 
of ian incidental nature such as staft for the MetropolltanCouncll and 
the EDcutive Council, purchase of motor ears and election to the 
Mettopotitan CouncU. etc., will have to be, ~e~ p-om the Cq~oUdated 
natlt'ytnma. i'tlie estlmBted expenditure on this account will be 
about, Ra. 3~ 79 lakha per annum recurring and Ra. 2' ~ t8khs, non-
recUrring as indicated below:-
(Ra .. in lakhs) 
(4) Salaries and allowances of the four Executive 
Councl1lors and the Chairman, Metropolitan CouncU 
and their personai staft, etc. (recurring)' "2' 00 
(b) Sal""s' and allowances of memben of the 'Metro-' 
politan Council (recurring) 1'18 
(c) Purchase of motor cars and ,telephones (O.Y.T. 
scheme) for the four Executive Councillors 
and the Chairman, Metropolitan Council, etc. 
non-~) 1~1 
,( d) Elections to the Metropolitan Council (once in Ave 
. years) and to the Interim Metropolitan Council .. 1: 35 
Clause 36 provides for the number of Parliamentary coDBtituen-
cias in Delhi being raised from five to seven. Additional expendi-
ture on account of salaries and allowances of the two members who 
will 'be elected from the two extra Parliamentary - conatltuencia 
will be about Ra. 24,400 per annum (recurring) . This expenditure 
wUl also have to be met from the Consolidated Fund of India . 
• -. ~_ , ........ __ ._ ..... , ....... ,.")0 ., .. .,.. 

MEMOR.ANJ>UM a!QARJ)ING DELlGATZD-LEGISLATION 
ClaUle 23 of the Bill empowers (a) the Metropolitan Council to 
make rules for regulatiDI its procedure and conduct of ita bUIfD_; 
and (b) the Admjniltrator to make. with the approval of the Presi-
dent, rules for probibitipg the diJcUllion at, Qr regulating the uk-
in, of' questions on, any matter which decta the dilcbar,e of hiI 
functiona In SO far u he is required by or under this Bm to act in 
hia discretion or by or under any law' to ex"'·1!',~ judicial or quasi-
judicial functions. CIa. 29 provides for the rulee -regarding the 
transaction of bulinels with the memben of Executive CouDcil 
be1n& made by the President and empowers the Administrator to 
make rules pracribing the manner of authenticating the orden 
- i8sued In his name. Clause 32 (1) empowers the Central Govern-
ment to make rules for the conduct of elections to the Interim Met-
rQpoli~ ,Council. Clause 9 further empowers the Central Govern-
ment to make an order specifying the nlo:iiflcations subject to which 
certain provisions of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, and 
any rules end orders mad~ thereunder relating to ,the conduct of elec-
tions to the Legialativ~ Assem'bly of a State shall apply to the COD-
duct of elections to the Mei:ropoUtan Council. 
--2. The matters mentioned above are of a procedunl. nature and 
it is difticult to provide for these matters in the Bill itself. The 
proposala for delegation of legislative power are thus of a normal 
. character. 
- . .. -: ,.- .,.... ~ .~". ~........... ., ··r ' .. : 
• , •• ~ ,. ~ ... oJ ',' ..... 
_ ._ 4 ... .. 22 
'0 .•• r , . 

EXTRACT noM 'l'HB REpUSDfTATION OF THE PIOPLZ ACT, 1950 
(43 or 1950) 
• • • • • , 
27A. Constitu-
tiOD of 
(3) The electoral college for the Union territory of Delhi shall electoral 
• • • • 
consist of- .- co1lepa 
~'~c~- ~e 
(4) the councillors of the Delhi Municipal Corporation; and ft11inI of 
(b) ten persons to represent the areas within the New ::~~_ 
Delhi Municipal Committee and the Delhi Cantonment ell of 
Board, to be chosen 'by direct election on the basta of adult States 
suffrage in accordance with rules made by the Central Gov- ~=D . 
ernment in this behalf. terrlto-
• • • • • 
EXTRACT noM: 'l'U GovaNKZNT or UNION .TaarrORmS Acr, 1963. 
(20 OF 1963). 
. . . . . , 
rifll . 
41. • • • • •.• I Duties 
(2) It shall also be the duty of the Delimitation Commiasion- ~:!:;. 
(4) to readjust, on the basis of the latest census figures, the ~ml'_ 
division of each of the Union territories of Delhi, Himachal Pra- OD. 
desh, Manipur and Tripura Into parUamentary constituencies, 
the total number thereof remaining the same; 
• • • • • 
. .' 
.0·, " 23 
1688 [B] LS-4 

... 
LOK SABHA 
, 
-------_. -- -- "-"---" 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the administration of the U niOD Territory of 
Delhi and for matters connected therewith. 
(Shri Gubtari lal Nanda, 
Minisur of Home Affairs.) 