BW No. 72 of 1962 
THE CONSTITUTION (THIRTEENTH 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 21ST AUGUST, 1962) 
, 
~ ARLlAMENT LIBRARY 
RO·····~·········TL-
n&tfo .. ~. L·.J L_,b-.;.. 

10 
1$ 
30 
Bill No. 72 of 1"1 
1lIE CONSTITUTION (THIRTEENTH AMENDMENT) 
BILL,19OO 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
fu.rther t..: amend the Constitu.tion of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Thirteenth Short titlll 
aac1 com-Amendment) Act, 1962. alenc:elDCIlt. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint. 
2. Tn PART XXI of the Constitution- Amendmellt 
(a) for the heading, the following heading shall be substitut- of Put XXI. 
ed. namely:-
"TEMPORARY, TRANSITIONAL AND SPECIAL PRO-
VISIONS"; 
(b) after artiC'lc 371, the following article shall be inserted, 
namdy:-
"371A (1), Notwithstanding anything in this ConsUtu- Special pro. 
tion,- 91110D otrlth 
(a) no Act of Parliament in respect of--
(i) religious or social practices of the Nagas, 
(ii) Naga customary law and procedure, 
(iii) administration of civil and criminal justice 
involv.;ng decisions according to Naga customary 
law, 
(iv) ownership and transfer of land and its 
resources, 
shall apply to the State of Nagaland unless the Legislative 
Assembly of Nagaland by a resolution so decides; 
(b) the Governor of Nagaland shall have special res-
ponsibility with respect to law and order in the State of 
Nagaland for so long as in his opinion internal distur-
bances occurring in the Naga Hills-Tuensang Area imme-
diately before the formation of that State continue 
respect to 
the Stlte of 
Nap11nd. 

2 
therein or in any part thereof and in the discharge of his 
functions in relation thereto the Governor shaU, after 
consulting the Council of Ministers, exercise his individual 
judgment as to the action to be taken: 
Provided that if any question arises whether any S 
matter is or is not a matter as respects which the Gover-
nor is under this sub-clause required to act in the exercise 
of his individual jl1dgment, the decision of the Governor 
.in his piscretion shall be final, and the validity of any-
thing done by the Governor shall not be called in ques- 10 
tion on the ground that he ought or ought not to have 
acted in the exercise of his individual judgment: 
Provided further that if the President on receipt of a 
report from the Governor or otherwise is satisfied that it 
is no longer necessary for the Governor to have special IS 
responsibility with respect to law and order in the State 
of Nagaland, he may by order direct that the Go\·ernor 
shall cease to have such responsibility with effect from 
such date as may be specified in the order; 
(c) in making his recommendation with respect to 20 
any demand for a grant, the Governor of Nagaland shall 
ensure that any money provided by the Government of 
India out of the Consolidated Fund of India for any spe-
cific service or purpose is included in the demand for a 
grant relating to that service or purpose' and not in any 3S 
other demand; 
(d) as from such date as the Governor of Nagaland 
may by public notification in this behalf specify, there 
shall be established a regional council for the Tuenung 
district consisting of thirty-five members and the Gover .. 30 . 
nor shall in his discretion make rules providing for-
(i) the composition of the regional council and 
the'manner in which the members of the regional 
council shall be chosen: 
Provided that the Deputy Commissioner of the 35 
Tuensang district shall be the Chairman ez Officio of 
the regional council and the Vice-Chairman of the 
regional council shall be elected by the memben 
thereof from amongst themselvesj 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
3S 
I 
(ii) the qualifications for being chosen ai, aDd tor 
being, members of the regional council; 
(iii) the term of office of, and the salaries and 
allowances, if any, to be paid to members of, the re· 
. gional council; 
(iv) the procedure and conduct of business of the 
regional council; 
(v) the appointment of officers and staff of the 
regional council and their conditions of service; and 
(vi) any other matter in respect of which it is 
necessary to make rules for the constitution and pro-
per functioning of. the regional council. 
(2) Notwithstanding. anything in this Constitution, for a 
period of ten years from the date of the formation of the State 
of'Nagaland or for such further period as the Governor may, 
on the recommendation of the regional council, by public 
notification specify in this behalf,-
• (a) the administration of the Tuensang district shall 
be carried on by the Governor; 
(b) where any money is provided by the Govemment 
of India to the Government of Nagaland to meet the 
requirements of the State of Nagaland as a whole, the 
Governor shall in his discretion arrange for an equitable 
allocation of that money between the Tuensang district 
and the rest of the State; 
(c) no Act of the Legislature of N~galand shall apply 
to the Tuensang district unless the Governor, on the 
recommendation of the regional council, by public notifi· 
cation so directs and the Governor in giving such direc· 
tion with respect to any such Act may direct that the Act 
shall in its application to the Tuensang district or any 
part thereof have effect subject to such exceptions or 
modifications as the Governor may specify on the recom-
mendation of the regional council; 
Provided that any direction given under this 8a~ 
clause may be given so as to have retrospective etIect; 
(d) the Governor may make regulations for the 
peace, progress and good government of. the Tuensang dis· 
trict and any regulations so made may repeal or amend 

• 
wiih retrospective effect, if necessary, any Act of Parlia-
ment or any other law which is for the time being appli-
cable to that district; 
(e) (i) one of the members representing the Tuen-
sang district in the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland S 
shall be appointed Minister for Tuensang affairs by the 
Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister and the 
Chief Minister in tendering his advice shall act on the 
recommendation of the majority of the members as 
aforesaid; 10 
(ii) ~he Minister for Tuensang affairs shall deal with, 
and have' direct access to the Governor on, all matters re-
lating to the Tuensang district but he shall keep the Chief 
Minister informed about the same; 
(f) notwithstanding anything in the foregoing pro- IS 
visions of this clause, the final decision on all matters 
relating to the Tuensang district shall be made by the 
Governor in his discretion; 
(g) in articles 54 and 55 and clause (4) of article 80, 
references to the elected members of the Legislative 20 
Assembly of a State or to each such member shall include 
references to the members or member of the Legislative 
Assembly of Nagaland elected by the regional council 
established under this article; 
(h) in article 170--
(i) clause (1) shall, in relation to the Legisla-
tive Assembly of Nagaland, have effect as if for the 
word 'sixty', the words 'forty-six' had been substi-
tuted; 
25 
(ii) in the said clause, the reference to direct 30 
election from territorial constituencies in the State 
shall include election by the members of the regional 
council established under this article, 
(iii) in clauses (2) and (3), references to terri-
torial constituencies shall mean references to terri- 35 
torial constituencies in the Kohima and Mokokchung 
districts. .. 
(3) Jf any difficulty arises in giving effect to any of the 
foregoing provisions of this article, the President may by 
order do anything (including any adaptation or modiftcatiOD 40 
of any other article) which appears to him to be necess8l'J ... 
the purpose of removing that difficulty: 

Provided that no such order shall be made after the expi-
ration of three years from the date of the formation of the 
State of Nagaland. 
ExpZanation.-ln this article, the Kohima, Mokokchung 
and Tuensang districts shall have the same meanings as in the 
State of Nagaland Act, 1962.". 

STATEMENT OF' OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In July 1960, an agreement was reached by the Government of 
India with the leaders of the Naga Peoples Convention under which 
it was decided that Naga Hills-Tuensang Area (Nagaland), which is 
at present a Part 'B' tribal area within the State of Assam, will be 
fonned into a separate State in the Union of India. 
2. The Agreement inter alia provides that-
(a) the Governor of the State of Nagaland shall. have 
special responsibility for law and order for so long as the law and 
order situation continues to remain disturbed on account of 
hostile activities; 
(b) the Governor shall have general responsibility with 
regard to the. funds made available to the new State by the 
Government of India; 
(c) the administration of the Tuensang,District of Nagaland 
shall be carried on by the Governor for a period of ten years 
during which it is expected that the people of that area would be 
in a position to shoulder fuller responsibilities of administration. 
A Regional Council is to be formed for the said Tuensang Dis-
trict comprising elected representatives from the tribes therein. 
This Regional Council will supervise and guide the working of the 
Village, Range and Area Councils in that district.and further no 
law passed by the Nagaland legislatur~ will extend to that district 
unless so recommended by the Regional Council; 
(d) Acts of Parliament shall not. apply to Nagaland unless so 
decided by the Nagaland 'Legislature with regard to:-
(i) religious or social practices of the. Nagas; 
(ii) Naga Customary Law and procedure; 
(iii) administration of civil and criminal justice involv-
ing decisions according to Naga Customary Law; 
(iv) ownership and transfer of land and its resources. 
3. As these matters are peculiar to the proposed new State of 
N agaland, provision with respect thereto has to be made in the Cons-
titution itself. This Bill accordingly seeks to amend the Constitu-
tion to provide for the aforesaid matters and matters anci1lery 
thereto. A separate Bill for the formation of the new State relatable 
to article 3 is also being introduced. 
NBW DI:uu; 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU. 
6 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF hmu 
• • • • • • 
PART VI 
TIm STAIfBS 
• • • • • • 
CHAPTER III.-THE STA.TE LEGISLA.TURE 
Genet'ol 
• • • • • • • 
~ition 170. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 333, the Legislative 
Le,lalative Assembly of each State shall consist of not more than five hundred. 
Assemblie8. and not less than sixty, members chosen by direct election from terri-
torial constituencies in the State. 
(2) For the purposes of clause (1) each State shall be divided 
into territorial constituencies in such manner that the ratio between 
the population of each constituency and the number of seats allotted 
to it shaU, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the State. 
Ezplanation.-In this clause, the expression "population" means 
the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which 
the relevant figures have been published. 
(3) Upon the completion of each census, the total number of seats 
in the Legislative Assembly of each State and the division of each 
State into territorial constituencies shall be readjusted by such 
authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law determine: 
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation 
in the Legislative Assembly until the dissolution of the then existing 
Assembly . 
• • • • • • 
PART XXI 
l'EMPoRARY AND TRANsmONAL PROVISIONS 
T •• porary 369. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament 
~entto shall, during a period of five years from the commencement of this 
:i:-='= Constitution, have power to make laws with respect to the following 
to certaf.D matters as if they were enumerated in the Concurrent List, namely:-matten ID 
the State (II) trade and commerce within a State in, and the pro duc-
::~ a,w! tion, supply and distribution of, cotton and woollen textil~, raw 
IDRb ttcc" iD cotton (including ginned cotton and unginned cotton or kapas), 
t e ODCUr- food ft (. 1 d' teDt Llat. cotton seed, paper (including newsprint), stu s me u mg 
edible oilseeds and oil), cattle fodder (including oil-cakes and 
'I 

8 
other concentrates), coal (including coke and derivatives of coal), 
iron, steel and mica; 
(b) offences against laws with respect to any ot the matters 
mentioned in clause (a), jurisdiction and powers of all courts ex-
cept the Supreme Court with respect to any of those matters, and 
fees in respect of any of those matters but not including fees taken 
in any ~urt; 
but any law made by Parliament, which Parliament would not but 
for the provisions of this article have been competent to make, shall, 
to the extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect on the expira-
tion of the said period, except as respects things done or omitted to 
be done before the expiration thereof. 
• • • • • • 
'~1 pro-371. (1) NotWithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Prest- vtllOll with 
dent may, by order made with respect to the State of Andhra Pradesh :!"St!te.:f 
or Punjab, provide for the constitution and functions of regional com- ~h: 
mittees of the Legislative Assembly of the State, for the modifications Puni:b. ' 
to be made in the rules of business of the Government and in the rules :!d~:'~ 
of procedure of the Legislative Assembly of the State and for any spe-
cial responsibility of the Governor in order to secure the proper func-
tioning of the regional committees, 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President 
may by order made with respect to the State of Maharashtra or 
Gujarat, provide for any special responsibility of the Governor for-
(a) the establishment of separate development boards for 
Vidarbha, Marathwada, and the rest of Maharashtra or, as the case 
may be, Saurashtra, Kutch and the rest of Gujarat with the 
provision that a report on the working of each of these boards 
will be placed each year before the State Legislative Assembly; 
(b) the equitable allocation of funds for developmental expen-
diture over the said areas, subject to the requirements of the State 
as a whole; and 
(e) an equitable arrangement providing adequate facilities 
for technieal education and vocational training, and adequate 
opportunities for employment in services under the control of the 
State Government, in resPect of all the said areas, subject to the 
requirements of the State 81 a whole . 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
Bll.L 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
(Shri Jawaharlal Nehru, Prime Minister.) 
• 