As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
801 No. 12 01 1"1 
THE INTERNATIONAL AIR:l>ORTS AUTHORITY 
BILL, 1971 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
. 1. "Short title, commencement and application. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
THE INTERNATIONAL AIRPoRTS AUTHORITY OJ' INDIA 
3. Constitution and incorporation of the Authority. 
4. "Disqualification for oftlce of member. 
5. Term of office and conditions of service of membel'8. 
".0. Vacation of office of member. 
7. Eligibility of member for re-appotntment. "', 
8. Meetings. 
9. Vacancy in the Authority not to invalidate proceedings. 
. .t ••••• 
10. Appointment of officers and other employees of the Authority. 
11. Authority to act on business principles. 
CHAPrERm 
PRoPERTY AND CONTRACTS 
12. Transfer of assets and liabilities of Central Government to the 
Authority. 
13. Compulsory acquisition of land for the Authority. 
14. Contracts by the Authority. 
15. Mode of executing contracts on behalf of the Authority. 
CHAPTER IV 
FuNCTIONS OF THE AUTHORITY 
16. Functions of the AuthOrity. 
CHAPTER V 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
17. Power of the Authority to charge fees, rent, etc. 
18. Additional capital and grants to the Authority by the Central 
aovemm~nt, 

ii 
CLAUSES 
19. Fund of the Authority. 
20. Allocation of surplus funds. 
: 21. SubmisSion of programme of activities and financial estimates. 
22. Investment of funds. 
23. Borrowing powers of the Authority. 
24. Accounts and audit. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELJ.ANBOl7S 
25. Submission of annual reports to Parliament. 
26. Delegation. 
27. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Authority. 
28. Officers and employees of the Authority to be public servants. 
29. Protection of action taken under the Act. 
30. Custody and disposal of lost property. 
31. Provisions relatilig to income-tax. 
82. Power of the Authority to undertake certain works. 
33. Power of Central Government to temporarily divest the Authority 
from the management of any airport. 
34. Power of Central Government to supersede the Authority. 
35. Power of Central Government to issue direcUons. 
36. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
37. Power of the ,Authority to make regulations. 
,38. Supplemental provisions .respecting regulations. 
39. Penalty for breach of certain regulations. 
,40. Power to remove difficulties. 
41. Amendment of Act 22 of 1934. 

Bill No. 13 oll971 
nm INTERNATIONAL AIRPORTS AUTIIORITY 
BILL, 1971 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the comtitution of an authority for the mcznagement of 
certain aerodromes whereat international air transport services a,.e 
operated or lire intended to be operated and fo,. matters connected 
therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-second Year of the 
RepUblic of India as foll'Ows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
S 1. (1) This Act may be called the International Airporb Authority Short title 
Act, 1971. commence. 
mentand 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government appll-
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. cation. 
(3) It applies, in the first instance, to the aerodromes of Bombay 
10 (Santa Cruz), Calcutta (Dum Dum), Delhi (Palam) and Madras 
(Meenambakkam) and the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, apply the provisions of this Act to any .other aero-
drome whereat international air transport services are operatec:t. or are 
intended to be operated and with effect from such date 'f .may be speei-
IS fied in the notification. " _ _ 

be8Di-
lion" 
Constitu-
tion and 
incorpora-
tionofthe 
Authority. 
2. in this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "airport" means an aerodrome as defined in clause (2) of 
aectlon 2 of the Aircraft Act, 1934 and to which this Act applles or 
is made applicable; 
(b) "airstrip" means an area used or intended to be used for 5 
the landing and take-oft' of aircrafts with short take-oft' and landing 
characteristics and includes all buildings and structures thereon or 
appertaining thereto; 
(c) "AuthOrity" means the International Airports Aut.hodty of 
lndia constituted under section 3; 10 
(d) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Authority; 
(e) "heliport" means an area, either at ground level or ele-
vated on a structure, used or intended to be used for the landing and 
take-off of helicopters and includes an area for parkin~ helicopters 
and all buildings and structures thereon or appertaining thereto; IS 
(f) "member" means a member of the Authority and includes 
the Chairman but for the purposes of sections 4, 5, 6 and 7 does not 
include the e:J: ogiciO member referred to in clause (b) of sub-sec-
tion (3) of section 3; 
2201193'-
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 20 
Act; and 
(h) "regulations" means regulations madE: under thi .. Act. 
CHAPTER II 
THE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORTS AUTHORITY 0 .. INDIA 
·3. (1) With effect from the commencement of this Act, the Central 25 
Government shall constitute an authority to be called the Intemational 
Airports Authority of India. 
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid 
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to 
the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 30 
movable an:] immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue 
and be sued. 
(3) The Authority shall consist of-
(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government; 
(b) the Director-General of Civil Aviation, ex. officio: arid 3S 
(c) not less than six and not more than thirteen members to 
be appointed by the Central Government . 
. (4) The Chairman shall be a whole-time member and the other 
members referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (3) may be appointed 
as whole-time or part-time members as the Central Government may 40 
think fit. 

(S) The lWhes of persons appointed as members shall be notJ1ted by 
the Central Government in the Official Gazette. 
(6) During the temporary absence of the Chairman, the Central Gov-
ernment may appoint another person, being a whole-time member, to 
, act as the Chairman. 
4. A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as a member 11 
he-
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an 
offence, which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves 
10 moral turpitude; or 
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or 
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared. bya competeut 
Court; or 
IS 
(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service ('f lhe Cov-
ernment or a corporation owned or controlled by the Government; or 
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, ~c,b 1lnancial 
or other interest in the Authority as is likely to affect prejudicially 
the discharge by him of his functions as a member. 
5. (1) Subject to the provisions of secti<>n 6, every member shall hold 
20 office for a period of three years from the date on which he assumes 
office: 
25 
30 
Provided that the Central Government may-
(a) terminate the appointment of any whole-time member, who 
is not a servant of the Government, after giving him notice for a 
period of not less than three months or in lieu thereof (in payment 
of an amount equal to his salary and allowances, if any, for a period 
of three months; 
(b) terminate the appointment of any part-time member who 
is not a servant of the Government after giving him notice for such 
period as may be prescribed; and 
(c) terminate at any time the appOintment of any member who 
is a servant of the Government. 
(2) The other conditions of service of the members shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 
35 (3) Any member may resign his office by giving notice in writing for 
such period as may be prescribed to the Central Government and, on 
such resignation being notified in the Official Gazette by that GoverI;l-
ment, such member shall be deemed to have vacated his office. 
(4) A casual vacancy caused by the resignation of a member under 
40 sub-section (3) or otherwise may be filled by fresh appointment and the 
person so appointed shall hold office for the remaining period for which 
the member in whose place he is appOinted would have held office. 
Disquallfl. 
cation for 
office Of 
member, 
TemlOl 
office and 
conditions 
ot service 
ofmem. 
bers. 

4 
" Vacation G", The . Central Government shall remQve a, member it he-
otofBce ot 
member. (a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned 
in section 4: 
Eligibility 
otmember 
tor ra-
appoint-
ment. 
Vacancy 
in the 
Authority 
Dot to 
invalidate 
proceed-
inll. 
Appoint_ 
mentot 
officers 
and other 
employees 
ot the 
Authority. 
Provided that no member shall be removed on the ground that 
he has become subject to the disqualification mentioned in clause (e) S 
of that section, unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard in the matter; or 
(b) ,refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting; or 
(c) is, without obtaining leaye of absence from the Authority, 
absent from three consecutive meetings of the Authority; or 
(d) in the opinion of the Central Government, has so abused his 
position as to render his continuance in oftlce detrimental to the 
public interest: 
10 
Provided that no member shall be removed under this clause 
unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in 
~e r.natter. 15 
7. Any person ceasing to be a member shall, unless 
under section " be eligible for re-appointment as such. 
disqualified 
S. (1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business 
at its meetin..gs (including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided 20 
by regulations. 
(2) The Chairman, or, if for any reason he is unabJe to attend any 
~eeting, any other member chosen by the members present at the 
meeting, shall preside at the meeting. 
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority 
shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the members present and 
voting, and, in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairman, or in his 
absence, the person presiding, shall have and exercise a second or casting 
vote. 
25 
. 30 
9. No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be deemed to be invalid 
by reason r.nerely of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, 
the Authority. 
10. (1) For the purpose of enabling it' efficiently to di!!charge its 
functions under this Act, the Authority sahll, 8ubjeC't to the provisions 
of section 12 and to such rules as may be prescribed in this bf'half, appoint 35 
(whether on deputation or otherwise) such number of officers and other 
employees as it may consider necessary: 
Provided that the appointment of such category of officers as may be 
specified after consultation with the Chairman in such rules, shall be 40 
subject to the approval of the Central Government. 

(2) Subject to the provisions of section 12, every officer or other em-
ployee appointed by the Authority shall be subject to such conditions of 
service and shall be entitled to such remuneration as may be determined 
by regulations. 
11. In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the Authority shall 
act, so far as may be, on business principles. 
CHAPTER III 
PROPERTY AND CONTRACTS 
12. (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), as from such 
10 date as the Central Government may appoint by notification in the 
Official Gazette in relation to any airport,-
IS 
20 
30 
35 
45 
(a) all properties and other assets vested in the Central Gov-
ernment for the purposes of the airport and administered by the 
Director-General of Civil Aviatic;m immediately before such day .hall 
vest in the Authority; 
(b) all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts 
entered into and all matters and things engaged to be dor-e by, with, 
or for the Central Government immediately before such day for or in 
connection with the purposes of the airport shall be deemed to have 
been incurred, entered into _and engaged to be done by, with, or for 
the Authority; 
(c) all non-recurring expenditure Incurred by the Central Gov-
ernment for or in connection with the purposes of the airport up to 
such da yand d~lared to be capital expenditure by the Central 
Government shall, subject to such terms and conditions as may be 
determined by the Central Government, be treated as the capital 
provided by the Central Government to the Authority; 
(d) all sums of money due to the Central Government in relation 
to the airport immediately before Mlch day shall be deemed .. be 
due to the Authority; 
(e) . all suits and ot~r legal proceedings instituted or which 
could have been instituted by or against the Central Government 
immediately before such day for any matter in relation to the airport 
may be continued or instituted by or against the AuthOrity; 
(I> every employee holding any office under the Central Govern-
ment immediately before such day solely or mainly for or in connec-
tion with such affairs of the airport as are relevant to the functions 
of the Authority under this Act shall be treated as on deputation 
with the Authority but shall hold his office in the AuthOrity by the 
same tenure and upon the same terms and condition~ of service as 
respects remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement or other 
terminal benefits as he would have held such office, if the Authority 
had not been constituted and shall continue to do so until the Centra] 
Government, either on its own motion or at the request of the 
Authority, recalls such employee to its service or until the Authority, 
with the concurrence of the Central Gover-nment, duly absorbs such 
employee in its regular service, whichever is earlier: 
Authority 
to act on 
business 
principIa. 
Transfer 
of asset. 
and 
liabilities 
of Central 
Govern-
ment to 
the 
Autho-
rity. 

6 
PrQvided that during tiu:! period of deputation of any such em-
ployee with the Authority, the Authority shall pay to the Central 
Government, in respect of every such employee, such contribution 
towards his leave salary, pension and gratuity as the Central Govern-
ment may, by order, determine: 5 
Provided further that any such employee, who has, in respect of; 
the proposal of the Authority to absorb him in its regular service, 
intimated within such time as may be specified in this behalf by the 
Authority his intention of not becoming a regular employee of the 
Authority, shall not be absorbed by the Authority in its regular 10 
service. 
(2) As from the date determined by the Central Government under' 
the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 16,- . 
. (a) the equipment and appl.anees relating to air navigation 
serviees and the 1tuiIdJngs used exclusively for sueh semen imme· IS 
diately before sueh day shall vest in the J\uthority; 
(b) all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts 
entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with, 
or for the Central Government immediately before such day for or 
ip connection with air navigation services shall be deemed to have 20 
been incurred, entered into and engaged to be done by, with, or for 
the Authority; 
(c) aD II1Im8 of money due to the Ceatral Gove,nment for or in 
'~oDDediOIl with air navigation serviees immediateiybefore sueh day 
,1h8R he deemed to be d}le .to the Authority; • 25 
(d) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which 
coWd hav.e been instituted by or against the .Central Government 
immediately before such day for any matter in connection with air 
, navigation services may be continued or inltituted Dy or against the 
~) ,t\utbprity; 30 
(e) every employee holding any office under the Central 
Goyemment ilXlmediately before such day solely or mainly for or in 
COJUlectiOn w1th·air navigation seriicesshall be treated as ondeputa-
tion with the Authority but shall hold his office in the Authority by 
the same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions of service as 3 
respects remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement or other 
terminal benefits as he would have held such office if the Authority 
had not been constituted and shall continue to do so until the Central 
Government, either on its own motion or at the request of the 
Authority, recalJssuch employee to its 'service or until the Authority, 40 
. with the concurrence of the Central Government, duly absorbs such 
employee in its re~lar service, whichever is earlier: 
Provided that during the period of deputation of any such em-
ployees with the Authority, the Authority s~all ~ay to the Central 
Government, in respect of every such employee, such contribution 4' 
towards his leave salary, pension and gratuity as the Central Goy.. 
emment may, by order, determine: ' 

14 of 1947. 
1 of 1894. 
7 
Provided furtlaer that any such employee, who has, in respect of 
the proposal of the Authority to absorb him in its regular service, 
intimated within such time as may be specified in this ~!lalf by 
the Authority his intention of not becoming a regular employee of 
5 the AuthOrity, shan not be absorbed by the Authority in its regular 
service. 
(3) If any dispute or doubt arises as to which of the properties, rights 
or liabilities of the Central Government have been transferred to the 
Authority or as to which of the employees serving under· the Central 
10 Government are to be treatt"Ci as on deputation with the Authority, under 
this section, such dispute or doubt shall be decided by the Central Gov-
ernment in consultation with the Authority and the decision of the Cen-
. tral Government thereon shall be final. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes 
15 Act, 1947 or in any other law for the time being in force, the absorption 
of any employee by the Authority in its regular service under this section 
shall not entitle such employee to any compensation under that he or 
other law and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal 
or other authority. 
20 (5) In this section and in section 16, the expression "air navigatior. 
services", in relation to any airport, means air traffic services (including 
aeronautical and flight information services), aeronautical communica-
tion and navigational aids and meteorological services at such airport. 
13. Any land required by the AuthOrity for discharging its functi:ms 
25 under this Act shall be deemed to be needed for a public purpose and such 
land may be acquired for the Authority under the provisions of the Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894 or of any other corresponding law for the time being 
in force. 
Compul-
sory ac-
quisition 
otland 
for the 
Authorit,.. 
14. Subject to the provisions of section 15, the Authority shall be com- Contracts 
30 petent to enter into and perform any contract necessary for the discharge of by the 
its functions under this Act. Authorit,.. 
15. (1) Every contract shall, on behalf of the Authority, be made by 
the Chairman or such other member or such officer of the Authority as 
may be generally or specially empowered in this behalf by the Authority 
3S and such contracts or c1au of contr,cts as may be specified in the regu-
lations shall be sealed with the common seal of the Authority: 
Provided that no contract exceeding such value or amount as the 
Central Government may, from time to time, by order, fix in this behalf 
shall be made unless it has been previOUsly approved by the Authority: 
40 Provided further that no contract for the acquisition or sale of im-
movable property or for the lease of any such property for a term exceed-
ing thirty years and no other contract exceeding such value or amount as 
the Central Government may, from time to time, by order, fix in this 
behalf shall be made unless it has been previOusly approved by the 
4, Central Government. 
(2) Subject to the prOVISions of sub-section (1), the form and 
manner in which any contract shall be made under this Act shall be such 
BI may be prescribed by regulations. 
Mode of 
executinl 
contracts 
on behalf 
of the 
Authority. 

8 
(3)' 'i~'o' contraet which is 'not in aecordanceWith the pro'riSib~Jof this 
Act aDd the regUlations, shall be binding ~,the Authority. 
CHAPTER'tv 
FUNCTIONS OF THE AUmORITY 
Functions 18. (1)' Subj«t, t() the rules, 'if any, made by the ¢eatral GQvemment. 5 
of the in thfsbehlUf, it 'shall be the :funeticm; of the AuthOrity to manage~ .. , 
Authority. airports efllciently. 
(2}Jt Shan be the duty of the Authority to provide at the airports 
such services and facilities as are necessary or desirable for the et.aci~nt 
operation of air transport services thereat; " , '" 10 
Provided that th~ fUIl(:~ion of pr(),vidingair navigation serv~ at 
the air.ports shall continue to be discharlJecl ,by the, Central Gove~rJlnlent 
until such date as that Government may, by ~der, d~t;ermine. 
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the provtsiorts;~tJhtainedm 
sub-sections (1) and (2), the Authority may-' " IS 
(1) plan,dev~lo~~ construct arid' milint.in 'runways;' tiljci-,&ys, 
llprons arid tetin1n~f'and aridllary 'buildings 'at ithe 'attports; 
• , I . .• , .: ~',' I"j ! , 
(b) ~construct residential buildblgsand create townships for its, 
employees; 
(c) establish and rbaintain hOtels,' restaurants and rest.rooms 20 
ii~: 6:t:rte~th~alrliOrts; , 
(d)establishW8l'ehquse& at the airports for .the stQrage or pro- "" 
cessing of goods; 
, . (e): arrange for postal, JAoney ex~hange, insurance and tele-.. "". " ", . "'I' ,. 
phone facilities fo,: the u~ of passengers ~d other perSons ,at' the 2 5 
airports; 
(f) make appropriate arrangements for watch and ward at the 
airports; , , ' 
. tg), ,regulate ;and~n;o1'~he p~y~gof ~~clt!s,an~. ~e',' ent~y 
and exit Qf passengers. ~nd . .:v~~~rs,in the airpo~ts with due ceg,'r4 30 
to the pretocoldUlllCtionlfQi tbe,Go¥er~ment.of lPcUa; " . 
(h) develep ,and, p.l'Qv,j.de : ;consultancy '" serv~ces . in Indja, ,and 
'abroad in reiatiQn to .plllJJ.l\l#lg and, development Qf airports 01' . ~ny 
·faeUities thereat; , .". , . . 
(i) establish and ~ag~: he~ip~l$ and airstrips;, 3, 
(1) ~rovide stiCh trmsport facilities as ate,:in the opinion of the 
A\lttibrity, necessary to: flie 'PBssengers travelling: by'air; 
, ' , 
(")to formolut or more eo~panies. under the Coropanies Act, 
1956 or under any other law relating to companie~ to further the al1858 
efficient discharge of the functions imposed on it by this Act; and 40 1 . 
. (1) ~e all. suc~ s~ps as may.b~ necessa~ or convehient'for, 
or may be"incid~mtal 'to, the exerci~ of any:poW~r 'or"the ~ 
of any function conferred or impOsed on it'llyi thii ~t. . . 

(4) .Io. the ~charge of it~ functions under thi$ sectiQn, the AutJ;1C?rity 
shallhaye Que regar<l to the development of air transport service and to • 
the efficiency, economy and safety of such se~i~e. . 
s 
IS 
20 
(5) N~thing contained in this section shlf,ll be construed as-
(4) imposing -an obligation on the Authority to diSClulrge any 
function or duty-under this section with respect to . any airport.iIl 
relation to which a notifioation has not been issued under sub-~~iQD 
(1) of section 12; 
(b) authorising the disregard by the Authority of any law for 
the 'time ·being in foroe; or 
(c) authQrisi~ any person to iristitute any proceeding in respect 
of a duty or li,ability to which the Authority or its officers or other 
employees would not otherwise be subject. '. 
CHAPTE~V .. 
FINANCE .• ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
.11. The Authority may,-
(i) with the - p&'ev}ous app~oval of tbe C~nt.ral Gov:!rnmcnt, 
,charge fees or rent,-
(a) fot the landing, housing or parking of air~afts or for 
any other service or facility oft'er~ in connection with aircraft 
operations, at any airport. heliport or airstrip_ 
Expzana.tion.-In this sub-clause "aircraft" does not include 
an aircraft belonging to the Indian Defence Services and' "aircraft 
operations" do not include operations of any aircraft belonging to 
2S the said ,Services; 
(b) for the' amenities given to thepassen!!ers and visitors 
at any airport, hel~por.t or airstrip; 
(c) for the use and enjoyment by periJOns of facilities aDd 
other services provided by the Authority at any airport, heliport 
30 or airstrip; 
:(ii) with due regard to the instl'uction.sthat t.he C~ptl'al .Gov-
ernment may give to .thl' Authority. from time to time, charge fees 
or rent from 'person" who are given by the Authority any facUity for 
carrying -on any trade' or -business at any airport. 
Power 
of the 
AI.f&honi,. 
tochaqe 
fees, rent, 
etc. 
35 18. The Central Government may, after due apJlropl'ialion made by Additional 
'Parlian'lentby law in this Itelullf,- ::ital 
. (a) pJ'C)vide any ~apital. over and above the capital provided 
under clause (c) of sub-section (1) or reeUon2; that'may·JMj required 
by the Authority for the discharge or its runctions under this Actor 
.101' .~.urpo.se ~c;nu~.eet~d. the~ewith on such tenus l1nd condition .. 
¥ ~t Gove.rnmeiit.:may determine; . 
(b) pay to the' Authority, on 5l~h termll and con4itions us the 
(:e.ntJ:!aJ Go,""rDment ma,y determille, by way or loans or grants sueh 
;..,... of moneY as 'th~tGovemmei1t may e~nsldt'r l1ccessary for the 
45 ellieient discharge by the Authority of its -furidions under this Ad. 
grant!! to 
the 
Authority 
by the 
Central 
Go\'em-
ment. 

H) 
Fund of. It. (1) The Authority shall have its own fund and all receipts vf the 
the Authority shall be credited thereto and all payments of the Authority 
Authority. shall be made therefrom. 
A11oca-
toinof 
wrplua 
fqnda. 
Submis,:, 
sian of 
pro-
Irammeof 
activit1ea 
andftnan-
cial e8ti.-
matel. 
(2) The Authority shall have power, subject to the provisions of 
this Act, to spend such sums as it thinks fit to cover all administrative S 
expenses of the Authority and on 'Objects or for purposes authorised by 
this Act and such sums shall be treated as expenditure out of the fund 
of the Authority. 
(3) AU moneys standing at the credit of the Authority which cannot 
immediately be applied as provided in sub-section (2) shall be deposited 10 
in the State Bank. of India or in such scheduled bank or banks and sub-
ject to such conditions as may from time to time be specifoed by the 
Central Government. 
Explanation.- In this sub-section "scheduled bank" has the same 
meaning as in clause (e) 'Of section 2 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, IS 
1934. 
zo. (1) The Authority may, from time to time, set apart such amounts 
as it thinks fit as a reserve fund or funds for the purpose of expanding 
existing facilities or services or creating new facilities 'Or services at any 
airport or for the purpose of providing against any temporary decrease of 20 
revenue or increase of expenditure from transient causes or for purposes 
of replacement or for meeting expenditure arising from loss or damage 
from fire, cyclone, air-crash or other accident or for meeting any liability 
arising out of any act or omission in the discharge of its functions under 
this Act: -2S 
Provided that without prejudice to the right of the Authority to estab-
lish specific reserves for one or more specific purposes, the Authority 
shall also have the power to establish a general reserve: 
Provided further that the sums set apart annually in respect of each 
or any of the specific and general reserves and the aggregate at any time 30 
of such sums shall not exceed such limits as may, from time to time, be 
fixed in that behalf by the Central Government. 
(2) After making proviSion for such reserve fund or funds and for 
bad and doubtful debts, depreciation in assets and all other matters 
which afe usually provided toT by companies registered and incorpo- 35 
rated under the Companies Act, 1956, the Authority shall pay the bal- 1 of 1958. 
ance of its annual net profits to the Central Government. 
21. (1) The Authority shall, before the commencement of E'aeb finan-
cial year, prepare a statement of the programme of its activities during 
the forthcoming financial year as well as a financial estimate in respect 40 
thereof. 
(2) The statement prepared under sub-section (/) shall, not less than 
three months before the commencement of eachftnaneial year, be sub-
mitted for approval to the Central Government. 
(3) The statement and the financial estimates of the Authority may, 45 
, with the approval of the Central Government, be revised by the Autho-
rfty. 

11 
D. The Autborlty may invest its funds (including any reserve fund) Invest_ 
In the securities of the Central Government or in such ·other manner aa ment Of 
may be prescribed. . funds. 
23. (1) The Authority may, with the consent of the Central Govern- Borrow-
ing powers 
of the 
Authority. 
S ment or in accordance with the terms of any general or special autho-
rity given to it by the Central Government, borrow money from any 
source by the issue of bonds, debentures or such other instruments as it 
may deem fit for discharging aU or any of its functions under this Act. 
(2) The Central Government may lUarantee in such manner as it 
10 thiDks fit the repayment of the principal and the payment of interest 
thereon with respect to the loans borrowed by the Authol.'ity UDder sub-
section (1). 
(3) Subject to such limits as the Central Government may, from 
time to time, lay down, the Authority may borrow temporarily by way 
IS of overdraft or otherwise such amounts as it may require far disrharging 
its functions under this Act. 
24. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other ra- Accounts 
levant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including and audit. 
the profit and loss account and the balance-sheet in such farm as may be 
20 prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comp-
troller and Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited annually by th(: 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any expenditure incurred 
by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Authority 
2S to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person 
appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the 
Authority shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General has 
30 In connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, 
shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, con-
nected vouchers, documents and papers and inspect any of the offices 
of the Authority. 
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller 
35 and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in 
this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause 
the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament. 
CHAPTER VI 
MIsCJ:LLANBOt1S 
25. (1) The Authority shall, as soon as may be after the end of each 
financial year, prepare and submit to the Central Government in such 
form as may be prescribed a report giving an account of its activities 
during that financial year and the report shall also give an aClount of 
45 the activities which are likely to be undertaken by the Authority during 
the next financial year. 
Submis-
sion of 
annual 
reports to 
Parlia-
ment. 

~lega­
tioD. 
Authenti-
cation of 
orders and 
other ins-
truments 
otthe 
Authority. 
Officers 
and em-
ployees of 
the AuthO-
rity to be 
public 
servants. 
Protection 
of action 
taken 
under the 
Act. 
Custody 
:mddis-
po3Glof 
lust pro-
Jlerty. 
Provisions 
relating 
to income-
tax. 
Power 
of the 
Authority 
to under-
take cer-
lain 
works. 
Power of 
Centra] 
Govern-
ment to 
tt.'mpo_ 
rarily 
divest' 
the 
Authority 
fremthe 
manage· 
ment of 
IIny 
lirport. 
12 
(2) The ee.t~GovemrMDt shall G8WIe au.ch .~ tobe": latd be-
fore both Houses of Parliament as soon as may he after· it. is ,aublnittottd. 
28. The Authority may, by general or special order in writinl, dele-
,gAte to the Chairman or any other member or to any oftlcer <11., t~~ Au-
thority. subject to such con~tions and liinitations, If any, as may be S 
specified in the order, such of its powers and fun.c!tions under this Act 
(except the powers under secti-o-n 31) a~ it m~y deem necessary. 
27. All orders and decisions of the Author.ity shan be aut_tieated 
by the signature of the Chairman or any other member authorised by 
the Authority in this behalf and all other instruments ·exiecuted by the 10 
. Authority shall' be authenticatt!d by the signature oifan 'officerof·elts 
Authority ah.ltbdrised -by the' Authority '!'I ~tbts· behalf! '" 
ZS. All officers and employees of the Authority shall, when acting or 
'purporting to act in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or of any 
rule or' regulation made thereunder, be deemed. to' be pubUcSei\1ants IS 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. ' 
ZI. No auit, prosecution or other legal proceeding$bldllie against the 
A~thority .orany member or anY,officer <tr other employee of th.e Au-
thority for anything, which is ,in, good faith .done or intended to be done 
in pursuance of this Act or of any rl,1le or regulati~ made thereunder or 20 
for any damage sustained by any aircraft or vehiCle in conseqt;('n('c of 
any <1efect in any Off the airports or other things ~il1g to or under 
. the controlo£ tile Authority. 
30. Subject to such' regulations as the' Authority may make in this 
behalf, the Authority shall provide for set!uring the safe custody and 25 
, l:estoration 01 any pl'operty which. while not in pr~per custody. i~ found 
on any premises belonging to the Authority or un4,er its overall control 
orin any aircraft. on any $uch premises. ' 
It. For the purpoaes of the Income...tex A~t. 1901 or any other: .~t­
Jl1entfOl' the time being infOllee l'.elatin& to ~me-ta~ or an-y otb.er Uix 
·on ineoJJle, profits or . "a ins. t.ae,Autborilty,"U be 4eellleG top., a ,e~- 30 
pany within the meaning of the Ineome..tax Act, 1"1 8J;ld fIh"U bel~c 
to tax accordingly on its income. profits and gains. 
32. The Authority may undertake to carry out on bch~lf of any 
person aJ)Y ~orks or services or ally class of wor!:s or ser-
v~~es on such terms and conditions as maybe agreed' upon 'betWeen the 35 
Authority and the person concerned. . 
33. (I) If at any time the Central Government is of opinion that in 
the public interest it is necessary orexped.ient so to d<t, it may, by order, 
direct the Authority to entrust the management of any airport with 40 
etTect from such date and to -such pel'8bn as may be specified in the ordcI '. 
and the Authority shall ];)e bound to comply with such direction: I 
i . t " ' . .'.. ~: :_:. 
, Provided thabbefore anorW ,is m.ade . under ~ .sup-section the Au-
thority shall be given a retlsonable .. ~ppot:t~it~ ~'b~i#g heard' i~' the 
. matter. " . u' . . . 45 
(2) Where th~ management of any airpOrt is, entnist,ed to any-person' 
specified under sub-section (1) (hereafter in this section "teferted to a'S 
45 of 1860. 
4301 1961. 

13 
Uae ,authorised}leI'1!On)" ,~ Authority, shall cease to exemse and cU.-
charge all its powers and functions under this Act in relation 'to such 
airport ,and sUc:h powers and functions shall be exercised and discharged 
by Uieauthorised person inaccol'dance with the' 'InstrUctions, if arty, 
5 which the Central Govei'nment may give to the allthbrlaed ~rSOl1 frt)m 
time to time: 
.'. Provided that nQ sucb.po~er or function as may be specified by the 
CeJil~.al Government by a: general or special order shall be exercised or 
~harged by :tbeau~~rised person except with theprevlous sanction 
10, of the Central Government. ' " ; .. 
(3) An order made under sub-section (1) shall, unless rescinded, be 
in operation for 'a period' of six months from the date on which the 
management of the airport is entrusted to the authorised person: 
Provided that the Central Government" may extend1lllCh period for a 
IS further period or periods not exceeding eighteen mcmths. j 
(4) During the operatiOl1(Jf an':oN1er made under'su.b·sectliOn (1), it 
shall be competent fOl' the Ceutrill Government to issue. from time to 
time, sitch directions to the A1r1th&tfty' as ate aec~ry to eaable the 
authoriSed persoii"t& exetoeise th~ ~poweri ami discharge the ,functions of 
20 the Authority under this Ad;in relatiMl 'to the, airport, the 'management 
qf which has ,beeJ!l,elltrusted to him and in particular to transfer any ,>urn 
of'money fr·om t~funt;i.9fthe 'Authority to the authorised person for the 
management of the airport and every such direction sha11 be com.plied 
with by the Authority. . ' 
25 (~) on, ~hece~sor o~. ,oJ>er~tion of any order made ~der sub-seetion 
(1) In relation to any airport, the authorised person sba:ll ceas~ toexer-
else ancl ,petTform' the pbwera and functions of, the Authority u~der this 
Act in relation to such airport and the, Autborityshall coqtinue to,exer-
cise and, perform such powers and functions in accordance with the pro-
30 visions of thi~ 'Act.' , , : 
(6) Onto assor 'of operatian of any ·order .made under sub-&ection 
(1) in relation to any airport, the authorised person shall hand over to 
~he AllthoritY,any property (including any sum of money or other'asset) 
remaining with him in 'connection with the management of such airport. 
! • '.": .• ! . . .• 
3S (7) Anything done or any action taken lllwfw~y by the author,bed 
40 
45 
p~rson ,in ,relation to any airport, during the period of operation of an 
order mad~ u~der sub-section' (1) shall be deemed tobave been done or 
t8k~n by .'the A\ithority~d shall be binding on the AUthority. 
34. (1) If, at any time, the Centra~ Governmemt is of opiDien-
(a) 'that on account of a ,grave emergency, the Autlwrity is un· 
abte 'to discharge the functions andduties.mposed on it by Qr under 
the provisions of this Act; or 
(b) that the Allthority has 'persistently made default In com-
'plying with snydireetion issued :by the Cerit,alGovemment Ullder 
this Act or in the,diacharle of the f~ons, and duties imposed an 
it by or under the provisions of this Act and as a result of which 
default the financial position of the. Authority or the administration 
of any airport has deteriorated; or" ., , 
Power 
ofCen-
tral Gov-
ernment 
tonper-
sedethe ' 
Authorlt7. 

Power 
ofCen-
tralGov-
ernmeat 
to laue 
dlree-
tiODl. 
14 
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the 
public interest so to do, 
the Central Government may. by notification in the Official Gazette, 
supersede the Authority for such period, not exceeding six months, as 
may be specified in the notification: S 
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-section for 
the reasons mentioned in clause (b), the Central Government shall give 
a reasonable opportunity to the Authority to show cause why it should 
not be superseded and shall consider the explanations and objections, if 
any. of the AuthOrity. 10 
(2) Upon the publication of Ii notification under sub-section (1) super-
seding the Authority,-
(4) all the members shall, as from the date of supersession, V~l'ate 
their offices as such; 
(b) all the powers. functions and duties which may, by or under IS 
the provisions of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf 
of the Authority, shall, until the Authority is re-constituted under 
sub-section (3), be exercised and discharged by such person or per-
sons as the Central Government may direct; 
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until 20 
the Authority is reconstituted under sub-section (3), vest in the 
Central Government. 
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the 
notification issued under sub-section (1). the Central Government may-
(a) extend the period of supersession for such further term, 25 
not exceeding six months, as it may consider necessary; or 
(b) re-constitute the Authority by fresh appointment and in such 
case any persons who vacated their offices under clause (a) of s1:1b-
section (2) shall 110t be deemed disqualified for appointm:!nt: 
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time before the 30 
expiration of the period of supersession, whether as originally specified 
under sub-section (1) or as extended under this sub-section, take action 
under clause (b) of this sub-section. 
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under 
sub-section (1) and a full report of any action taken under this section 35 
and the cirCumstances leading to such action to be laid before both Houses 
of Parliament at the earliest opportunity. 
35. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the 
AuthOrity shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties under this 
Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy 88 the Central 40 
Government may giv~' in writing to it from time to time: 
Provided that the Authority shall. as far as practicable, be given oppor-
tunity to express its views before any direction is given under this sub-
section. 
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a cAuestion is 45 
one of DOUCV or not shall be flna 1. 

5 
10 
15 
20 
IS 
•• (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for-
(a) the term of office and conditions of sarvice of the Chairman 
and other members under section 5 including the salaries payable to 
the Chairman and to the members who are required to render whole-
time service and the fees and allowances payable to the members who 
are required to render part-time service; 
(b) the period of notice required to terminate the appOintment 
of any member, who is required to render part-time service and who 
is not a servant of the Government, under section 5, and the period 
of notice that may be given to the Central Government by a member 
before he resigns his office, under that section; 
(c) the conditions and limitations subject to which the Authllrity 
may appoint officers and other employees under sub-section" (1) of 
section 10; 
(d) the terms and conditions subject to which the non-recur-
ring expenditure incurred by the Central Government for or in con-
nection with the purposes of any airport shall be treated as the capi-
tal provided by the Central Government to the Authority under 
clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 12; 
(e) the manner in which the Authority may invest its funds 
under section 22; 
25 <f) the form in which the Authority shall prepare the annual 
statement of accounts including the profit and loss account and the 
balance-sheet under section 24; and 
(g) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may 
30 be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session 
tor a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two successive sessions and if before the expiry of the session in 
which it is so laid or the session immediately following both Houses agree 
1n making any modification in the rule, or both Houses agree that the 
35 rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, ~hat 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the' 
validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
-
Power 
ofCen-
tralGov-
ernment 
to make 
rules. 
37. (1) The Authority may make regulations not inconsistent with 
40 this Act and the rules made thereunder to provide for all matters' for 
Which provision is necessary or expedient for the purpose c! coiving effect 
to the provisions of this Act. 
Power 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
regulations may provide for-
(a) the times and pJaces of the meetings of the Authority and 
the procedure to be followed for the transaction of business at SUCh 
meetings under $ub-Be(:tion (1) of section 8i 
of th" 
Authority 
tOmQe 
regula-
tiOIU' ' 

Supple-
mental 
provi-
sionsres-
pectinl 
regula-
.,. tiona. 
Penalty 
for 
breach, 
of certain 
regula-
tiona-
J6 
(b) the conditions of service and the remuneration of officers 
and other employees appointed by the Authority; 
(c) the contracts or class of contracts which are to be sealed 
with the (;ommon seal of the Authority and the form and manner in 
which a contract may be made by the Authority; 5 
(d) the storage or processing of [~oods In any warehou~;e estab-
lished by the Authority under clause (d) of sub-section (3) of sec-
tion 16 and the charging of fees for such storage or processing; 
(e) the custody and restoration of lost property and the terms 
and conditions under which lost property may be restored to the 10 
person entitled thereto, under section 30; 
(1) the disposal of any lost property in cases where such pro-
perty is not restored und ~r section 30; 
(g) securing the safety of aircraft, vehicles, and persons using 
the airport and preventing danger to the public arising from the use IS 
aud operation of aircraft in the airport; 
(h) preventing obstruction within the airport for its normal 
functioning; 
(i) prohibiting the parking or waiting of any vehicle or carriage 
within the airport except at places specified by the Authority; 20 
(j) prohibiting or restricting access to any part of the airport; 
(k) preserving order within the airport and preventing d~age 
to property therein; 
(l) regulating or restricting advertising within the airport; 
(m) requiring any person, if so directed by an officer appointed 2S 
by the Authority in this behalf, to leave the airport or any particular 
part of the airport; and 
( .... ) generally for the efficient and proper management of the 
airport. 
38. (1) Any regulation which may be made by the Authority under 30 
this Act may be made by the Central Government by notification in 
the Official Gazette within one year of the constitution of the Authority 
and an,. regulation so made may be alt~red or rescinded by the Autho-
rity by means of a regulation made by it under this Act. 
(2) No regulation made by the Authority under this Act shall have 35 
effect until it has been approved by the Central Government and pub-
lished in the Official Gazette. 
39. Any regulation made under any of the clauses (g) to (m) (in-
clusive) of sub-section (2) of section 37 may provide that a contraven-
tion thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 'five 40 
hundred rupees and in the case of a continUing contravention with an 
additional fine which may extend to twenty rupees for every day during 
which such contravention continues after conviction for the first such 
contravention. 

• I 
to. (1) If any difficulty anses in g!ving eftect to the provlslons of Power 
this .ficr, tile Ct:ntral UoveL'nm~llt may, oy genera! or specuu order pub- tore-
l1sncd m we lJttlcla! liazette, maKe suen provIsIons not mcorulistent with move 
tne provisions 01 trus Act as appear to It to be necessary or expedient di1llcul-ties. tor tne removal of the difficulty: 
S 
Provided that no such order shall De mad' after the expiration of 
one year from the commencement 01 UUS Act. 
(2) Every order made under sub-st:ction (1) shall be laid, as soorl 
as may be atter it is made, betoreeach House of .Parliament while it is 
10 m session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two successive seSSlOns and 11 before the expiry of the 
session in which it is ::''0 laid or the session lIIllnedlately fOllowmg ooth 
Houses agree in makmg allY modification in the order or both Houses 
agree that the order should not be made, the order shall there~ter have 
IS effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the cas~ m.!y be; 
so, however, that any such modIfication or annulment shall be without 
lJrejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order. 
20 
30 
41. In sub-section (2) of section !) of the Aircraft Act, 1934, for clause 
(b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
"(b) the licensing, inspection and regulation of aerodromes, the 
conditions under which aerodromes may be maintained, the prohibi-
tion or regulation of the use of unlicensed aerodromes and the fees 
which may be charged at those aerodromes to which the Inter-
national Airports Authority Act, 1971 does not apply or is not !Jl:8de 
applicable: 
Provided that until the date determined by the Central Govemv 
ment under the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 16 of the Inter-
national Airports Authority Act, 1971 any rule mad.:! under this 
clause may provide for the charging of fees for providing air traffic 
services (including aeronautical and flight information services). 
aeronautical communication and navigational aids and meteorological 
services at any aerodrome to which the said Act applies or is mad. 
applicable;". 
Amend· 
mento! 
Act 22 
of 1934. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The international airports at Delhi, Bombay, Calcutta and Madras are 
the aerial gate.ways of India, and are becoming increasingly important 
in developing India's trade and tourism. Owing to the rapid growth of 
tr.-ffic, and the increasing impact of technological development in the 
.ihape of large capacity sub-sonic and super-sonic jet aircraft, the orga-
nisation and management of these four international airports will assume 
increasing importance in the years to come. 
2. To determine and advise Government on the action required to be 
taken to provide these. international airports with the buildings, equip-
ment, facilities and organisation necessary to cater to the necdl:l of pas-
senger and goods traffic, baggage and cargo handling, and other related 
matters, a high powered International Airports Committee was appoint-
ed in July 1967 under the Chairmanship of Shri J. R. D. Tata. The Com-
mittee has made a number of recommendations for the phasE'd develop-
ment of the four international airp.orts spre.ad over a period of fifteen 
~ears, correl!lponding to three Five Year Plans commencing from April, 
l~. The recommendations of the Committee would involve an estima-
ted total expenditure of Rs. 106.12 crore-Rs. 63.56 crore to bE: spent 
in the Fourth Plan (1969-74), Rs. 35.54 crore in the Fifth Plan (1974-
79) and the balance of Rs. 7.02 crore to spill over to the Sixth Plan. A 
provision of about Rs. 37: 00 crore (excluding Rs. 10 crore for provision 
of communication and navigational aids) has been made for the afore-
said four international airports in the Fourth Five Year Plan of the Civil 
Aviation Department. 
3. An important point made by the Committee is that the success in 
spending effectively the large outlays for the creation of the new airport 
facilities will depend largely on the speed and flexibility with v. hich the 
project is launched and administered. Keeping in view the compUlsions of 
Government procedures, the Committee urged that a Corporaholl should 
be set up under the Indian CC'mpanies Act. and all the present and future 
assets of the four international airports placed under its ownership and 
management, except for the functions of aeronautical communication, 
navigation and air traffic services as well as weather forecasting services 
which should continue to be under the control of the Departments of 
Civil Aviation and Meteorology respectively. In the opinion of the Com-
mittee, only a comme.rcially oriented organisation with sufficient flexi-
bility and autonomy in financial matters; and freed from tho! require-
ments of regular Government procedures, would be able to provide the 
drive and speed sO necessary for the quick development and business-like 
management of these a~rports. A sub-Committee appointed by the In-
ternational Airports Committee in this regard had come to the definite 
conclusion that the creation of an autonomous Airport Authority would 
not cause any additional burden or liability on the Central Government 
budget and would in fact have definite functional advantages . 
. r , 
.. ·It :. . ' . I. 18 

19 
4. The proposed Airports Authority will be engaged in creating, main-
taining and providing, services and facilities, rather than in the produc-
tion of or trade in goods. For the purposes of coordination with various 
Government agencies, a Joint Stock Company under the Indian Com-
panies Act may be ill-suiteu. The decision of Government on the recom-
mendations of the Administrative Reforms Commission is that the statu-
tory corporation form is preferable for enterprises providing public uti-
li~s which are primarily intended to develop bas~.: infrastructure faci-
lities, as is the case here. It is accordingly proposed to constitute a sta-
tutory Authority for the. development and management of the four in-
ternational airports of Delhi. Bombay, Calcutta b.ild Madras. Power has 
also been conferred on the Central Government to apply the provisions 
of the Act to any other airpQrt where international air transport services 
are operated or are intended to be operated. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object. 
6. The notes on clauses appended to the Bill explain the more impor-
tant provisions of the Bill. 
NEW DELli!; 
The 15th May, 1971. 
KARAN SINGH. 

Notes on clauses 
Clause l.-Undersub-clause (3), the b.,ct will apply, i!1 the fitst 
instance, to the aerodromes of Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi and Madras and 
power has been conferred on the Cemral Government to apply the lJrovi-
sions of the Act to any other ael'Odrome whereat international air trans-
port services are opt:rated or are intended to be operated. 
C/.a.use 3.-'l'he clause provides for the constitution of the Interna. 
tional Airports Authority ot India. Under the clause the Authority will 
be a body corporate and will consist of a whole-time Chairman, who will 
be its chief executive, and such number of other whole-time or part-time 
members, being not less than seven and not more than fourtaen. The 
Director General of Civil Aviation will be one of the ex otJi(.·~o members 
of the Authority. 
Clauses 4 to H.-These dauses make provision for disqualification for 
office of membe.", the term of office and conditions of service of members 
and other matters relating to the functioning of the Authority. Every 
member of the Authority, other than the ex officio member, s11a11 oJ-'di-
narily be entitled to hold office for a period of three years from the 
date on which he assumes office. 
Clause 12.-The clause provides for the transfer of assets and liabili-
ties of the Central Government to the Authority. All non-recurring 
expenditure incurred by the Central Government for or in connection 
with the purposes of the airports to which the Act applies and declared 
to be capital expenditure shall be treated as the capital provided by 
the Central Government to the Authority. 
Keeping in view the difficulties involved in the initial transfer ot 
responsibility for the international airports to the Authority, on the 
lippointed day, provision has been made to the effect that every employee 
holding any office under the Central Government immediately before 
the appointed day solely or mainly for or in connection with such affairs 
of the airport as are relevant to the functions of the Authority shall hi 
treated as on deputation with the Authority. However, every such em-
ployee shall hold his office in the Authority by the same tenure and UPOl 
the same terms and conditions of service as respects remuneration, leav,", 
provident funJ and retirement or other terminal benefits as he woulQl 
have held if the Authority had not been constituted and shall continu," 
to do so until the Central Government, either on its own motion or at 
the request of the Authority, recalls such employee to its service or until 
the Authority, with the concurrence of the Central Government, duly 
absorbs such employee in its regular service, whichever is c:.rlier. 
During the period of deputation of every such employee with the 
Authority, the Authority shall pay to the Central Government in respect 
of every such employee such contribution t'Owards his leave salary, 
•• 20 

21 
pension and gratuity as the Central Government may, by order, deter-
mine. Provision has also been made in the clause to the effect that any 
employee who has, in respect of the proposal of the Authority to absorb 
him in its regular serVice, intimated within such time as may be specified 
in this behalf by the Authority his intention of not becoming a regular 
employee of the Authority, shall not be absorbed by the Authority in its 
regular service. 
Clause 13.-The clause provides that any land required by the 
Authority for discharging its functions under the Act shall be deemed 
to be needed for a public purpose and such land may be acquired for 
the Authority under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 or 
of any other corresponding law for the time being in force. 
Clause 14.-The clause empowers the Authority to enter into and 
perform any contract necessary for the discharge of its functions under 
the Act. 
Clause 15.-The clause provides for the modes of executing contracts 
on behalf of the Authority. Provision has also been made in the clause 
to the effect that no contract for the acquisition or sale of immovable 
property or for the lease of any such property for a term exceeding 
thirty years and no other contract exceeding such value or amount as the 
Central Government may, from time to time, by order, fix in this behalf 
shall be made unless it has been previously approved by the Central 
Government. 
Cla1.£8e 16.-The clause provides for the functions of the Authority. 
It shall be the function of the Authority to mana.g'e the airports to which 
the Act applies or is made applicable, efficiently. An obligation has been 
cast on the Authority to provide at the airports such services and facili-
ties as are necessary or desirable fo>:" the efficient operation of air trans-
port services thereat. However, the function of providing air navigation 
services, that is to say, air traffic services, aeronautical communication, 
and navigational aids and meteorological services, wilJ continuE' tl) be pro-
vided at the airports by th~ Central Gcvernment until and unless the 
Central Government, by order, entrust the same to the Authority. 
Sub-cJause (3) of the clause enumerates the various functions of the 
Authority. 
Clause 17.-The clause empowers the Authority to charge, with ih~ 
previous approval of the Central G<>vernment, fees or rent for the land· 
ing, etc., of aircrafts, for the amenities given to the pasR~ngers c'ld 
visitors at airports and for the use and enjoyment by persons of lacilitief 
and other services provided by the Authority at the airports. The air 
crafts belonging to the IndIan DE'fence Services wi1l not be li:lble to bE 
charged any fees or rent by the Authority for thf'ir landing, etc., or f01 
any other service or facility offered by the Authority in connection witt 
the operation of such aircrafts. The Authority is als'"l empowered t( 
charge fees or rent from persons who are given by the Authority an, 
facility for carying on any trade or business at any airport. 
Clause IS·-The clause empowers the Central Government, on such 
telms and conditions as the Central Government may determine, to pro-
vide additional capital to the Authority and also to pay to ~he Authority, 

22 
by way of loans or grants such sums of money as the Central Government 
l"'lay consider necessary for the efficient discharge by the Authority of its 
functions under the Act. 
Clause 19.-The clause provides for the fund of the Authoray. The 
Authority will have its own fund and all its receipts shall be credited 
thereto and all its payments shall be made therefrom. Provision has also 
been made in the clause for the deposit of moneys standing at the credit 
of the Authority and which cannot immediately be applied ior any 
purpose. 
Clause 20.-The clause provides for the establishment of a reserve 
fund or funds for the purpose of expanding existing faciUties or service., 
or creating new facilities or services at any airport or for the purpose of 
pro'\iding against any temporary decrease of revenue or increase of 
expenditure from transient causes or for purposes of replacement or for 
meeting expenditure arising from loss or damage from fire, cyclone, 
air-crash or other accident or for meeting any liability arising out of any 
act or omission in the discharge of the functions of the Authority under 
the Act. After making provision for reserve funds, bad and doubtfu1 
debts, depreciation, etc., the Authority shall pay the balance of its annual 
net profits to the Central Government. 
Clause 21.-Under the clause, an obligation has been impo!'led on the 
Authority to prepare, befoTF;! the commencement of each financiAl year, 
a ~tatement of the programme of its activities during the forthcoming 
financial year as well as R financial estimate in respect thereof. The 
statement so prepared shall be submitted by the Authority for the 
approval of the Central Government. 
Clause 22.-The clause empowers the Authority to invest its funds in 
the securities of the Central Government or in such other manner as 
may be prescribed. 
Clause 23.-The clause empowers the Authority to borrow money 
from any source by the issue of bonds, debentures or such other instru-
ments as it may <;leem fit for discharging all or any of its functions undet' 
the Act. The loans borrowed by the Authority may be guaranteed by 
tbt Central Government for the re-payment of the prinCipal and the 
payment of interest thereon. 
Clause 24.--: The clause provides for the audit of accounts of the 
Authority by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
Clause 2S . ....:..The clause imposes an obligation on the Authority to 
pt'epare and submit to the Central Government, after the end of each 
financial year, a report giving an account of its activities during that 
financial year and also of the activities which are likely to be undertaken 
by the Authority during rthe next financial year. The report submitted 
by the Authority to the Central Government will be laid before both 
Houses of Parliament. 
Clause 26.-The clause p.mpowerR the Authority to de1err.tt to tbp 
Chairman or any other member or to any officer of the Authority such of 
it'l nowp.t's ~nd functions UJ'aer the Act, except the powers under .clause 
~'7, as it inay deem necessary. 

23 
'ClaUle 27.-The clause makes prOVISIon for authentication of orders 
and other instruments of the Authority. 
Clause 30.-The clause jmposes an obligation on the Authority to 
provide for securing the safe custody and restoration of any property, 
which, while not in proper custody, is found on any premises belonging 
to the Authority or under its overall control or in any aircraft on any 
sueh premises. 
Clause S1.-Under the clause, the income, profits or gains of the 
Authority will be liable to tax under the Income-tax Act, 1961 as if it 
were a company. 
Clause 32.-The clause empowers the Authority to carry out on behalf 
of any person any works. or services or any class of works or services on 
such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon between the Authority 
and the person concerned. 
Clause 33.-The clause empowers the Central Government to tempo-
rarily divest the Authority of the management of any airport in cases 
where the Central Government is of opinion that in the public interest 
It is necessary or expedient so to do. When the Authority is temporarily 
divested of the management of any airport, such management shall be 
entrusted by the Central Government to such person as may be speci-
fied in the order divesting the Authority of such management. An order 
divesting the· Authority of the management of any airport will be in 
operation fur a period of six months from the date of the issue of the order 
and the Central Government is empowered to extend the said period of six 
months for a furtner period or periods not exceeding eightef'n months. 
Clause 34.-The clause provides that the Authority may be superseded 
on any of the three grounds, namely, (i) if on account of a grave emer-
gency the Authority is unable to discharge the functions nnd duties impos-
ed 'On it by the Act, (ii) if the Authority has persistently made default 
in complying with any direction issued by the Central Government under 
the Act or in the discharge of the functions and duties imposed (In the 
Authority by the Act and as a result of which default the financial posi-
tion of the Authority or the administration of any airport has deteriorated, 
and (iii) jf circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public 
interest to supersede the Authority. The Authority may be superseded 
for a period not exceeding six months. The Central Government is em-
powered to extend the period of supersession for such further term not 
exceeding six months as it may consider necessary, or reconstitute the 
Authority during or on the expiry of, the period of supersession. 
Clause 35.-The clause empowers the Central Government to issue, 
from time to time, directions to the Authority on questions c;f policy, 
and the Authority shall be bound by the directions so issued. 
Clause 36.-The clause empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The matters with respect 
to which rules may be made are enumerated in sub-clause (2). 
Clause 37.-The clause empowers the Authority to make re~uJati.,ns 
not inCQnfliFtent wjth the Act and the rules made thereunder to provide 

24 
for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient tor the 
purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the Act. The partieular· 
matters with respect to which regulations may be made are enumerated 
in sub-clause (2). 
Clause 38.-The clause empowers the Central Government to make 
the first regulations under the Act within a period of one year of the 
constitution of the Authority. The clause further provides that no relU-
lation made by the Authority under the Act shall have effect until it 
has been approved by the Central Government and published in the 
Official Gazette. 
Clause 39.-The clause provides for penalty for breach of regulations 
made under sub-clauses (2) (g) to (2) (m) of clause 37. 
Clause 4O.-The clause empowers the Central Government to make 
orders fer the removal of 01 difficulty which may arise in giving effect 
to the provisions of the Act. 
G:lause •. -The clause seeks to amend clause (b) of sub-section (2) 
of section 5 of the Aircraft Act, 1934 with a view to restrict the power 
of the Central Government to charge fees only at those aerodromes to 
which the proposed legislation does not apply or is not made applicable. 
However, until the function of providing air traftlc services (includlnl 
aeronautical and flight information services), aeronautical communica-
tion and navigational aids and meteorological services at the aerodrome. 
to which the proposed legislation applies or is made applicable is entrust-
ed to the Authority, the Central Government will continue to have 
power to charge fees for providing such services and aids at th~ 
.erodromes. 

'" The Bill proY-ides for tlle constitution of an Authollity for the develop-
ment and management of the fo.r inte~ati.nal aipports at Dtlilhi, 
Bombay, Calcutta and Madras. Power has been oonferred on the 
Central Government to apply the provisions of the Act to any other 
airport where international air transport services are operated or are 
intended to be operated. The Bill further provides that fex the present 
air navigation servic. at these airports will continue to be provided by 
the Central Government until such date as _hat Government may," by 
order, determine. 
2. Under clause 12(1) (c) of the Bill, all non-reeurring ex,Penditure 
incurred by the Central Government for or in connection with th, pur-
poses of the airport up to the date of vesting of the airport in the Autho-
rity, and declared to be capital expenditure by the Central Government, 
shall be treated as the capital provided by the Central Government to the 
Authority. Under clause 12 (1) (d), all sums of money due to the Central 
Government in relation to the airport immediately before the date of 
vesting of the airport in the Authority shall be deemed tli) be due to the 
Authority. 
3. Clause 12(1) (c) wiH result in the transfer of assets and properties 
worth about Rs. 23.27 crores after taking into account the elelnent of 
depreciation estimated at Rs. 97.87 lakhs. The exact value of the assets 
to be transierred will, however, be decided by Government after a de-
tailed scrutiny of the assets. The sums of money which under clause 
12(1) (d) shall be deemed to be dllle to the Authority on the vesting date 
cannot be estimated. However, the annual income for the year 1969-70 
is estimated to be of the order of four crares and seventy-onc lakhs ai. 
rupees. 
4. Air navigation services at the airports aforesaid will continue to 
be provided by the Central Government until such date as that Govern-
ment may by order determine. Clause 12(2) (a) provides that as from 
the date determined by the Central Government for the transfer of the 
air navigation services at the airports to the Authority, the equipment 
and appliances relating to air navigation services and the buildings used 
exclusively for such services immediately before such day shall vest in 
the Authority. Clause 12(2) (c) provides that all sums of money due to 
the Central Government for or in connection with air naVigation services 
immec4iately before the date mentioned above shall be deemed to be due 
to the Authority. If it is decided by Government to transfer air naviga-
tion aervices to the Authority the value of the eqUipment and ~}lpli&nces 
relating to air navigation services and the buildings used exclusively for 
weh services to be vested in the Authority under clause 12(2) (a) is esti-
mated to be of the order of Rs. 10.74 crores. The residential I"uildings at 
these aiprts are at present primarily occupied by the personnel emp-
loyed in the air navigation services and the value of these buildings, if 
It is decided by Government to transfer them to the Authority is esti-
mated at Rs. 1.~5 crores. The value of the land occupied for residential 
25 • t.·,.. • I...-lt 

26 
buildings is included in the value of assets and properties indicated iii 
para 3 above. Though under clause 12 (2) (c) all sums of mcney due to 
the Central Government for or in connection with air navigation services 
on the vesting date shall be deemed to be due to the Authority, at present 
no separate charges are being levied by the Central Government for such 
services. However, if on a future date the Central Government le.vies 
such a charge, all sums of money due in respect of the same immediately 
before the date of transfer of such services to the Authority would accrue 
to the Authority, the estimate in respect of which cannot be made.,at 
present. 
5. Clause 18 provides for the payment of additional capital, loans 
and grants to the Authority by the Central Gqvernment. Since ~ 
payment of additional capital, grants and loans to the Authority will 
depend on the future requirements of the Authority in the context of its 
development plans, the amount that may have to be incurred by the 
Central Government from the Consolidated Fund of India on this account 
cannot'be estimated at present. However, on the basis of the provision 
inade in the Fourth Five Year Plan and the expenditure incurred in 
1969-70 and likely to be 'incurred in 1970-71, an amount of rupees 
twenty-nine crores is Ukely to be spent for the development of these 
airports during the subsequent years of the Fourth Plan. 
6. Clause 23 (2) provides for the guarantee by the Central Govern-
ment of the repayment of the principal and the payment of interest 
in respect of the loans borrowed by .the Authority under sub-clause (1) 
of that clause. The ultimate liability arising out of such gt:arantee canDOt 
be estimated at this stage. 

MEMORANDUM REGAROmC1 DEUGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 36 of the' Bill empowets·the Centrid'Govetmnent to make rule. 
to carry out the purposes of ~ pr9P~sed legislation. The various 
matters with respect to which rules may be made have been detailed in 
particular in sub-clause (2) of the clause and relate maini y to the 
conditions of service of th~ Chairman and other members of t~e AuthoriiY; 
the period of notice required to termina.te. the appointment of an~ mem-
b~r who is required to' render' part-time service and who is not a'seJ;"vant 
of the Government, and the period of notice that may be given"' to th~­
Central Government by a member before he resigns his office; the 
conditio~-atl.d limitattonssubject :to which the ·Authority may appoint 
oftlCers _andotheremployees;tbe;terms andcanditions'subjeet to which 
the non-recurring expendituredDCliIrredby -the OeDtraI 'Governmeiat . lor 
or in connection with the purposes oflanyairpo-rt,:shaU be' tret'ted as.ihe 
capital provided by the Central Government to the Authority; the manner 
in which the Authority may invest its funds and the form in which the 
Authority shall prepare its annual statement of accounts. These are 
matters of detail and it is difficult to provide for these matters in the 
Bill itself. Under sub-clause (3) of the clause, the rules made under the 
clause will be laid before Parliament for its scrutiny. 
2. Clause 37 of the Bill empowers the Authority to make regulations 
not inconsistent with the proposed legislation and the rules made there-
under, to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or 
expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the legisla-
tion. The various matters in 'relat!on to which the Authority may make 
regulations have been detailed in particular in sub-clause (2) of the 
clause. These matters inte... alia relate to the times and places of the 
meetings of the Authority and the procedure to be followed for the 
transaction of business at such meetings; the conditions of service and the 
remuneration of officers and other employees appointed by the Authority; 
the storage or processing of goods in warehouses established by the 
Authority, and preventing obstruction within the airport foor the normal 
functioning of the Authority. These matters are also of detail and it is 
difficult to provide for the same in the Bill itself. Under sub-clause (2) 
of clause 38, no regulation made by the Authority will have effect untn 
it has been approved by the Central Government. 
3. The delegation of legislative power proposed to be ~onferred on 
the Central Government and the Authority under clauses 36 and 3'7 
respectively of the Bill is of a normal character . 
.. 
j .. c.' ., . 
....... 
". 
• 
.... , 

11"."., 
otCea-
tral Gov-
.rnment 
tomaka 
rWa 
ANNlilJItt • 
~w ~ . .. 
ExTIIACT FROM TH. ADClW'T ACT. I9S4 .,. 
(22 OJ' 1984) 
• • • • • 
•. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, luch 
rulel may prOvide for--
• • • • • 
(b) the licensing, inspection and regulation of aerodromes, the 
eonditioDII under which aerodromes may be maintained and the fees 
which may be charged thereat, and the 'Prohibition or regulation of 
the UIe of unlicensed aerodromes; 
• • • • • 
II 
" 1': A -.. i' 
i ... :,_: ' 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the constitution of an authority for the mangement of certain aerodromes 
whereat international air transport services are operated or/are intended to be operated 
and for matters connected therewith. 
... 'CD 
Dr. Karan Singh, 
Minister oj Tourism and 
CifJil AfJiation (Paryatan aur 
N filar V imanan Mant,,) 