10K SAIillA 
CORRIGENM 
to 
THE MINES (AMENDMENr) BILL, 1983 
(To be/As introduced in 10k Sabha) 
1. Page 4, line 13,-
1:Ql: "st~ te" ~ "slate" 
2. Page 6, line 4,-
.t:Ql:. "f1 gur e s " ~ "f1 gure n 
3. Page 6, line 25,-
!Ql:. "date s " ~ "date" 
4. ,Page 7, line 5,-
.nu: ''proisions'' ~ 
5. Page 10, line 3'i-
••• 
nu: "injuries" ~ "injur;y:" ~,;,", 
6. Page 12, line 26,-
!c1: "mime" ~ "mine" 
.... 
7. Page 13, in the marginal heading to clause 26,-
fiU: "Substi~ut1os" ~ ''Bubst1 tut10n" 
8. Page 13, line 22,-
!cl: "~ub-scetion" ~ "sub-section" 
9. Page 13,,11ne 41,-
ru' "owner s " ~ "0 wner n 
10. page 17, 11.l the marginal. heading to clause 44,-
!cu: "Om1lssion" ~ "Omission" 
, 1. pa. go 21, lina 5 from bot to°m,-
atter "If"inser t "any" 
12., page 36, line 1,-
m ''person'' ~ ''persons'' 
.:...,;../ 

- 2 -=-__ ---------- __ --------- ------
13. Page 37, in the marginal heading to section 19,-
!.cl:. -," Irinld s g" ~ "Drinking" 
14. Page 37, in the marginal heading to section ~2,­
after "employment" insert "of persons" 
15. page?/3, - in the marginal heading to section 23,-
M ''accident'' r~ "accident s" 
16. Pa ge 44, line 20,-
.!Ql:. "attemps II ~ "at tempts" 
17. Pa.ge 44, line 37,-
~ ."work in" ~ "work" 
NEW DElliI; 
May 9, 'M3 
Vaisakha 19, 1~~ (~ka) • • 

15011952. 
As INTRODUCED IN' LOK SABHA ON 
I 
Bill No. 72 of 1983 
THE MINES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1983 
A 
BILL 
further to. amend the Mines Act, 1952. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fourth Year of ·the R~public 
of Indin as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mines (Amendment) Act, 1983. Short 
title and 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government com_ 
'5 may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. mence-
10 
ment. 
2'. In the Mines' Act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to '8S the principal Amend-
Act), in section 2, in sub-section (1),- mentol 
section 2-
(i) clause (a) shall be omitted; 
(ii) for clause (c), the follOwing clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
'(c) "agent", when used in relation to a mine, means every 
person, wbether appointed as such or not, who, acting or pur-
porting to act on behalf of the owner, takes part in the manage-
ment,. control, supervision or direction of the mine or of any 
part thereof;'; 
(iii) for clause (e), the following clause shall be 'Substituted, 
namely:-
• (e) "Committee" means a committee 
section 12;'; 
constituted under 
.... 

(iv) for clause (h), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
'(h) a person is Jlaid to be "employed" in a mine who works 
as the manager or who works under appointment by the owner, 
agent Or manager of the mine or with the knowledge of the 5 
manager, whether for wage:; or not-
(i) in any mining operation (including the concomitant 
operations of handling and transport of minerals up to the 
point of despatch and of gathering sand and transport thereof 
to the mine); I () 
(ii) in operations or services relating to the development 
of the mine including construction of plant therein but 
excluding construction of buildings, roads, wells and any 
building work not directly connected with any existing or 
future mining operations; 15 
(iii) in 'operating, servicing, maintaining or repairing 
any part of any machinery used in or about the mine. 
(it,) in operations, within the premises of the mine, of 
loading for despatch of minerals; 
(v) in any office of the mine; 20 
·(t'i) in any welfare, .Jtealth, sanitary or conservancy 
services required to be provided under this Act, or watch 
and ward, within the premi$es of the mine excluding residen-
tial area; or 
(vii) in any kind Of work whatsoever which is prepara- 115 
tory Or incidental to, or connected with. mining operations;'; 
(v) clause (ii) shall be omitted; 
(vi) for clause (j), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
'(j) "mine-" means anyexC8vation where any operation for 80 
the purpose of sear.cbing for or obtaining minerals bas beeJl 
or is being carried on and includes-
(i) all borings, bore holes, 'oilnlls and aec_ory ftIldiI 
conditioning plants, including the pipe conveying mineral 
oil within the oilfields;' 35 
(ii) all shafts, in or adjacent to and beloagillg to a 
mine, whether in the course of being sunk or not; 
(iii) all levels and inclined planes in the course of being 
driven; 
(iv) all open CBst wor.ldnSS; 40 
(v) all conveyors or aerial ropeways .proV1cled far the 
bringing into or removal from a mine of minerals or other 
articles or for the removal of refuse therefroJD; 
(vi) all adits, levels, planes, machinery, works, rallwaya, 
tramways and shitftgs in or adjacent to and belOJ1ging to • 45 
mine' , , . 

102 of 1966. 
10 
20 
3 
(vii) all protective works being carried out in or adja-
cent to a mine; 
• (viii) all workshops and stores situated within the pre-
cincts of a mine and under the same management and used 
primarily far the purpoaes oonnected with that mine or 
a number of mines under the same management; 
(ix) all power stations, transformer sub-stations. can. 
vertor stations. rectifier stations and accumulator storage 
srations for supplying electricity solely or mainly for the 
purpose of working the mine or a number of mines under 
the same management; 
(x) any premises for the time being used for d.epositing 
sand or other material tor use in a mine or for depositing 
refuse from a mine or in whjch any operations in connection 
with such sand, refuse Or other material is being carried on, 
being premises exclusively occupied by the own~ of the 
mine; 
(ri) any premises in or adjacent to and beknging to a 
mine on which any process ancillary to the getting, dressing 
or preparation for sale of minerals or of coke is being carried 
on;'; 
(vii) clause (j;j) shall be omitted; 
(t'iii) in clause (l) ,-
(a) the words "and in the case of a mine owned by a 
25 company, the business whereof is beini carried on by a managing 
agent, such managing agent" shall be omitted; 
(b) for the words "any contractor", the words "any con-
tractor or sub-lessee" shall be substituted; 
(ix) for clause (n), the following clause shall be substituted. 
30 namely:-
35 
'(n) "qualified medical practitioner" means a medical prac-
titioner who possesses any -recognised medical qualification as 
defined in clause (h) of section 2 of the Indian Medical Council 
Act, 1956 and who is enrolled on a State medical register as 
defined in clause Or) of that section:'; 
(x) after cl~U'se (p). the following clause shall be inserted. 
namely:-
• (pp) "reportable injury" means any injury other than a 
serious bodily injury which involves, or in all probability will 
40 involve, the enforced absence of the injured person from work 
for a period of seventy-two hours or more;'; 
(.1..-1.) for clauses (q) and (r). the following clauses shall b~ 
substituted, namely:-
'(q) "serious bodily injury" means any injury which in-
volves, or in all probability will involve, the permanent loss of 
any part or section of a body or the Use of any par~ or sectien 
of a body, or the perman~nt loss of or injury to the sight or 

Amend-
mento! 
section 8. 
Amend-
mentol 
section 5. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 7. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 8. 
Inser_ 
tion 01 
new 
section 9A. 
Facili_ 
ties to be 
provid_ 
edfor 
occupa_ 
tional 
h~alth 
survey. 
hearing or any permanent physical incapacity or the fracture of 
any bone or Ol1e or more joints or, bones of any phalanges of 
hand or foot; • . . 
(r) . 'week" means a period of seven days beginning at mid~ 
night on Saturday night or such other night as may be approved 5 
in writing (or a partiC'Ular area by the Chief Inspector or an 
Inspector.'. 
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, in SUb-section (1) ,-
(a) in the o~ning portion, for the words and figures ",sections 
7, 8, 9, 44, 45 and 46", the words and figures "sections 7, 8, 9, 40, 45 10 
and 46" shall be substituted; . 
(b) in clause (b).~ 
(i) after the words "building stone,", the word "state," shall 
be inserted; 
(ii) after the words "fullers earth", the words ,e, marl, 15 
chalk" shall be 'inserted. 
4. In section 5 of the principal Act, in the proviso to sub-section (3), 
for the word and figures "section 22", the words, figures and letter 
"section 22 or section 22A" shall be substituted. 
5. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2) ,- 20 
(a) for the words and figures "Code of Criminal Procedure, 5 of 1898. 
1898", the words and figures "CoCte of Criminal Procedure, 1973" 2 of 1974. 
shall be substituted; 
(b) for the word and fiFes "section 98", the word and figures 
"section 94" shall be substituted. 25 
6. In section 8 of the principal Act,-
(a) after the words "levelling or measuring any mine", the 
words "or any output therefrom" shall be inserted; 
(b) after the words "level or measure the mine or any part 
the~of", the words "or any output therefrom" shall be inserted. 30 
7. After section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inser~ed, namely:-
"9A. (1) The Chief Inspector or an Inspector or other officer 
authorised by him in writing in this behalf may, at any time during 
the normal working ho~rs of the mine or at any time by day or 35 
night as may be necessary, undertake safety and occupational. 
health survey in a ,mine after giving notice in writing to the manager 
of the mine; and the owner, agent or manager of the mine shall 
afford all necessary facilities (including ~cilities for the examination 
and testing of plant and machinery, for the collection of samples and 40 
other data pertaining to the survey and for the t~ans~ol't and 

5 
10 
20 
30 
35 
examination of any person ~mployed in the mine chosen for the 
survey) to such Inspector or officer. 
(2) Every person employed in a mine who is chosen for exa-
min~tion in any safety and occupational health survey under sub-
sectIOn (1) shall present himself for such examination and at such 
place as may be necessary and shall furnish all information regarding 
his work and health in coimection with the said survey. 
(3) The time spent by any person employed in a mine who is 
chosen for examination in the safety and occupational health survey, 
shall be counted towards his working time, so however that any 
overtime shall be paid at the ordinary rate of wages. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this SUb-section, "ordinary 
rate of wages" means the basic wages plus any dearness allowance 
and underground nlIowance and l:ompensation in cash including 
such compensation, if any, accrUing through the free issue of food-
grains and edible oils as persons employed in a mine may, for the 
time being, be entitled to, but does not include a bonus (other than 
a bonus given as incentive for production) or any compensation 
accruing through the provision of amenities such as free housing, 
free supply of coal, medical and educational facilities, sickness 
allowance, supply of kero'sene oil, baskets, tools and uniforms. 
(4) Any person who, on examination under sub-section (2), is 
found medically unfit to discharge the duty whiCh he was discharg-
ing in a mine immediately before such presentation shall be entitled 
to undergo medical treatment at the cost of the owner, agent and 
manager with full wages during the period of such treatment. 
(5) If, after the medical treatment, the person referred to in 
sub-section (4) is declared medically unfit to discharge the d'Ilty 
which he was discharging in a mine immediately before presenting 
himself for the said examination and such unfitness is directly 
ascribable to his employment in the mine before such presentation, 
the owner, agent and manager shall provide such person with an 
alternative employment in the mine for which he is medically fit: 
Provided that where no such alternative employment is imme.-
diately available, 'Such person shall be paid by the owner, agent and 
manager disability allowance determined in accordance with the rates 
prescribed in this behalf: 
Provided further that where ::;uch person decides to leave his 
employment in the mine, he shall be paid by the owner, agent and 
manager a lump sum amount by way of disability compensation 
determined in accordance with the rates prescribed in this 1?ehalf. 
(6) The rates under the provisos to 'sl~b-section (5) shall be 
determined having regard to the monthly wages of the employees, 
the nature of disabilities and other related factors.", 

Amend_ 
mentot 
section 
10. J 
Amend-
mentor 
section 
11. 
Substi_ 
tution ot 
new 
sections 
for 
sections 
12,13 and 
14. 
Com-
mittees. 
6 
8. In section 10 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), after the word "inspection", the words 
"or survey" ana after the word and figure "section 8", the worcts, 
figures and letter "or section 9A" shall be inserted; 
(b) in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) for clause (b)', the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(bi) a Committee or Court of inquiry constituted or 
appointed under section 12 or section 24, a'.:) the case may 
be;"; 
(ii) for clause (e), the following clauses shall be substitu-
ted, namely:-
"(e) the Controller, Indian Bureau of Mines; 
(f) any registered or recognised trade union; 
5 
10 
(g) such other officer, authority or organisation as may 15 
be specified in this behalf by the Central Government.". 
9. In section 11 of the principal Act, in 'Sub-section (4), clause (a) 
and sub-clause (ii) of clause (e) shall be omitted. 
10. For the heading "MINIJ'I'G BOARIJS AND COMMlTTEES", 'occurring 
immediately before section 12 of' the principal Act, and for sections 12, 20 
13 and 14 of the principal Act, the following heading and sections shall 
be substituted, Illmely:-
"COMMJ'M'EES 
12. (1) The Cen'tral Govemment shaU, with effect from such 
dates IIS'that Government may, by notification in the OfReial Gazette, 25 
specUy In this behalf, constitute lor the purposes of this Act, a 
Committee consisting of-
(a) a person in the service of the Government, not heinl 
the Chief Inspector or an Inspector, appointed by the Central 
Government to act as Chairman; 
(,b) the Chief Inspector of Mines; 
(c) two penons to represent the interests of miners appoint. 
ed by the Central Government; 
(id) two persons to represent 'the interests of owners of 
min. appointed by the Central Government; J5 
(e) two qualified mining engineers not direclly employed 
in the mining industry, appointed by the Ce~tral Government: 
Provided that one at least of the persons BIJpointed under clause 
(e) shall be for representing the interests of workers in coal'mines 
and one at least of the persons appointed under clause (d) shall be 10 
for representing t~ ir'terests of owners of coal mines. 

lofl908. 
5 
10 
20 
35 
7 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-sedion' (l), the 
Central Government may constitute one or more Committees to 
deal with specific matters relating to any part of the territories to 
which 'tbis Act extends or to a mine or a group of mines and may 
appoint members thereof and the proisions of sub-section (1) 
(except the proviso thereto) shall apply for the constitution of any 
Committee under 'thiS sub-section as they apply for the constitution 
of a Committee under that sub-section. 
(3) No act or proceeding of a Committee shall be invalid by 
·reason only of the existence of any vacancy among its members or 
8by defect in 'the constitution thereof. 
13. (1) The Committee constituted under sub-section (1) of 
section 12 shall-
(a) consider proposals for making rules 'and :regulations 
under this Act and make appropriat~ recommendations to the 
Central Government; 
(b) enquire into such accidents or other matters as may be 
referred to it by the Central Government from time to time and 
make reports thereon; and 
(c) subject to the provisions of SUb-section (2), hear and 
decide such appeals or objections against notices or orders under 
this Act or the regulations, rules Or bye-laws thereunder, as 
are required to be referred to it by this Act or as may be 
prescribed. 
(2) The Chief Inspector shall not take part in the proceedings of 
the Committee with respect to any appeal or objection against an 
order or notice made or issued by him or act in relation to any 
matter pertaining to such appeal or objection as a member of the 
Committee. 
14. (1) A Committee constituted under section 12 may exercise 
such of the powers of an Inspector under this Act as it thinks' neces-
sary or expedient to elCercise for the purposes of discharging its 
functions under this Act. 
(2) A Committee constituted under section 12 shal1, for the 
purpose's of discharging its functions, have the same powers as are 
vested in a court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 when trying 
a suit in resPect of the following matters, namely;-
(a) discovery and inspection; 
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining 
him on oath; 
(c) compelling the production of documents; and 
(d) such other matters as may be prescribed.". 
Functions 
of the 
Commit-
tee. 
Powers, 
etc., of 
the Com.. 
mitteN. 
11. In section 15 of the principal Act, for the words and figures "a Amend-
Miniag Board constituted under 'Section 12 or by a Committee appointed ment of 
uBdersection 13", the words and figures "8 Committee constituted under section 15. 
45 section 12" shall be substituted. , 

I 
8 
Amend- 12. In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the word 
ment of "Director", the word "Controller" shall be substituted. 
section 16. 
Substi- 13. For sections 17 and 18 of the principal Act, the following sections 
tution of shall be substituted, namely:-
new 
sections 
tor 
sections 
17 and 18. 
Managers. 
Duties and 
respon-
sibilities 
otowners. 
agents 
and 
managers. 
"17. (1) Save as may be otherwise prescribed, every mine shall 5 
be under a sole manager who shall have the prescribed qualifications 
and the owner or &gent of every mine shall appoint a person having 
such qualifications to be the manager: 
Provided that the owner or agent may appoint himoeelf as 
manager if he possesses the prescribed qualifications. 
(2) Subject to any instructions given to him by or on behalf 
of the owner or agent of the mine, the manager shall be responsible 
fOr th~ overall management, control, supervision and direction of the 
mine and all such instructions when given by the owner or 'agent 
'Shall be confirmed in writing forthwith. 
(3) Except in case of an emergency, the owner Or agent of a 
mine or anyone on his behalf shall not give, otherwise than through 
the manager, instructions affecting the fulfilment of his statutory 
duties, to a person, employed in a mine, who is responsible to the 
m'3J1ager. 
18. (1) The owner and agent of every mine shall each be res-
ponsible for making financial and other provisions and for taking 
such other steps as may be necessary for compliance with the pro-
visions of this Act and the regulations, rules, bye-laws 'and orders 
made thereunder. 
10 
20 
!25 
(2) The responsibility in respect of matters provided for in the 
rules made under clauses (d), (e) and (p) of section 58 shall be 
exclusively carried out by the owner and agent of the mine and by 
such person (other than the manager) whom the owner or agent 
may appoint for securing compliance with the aforesaid provisions. 30 
(3) If the carrying out Of any instructions given under sub-
'Section (2) or given otherwise than through the manager under ·sub-
section (3) of section 17, results in the contravention of the provisions 
of this Act or of the regulations, rules, bye-laws or orders made 
thereunder, every person giving such instructions shall also be liable 35 
for the contravention of the provisions concerned. 
(4) Subject to the provisions of sUb-sections (1), (2) and (3). 
the owner, agent and man'ager of every mine shall each be respon-
sible to see that all operations carried on in connection with the 
mine are conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Act 40 
and of the regulations, rules, bye-laws and orders made thereunder. 
(5) In the event of any contravention by any person whosoever 
of any of the provisions of this Act or of the regulations, rules, bye-
laws or ordars made thereunder except those which specifically 
require any 'person to do any act or thing or prohibit any person 45 

5 
10 
IS 
9 
from doing an act or thing,besides the person who contravenes each 
of the following persons 'Shall also be ck-eDled to be gUilty of such 
contravention unless he proves that he had used due diligence to 
secure compliance with the provisions and had taken reasonable 
means to prevent such contravention:-
(i) the official or officials appointed to perform duties of 
supervision in respect of the provtsions contravened; 
• 
(ii) the manager of the mine; 
'(iii) the owner and agent of the mine; 
(iv) the person appointed. if any, to carry out the respoll-
sibility under sub-section (2): 
Provided that any of the persons aforesaid may not be proceeded 
against if it appears on inquiry and investtgation, tlfat he is not 
prima facie liable . 
. (6) It shall not be 'a defence in any proceedings brought again'St 
the owner or ~gent of a mine under this section that the manager 
and other ofJlcials have been appointed in accordance with the pro-
visions of this Act Or that a person to carry the responsibility under 
su~section (2) has been appointed.". 
20 14. In section 19 of the principal Act, in sul>-section (2), for the Amend. 
mentof 
section 
19. 
35 
words "twenty feet". the word's "six metres". shall be substituted. 
15. In section 22 of the principal Act,- Amend-
mentot 
«a) in S'Ub-section (3), for thl! words "until the danger is section 
removed", the words "until he is satisfied that the danger is removed" 22. 
shall be substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 
mserted, namely:-
"(3A) Every person whose employment is prohibited under 
sub-section (lA) or sub-section (3) shall be entitled to payment 
of full wages for the period for which he would have been. but 
for the prohibition in employment and the owner, agent or 
manager shall be liable for payment of sue" full wagf:s of that 
person: 
Provided that the owner. agent or mana~r may instead of 
paying such full wages provide such person with an alternative 
employment at the same wages which such person was receiving 
in the employment which was prohibited."; 
'(e) in sub-section (6). for the words "which shall refer", the 
words "which shall, ordinarily within a period of two months from 
the date ot receipt of the objection, refer" shan be substituted; 
-.-- (d) in sub-section (7), in the proviso, for the word "requisition", 
the word "notice" shall be substituted, 

1uB'ta0D 
ofDeW' 
aec:UaIl 
2IZA. 
Power to 
prohi.. 
·bitem.. . 
PlD7ment 
IDcertafA 
eueL 
10 
18. After section 22. of the princlpal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:~ 
"22A. (1) Where in respect 'of any matter relating to safety tor 
which express provision is made by or under this Act, the owner, 
agent or manager of a mine fails to cdmply With such provisions, the 
Chief Inspector may give notice in writing requiring the same to be 
complied with within such time as he may specify in thp, notice or 
within such ex~nded period of time 'as he may. from time to time, 
speclfy thereafter. 
5 
(2) Where the owner, a~t or mana~er fails to comply with 10 
the terms of a notice given under sub-section (1) within the period 
specified in such notice or, as the case may be, within the extended 
period of ·time specified under that 'Sub-ser.tion, the Chief Inspector 
may, by order in writinl{,prohibtt the emplOYMent in or about the 
mine or any 'Part thereof of any '!)P.rson Vlho~ employment is not, J 5 
In his ol)inion. reasonably ner.esS'8ry fo,. Sp.curinrr f.'(lm~liance with 
the terms of the notice. 
(3) Everv person who~ emplovment is nrohihited unlfur sub-
section (2), shall be entitled to payment of fulol wartes for the period 
for which he would have been, but for the PTohihition. in emplov- 20 
ment, 'and the owner, a~t or mana~er \'!lhall b". liable for payment 
of such fun wa~es of that person = 
Provided thRt the owner. arent 0" manae'er may, instea!') of 
pavincr such full wa~es llT.'ov1ife!l;l1Ch nerson. with an AHp.rnatfve 
emDlovment at thp l't'trne WA~ whf~b ~u~h neTson wa~ reC'P'ving tn 25 
the erhl)loyment whiclt'.v~s pnhibited under su.b-section (2). 
(4) The provi'Sions of sub-sections (!;). (6) and (7) of section 
22 shall IlDD1v in rehtion to a not1C'!e issu~d under s~lb-seM.ion· (1) 
or 'an order mltde under s1Jh-~r.tion (2\ of this se<-tion ae; they 8l)Dlv 
in relatioll ~o a notice uurJer sub-section (1) or an ortier under sub- 30 
section (1A) of that section.", 
1'7. In section 23 of the principal Act,-
Cal after sulJ..lsection (1): th~ "'(lllowing sub·section shall be 
inserted, namely:~ 
"(1A) Whenever there occurs jn or about a mine an I'lf'(!irtf'nt 35 
causlncr reoortable iniuries to anv person. the owner, aaent or 
mana~ of the mine shall enter in B refth;ter such occurrence in 
the prescribed form Rnd cOl'ies of such entrie~ shnll be furnished 
to the Chief !np;pector once ~n 3 quarter."; 
(b) for sub-section ·(3). th!" following sub-section shall be 40 
substituted, namely:-
'I (3) The Central Government rna,·, by notification in the 
omefal Gazette, di~~t thpi; a~trtente; t'Jther than those specifled 
in suh-sections '(1) and (lA) whim cause bodily injury resulting 
• 

5 
10 
15 
!20 
II 
in the enforced absence from work of the person injured bJr a 
period exceeding twenty-four hours shall be entered in a regiatar' 
in the prescribed form or shall be subject to the provisions of 
sub-section (.1) or sub-section (1A), as the case may be.". 
(c) after sUb-section (4), the .following sUb-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(5) Whenever there occurs in or about a mine an aCCident 
causing loss of life or serious bodily injury to any person, the 
place of accident shall not be disturbed or altered before the 
arrival or without the conbel1t of the Chief Inspector or the 
Inspector to whom notice of the accident is required to be given 
under SUb-section (1) of sedion 23, unless such disturbance or 
alteration is necessary to prevent any further accident, to remove 
bodies of the deceased, or to rescue any person from danger, or 
unless discontinuance of work at the place of accident would 
seriously impede the wo~king of the mine: 
Provided that where the Chief Inspector or the said Inspector 
fails to inspect the place of accident within seventy-two hours 
of the time of the accident, work may be resumed at the place 
of the accident.". 
18. In section 27 of the principal Act, for the word and figures "section Amelld-
13", the word and figures "sectIon 12" shall be substituted. manto! 
NCtlon2'1. 
30 
35 
19. In section 33 of the principal Act, for sub-sections (2) and (3), the 
following sub-sect.ion shaJ.I be SUbstitUted, namely:-
• (2) Where any person employed in a mine is paid on piece-
rate basis, the time-rate shail be taken as equlvaJ.ent to the c1aiJ.y 
average of his full-time earnings for the days on wnich he actually 
worked during the week immediately precedmg the week in w.bich 
overtime work has been done, eXc.J.usive of any overtime, and such 
time-rate shall be deemed to be the ordmary rate of wages of such 
person: 
Provided that if such pel'son bas not worked. in the preceding 
week on the same or identlcal job, the time-rate sh.ail be b,.ect on 
the average for the days he has worked In the same week excJ.ucuni 
the overtime or on the daily average of .his earrungs 111 any ~L'ececLDg 
week, whichever is hlgher. 
ExpZanation.-For the purposes of this section, "ordinary rate of 
wages" shall have the same meaning as in the Explanation to sub-
section (3) of sectioll 9A.'. 
40 20. In section 38 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the 
words and figures "subject to the provisions of section 22", the words, 
figures and letter "and section 22A" ~hall be inSerted.. 
21. In section 39 of the principal Act, in the opening portion, for the 
words "Save in respect of adolescents, the Central. Government", the 
45 words "The Central Government" shall be substituted. 
Amend. 
mentof 
~ 
33. 
Amend. 
mentof 
section 
18. 
Amend-
mentol 
.ecitODat. 

Substi. 
tution of 
new 
. section 
for 
section 40. 
EmplOY. 
mentol 
persons 
belOW 
eighteen 
years of 
a,e. 
Omission 
of' 
sections 
411 and 42. 
Substi.. 
tutionof 
new 
section 
for 
section 
43. 
Power 
tole. 
quire 
medical 
ezami-
nation. 
OmiasiOD 
of 
Sl!!Ction 
, 44. ~ 
12 
22. For section ~O of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
'40. (1) After the commencement of the Mines (Amendment) 
Act, 1983, no person below eighteen years of age shall be allowed to 
work in any mine or part thereof. 5 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
apprentices and other trainees, not ·below sixteen years of age, may 
be allowed to work, under proper supervision, in a mine or part 
thereof by the manager: 
Provided that in the case Of trainees, other than apprentices, 10 
prior approval of the Chief Inspector or an Inspector shall be obtain-
ed before they are allowed to work. . \ 
ExpZan4tion.-In this section and in section 43, "apprentice" 
means an apprentice as defined in clause (a) of section 2 of the 
Apprentices Act, 1961.'. 
23. Sections 41 and 42 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
24. For section 43 of the principal Act, the followin~ section' shall be 
substituted, namely:-
15 
"43. (1) Where an Inspector is of op1ll10n that any person 
employed in a mine otherwise than a'S an apprentice or other trainee 10 
is not an adult or that any person employed in a mine as an appren-
tice or other trainee is either below sixteen years of age or is no 
longer fit to work, the Inspector may serve on the manager of the 
mine a notice requiring that such person shall be examined by a 
certi1ying surgeon and such person shall not, if the Inspector so 15 
directs, be employed or pennitted to work in any mime until he has 
been so examin~d and has been certified that he is an adult or, if 
lach person is an apprentice or trainee, that he is not below sixteen 
years of age and is fit to work. 
(2) Every certificate granted by a certifying surgeon on a So 
reference unck!r 'Sub-section (1), shall, for the purpose of' this Act, be 
conclusive evidence of the matters referred therein.". 
25. Section 44 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
520l1881. 

5 
13 
26. For section 45 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Substi-
substituted, namely:- . tutios ot 
"45. Subject to the provisions of sulHection (2) of section 40, 
after such date as the Central Government may, ,by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, no person below eighteen years 
of age shall be allowed to be present in any part of a mine above 
ground where any operation conllected with or incidental to any 
mining operation is being earnlon.". 
~ew 
section 
tor 
sectiOn 
45. 
Prohibi-
tionot 
the pre-
senCe of 
persons 
below 
eighteen 
years 
otage 
in amine. 
21. In section 48 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), clause (d) 
10 shall be omitted. 
Amend. 
mentol 
section 48 
20 
30 
35 
28. In section 49 of the principal Act, for the proviso, the following Amend-
proviso shall be substituted, namely:- mentof section 
... 
"ProVided that if such award, agreement or contract of seJ;Vice, 49. 
provides for a longer annual Ieoave with wages than that provided in 
this Chapter, the quantum of leave, which the person employed shall 
be entiUed to, shall be in accordance with such award, agreement or 
contract of service, but leave shall be regulated in accordance with 
the provisions of sections 50 to 56 (both inclusive) with respect to 
matters not provided for in such award, agreement or contract of 
service.". 
2B. In section 52 of the principal Act~-
(a) in sub-scetioll (1), in clause (a), for the words "sixteen days", Amend-
the words "flfteen days" sbaIl be sabstltuted; ID8Dt of 
aecUoa 
(b) after tRdMectioD (9) and before the E:pI4Mticm, the foUew- 52. 
ID&' mb-sectiOll shall be buIe.rtIec\ name1y:--
0"(10) Where a person employed in a mine is discharged or 
dJsmissed from service or quits Ids employment or is superan-
nuated or cUes while in service, he or his heirs or his nominee, as 
the case may be, shall be entitled to wages in Hea of leave due to 
him calc:ulated at the rate specified in sub-section (1), if,-
(a) In the case of a person employed below II'OlPld In a 
mine, he has putJn attendance tor not less than ODe-half 01 
the total Dumber of days from the date of his employment to 
the date of his d.i&eharge or dismissal or quitting of employ-
ment or superannuation or death; and. 
•• (b) in lIllY other case, he has put in attendance for Dot 
less tbaD. two-thirds of the toW number of days from the 
date of his employment to the date of his discharge or dls-
.m.aI or qulttJng of employment or supemnnuatlon or 
death, 
and payment of such wages shall be made by the O\VDer&, agent 
or mauager of the mine at the rate specl8ed In aeetloD 53, 

Amend-
mentof 
ncUon 
57. 
.. where the person is di8charpd or dimai.ed fnIm. .-vice ., qults 
employment or Is SlIper&IUl-.ted, before the a;pIrJ 01 the .... c1 
working ilay after such discJIarI'e, di. ..... l, qalttiq' of employ-
ment or superannuation, as the ease may be, RDc1 where the 
persoll employed dies while in service, within a period of two 5 
mODths of his death."; 
(c) in the Explanation, for the words, brackets aDd &pre. "sub .. 
sections (1) and (3)", the words, brackets and ftgares "salt-eeetions 
(1), (3) aDd (10)" shall be substituted. 
30. In section 57 of the principal Act,-
~ , 
(a) in clause (j), the wordj "adolescents and" shall be omitted; 
(b) in clause (q), for the words "for providing for the safety of 
persons present on haulage roads", the words "for regulating the use 
of machiJlery in mines, for providing for the safety of perIODS emp]Qy .. 
10 
ed on or near such machinery and on haulage roads" shall be 15 
substituted~ 
(c) in clause (11.), for the words "for prescribing the plans, and 
sections and field notes connected therewith, to be kept by owners, 
agents and managers of mines", the words "for requiring owners, 
agents and managers of mines to have fixted boundaries for the mines, 20 
for prescribing the plans and sections and field notes connected t~­
with to be kept by them" shall be substituted; 
(d) in clause (v), the words "for dealing effectively with the 
situatioR" shall be inserted at the end; 
';"'y 
(e) in clause (x), for the words "fifty yards", the words "forty- Sl5 
five metres" shall be substituted. 
31. In section 58 of the principal Act,-
r 
(a) for clause (a), the following cle\.l$e sball be substituted, 
namely:-
"(a), for providing the term of oftloe and other conditions 30 
. of service of, and the manner of ftlling vaC8J1Ciea IIDODg, the 
members of a Committee and for regulating the prooecIure to be 
followed by a CommitOOe for transacting its businetls;"; 
(b) in clause (c), after th~ words "connected with the enquiry", 
the words "in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue" shall 35 
be inserted; i 
(c) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:- I 
I, (cc) for prOViding for inspection of mines to be carried out 
on behalf of the persons employed therein by a technical expert 40 
(not less than an overman in status), the faci1itiea tberefor, the 
freq1.iency at which and the manner in which such inspections 
are to be carned out and the manner in whi~h reports of such 
inspections are to be made;"; 
(d) clause (k) shall be omitted; 45 

15 
(e) in clause (u), for the words "six pies per t~n" the words 
"twenty-five paise per tonne" shall be substftllted; , 
. (f) in clause (v), the word "and" occurring at the end shall be 
oDUtted and after clause (v) as so amended, the following clause 
5 shall be inserted, namely:-
C/ (vv) for providing for the constitution of safety Committees 
for groups of specified mines or for all mine'S in a specified area 
fOr promoting safety and for laying down the composition, 
manner of formation and functions of such 'Safety Committees, 
10 and;". 
20 
25 
so 
35 
32. In section 59 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (4), the following sUb-section shall be sub-
stituted, namely:-
"(4) No regUlation or rule ':'lhaJ1 be made unless the draft 
thereof has been referred to the Committee constituted under 
sub-section (1) of section 12 and unless that Committee has had 
a reasonable opportunity of reporting as to the expediency of 
making the same and as to the suitability of its provisions."; 
(b) sub~ection (7)· shall be omitted. 
33. In section 60 of the prinCipal Act,-
(a) for the words "Mining Boards", the words "the Committee 
constituted under sub-section (1) of section 12" shall be substituted; 
(b) in the proviso, after the words "so made", the words "shall 
be sent to the said Committee for information and" shan be inserted. 
34. In section 61 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "for the control and 
guidance of the persons acting in the management of, or employed 
in, the mine". the words "governing the use of any particular 
machinery or the adoption of a particular method of working in the 
mine" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (,~) for the word~ "Minin'! Bosm'l 0'''. where 
there is no Minin.e' Bonra, to !;uch officer or :mthoritv R~ the Central 
Government mav. by .!teneral or special order. appoint in thi~ behalf", 
the words "Committee constituted under sub-section (1) of s~tion 
12" shall be !'lubstituted; 
(c) in sub-section (4), in clause (a). for the words "Mining 
Board or such officer or authority as aforesaid", the words "Commi-
ttee constituted under suh-~ction (1) of section 12" shall bf! substi-
tuted. 
40 35. After section 61 of the principal Act, the following section ShRll 
45 
be inserted, namely:-
"61A. Every regulatidn made under section 57, every rule made 
under section 58 and every bye:"law made under section 61 shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia-
ment. while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two, or more successive 
sessions. and if. befor~ the· cxplr~, of the session immcdiatp.ly foIlow-
ing the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the regulation, rule Or bye-
Amend-
mentol 
section 
39. 
Amend-
mentol 
section 
60. 
Amend-
mentot 
section 
61. 
L 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
61A. 
Laying 
otre-
gulations, 
rules 
andb:ye_ 
laws 
before 
~arlia­
ment. 

Amend-
mentof 
seetion65. 
Substi-
tution 
of new 
section 
for 
section 68. 
Penalty 
for em-
ployment 
ol 
persons 
below 
eighteen 
yuraof 
age. 
Amend-
mental 
section 
728. :.: 
Amend-
mentol 
section 
72C. 
Amend-
!Dento!: 
section 
75. 
t6 
law or both Houses agree that the regulation~ rule or bye-law should 
not be made, the regulation, rule or bye-law shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the ca.,e may 
~j so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 5 
that regulation, rule or bye-law, as the case may be.". 
36. In section 65 of the principal Act, for the word and figures 
··section 40", the word and figures "section 43" shall be substituted. 
37. For section 68 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"68. If a person below eighteen years of age is emp10yed in a 
mine in contravention of section 40, the owner, agent or manager of 
such mine shall be punisbable with fin:? which may extend to five 
hundred rupees.". 
38. In section 72B of the principal Act,-
(4) after the word and figures "section 22", the words, brackets, 
figures and letter "or under sub-section. (2) of section 22A" shall be 
inserted; 
10 
(b) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:-
''Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons 20 
to the contrary to be recorded in writing in the judgment of the 
court, such fine shall 110t be less than two thousand rupees." . . 
39. In section 72C of the principal Act .. in sub-section (1),-
(a) after the word ~nd figures "section 22", the words, brackets, 
fi'gures and letter "Or under sub-section (2) of section 22A" slmll be 25 
inserted; 
(b) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:-
"Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasoDS 
to the contrary to be recorded in writing in the judgment of the 
court, such fine, in the case of a contravention referred to in 30 
clause (a), shall not be less than three thousand rupees.". 
40. In section 75 of the principal Act. in the proviso, for the words 
"Provided that", the words "ProVided further that" 'Sh'8ll be substituted, 
and before the pro\iso as so amended. the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"Provided that the Chief Inspector or the district magistrue- or 
the Inspector as so authorised shaU, before instituting such prose-
cution, satisfy himself that the owner, agent or manager had failed 
to exercise all due diligence to prevent the commission of such 
offence.". 
35 

'j. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
35 
17 
41. In sectiQn 76 of the principal Act, for the proviso, the following 
proviso 'Shall be substituted, namely:-
"Provided that where a firm, association or company has given 
notice in writing to the Chief Inspector that it has nominated,- . 
(a) in the case of a firm, any of its partners or managers; 
(b) in the case of an association, any of its members or 
managers; 
((') ~n the case of a company. any of it:; direc;tors or ma;na. 
gers, , • ~ ~ ,j 
who is resident, in each case in any place to which this Act extends 
and who is in each case either in fact.In charge of the management 
of, or holds the largest number at shares in such firm, association 
Or company, to as'Sume the responsibility of the dwner of the mine 
for the purposes of this Act, such partner, member, director or 
manager, as the case may be, shall, so long as he continup.s to so 
reside and be in charge or hold the largest number of shares as 
aforesaid, be deemed to be the owner of the mine for the purposes 
of 'this Act unless .. a notice in writing cancelling his nomination or 
stating that he haS ceased to be a partner, member, director or 
manager, as th~ cal:i'e Inay be, is received by the Chief Inspector. 
ExpZanation.- Where a fu'm, association or company has different 
establishments Or branches or di1ferent units in any establishment or 
branch, different persons may be nominated under this proviso in 
relation to different elitablishments or branches 01' units and the 
person so nominated shall,. with respect only to the establishment, 
branch or unit ill relation t~ which he has been nominated, be deemed 
to be the owner of. the mine.". 
42. In section 79 of. the principal Act,-
(a) after clause .(ii.) , the ,following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
,. (iia) in any case in which the accused is Or was a public 
servant and previous sanction of .the Central Government or of 
th~ State Government or of any other authority is necessary for 
taking cognizance~ of the offence under any law for the time 
being in force, within three months of the date on which such 
sanction is received by the Chief Inspector, or"; 
(b) in claus) (iit.), for the words "six months"~ the words coone 
year" shall be substituted. 
Amend.;. 
mentol 
section 
76. 
Amend. 
mental 
section 79. 
43. in section 80 of the principal Act, for the words ~Ill'resideney Amend. 
40 magistrate or magistrate o.f the fir~t class", the: words "Metro,polltan ment of 
Magistrate or Judicial MagIstrate of the first class' shall be substItuted. sectjon so. 
44. Section BOA of the principal .t\ct shall be omitted. Omilssion 
of sec.. 
Ucm:aOA, 

Amend. 
mentor ~ 
section 81. 
Amend. 
,mentol 
section. 
8S. 
Amend. 
mentof 
section 
84. 
Insertion 
olnew 
sections 
85B and 
86C. 
Signing 
" 
of .. 
returns, 
notices, etc. __ 
Nofea 
or charge 
,to be 
realised 
for 
facilities 
and 
- con-
venien. 
ees. 
Transi. 
tory 
pro_ 
vision. 
45. In section 81 of the principal Act, in sub-sections (1) and (2), the 
words "a Mining Board or" shall be omitted. 
46. In section 83 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1),- , 
(i) for the words "all or any of the provisio~ of this Act", 5 
the words "all or any of the provisions of this Act or the rep 
lations, rules or bye-laws" shall be substituted; 
(ii) ih the proviso, for the word and, figures "section 45", tile 
words and figures "sections 40 and 45" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the wor-ds "regulations or fUles under 10 
this Act", the words "regulations, rules or bye-laws". shall be substi-
tuted. 
47. Section 84 ot the principal Act shall be re-numbered as .sub-
section (1) of that section and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, 
the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:- 15 
,. (2) The Chief Inspector may, for reasons to be recorded.in. 
writing, reverse Or modify any order passed by him under this Act 
or under any regulation, rule or b~-law . 
. (3) No. order prejudicial to the owner, agent or manager of a 
mine shaUbe made under this section unless such owner, agent or flO 
manager has been given a reasonable opportunity of making re-
presentation.". ' . --- .... 
48. After section aSA of the principal Act, the following sections shall 
be inserted, namely:- •.. " 
"SSB. All roturns and notices required to be furnished or given 
or communications sent by or on behalf of the owner of a mine in 125 
connection with the provisions of this Act or any regulation, rule, 
bye-law or ·any order made thereunder shall be siined by the owner, 
agent or manager of the mine or by any person to whom power iIi 
this behalf has been delegated by the owner by a power of atto.meY.. 30 
8OC. No fee or eharce shall be realised from any person employed 
in a mine in respect of any protective lU'I'IUlI'ementS or facWU_ to 
be provided, or any eqUipment or appllaDces to 1M' IUppUed UDder the 
provisioDs y' this Act.". ~ 
49. (1) As from the date of constitution of the Committee under sub. 35· 
section ,(I) of section 12 of the principal Act as amended by this Act-
(i) any Mining ,Board constituted under section 12 of the prin-
cipal Act and functioning as such on the aforesaid date shall stan'd 
, dis/IOlvedi ..... 

5 
19' 
(ii) the Chairman and members of any such Board, who on the ) 
aforesaid date are members of that Mining Board shall cease to hold 
office as such; 
(iii) 'all proceedings pending on the aforesaid date in any Mining 
Board shall stand transferred to the said Committee which shall 
deal with them as if they had been pending therein. 
(2) Anything done or any action taken before the aforesaid date by . 
any Mining Board sh'aU, so far a'S it is not inconsistent with any of the 
provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act, be as valid and 
10 eJfective as 1£ it had been d()ne or taken by the Committee. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Mines Act, 1952 seeks to regulate the working conditions in 
mines by providing for measures to be taken for the safety of the 
workers employed therein and certain amenities for tlunn. In the light 
of the working of the Act, certain modifications of the provisions of the 
Act have become pecessary. They' mainly relate to (1) the removal of 
certain practical difficulties experienced in its enforcement; (2) provi-
sion for additional safety regulations; (3) closer association of workers 
with safety measures; (4) provision for a minimum penalty in case 
of gross negligence or recklessness; and (50) increase in the levy of the 
ceSS' for the admiQlstra,tion of central' rescue stations. 
2. The notes on clauses appended to the Bill explain the provisioDS 
thereof. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 5th May, 1983. 
VEERENDRA PATIL. 
", .t' •. , 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
(Copy of letter No. 5-29012!2 I 82-MI, dated the 6th May, 1983 from 
Shri Veerendra Patil, Minister of Labour and Reha~i1itation to the 
Secretary, Lok Sabha]. 
The President,' having been informed of the subject matter of the 
.proposed Bill further to amend the Mines Act, 1952, has in purSU'8llce of 
clau£es (1) and (3) of article 117 of the Constitution· of India, r~om­
m.nded to Lok Sabha the introd'lction and consideration of the Bdl· 

Notes on clauses 
j .. 
Clau.se 2.;;Thls, cl~pse seeks mainly' to amend the definition of the 
e~p:eS's.lo~S ~gent', "a person employed in a mine", "mine" and llserious 
bodily InJury to make them more comprehensive. The present definition 
of "serious bodily injury" covers two, distinct types of injuries, I.e., those 
that are reported" because of thp. time involved in recovery and. others 
which cau~ injury to any particular limb, etc. Invariably. injuries of 
the former type are reported only after statutory period of absence (20 
d~ys) is exceeded, whereas those M the latter type are reported forth-
wtth. Therefore, a distinction has necessarily to \ be made between the 
two types of injuries which are at present coW!red under the definition 
of "serious bodily injury". It is, therefore, proposed to amend the 
definition of "serious bodily injury" and introduce a new definition of 
"reportable injury" to cove~ injuries which result in forced absence for 
a period of 72 hours or more. The other amendments in this clause are 
verhal -and consequE'ntial. 
Clause 3.-Sub-clau,~c (a) .-The .amendment proposed in this sub-
clause is consequential to the substitution of section 40 with a new 
section and omi!':sion of section 44 under clauses 22 and ~5. 
Suh-clause (0) .-This Ruh-clall~e seeks to brinp,' any mine enga~d 
in the extraction of "slate", "marl" and "ch-alk" in the category of mines 
exempted from cprt:1in . provisions of the Mines Act as there are at 
present a lar~e number of mines producing 'State, marl and chalk, most 
of which nre smnll nnd shallow and worked irregularly. 
Clmu:(! 4,-The amendment proposed in this clause is consequential 
to the' in~ertjon of II new sect.ion 22A as proposed in clause 16. 
Clmlse 5,-The amendment proposed in this clause has become neces-
sary in view of the coming into force of the Code of Crimin-a1. Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974). 
Clatl,~e 6.-This c1ml~(> stlekc; to p.nl11r~e the powers of the special 
officer und('t' s('('tion R of the Mines Act so as to enable him to measure 
also any output in a mine. 
Clausp 7,-This c1n\15/' seeks to insert a nf'W section 9A with n view to 
emnow('T' the Minf!~ InsnertoratE' to undertake safetv and occupational 
health RUrvf'v in minec;, This provision is baseci on the recommendation 
made at the 16th Session of the Indian Dabour Conference in this behalf. 
The time sf\f'nt bv anv nerson ('hoc;en for E'xnminntion jn such safety and 
occ"p~tiomll health sl1rvey 511::111 he cOl1ntl"d towards his workinrr time, 
so howe,-er. that Imv overtim~ l'Iha11 he pniti at tpe orrlinarv rntp of 
wn(!V'S. It also c1Rrif11"'il thp. different item!l th:lt ~hould be inclllded in. 
the "orc:1inarv rat!:' of wages" for calculation of extra Wll~P!\ fn.- oVl'rtimp.. 
H sltch person is found medlcall"unfit on Sl1C~ sl'ntey, hf> shl'll1 hf> f'nHt-
l"ti to medi~l trentmf>nt at the coc;t of th ... owner, "'r:s:ent or mana O'pf with 
full wa~ durin~ the oeriod of such tre'ltment. If ~fte~ <;llch trp'3tment 
hE" is deC'lar~d unfit to dischar!!p. th~ dutv which he wa'~ dlschar.rlnrr 
and iU.ch unfitness is oirectly ascribahle to hts, emplo"nent, he is entltlp.d 
., 

II 
for an alternative 'employment in the mine for which he is medically fl't 
or for payment of disability allowance .. It also provides for payment of 
lump sum amount, where he' desires ~o leave the employmt!nt. 
Clause 8.-Sub-clause (a) .-The amendment proposed to sub-section 
(1) of section 10 of the Mines Act is consequential to th~ amendment 
propO'St:d in clause 7 • 
. Sub-cla-use (0) .-The change in clauf,e (b) of sub-section (2) of the 
said section 10 is consequential to the amendment proposed in clause 
10 and the change in clause (e) of that sub-section is necessitated beCause 
of the change in the designation of the post of "Director, Indian Bureau 
of Mines" to "Controller, Indian Bure:m of Mines". The new clauses 
(f) and (g) proposed to be inserted in the said sub-section empower the 
person referred to in suh-section (1) of section 10 to disclose the infor-
mation obtained nnder the said sub-section to any registered or recogni .. 
sed trade union and to sllch officer, authority or organisation as may be 
specified by the Centrnl Government in this behalf. 
Clause g.-The amendment ptoposed in this clause is consequential 
to the amendment proposed in clnuse 22. 
Clause 10.-This clause seeks to substitute sections 12, 13 and 14 of the 
Mines Act witlt new sections. New section 12 seeks to provide for the 
constitutIon ofa CommittE'f.' in plncp of Mining Boards and constitution 
of one or more Committees to deal with specific matters relating to a 
mine or a group of mines 01' areas. The composition of the Committee 
is also provided in that section. New section 13 seeks to provide for the 
functions of the Committee and new section 14 seeks to provide " for the 
powers of the Committee for discharging its functions. 
Clauses 11 and 12.-The amendments propoSed in these clauses are 
consequential to the amendments proposed in clause 10 and su~c1ause 
(b) of clause 8. . 
J " 
Clause 13.-Theexisting sections 17 and 18 of the Mines Act are pro-
~d to be replaced by new sections 17 and 18 with a view to making the 
owner, agent or mana~er of a mine responsiple to the extent of his 
statutory duties specified under the Mines Act and the rules, regulations, 
etc., made thereunder and for that purpose also to specify in the Mines 
Act more clearly the duties and re'sponsibilities of the owners. 
Clause 14.-The" amendment proposed in this clause is consequential 
to the introduction of "metric system". 
Clau.<1p. 15.-This plause seeks to 'clarify that the prohibitory order 
issued under sub-~ion (3) of section 22 by the Chief Ins~ector or 'all 
Inspector shall remain valid until the Chief Im;pector or the Inspector 
is satisfied that the danger is removed. It is also propospd to insert a 
new sub·section (3A) in section 22. It provides fot' the pnyment of full 
wages or alternativ-e employment at the same wages to A perRon whose 
employment is prohibited under sub-section (lA) or suh·c;ection (3). 
The amendment to sub-section (6) of sf!'ction 22 st'ek!l to ensut'e that 
there is no delay in refemng the objection received" under this section 
to the Committee by the' Central Government. The otb'r .• mendment 
in tllSlt ~la~ 1~ of f' con~uent1-al ~lJtllre. ,~ " ........ M ..~ 

!23 
tZause Hi'"7"""This clause seeks to insert a new section '22A to enable 
~he Chief Inspector to pl'ohibit employmeht of persons in cases where, 
despite warnings, the owner, agent or manager docs not show any 
improvement in regard to safety maiters. It also provides for payment 
of full wages or alternative empolyment at the same wages to a person 
whose ~mployment is so pro~tbited. 
ClauSe 17.-Sub-clause (a) .-This sub:.clause seeks to insert a new 
sub-section (lA) in section 23 of the Mines Act dealipg~ with an accident 
causing reportable injury to any person. This is consequential to the 
insertion of a new definition of "reportable injury" [vide clause 2 (x)] 
Sub.cla:use (b).-Under sub-se~tion (3) of section 23 of the Mines Act, 
bodily iJ;ljury resulting in the forced absence of an injured person from 
work for a period exceeding 48 hours. is required to be entered in a 
register. It is proposed to reduce this period of forced absence from 48 
hour& to 24 hours. The other amendment ill conseq'Uential to the insertion 
of thj: hew sub-section (lA) [vide sub-clause (a)]. 
Sub-clause (e) .-This sub-clause seeks to insert a new sub-section (5) 
to provide that a place of accident causing loss of life or serious boc:Uly 
injury should not bp. disturbed before the arrival, or without the 
consent, of the Chief Inspector ·or' an Inspector. This provision already 
'exists in the regulations framed Ullqer the Mines Act. Being a substantive 
and important provision, it is considered necessary to include it iD the 
Mines Act itself. • 
Clause. lB.-The amendment proposed in this clause is consequential 
to the amendment proposed in clause 10. 
Clause 19.-The fixation of time-rate as per existing sub-section (2) 
of section 33 is administratively found not practicable and the amend· 
ments seek to modify sub-section (2) S'Uitably to overcome these difti-
culties. It also clarifies different items that should be included in the ' 
"ordinary rate of wages" for calculation of extra wages· for overtime. 
Clauses 20 and 21.-The amendments proposed in these clauses are 
con~equential to the insertion of new section 22A as proposed in clause 
16 and the substitution of section 40 with a new section as proposed in 
clause 22. 
Clause 22 . .....:..This clause seeks to SUbstitute 'section 40 of the Mines Act 
with a new section prohibiting' employment of persons below eighteen 
years of age in place of the exiSting provision prohibiting adolescents. 
However, it permits apprentices and other trainees not below sixteen 
years bf age to work, with tht; prior approval of the Chief Inspector or 
an Inspector I in a mine Of" part thereof by the manager under proper 
supervision. 
Clauses 23 and 25.-These clauses seek to omit sections 41, 42 and 44. 
These' omissions are consequential to the SUbstitution of section 40 with 
a new section as proposed in clause 22. 
Clause 24.-fhis clause seeks to substitute section 43 of the Mines Act 
with a new section which prmTides for the medical examination of ,any 
person employed in a mine otherwise than as an apprentice or other 

• I 
U4 
trainee who is not an adult or any person employed in a mine as aD 
~pprentice or other trainee who is either below sixteen years of age or 
IS no longer fit to work. It also provides for grant of a certificate by a 
certifying surgeon certifying that- such person is an adult or is an 
apprentice or tr~inee not below sixteen years of age and fit to work. 
Clause 2G,--This clause seeks to substitute section 45 of the Mines'Act 
.... with a new section prohibiting the presence of a persollbelow eighteen 
years of age' iu any 'part of a mine above ground where, any. operation 
connected with or incidental to any mining operation is carried on. This 
is consequential to the sUbstitution of section 40 with a new section as 
proposed in clause 22. 
Clause 27.-The Cimendment proposed in this clause is consequential 
to the substitution of section 40 with a new section as proposed in 
clause 22. ., 
Clause 28.-Thi'S clause seeks to amend section 49 of tin! Mines Act in 
order to clarjfy that such of the 'benefits provided for in the MinttS Act 
as are more favourable to the persons employed in a mine than those 
provided for under the provisions of an award,agreement or contract of 
,service relating to those persons should be made available to them. 
Clause 29.-Sub-clause '(a) .-Presently, the annual leave with wages 
of a person employed in a mine is calculated at the rate of one day for 
every sixteen days of work performed by him. It is proposed to m9dify 
this calculation by making it at the .rate of one. day for every fifteen 
days of work performed by such person. 
Su.b-clause (b) .-It is proposed to insert' a new sub-section in section 
52 of the Mines Act to provide for grant of proportionate leave in case of 
persons employed in a mine whose services are terminated or who quit 
their employment or are superannuated or die during the course of the 
year if they have put in certain minimu~ number of attendance. 
Sub-clau.se (c) .-The amendment proposed in this sub-clause is 
consequential to the amendment proposed in sub-clause (b). 
Clause 30.-Sub-clause (a)·.-The amendment proposed in this sub-
clause is consequential to' the substitution of section 40 with 4 new 
section as proposed in clause 22. 
Sub-clause (b).-The amendment proposed to clause (q) of section 
57 is intended to empower the Central 'Government to make regulatioDi 
for regulating the use of machinery' in mines and for iproviding for 
the safety of persons employed in or near such machinery and. on 
haulage roads. The need for such a prOvision arises due to the operation 
of many types of new .. machinery, such as mechanical loaders, shuttle 
cars, etc., the use of which in mines intrQduces special hazards. 
, 
Sub-clause (c) .-This sub-clause seeks to amend clause (u) of 
section 57 to make an enabiing provision so that owners, agents and 
managers of mines may be required to have well-defined boundary for 
every mine. 
Su.b-clmue (d)-Power is also being taken under thi'S sub-clause to 
tmJb1e the Central Government to make reJUlationa for evolvil18 ,tancl .. 

25 
1Dg proCedures to deal e1flectively with any emergency situation caused 
by accidents or accidental explosions or ignitions. This provision is 
based on the recommendation made by the lL.O. experts in their report 
to the Government on "Mines Safety". 
Sub-clausp. (e) .-The amendment propbsed in this sub-.clause is con. 
sequential to the introduction of "metric system". 
Clause 31.-Sub.ctause (a).-The amendment proposed in this sub. 
clause is consequential to the amendment proposed in clause 10. 
Sub·clause (b) .-The amendment proposed to clause (c) of section 
58 of the Mines Act enables the Central Government to recover the 
expenses of Court of inquiry under section 24 from the manager, owner 
or agent of the mine concerned in the same manner as an arrear of land 
I 
revenue. 
Sttb-clause (e) .-This sub·clause seeks to i~troduce a new provision 
in section 58 to provide for inspection of mines by workers' :epresenta-
tives as this would help not only in checking contraventions but also in 
securing workers' cooperation in safety measures. This provision is 
based on the recommendation made by the first Conferel1C'e on Safety in 
Mines. 
Sub.cla1.L.'le (d).'- This sub-clause seeks to omit the existing clause 
(k) of section 58 of the Mines Act and is consequential to the substitu· 
tion of section 40 with a new section as proposed in clause 22. 
Sub-clause (e) .-This sub-.clause seeks to enhance the le~r and collec-
tion of duty of excise on coke and coal produced in, and despatched 
from, a mine from six pips per ton to twenty-five paise 'Per tonne-. 
Sub.clause (f) .-This !;ub-c1ause give!; effect to another recommenda-
tion made by the first Conference on Safety in Mines with a view to 
providing for an effective method of associating workers with promotion 
of safety in mines by formation of safety Committees. 
Cl4use 32.-Sub.r7rtw;(, (a) .-The amendment proposed in this clause 
is consequential to th~ amendment proposed in clause 10. 
Sub.clause (b) .-Sub-section .(7) of section 59 of the Mines Act is 
proposed to be omitted in con':lequence of the new section 61A (?-ide 
clause 35) whkh provides for the laying of regulations, rules and bye-
laws made under the Mines Act hefore each House of Parliament. 
Clause S3.-The amendments proposed in this clause are consequen-
tial to the -amendment proposed in clAuse 10. 
Clause 34 -Sub-section (1) of section 61 provides for submission of 
draft bye-laws for the control <Inn guidance of persons acting in the 
management of; or employed in. the mine !ro as to prevent accidents 
and to provide for the safety. convenience and cliscipUne of persons 
emploved in the mine. Sub-clause (a) seeks to amplify that the bye-
laws to be drafted mav also provide. in addition, for safe working of 
spedal type of machinery or. method of wor~ng in the mine· The 
other amendments are consequential to -the amendment propO':>ed in 
clause 10. •• 

·.-. 
Clause 35.-The new section 61A provides tor laying of regulations. 
rules and bye-laws made under the Mines Act before each House of 
Parliament in conformity with the procedure now being' followed. 
Clauses 36 and 37.-The amendments proposed ift these clauses are 
consequential to the amendments proposed in clauses 22 and 24. 
Clauses 38 and 39.-These clauses seek to fix the quantum of mini. 
mum fin~ to be imposed for more serious types of offences under the 
Mines Act. The other amendments are consequential to the insertion of 
new section 22A as proposed in clause 16. 
Clause 4O.-Under section 75 of the Mines' Act, no prosecution shall be 
instituted against any owner, agent or manager for any offence under 
the Mines Act except at the instance of the Chief Inspector or of the 
district magistrate or of an Inspector authorised in this behalf. It is 
proposed to lnsert a proviso in that section to the effect that the Chief 
Inspector or the district magistrate or the Inspector shall. before institut-
ing such prosecution. satis.fy himself that the owner, agent or manager 
had failed to exercise all due diligence to prevent the commission of 'Such 
offence . 
. Clause 41.-Section 76 of the Mines Act provides for the determina. 
tion of owner in certain cases. Under the provi!'lo to that section. a firm. 
association or company can nominate its partners, members or directors .. 
as the case ·mav be. to a1l~ume the r'E'sponsibiUty of the owner of the mine. 
The proposed amendment empOwers sllch firm. association or coml'lnny 
to nominate mamll~ers n'so. Tt Rlso enables a firm, association 0" com-
pany which has diffe,.E>nt establi~hmf"nts or branches to nomhl,te dif',<>rent 
persons in re1::ltion to different f'stablishments or hranche!'; . 
. Clause 42.-lTnder sf-ction 79 of the Mines Ad. nros-e~ltion" for offpn('~ 
under thp Act become time.barred after six months 0.f the rhte of the 
al1e~ed offenr~ or the ri~'e on which the alle~ecl oft'enrf' came to the 
knowledge of the Tnspector. Tn some circumstances whl;>re the manaV'ers 
and a~nt~ employed in Government owned mines were prosecuteJ, the 
cases were dischar.~rl because the Gover!1ment conce"npr'l did not accord 
sanction for their prosecuti0.n within six months of the date of the alleged 
~ence. No further netion could be taken in such cases.. The amenll-
ment propoge/t in sub-clausE' (n) is intended to (wprrnme thf> dlfflcultv 
experienced in such cnses. Tn a ('ose where thp Court of inauirv has 
been ",poointed hv the Central Government under seetinn 24 of the Act. 
a complaint for takin~ cogf\;'.:ance of the offence has to be made within 
six months after the date of publication of t~ report of the Court of 
inquiry by the C@ntral Government. This neriod of Rix months i9 
proposer'! to be pnhanC'ed to one vear unner "mb-cll'mse (b). 
Clauses 43 and 44.-The amendment~ propMen in these clauses have 
become necessary in view of the coming into force of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure. 1973 (2 of 1974). 
Cl4use 45.-The amendment m'oposed in this clause is consequential 
to the amendment propo~erl in clAtlR'e 10. 
C"lause 46.-Scction 83 (1) of the Mines Act doec; not empower the 
Central Government to grant exemption from. the re£!Ulations, rules or 
bye-laws mane ttneler the Mines Act. One of the amendments in sub. 

Q'I 
clause (a) seeks to confer this power. Similar amendment is being 
made in sub-section (2) in so far as bye-laws are concerned [vide sub-
clause ,(b) ]', The other amendment in sub-clause (a) is consequential. 
to the amendment proposed in clauses 22 and 26. 
Clause 47.-The amendment proposed in this clause gives statutory 
recognition to the authority of Chief Inspector to reverse or modify, for 
valid reasons, any order that may be passed by him under the Mines Act, 
regulations, rules or bye-laws. 
Clause 48.-This clause seeks to insert two new sections 85B and 
S5C in the Act. The new section 85B provides for the returns, notices, 
etc., to be signe:d by the owner, agent or manager and the new section 
85C is intended to clarify the legal position that the cost of any pro-
tective equipment, etc., statutorily to be provided to the workers should 
be borne by the employer. 
Clause 49.-This clause provides that trom the date of eonstitution 
of the Committee, the present Mining Boards shall stand dissolved and 
their work transferred to the Committee. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDuM 
New section 12 sub$tituted by "clause 10 of the Bill oseeks to provide for 
the constitution of a Committee. This Committee will replace the eJdBt.. 
ing Mining Boards for diJferent States or graups of States as well as 
Committees appointed under section 13. The Committee will have a small 
staff. The Committee will have also to pay travelling allowance and 
daily allowance to non·official members for attending the meetings of 
the Committee as per Government rules. The setting up of the Commit-
tee is expected to invoJve an annual expenditure of about Rs. 50,000 88 
indicated below:-
Pay of establishment 
Allowance, honoraria 
Contingencies 
Total :-
Rs. 20,000 
RB. 25,000 
R$. 5,000 
Rs. 50,000 
A non-recurring expenditure of Rs. 10,000 is expected to be incurred in 
the fIrst year in the setting llP of office and purchase of f~ture, etc. 
2. Clause 2 (iv) of the Bill seeks to amend section 2 (1) (h) of the Act 
to clarify the application Clf the Act to persons employed in mines. Clause 
29 of the Bill seeks to amend section 52 to provide for grant of leave to un-
dergraund workers at the rate of one day for every 15 days of work as 
against one day for every 16 days of work at present. Clause 29 also makes 
provision for granting proportionate leave in the case of persons who 
cease to continue in service for one reason or the other during· the course 
of the calendar year b~fore they put in required number of attendenee. 
Clause 31 (eo) provides for increase in the maximum pennissible rate of 
rescue cess from six pies per ton to 25 paise per tonne on the coke and coal 
despatched from mine. New section SSC inserted by clause 48 seeks to 
clarify that the cost of any protective equipment, etc., statutorily to be 
provided to the workers should be borne by the employer. The amend-
ments proposed may involve increased expenditure in so far as they 
concern the Central Government undertakings. At this sta'ge, it is not 
possible to make an accurate estimate of the recurring expenditure that 
would be involved in so far as Central Government undertakings are 
concerned. No non-recurring expenditure is arrticipated. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 3O.-Sub-c1ause (a) seeks to amend clause (j) of section 57 
'J 
consequent on the prohibItion of employment of persons below eighteen 
years of age in place of existing provision prohibiting adolescents. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to amend clause (q) of that section to empower 
the Central Government to make regulations for regulating tie use of 
machinery in mines and for providing for the safety of persons employed 
on or near such machinery and on haulage roads. 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to amend clause (u) of that section to enable 
the Central Government to make regulations for requiring owners, agents 
and managers of mines to have well-defined boundary for every mine. 
SUb-clause (d) seeks to amend clause (v) of t11at section ~ enable 
the Central Gove~ent to make regulations for evolving standin, 
procedures to deal e1fectively with any emergency situation caused by 
,accident'S Or accidental explosions or ignitions. 
Sub-claUle (e) seeks to amend clause (x) of that section consequent 
on the introduction Of 'metric system'. 
Clause 31.-Sub-clause (a) seeks to substitute clause (a) of section 
58 of the Act to enable the Central Government to make rules for pro-
viding the term of office and other conditions of service of, and the 
manner of iilling vacancies among, the members of a Committee and 
ior regulating the procedure to be followed by a Committee for transact-
ing its business. 
Sub-clause (b) seek!; to amend clause (c) of section 58 of the Act 
enabling the Central Government to recover the expenses in connection 
with a Court of inquiry from the manager, owner or agent of the mine 
concerned in the same mann~r as an arrear of land revenue. 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to insert a new clause (cc) in that section to 
enable the Central Government to make rules for providing for inspec-
tion of mines to be carried out bya technical expert (not less than an 
overman in status) on behalf of persons employed therein, the frequency 
at which and the manner in which such inspections are to be carried 
out and the manner in which reports of such inspections are to be made. 
Sub-clause (e) seeks to amend clause (u) of section 58 to increaSe the 
rate of the levy and collection of duty of excise from six pies per ton 
to twenty-five paise per tonne on all coke and coal despatched from 
mines. This will empower the Central Government to make rules levy-
ing the duty of excise not exceeding twenty-five paise per tonne. 
Sub-clause (£) seeks to insert a new clause (vv) in section 58 
empowering the Central Government to make rules for providing for 
\ 

the constitution of safety committees for groups of ..specUied mines or 
for all mines in a specified area, for promoting safety and for laying 
down the composition, manner of formation and functions of safety 
committees. 
The matters with respect to which such regulations and rules may 
be made are matters of detail and .day-to-day workin·g within the scope 
of the general provisions of the Act. Under the. proposed sub-slause (e) 
of clause 31 of the Bill, the maximum rate of duty ot exc.ble bas been 
specified in the Act and the Government can notify a rate Dot exceeding 
the maximum so sp~cified. The delegation of legislative power is there-
fore~ of a n(frmal character. 

1 of 1956. 
• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE MINEs ACT, 1952 
(35 OF 1952) 
• • • • 
2. (1) In this Act, unless ~h~ context otherwise requires,-
(a) ""adolescent" means a person who has completed his fifteenth 
year but has not completed his eighteenth year; 
• • • • • 
(c) "agent", when used in relation to' a mine, means any indi-
vidual, whether appointed as such or not, who acts as the represen-
~ative of the owner in respect of the management, control and 
direction of the mine or of any part thereot and as ~uch superior to 
a manager under this Act; 
• • • • • 
(e) "child" means a person who has not completed his fifteenth 
year; 
• • • • • 
(h) a person is said to be "employed" in a mine who works 
under 'appointment by or with the knowledge of the manager, 
whether for wages or not. in any mining operation, or in cleaning or 
oflfng any part of any machinery used in or about the mine. or in 
any other kind of work whatsoever incidental to, or connected wHit, 
mining operations: 
• • • • • 
'(ii) "managln~ agent" has the meaning assigned to it in the 
Companies Act. 1956; 
(i) "mine" means anv excavation where any operation for thee 
purpose of searching for or obtaintn~ minerals has been or is being 
carried on, and tncludes-
(i) all borings, bore holes and oil wells; 
'(ii) all shafts. in or adjacent to and bel~nging to a mine, 
whether in the course of being sunk or not; 
(iii) all levels and inclined planes in the course of being 
driven; 
(iv) all open cast workings; 
(v) all conveyors or aerial ropeways provided tor the 
bringing into or removal from a mine of minerals or other 
articles or for the removal of refuse therefrom; 
Defini. 
tions. 

(vi) aU adits, levels, planes, machinery, works, railways, 
tramways and sidings, in or adjacent to and belonging to a mine: 
(vii) all workshops situated within the precincts of a mine 
and under the same management and used solely for purposes 
connected with that mfne or a number of mines under the same 
management; 
(viii) aU power stations for 'Supplying electricity solely for 
the purpose of working the mine or a number of mines under 
the same mantlgement; 
(tc) any premises for the time being used for depositing 
refuse from a mine, or in which any operation in r;onnection with 
'Such refuse is bein~ carried on, being premises exclusively 
occupied by tlw!o owner of the mitle; 
(x) unless exempted by the Central Government bv notifi-
cation in the' Official Gazette, any premise!! or part th~reof. in 
or adjacent, to and belonging to a mine. on which any process 
anci1lal",V to the getting, dressing or preparation for sale of 
minerals or of coke i~ being carried on; 
• • • • • 
(;;;) "month" means the period from the first day of any month 
reckoned accordin,~ to the British calendar to the last dRy of the same 
month; 
• • • • • 
(1) ·'owner", when nsed in J'f'lation to t1 mine. TTlt'an'S am" person 
who is the immediAte 'Proprietor or le~see ot' occupier of the mine 
or of any part thereof and in the case of a mine the business whereof 
is being carried on by a . liquidator or receiver, such liquidator or 
receiver and in the C'ase of a mine owned by a company, the business 
whereof is being carried on by a managing agent. such managing 
agent; hut does not include a person who merely re~ives a royalty, 
rent Or fine from the m;ne, .or is mp relv the proprietor of the mine. 
subject to any lease, grant or licence for the workinJ! thereof .. or is 
merely the owner of the soil and not inte,.e~teii in the mineMlls of 
the mine: bllt any contr~ctor foT' the wo,.king of a mine or any part 
thereof shall be subject to this Act in like manner as if hp. were an 
owner, but not so as to exempt the owner from any liahility; 
• • • • • 
(n.) "qualifted medical practitioner" mean'.; a person holding, a 
qualification granted by an authority specified in the Schedule t.o the 
Indian Medical Degrees Act, 1916, or in the Schedule to the Tndian 
Medical Council Act, 1933: 
• • • • • 
(q) "serious bodily iniury" means any injury which involves, 
or in all probability"will involve, the permanent Joss of the use of, 
ar permanent injury to, any limb, or the ,permanent loss Of or injury 
to the sight or heating, Or the ft'acture of any limb or the enforced 
absence of the injured person from work for R period exceeding 
twenty days; 
7 of 1916. 
2'1 of 1933; 

5 of 1898. 
33 
. (r) "week" means the period between mtanight on Saturday 
mght and midnight on the, succeeding Saturday night. 
'" ... ... ... 
::. (1) The provisions of this Act, .except those contained in sections 
7, 8, 9, 44, 45 and 46, shall not apply to-
... '" ... '" 
(b) any mine engaged in the extraction of· kankar, murrum, 
laterite, boulder. gravel, shingle, ordinary sand (excluding moulding 
sand, glass sand and other mineral sands), ordinary clay (excluding 
kaolin, china clay, white clay or fire clay), building stone, road 
metal, earth, fullers earth and lime stone: 
5. (1) 
provided that-
(i) the workings do not extend below superjacent ground; or 
(ii) where it is an open cast working-
(a) the depth of the excavation measured from its 
highest to its lowest point nowhere exceeds six metres; 
(b) the number of persons employed on anyone day 
does not exceed fifty; and 
(c) explosives are not used in connection with the 
excavation. 
... * '" ... * 
... '" '" ... 
(3) The district magistrate may exercise the powers and perform 
the duties of an Inspector subject to the general or special orders of the 
Central Government: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-'SeCtion shall be deemed to empower 
a district magistrate to exercise any of the powers conferred by section 
22 or section 61. 
... ... ... ... ... 
7. (1) ... ~ . '" ... ... 
(2) The Chief Inspector and any Inspector may, if he has reason to 
believe, as a result of any inspection, examination or inquiry under this 
section, that '8n offence under this Act has been or is being committed, 
search any place and take possession of any material or any plan, 
section, reiister or other record appertaining to the mine, and the pro-
visions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, shall, SO far as may be 
applicable, apply to any search or seizure under this Act as they apply 
to any search or 'Seizure made under the authority of a warrant issued 
under section 98 of that Code. 
Act not to 
apply in 
certain 
cases. 
It 
Chid 
Ins_ 
pector 
and 
Inspectors. 
Powers 
of Ins-
pector'S of 
Mines. 

Powers 
ofapecial 
oftleer 
to enter, 
measure, 
etc. 
• 
Secrecy 
oUnfor-
mation 
obtained. 
Certify-
ing 
surgeons. 
8. Any person in ~e serviee of the Government duly authorised in 
tbis behalf by a special order in writing of the Chief Inspector or of an 
Inspector may, for the purpose of surveying, levelling or measuring any 
mine, after giving not less than three days' notice to the manager of such 
mine, enter the mine and may survey, level or measure the mine or any 
part theI:'eof at any time by day or night: 
Provided that, where in the oJ.>inion of the Chief Inspector or of an 
Inspector an emergency· exisq, he may, by order in writing, authorise 
any such person to enter the mine for any of the aforesaid . purposes 
without giving any such ·notice. 
• • • • 
10. (1) All copies of, and extracts from, registers or ·othe.r records 
appertaining to any mine and all other information acquired by the 
Chief InSpector.of an, Inapeetor ;or by. 'IUly.. one assistin8 him, in the course 
of the' inspection ot any mine under this Act or acquired by any person 
authoriAed under section- 8 'in the· exercise of his duties thereunder, shall 
be regarded u confidential and shall not be disclosed to any person or 
authority W\less. the Chief Inspector or the Inspector considers disclosure 
necessary to ensure the health, safety or welfare of 'any person employed 
in the mine or in any other mine adj8r.ent thereto. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to the disclo'3ure of uny 
such ihformati~n (if so required) to-
• • • • 
(b) a Mining Board, Committee, or Court of Inquiry con!ltttu~d 
or appointed under section 12, section 13 or section 24, as the case 
may be; 
.. • • • 
(e) the Director, Incfum Bureau of Mines. 
\. , 
.. • • • 
11. (1) • .. • • • 
(4) The certifying· surgeon shall carry 
prescribed in connection with-
out ,such duties as· may be 
(a) the examination and certification of adolescents Wlder this 
Act; 
• • • • 
(c) the exercise of such medical supervision as may be prescribed 
for any mine or class or description of mines where-
.. .. • • • .. 
(ii) acloleaeenta are or ue to be eIUployed in any work 
which is likely' to cau.e injury to their health. 
.. • • • • 

MINING . .1ikWulB. AND· Co.v:al'lttiiiS 
. ~2. ~l) The ~entral Government may constitute for any part of the Mininr 
terrl~o.rles to WhICh this Act extends, or for 2D¥ group or class of mines, Boards. 
a Mmmg Board consisting of--
. (a) a person in the 'Service of the Government, not being the 
ChIef Insoector or an Inspector, .appointed by the Central Govern-
ment to act as Chairman; 
(0) the Chief Inspector or an Inspector appointed by the Central 
Government; 
(c) a person, not being the Chief Inspector or an Inspector, 
appointed by the Central Government; 
• 
(d) two pe,,:sons nominated by owners of mines or their repre-
sentatives in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(e) two persons to represent the interest of miners, who shall be 
nominated in accordance with the following provisions, narrely,-
(i) if there are one or more registered trade unions having 
in the aggregate as members not leSs than one-quarter of the 
miners, the said persons shall be nominated by such trade union 
or trade unions in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(ii) if sub-clause (i) is not applicable and there are one or 
more registered tradeuniom; having in th,ageregate as members 
not less than one thousand miners, one of the said persons .shall 
be nominated by such trade union or trade unions in such 
manner as may be prescribed and the other by the Central Gov-
ernment; 
(iii) if neither sub-clause (i) nor sub-clause (ii) is appli-
cable, the said persons shaH be nomiDated by.the. Central Gov-
ernment. 
Explanation.-=-In this clause "miner" means a person, employed 
otherwise than in a position of supervision or Ql8Dagement, in any 
of the mines for which the Mining Board is constituted. 
\ (2) The Chairman sh:lll appoint a person to aot as secretary to the 
Board. 
(3)' The Central qovcrnment may give directiohs as to the payment 
of travelling expenses jncurred by thesecretllrY. or any member of any 
such I Mining Board in the performance of his duty as stu!h secretary or 
member. ' oJ: ;'. , 
13, (1) Where under this Act any question relating to a mine is Conunit. 
n!ferred to a Committee, the Committee shall consist of- tees. 
(a) a chairman nominated by the Central Government or by 
'Such officer or authority as the Central Government may authorise 
in this behalf; 
(b) a person nominated by the chairman and qwilified by· .expe-
rience to dispose of the question referred to tbe~mmittee; and 

Powers 
of 
Mining 
Boards. 
, ~. 
b 3 , 
(c) two persons to rE!present the. i!lterests of the person employed 
in the mine of whom one shall be nominated by the owner, agent or 
manager of the mine concerned, and the other shall be nominated by 
the Central Government in consultation with such organisations of 
miners employed. in the mine as may be recognised for the purpose 
by that. Government. 
(2) No Inspector or person employed in or in the management of any 
mine concerned shall serve as chairman or member of a Committee 
appointed under this section. 
(3) Where an owner, agent or manager fails to exercise his power of 
nomination under clause (c) of sub-section (1), the Committee may, not-
withstanding such failure, proceed to inquire into and dispose of the 
matter referred to it. 
(4) The Committee shall hear and record such infonnation as the 
Chief Inspector or the Inspector1 or the owner, agent or manager of the 
mine concerned., .may place before it, and shall intimate its decision to 
the Chief Inspector or the Inspector and to the owner, agent or manager 
of the mine, and shaH report its decision to the Central Government. 
(5) On receiving such report the Central Government shall pass 
orde!,s in conformity therewith unless the Chief Inspector or the owner, 
agent or manager of the mine has lodged an objection to the decision 
of the Committee, in which case the Central Government may proceed 
to review such decision and to pass such orders in the matter as it may 
think fit: 
Provided that if an objection is lodged by the Chief Inspector, notice 
of the same shall be given to the owner, agent or manager of the mine 
before any orders are passed thereon by the Central Government. 
(6) The Central Government may give directions as to the remune-
ration, if any, to be paid to the members of the Committee or any of 
them, and as to the payment of expenses of the inquiry including such 
remuneration. . 
14. (1) Any Mining Board constituted under section 12 and any Com-
mittee constituted under section 13 may exercise such of the powers~f 
an Inspector under thiS Act as it thinks necessary or expedient to exer-
ciSe for the purpose of deciding or reporting upon any matter referred 
to it. 
(2) Every Mining Board constituted under section 12 and every 
Committee appointed undar section 13 shall have the powers of a civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 for the pw-p08e of enforc-
ing the attendance of witnesses and compelling the production of docu-
ments and material objects. 
Recovery 15. The Central Government may direct that the expenses of any 
of ex_ inqujry conducted by a Mining Board constituted under section 12 or 
penses. by a Commfttee appointed under section 13 shall be borne in whole or 
in part by the owner or agent of the mine concerned, and the amount 
so directed to be paid may, on application by the Chief Inspector or an 
Inspector _ to a magistrate having jurisdiction at the place where the 
mine is situated or where such owner or agent is for the time being 
5011908. 

~7 
re~iclent, be recovered by the distress and sale of any movable property 
wIthin the limits of the magistrate's jurisdi.ction belonging to such owner 
or agent: 
Provided that the owner or his agent has not paid the amount within 
six weeks from the date .f receiving the notice from the Central Gov-
ernment or the Chief Inspector of Mines . 
• * * • * 
16. (1) The owner, agent or manager of a mine shall, before the com-
mencement of any mining operation, give to the Chief. Inspector, the 
Director, Indian Bureau of Mines and the district magistrate of the 
district in which the mine is situate, notice in writing in such form and 
containing such particulars relating to the mine ~ may be prescribed . 
• • * • 
17. Save as may be otherwise prescribed every mine shall be under 
one manager who shall have the prescribed qualifications and shall be 
responsible for the control, management, supervision and direction of 
the mine, and the owner or agent of every mine shall appoint himself 
or some other person, having such qualifications, to be such manager. 
18. (1) The owner, agent and manager of every mine shall be res-
pensible that all operations carried on in connection therewith are con-
ducted in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of the regu. 
la tions, rules and bye-laws and of any orders made tl1ereunder. 
(2) In the event of any contravention of any such provisions by any 
person whosoever, the owner, agent and manager of the mine shall each 
be deemed also to be guilty of such contravention unless he proves that 
he had taken all reasonable means, by publishing and to the best of his 
power enforcing those provisions, to prevent such con~ravention. 
(3) It shall not be a defence in any proceedings brought against an 
owner or agent of a. mine under this section that a manager of the mine 
has been appointed in accordance with the prOvisions of this Act. 
• * • '" 
19. (1) '" • • * 
Not..ice to 
be gl\ren 
of mining 
opera_ 
tions. 
Mana-
gers. 
Duties 
and 
responsi-
biliijes 
of owners, 
agents. 
and 
managers. 
Drink. 
(2) All such pOints 'shall be legibly marked 'DRINKING WATER' inisgwater. 
a language understood by a majority of the persons employed in the 
mine and. no such point shall be situated within twenty feet of any 
washing place, uriJial or latrine, unless a shorter dist~ce is approved 
in writing by the Chief Inspector. 
* * • • * 
22. (1) • * • 
(3) If the Chief . Inspector, or an Inspector authorised in this behalf by 
general or special-6rder in writing by the Chief Inspector, is of opinion 
that there is urgelt and unmediate danger to the life or safety of any 
person employed it any mine or part thereof, he may, by order in writing 
containing a statement of the grounds of his opinion, prohibit until the 
danger is removed, the employment in or about the mine or any part 
thereof of any person whose employment is not in his opinion reasonably 
necessary for the purpOse of removing the danger. 
* * • • • 
(6) If the owner, agent or manager of the mine objects to a notice 
sent under sub-section (1) by the ,Chief Inspector or to an order made by 
Powers 
oftns-
peetors 
when 
causes of 
dangel' 
not 
expressly 
provided 
against 
exist or 
when em-
ployment 
is danger-
ous. 

Notice 
to be 
given of 
accident. 
Publica. 
tionof 
reports. 
Extra 
wqes 
.frrr over -
time. 
• 1 
'l!:xemp-
tionfrom. 
provi-
tlkmsre. 
',1l'diDg 
employ. 
ment. 
", Sa 
'"" .. ":"": . ::. ',' . 'J . . .: . .: . ...... " ,. ~ . ". 
th~ .. Chief Ins~~,~I1-der, ~u})P.ection (JAJ ,or,. Ii~~ct~ (~),' ,or' ~ub. 
section (3) or sub-section (4), he may, within twenty days after the 
receipt of the notice containing the reqwisition or of the order or' after 
the date of the decision on appeal, as the case may be, send his objection 
in writing stating the grounds 'thereof to the Central Govern-
ment which shall refer the same to a Committee. 
(7) Every notice under sub-section (1), or order under ~ub-6ection 
(lA), sub..section (2), sub-section (3) or sub-section (4), to which objec-
tion is made under sub-section (6), shall be complied with, pending the 
receipt at the mine of the dec:sion of the Committee: 
• • 'A 
Provided that the Committee may, on the applic,a~ion of the owner, 
agent or manager, suspend the operation of a requisition under sub-
section (1), pending its decision on the objection. 
. . ... ... ... 
23. (1) ... ,III • ... 
.. 
(3) The Central GOvemm~nt may, by ~otification in the' Official 
Gazette, direct that accidents other than those specified. in sub-section 
(1), which cause bodily injury, resulting in the enforced absence from 
work of the person injured for a period exceeding fOJ:'ty-eight hours shall 
be entered in a register in the prescribed form or shall be subject to the 
provisions of sub-section (1). . 
... ... • • 
'. ' ~7. ,T~ Centr~ GOv~ Jtla>'" cause, any, report sU~,mi'tted .,by a 
Cqmmi~e und~ secti9~ 13!,o~.any ~rt ~f e~tracts from a~y report 
submitteQ to it UDder,~,~, and ,~ll,clil.l¥ e.very report,~\lb~itted ' 
by a Court of inquiry under section 24 to be 'published at'such nme 'and 
in such manner as it may think fit. 
* .. ... • • 
33. (1) .. .. .. .. ... 
(2) Where any person employed in a mine is paid on piece-rate basis, 
the Central Government shall, in consultation with the employer con-
cerned and. the representatives of the persons ,employed in the mine, fix 
for the purposes of this section time rates which ,hall, as nearly as 
possible be equivalent to the average rate of ~nas of the persons so 
employed, and the rates so fixed shall be deemed to be the ordinary rate. 
of wages of such persons. 
(3) For the purposes of this section "ordinary rate of wages" means 
the basic wages pl1l8. any' dearness allowance and Compensation in cash 
including ,such compensation, if any, accruing through the free iSSUe of 
foodgrains and other articles as persons employed in a mine may, for 
the time being, be entitled to, but does not include a bonus . 
.. ... .. .. • 
38. (1) In case of an emergency" io.volving serio!Js risk to t~ safety 
of the mine or of periOll$ employed. therein, or in case, of an ac~dent, 
whether actual or apprehended, or in case of any act of God or in case 
,of any urgent work,t(), be done ~ma~hinery, plan~,or equi~men\ ,of the 
mine as the result.of breakdown, of ,such machinery, plant or eqwpment, 
the manager may, subject. to the prOVisions of section' 22 and 1n accord~ 

ance with t~ rules under section 39, permit pen;ons to be employed in 
contravention of section 28, section 30, 'section '31, section 34 or sub-
section (5) of section 36,' on such work as maybe necessary to protect 
the safety of the mine or of the persons employed' therein: 
Provided that, in case of any urgent work to be done to machinery, 
plant or equipment under this section, the manager may take the action 
permitted by this section, although the production of mineral would 
thereby be incidentally affected, but any action so taken shall not exceed 
the limi~s necessary for the purpoSe of avoiding seIious interference 
with the ordinary working of the mine. . 
• • ... • ,. 
3B. Save in respect of adolescents, the Centrdl Government may make. 
rules providing for the exemption to such extent, -in such circumstances 
and subjeci to such conditions as may be Specified, from the provisions 
of sections 28, 30, 31, 34 or 'Sub-section (5) of section 36-
(a) of all or any of the persons employed in a mine, where an 
emergency involving serious risk to the safety of the mine or of the 
persons employed therein is apprchend'.!d; 
... ... • .' ... 
40. (1) No adolescent shall be allowed to work in any part of a mine 
which is below ground unlesr-
(a) he has completed .his sixteenth year; 
(aa) a medical certificate in the prescribed form granted to the 
adolescent by a certifying surgeon certifying that he is fi.t for work 
as an adult is in the custo'dy of, thenfanager of the mine; 
(b) the adolescent carries. while at work, a token giving a 
reference to such certificate; 
, 
(c) the adQlescent has an interval for rest of at least half an 
hoUl' atter every four and a half h~rs, ot continuous work on any 
day. 
(2) NotWithstanding anythi,ng conf.ah?ed in this Act, no adolescent 
whQ has b~ grante4, a c¢ific~te, un~ sub-sec~ion (1) shall be ,emplo-
yed in any mine. ex<:el?t Q~tw~eJ:l the, h~~r;; of 6 A,M. and 6 p;~: 
Provided that the Central Govern.men '. raay, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, vary the hours of empluym.ent of such adolescent in 
respect of any t¢n.e or class bf mines so' however that no :employment 
of any sueg. adoles~nt betWeen the hC?Uf:3 A 10 P.M. and 5 A.M. is per-
mitted thereby. ' , 
41.. (1) A certificate of fitness granted l'r !'enewed fC?r the purposes of 
section 40-
(a) shall be valid only for a per'(J~1 of twelve months from the 
date thereof; '.,,' I ' 
(b) may be subject to speci~d r'l)lHlitions in regard to employ-
m~t geJlerally or the nat,ure of t~ \vol'k in which the adolescent 
may be employed. '. 
Power to 
makcex-
• empting 
rules. 
Employ.,. 
UIllIlt of 
addles-, 
cents.' . 

Elkc;t oC 
certificate 
of fillteS5 
araJltcd to 
lldolc&c:eDtS. 
Power to 
require 
medical 
examina-
tion. 
Working 
hounfor 
adolescenb 
notcerti-
ftedtobe 
fit for, 
work 
as adults 
(2) A certifying surgeon shall revoke a cel'tificate granted or reneweQ 
under section 40, it in his: opinion the holder of it is no longer fit for work 
in the capacity stated therein in a mine,"" 
. (3) Where a certifying surgeon refuses to grant or renew a certificate 
or revokes a certificate, he shall, if so required by the person concerned, 
state his reasons in writing for so doing, 
(4) Where a certificate under section 40 with reference to any adole-
scent is granted or renewed subject to such conditions as are referred 
to in clause (b) of sub-section (1), an adolescent shall not be required 
or allowed to work in any 'mine except in accordance with those 
conditions. 
(5) The adolescent or his parents shall not be liable to pay any part 
of the expenses of any medical examination under section 40 in all cases 
where the application for a medical certificate is accompanied by a docu-
, ment signed by the manager of a mine stating that the adolescent to be 
examined will be emplbyed in the mine if certified to be fit for work 
therein or the application is made by ~he manager of the mine in which 
the adolescent desires to be employed. 
42, An adolescent, who has been granted a certificate of fitness to work 
in a mine as an adult under section 40, and who while actually employed 
in a mine carries a token giving a reference to such certificate, shall, 
subject to the conditions referred to in that section, be deemed to be an 
adult for the purposes of ' this Act. 
43. (1) Where an Inspector is of opinion that any person employed in 
a mine is a child or is an adolescent without a certificate of fitness or is 
an adolescent with a certificate of fitness but no longer fit to w.ork in the 
capacity stated in the certificate he may serve on the mana~er of the 
mine a notice requiring that such person shall be examined by a certify-
ing surgeon and such person shall not, if the Inspector so directs, be 
employed cr permitted to work in any mine until he has been SO examined 
and has been certified that he is an adult or, if an adolescent, he has been 
granted a certificate of fitness, or, as the case may be, a fresh certificate 
of fitness under section 40. 
(2) Every certificate as to the age of a pel'son which has been granted 
in the prescribed manner and any certificate granted by a certifying - , surgeon on a reference under sub-sectIon (1) shall, for the purposes of 
this Act, be conclusive evidence of the matters, stated therein, 
44. (1) No adolescent who has not been granted a medical certificate 
certifying that he is fit for work as an adult shall be 'employed or per-
mitted to be employed above ground in a mine-
(8) for more than four.and-a-half hours in any day, and 
(b) between the hours of 6 P,M. and 6 A.M, 
(2) The period of work ot all such adolescents employed in do mIne 
shall be limited to two shifts which shall not spreadover more than five 
hours each, and there shall be no change of shifts except once in a period 
of tlilrty days and with the previous permission in writing of the Chief 
Inspector. ' 

4.5. (1) No child shall be employed in any mine, nor shall any child 
be allowed to be present in any part of a mine which is below ground or 
in any open cast working in which any mining operation is being carried 
on. 
(2) Alter such date as the Central Government may, by notiftcation 
in the omcial Gazette, appoint in this behalf, no cbtJ4 shall be allowed 
to be present in any part of a mine above groUDd where any operation 
connected with or incidental to any mining operation is being carried on. 
• • • • • 
Employ· 
mentof 
chU4ren. 
48. (1) For every mine there shall be kept in the prescribed fonn and ~ 
place a register of all persons employed in the mine showing in respect ot P8l'ICIIII 
of each such person- empJoJed. 
• • • • • 
(d) in the case of an adolescent, reference to the cert:lftcate of 
fitness granted under section 40; 
• • • • • 
and the relevant entries shall be authenticated by the signature or the 
thumb impression of the person concerned. 
• • • • • 
e. The provisions of this Chapter shall not operate to the prejudice of 
any right to which a person employed in a mine may be entitled under 
any other Jawor under the terms of any award, agreement or contract of 
service: 
Provided that when such award, agreement or contract of !Iel"'V'iee pro-
vides for a longer leave with wages than provided in this Chapter, 8Uch 
person shall be entitled only to such longer leave . 
• 
• • • • • 
AppJlea. 
tion of 
Chapter. 
a. (1) Every person employed in a niine who h~ completed a ealen- Auual 
dar year's service therein shall be allowed, during the subsequent calen- lenewi1h 
dar year, leave with wages, calcu1ated,- ...... 
(G) in the ease of a person employed below ground at the rate of 
one day for every sixteen days of work performed by him, and 
• • .. • • 
E%plG1I4tiOn.-For the purposes of sub-sections (1) and (3), any frac-
tion of leave of half a day or more shall be treated as one full day and 
fraction of less than half a day shall be omitted. 
• • • • • 

.' 
4sa 
ST. 'n1e Central Government may, by notification in the Oftlcial 
Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act for all or any of the 
following purposes, namely:-
• • • • • 
(.1) for prohibiting, restricting or regulating the employment of 
adolescents and women in mines or in any class of mines or on par-
ticular kinds of labour which are attended by danger to the life, 
safety or health of such persons and for limiting the weight of any 
single load that may be carried by . any IUch person; 
• • • • • 
(q) for providing for the safety of persons present on haulaa-
roads and for restricting the use of certain classes of loco1Jlottvea 
underground; 
• • • • • 
(u) for prescribing the plans, and sections and field notes eon-
nected therewith, to be kept by owners, ngents and managers of 
mines and the manner and places in which such plans, sections and 
fleld notes are to be kept for purposes of record and for the submis-
sion of 'eoples thereof to the Chief Inspector; and for requiring the 
maldng of fresh surveys and plans'by them, and in the event of non-
eompliance, tOr hav:fn~ the survey made and plans prepared throu~b 
any other agency and for the recovery of expenseS thereof in the 
same manner as an arrear of land revenue: 
(D) for regulating the procedure on .:the occutTenc~ of accident! 
or accidental explosions or i","Hions in oT .. nbol1t, mines; 
• • • • • 
(z) for prescribing the notice to be given by the owner. altfmt 
or mana~ of a mine befoTe minil'lP.' operations aTe commenced at or 
extended to any point witlrln flftv YWds of Rny railway sul>~ect to 
the provisions of the 'lntHan RaHway!; AM;. i890. or of any pubUc 
roads or other works, as the case may b(,. which aTe maintained by 
the Govemment (IT' anv Jo~~l Rutborltv: . . 
• I~ • • • 
58. The Central Government may. by notification in the Offtclal 
Gazette. make rules eonsfstent with this,Act for all or any of the 
'following purpos~, nameJy~-
'(a) for providing for the appointment of qhairman and mem-
bers- of M"ming BoaT."~fJ, and fo1:' re'r',lAti"t! thE' l'rocedut"P. of ~.leb 
Boards; 
, ~. 
• • I • 
(c) for providin~ In!' thEl! ar1Y'jntm~t of r.m,lrllll of fnqni"Y undE't' 
section 24, for regulating th"... 'DTocMu1'e Rnd T>Owet"~ of lruch CouTts .. 
loT the payment of travelling allowance tf' thp members. and for the 

43 :, I\,. 
recovery of the expenses of such Courts including any other ex.. 
j I . : t!If ., • ., 
~~ CO~~~ith ~Ul.ry from the'~ger, owner or ~t of 
""-'e IJllll,e co ...... -.".~; 
• * * • * 
(k) for 'prescribing the form of the ~·tiJicate of fitness reqUired 
by' sectiqn 40, the conditions subject to which and the circumstances 
in which they may be granted and the circumstances in which· they 
may be revoked; .. .' 
• * • .. • 
('Ii) for providing for the levy and collection of a duty of excise 
(at a rate not exceeding six pies per ton) on coke and coal produced 
in arid despatched. from mines specUied under claUSf: (r) 0.: in any 
group or lncluded under clause (T) in any specified area, the utilisa-
tion of the proceeds thereof for the creation of a central rescue 
station fund for such group or area and the administration of. Such 
funds; , 
(v) for providing for the formation, training, composition and 
duties Of· rescue brigades and. for the terms and conditions of service 
of persons trained in rescue work employed in mines; and generally 
for the conduct of rescue work in mines; and 
· . • * • * 
59. (1) * * * • • 
(4) No regulation 'or rule shall be made unless the draft thereof has 
been referred to every Mining Board constituted in that part of the ter-
Zitories to which this Act extends which is affeCted by the regulation or 
rule, and unless each such Board has had a reasonable opportunity of re-
porting as to the expediency of making the same and as to the suitability 
of its provisions. 
• • • • • 
(7) The regulatiOns and rules made under sections 5'7 and 58 shall be 
laid before Parliament as soon as niJ1y be, after they are made. 
Prior 
public:atioJl 
ofreJUia-
tioas aDd 
rules. 
60. Notwithstanding anything contained m·'-oSub-sections (1). (2) and Power to 
.(4) of section 59, regulations under section 57 may be made without make re-
previQus publication and ,with04t reference to Mining Boards, if the ~JatiOD8 
Cenu'a! Government is satisfied that f~: the .prevention of appreh~d~. =::a:. 
danger or the speedy remedy of conditions .lIkely ~Q cause danger It IS· publica-
Decessary in making· such regulatiOns to dispense With the delay that- tion. 
would result frOn;l such publicat.ion and reference: , -
ProVided that any regulations so made shall not remain in force for 
more than one year from the making thereof. 
61. (1) The owner, agent'oi-manager of a mine may, and shall, if Bye-l ..... 
called upon 'to do so by 'the ChIef· Inspector or InspectO:r; 'frame and sub-' 
mit to the Chief Inspector or Inspector a draft of such fiye-Iaws, not be-
ing inconsistent with this Act or any regulations or rules for the time 
being in force,. for the control an.d ~idance of the persons acting in the 
management' of, or employed in, the mine as such,. owner, agent 0G. 

Penalty 
for l 
double em-
plOJJD8ld 
ofJ'ouat 
perIODI. 
Speclal 
provision 
for COD-
travention 
01 Ol'ders 
under sec-
tion 22-
Special 
provia1on 
for COD-
traventiOn 
of law 
with daD-
J8ZOUI 
result.. 
manag. may deem necessary to prevent accidents 'and provide for the 
ldety, COIlvenienceand discipline Of the personS employed. in the mine.. 
• • • • • 
(3). U within a period of two months from the date on whiCh any draft 
bye-laws or draft amendments are sent by the Chief Inspector or Inspec-
tal" to the owner, agent or manager under the provisions of sub-sec:tion 
(2), the Chief lDspector or InspeCtor and the owner, agent or manager. 
are unable to agree as to the terms of the ,bye-laws to be made UDder sub-
section (1), the Chief Inspector or Inspector shall refer the draft bye-
laws for settlement to the Mining Board or, where there is no Mining 
Board, to such oftlcer or .authority as the Central Government may, by 
general or special order, appoint in this behalf. 
(4) (a) When such draft bye-laws have been agreed. to by the owner, 
agent or manager and the Chief Inspector or Inspector, or, when they 
are UDable to agree, have been settled by the Mining Board or such om-
cer or authority as aforesaid, a copy of the draft bye-laws shall be &eDt 
by the Chief Inspector or Inspector to the Central Government for 
approval. _ 
• • • • • 
85. W.ooever knowingly uses or' attemps to use as a certificate of 
fitness granted to himself under section 40 a certificate granted to aD-
other person under that section, or, having been' granted a certlflcate 
of fitness to himself under that section, knowingly allows it to be used, 
or allows an attempt to use it to be made by another person, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one 
month, or with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, o.r with 
both. • " .i'· ;ltl!;l 
• • • • • 
18. If a child or an adolescent is employed in a mine on any day on 
,which he has already been employed in another mine, his parent or 
guardian or the person who has the custody of such child or adolescent 
or who obtains any direct benefit from his wages shall be puntshable 
with fine which may extend to fifty rupees, unless it appears to the 
court that the child or adolescent was so employed without the CODIeDt 
or connivance of such parent, guardian or person . 
• • • • 
7ZB, Whoever continues to work in a mine in contravention of any 
order issued under sub-sec:tion (lA), sub-section (2) or sub-aect1on (') 
of section 22 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term wblcb 
may extend to two years, and shall also be liable to fine which may _-
tend to five thousand rupees. 
..... 
'J2C. . (l) Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act o.r of 8.D7 
regulation, rule or bye-law or of any order made thereunder other thaD 
an order made under sub-section (lA) or sub-section (2) or eub-Metica 
(3) of section 22, shall be punishable-
(a) if such contravention results in lOBS of life, with imprlaon-
ment which may extend to two years, or with fine which may ... 
tend to five thousand rupees, or with both; or 
I 

.. s 
(b) if, such contravention results in serious bodily injury, with 
imprisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine which 
may extend to three thousand rupees, or with both; or 
(c) if such contravention otherwise causes injury or danger to 
persons employed in the mine or other persons in or about the mine, 
with imprisonment which may .extend to three months, or with 
Ane which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both . 
• • • • • 
'15. No prosecution shall be instituted against any owner, agent or 
manager for any offence under this Act except at the instance of the 
Chief Inspector or of the district magistrate or of an Insoector authorised 
in this behalf by general or special order in writing by the Chief 
Inspector: 
Provided that in respect of an offence committed in the coutse of 
the technical direction and management of a mine, the distri.!t magis· 
trate shall not institute any prosecution against an owner, agent or 
manager without the previous approval of the Chief Inspector. 
'16. Where the owner of a mine is a firm or other association of indi-
viduals, all, or any of the partners or members thereof or where the 
owner of a mine is a company, all or any of the directors thereof or 
where the owner of a mine is a Government or any local authority, all 
or any of the officers or persons authorised by such Government or local 
authority, as the case may be, to manage the affairs of the mine, may 
be prosecuted and punished under th.is Act for any offence for which 
the owner of a mine is punishable: 
Provided that where a firm, association or company has given notice 
in writing to the Chief Inspector that it has nominated,-
(a.) in the case of a firm, any of its partners, 
(b) in the case of an association, any of its members, 
(c) in the case of a company, any of its directors, 
who is tesident in each case in any place to which this Act extends and 
who is in each case either in fact in charge of the management of, or 
holds the largest number of shares in, such finn, association or company. 
to asS'Ume the responsibility of the owner of the mine for the put'pOse& 
of this Act, such partner, member or direct<>r, as the case may be, shaD, 
so long as he continues to so reside and be in charge or hold the largest 
number of shares as aforesaid, be deemed to be the owner of the mine 
for the purposes of this Act unless a notice in writing cancelling his 
nomination or stating that he has ceased to be a partner, member or 
director, as the case may be, is received by the Chief Inspector . 
• • • • • 
'il. No court shall take cognizanc~ of any offence under this Act, 
unless· complaint thereof has been made-
• • • • • 
Prosecu. 
tion of 
owner, 
agent Or 
manager. 
Detenni. 
nation of 
owner in 
.certain 
cases. 
Limita. 
tion of 
prosecu-
UODI. 

Cogniz.· 
ance of 
of!eDees. 
Special 
provision 
reprd-
ine fine. 
Re:fenmc:e 
to MiIline 
Board. or 
Committee 
, in lieu of 
prosecu-
tion in 
certaizl 
cases. 
Power to 
exempt 
from 
operation 
of-.Act. 
. (iii) : in. any case w~ a Court ~f inquiry, ~ been ~'ppointed 
by the Cen~al GQV~t under lM'Ct.ion ~·within ~ mOD~ 
after the r4te of the publication of tpe report ,.referreci', to in sgb.: 
section (4) of. t.pat section, 
whichever is later. 
Ezplanation..-For the purposes of this 'SeCtiOn-
,·,,'-;0,1 
"~I ., 
(4) in the case of a continuing offence, the period. of limitation 
shall. be computed with re~ence to every point of time during 
whiCh. the ojlence continues; . ., " 
(b) wh~ for the performance of any act ,time has been extelld-
ed under this Act, the period of ·limitaUon shall' be computed from 
the expiry of- the extended period. 
80. No court iDferior to that of a presidency magistrate or maptrate 
of t.hefirst clasS shall try any offence under this Act which ia alleged 
to have been committed by any owner, agent or manager of a mine or 
any oftence wb,ich is by this Act made punishable with imprisomneDt. , 
BOA. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 32 of the Code 
of Crimina) Procedure, 1898, it shall be lawful for a presidency JDalia-
trate or a magistrate of the first class to pass a sentence of fine -.ceed-
ing two thousand rupees authorised by thiJ Act on any perJOn convictec:l 
of an o1lence tbereunder. . 
81. (1) If t~ court tryinj any f;:ASe instituted at the instance of the 
Chief Inspector or of the district mBgfstrate orot an Inspector under 
this Act is of opinion that the case is one whic.b. should, in lieu of a 
prosecution t be referred. to a Mining Board or a Committee. it may staY. 
the criminal procee<:liDJpl, :and report the matter to the Central Govern-
ment with a view to such .reference being made •. 
(2) On receipt of a report under sub-section .(1), the Central Gov-
ernment may refer the case to a J4ilUng Board or a Committee, Or mAY. 
direct the court to proceetl with tIH! trial. ,! 
• • • • • 
83. (1) The Central GoverD.JIlent may, by notification in th8 O1!lcial • 
Gazette, exempt either absolutely or subj~t to any spe¢ied conditioDl \ .• 
any local area or any mine or group OJ: cu.ss of mines or any part of, a 
mine or any class of persons frOID the operation of all or any of ~ pr0-
visions of this Act: .' 
Provided that· no local area or mine or group or ,dass of. min. I1bal1 
be exempted from the provisions of section 45 unless it is alio exempted 
from the ope~tion of all the 9ther pro~ODs of this Aet. 
(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order and 
subject to such restrictions as it may think fit to impose, authorise the 
Chief Inspector or any other authority to exempt, subject to any alpeci1ted. 
conditions, any $e or part thereof ~m the operation of any of the 
provisions of the regulations or rules IIJlder thil Ad if the Chief Inspac-
5 of 1898. 

.7 
tor or such authority is of opinion that the conditions in any min. or 
part thereof are such as to render compliance with such provision un-
necessary or impracticable. 
" . 
M. The Central Government may reverse or modify any order pasaed Power to 
under this Act. . alter or 
.. I!".,,; ... 
85. This Act shall also apply to mines belonging to' the Government. 
• • • • • 
reseind 
orders. 
ApplIca-
tion ot 
Act to 
mines be.. 
10n&in8 to 
Govern. 
ment. 

LOK SABRA 
BILL 
further to amend the Mines Act, 1952. 
(Shri Veet'eftdm PatU. 
Miftiatet' Of Labouf' tiM Rehabilitation.) 