‘AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

UL 199g

Bill No. 72 of 1998

_—_——_
THE ABOLITION OF BEGGING BILL, 1998
By
‘Suri Susi Kumar Suinve, M.P.

A

BILL

to provide for abolition of begging and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.

Be itenacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (/) This Act may be called the Abolition of Begging Act, 1998.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2, In this Act unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Central Government;

Short title and
extent.

Definitions.


Abolition of beg-
ging,
Punishment for
forced begging.

Arrest of persons
found begging.

Beggars’ Welfare
Fund.

(७) “beggar” means any person who indulges in begging;
(c) “begging” means —

(i) soliciting or receiving alms or caused to solicit or receive almsi
public place including railways, bus-stops, road sides or any other place
public has access by invoking pity;

(ii) exposing or exhibiting any wound, deformity or disease of selfor
other person or of an animal for the purpose of soliciting or collecting

(iii) allowing one self to the used as an exhibit for the purpose of
or collecting alms.

but does not include—

(i) soliciting or receiving money or food or gifts by performing any an
work or any music or dance or acrobatics or painting work in a public place;

i) any offering or money or food received in connection with any
gious custom or usage obtained in any religion.

(4) “child” means a boy or a girl who has not attained the age of eighteen ye

(९) "children home" means a children home established under Juvenile Jus
Act, 1986;

(0 “court means any court exercising jurisdiction in the area in which the
son accused of begging has been arrest

(6) “receiving centre" means a centre established under this Act, where ai
person arrested on the ground of begging shall be kept till he is rehabilitated;

(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

3. Begging by any person in any manner is hereby abolished

4. Whoever forces or encourages any person, including a child in his care, cust
charge, for begging or whoever uses any person as an exhibit for the purpose of be
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than thn
years and may extend to seven years in case that person collect or solicit alms by forcing}!
or more persons to indulge in begging

5. (1) Any person found begging shall be arrested by the police and betore
every such arrest, the officer-in-charge of the concerned police station shall satisfy himsel
as to the bonafide of the arrested beggar.

(2) Any person, other than a child, arrested, on the ground of begging sh
sent to a Receiving Centre, to be established in every district by the appropriate
ment, wherein such persons shall be provided with facilities for his rehabilitation.

Explanation.— For the purpose this section, faci tation mea
and includes medical care, sustenance and training in agricultural or industrial or othe
pursuits aiming at gainful employment to the beggars.

(3) Any child arrested on the ground of begging shall be sent to a children home

6. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be called the 8
Welfare Fund for the welfare of the beggars.

(2) Every beggar shall be given such amount, as may be necessary, but not
than rupees ten thousand out of the fund constituted under sub-section (/) for
employment.


3

7.(1) The appropriate Government shall formulate such schemes, work out such
including plans for provision of education, and create suitable infrastructure in
district so as to enable beggars who take up suitable jobs for earning their livelihood.

(2) The appropriate Government shall set up destitute homes in every district for
jiding food, shelter and protection to the old, infirm, helpless and destitute persons to
re that they do not indulge in begging.

8. Any person or persons found running organised gangs of beggars shall be liable to
inished with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to ten years or with fine of not
than rupces five lakhs or with both.

9. Any person maims himself or other person for the purpose of soliciting or collecting
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years:

Provided that when the person maimed is a child below fourteen years of age or a
joman or a person above sixty yea of age, the sentence shall not be less than seven years.

10, Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
fence under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.

11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
‘ing out the purposes of the Act.

Formulation of
schemes and
plans for beggars.

Rigorous impri-
sonment for or-
ganised gangs of
beggars.

Punishment for
maiming.

Offence to be
cognizable and
non-bailable.

Power to make
rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Despite all efforts made and welfare measures taken by the Central and the State
Governments, begging continues unabated all over the country, especially in the metropoli-
tan cities and urban centres. It is not the handicapped, deprived and the destitute who are
driven to begging for mere sustenance, but able bodied-persons too take to begging as a
regular occupation. There are organised gangs who exploit innocent children and force them
into begging not for sustenance of these boys and giris but for gathering alms for the gang
leaders and organisers. Quite often these children are maimed before pushing them into
beggary. Running of beggars gangs is a highly represhensible crime and has to be dealt with
the severity it deserves. Special provisions have to be made to Prevent begging on road
crossing which is not only hazardous for those who indulge in such begging, but so for the
road users.

Drives launched by different State Governments and Union Territory Administrations
and anti-begging legislations enacted by various State Legislatures so far have failed to
curb and even contain this menace, which has assumed criminal proportions. As per 1971
Census, the number of beggars in the country was 10 lakhs. Since beggars, by and large,
evade census operations, the number should actually be many times more and by now over
the period of last 20 years the number should have been risen to several crores,

So far no serious and concerted effort seems to have been made to link prevention,
rather abolition, of begging with planned social and welfare programmes. Abolition of
begging has to go alongwith programmes for education, training and rehabilitation of the
children, women, and men found indulging in begging. To root-out the menace of begging
from the country, a national perspective has to be created, by developing an infrastructure
to tackle begging not only by a legal framework but socially by creating an environment of
accommodation and acceptance of beggars in the society, to assure them a life with dignity.

Hence this Bill.

New Dewitt; SUSHIL KUMAR SHINDE
May 18, 1998.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

| 5 of the Bill provides for establishment of "Receiving Centres" by the
fate Government. Clause 6 of the Bill provides for establishment of Beggars’ Welfare
by the Central Government. Clause 7 of the Bill provides for formulation of schemes
creating suitable infrastructure in every district. The Central Government would have to
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India for the establishment of Receiving
itres, Destitute homes and for formulation of schemes and creating suitable infrastructure
respect of Union territories. As far as the establishment of Receiving Centres, Destitute
and formulation of schemes and creating suitable infrastructure in the States are
|, the State Governments will incur expenditure from their respective Consolidated
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
ely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees four hundred and fifty
per annum,

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two crore is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for:
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the deleg:
legislative power is of a normal character,



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

‘© provide for abolition of begging and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.

(Shri Sushil Kumar Shinde, MP)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1052LS—30.06.1998.