5 
37 of 1952. 10 
15 
20 
--
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
~)1 
• 8 HAY 1!8J 
Bill No. 72 of Issi 
.-....- • .7 ~ .... 
'tHE CINE-WORKERS WELFARE FUND BILL, 1981 
A 
BILL 
to provide jor the financing of activities to promote the welfare of 
certain cine-workers. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-second Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Cine-workers Welfare Fund Act, 
1981. 
. {Z) It extends tc the whole of India. 
,(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short 
title, 
extent 
and 
com-
mence-
ment. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Deflnl-
- --(0) "cinematograph film" has the same meaning as in the C'ine- tions. 
matograph Act, 1952; 
(b) "cine-worker" means an individual-
(0 who has been employed, directly or through any con-
tractor or in any other manner, in or in connection with the 
proc\uctio~ of not less than five feature films to work as an 
artiste (including actor, musician or dancer) or to 'do any work, 
skilled, unskilled, manual, sU/?ervisory, technical, artistic or 
otherwise; and 
(ii) whose remuneration with respect to such employment in 
or in connection with the production of each of any five feature 
flliDs, has not exceeded, where such remuneration has been by 
. way of monthly wages, a sum of one thousand rupees per month, 
and where Euch remuneration has been by way of a lump sum, 
a sum of five thousand rupees; ! 

Cine-
workers 
Welfare 
Fund. 
Appli-
cation 
of Fund. 
Ad-
visory 
Com-
mittees. 
\)\:~:) " 2 
(c) "feature film" means a full length cinematograph film pro-
duced wholly or partly in India with a format and a story woven 
arounn a number of characters where the plot is revealed mainly 
through dialogues and not wholly through narration, animation or 
cartoon depiction and does not include an advertisement film; 5 
(d) "F'und" means the Cine-workers Welfare Fund formed 
under section 3; 
(e) "prescribecl." means prescribed by rules made under this 
i\ct; I 
(1) ''Qroducer'' in relation to a feature film, means the person 10 
by whom arrangements necessary for the making of such film 
(including thE!! raising of fin::nce and engaging cine-workers for such 
film-making) are undertaken. 
3. There shall be formen a Fund to be called the Cine-workers Wel-
fare Fund, and there shall be credited thereto- 15 
(a) such amoun'ts as the Central Government may, Rlfter due ap-
propriatioD made by Parliament by law in this behalf, provide from 
out of the proceeds of the duty of excise credited under section 5 of 
'the Cine-workers Welfare Cess Act, 1981, after deducting therefrom 
the cost of collection as determined by the Central Government under 20 
this Ad; .. 
(b) any grtlflts made to the Fund by the Central Governmen~; 
(C') 
i\ct; 
(d) 
any money received as donations for the purposes of this 
any income from investment of the amounts in the Fund. 
4. (1) The Fund shall be applied by the Central Government to meet 
the f' xpenditure incurred in connection with measures and facilities 
which, in tho opinion of that Government, are necessary or expedient to 
promote the welfare of cine-workers; and, in particular,-
25 
(a) to defray the cost of such welfare measures or facilities for the 30 
benefit of cine-workers as may be decided by the Central Government; 
(Ib) to provide assistance in the form of grants or loans to indigent 
cine-workers; 
(c) to sanctiOll any money in aid of any scheme for the welfare of 
the cine-workers which is approved by the Central Government; S~ 
(d) to meet the allowances, if any, of the. memben aI the Advisory 
.. Committees and the Central Advisory Committee con.tituted under 
sections 5 a.r 6 respectively and the salaries and allowances, if any, 
of persons appointed under section 8; • " 
(e) any oth~r expenditu\"e which the Central GOl'ei'Ilnit!nt may 40 
direct to be defrayed from the Fund. 
(2) The Central Government shall have power to decide whether 
any particular expenditure is or is not debitable to the Fund, and its 
decision shall be final. 
5. (1) The Central Govemment may constitute as many Advisory Com- 45 
mitten as it thiaks fit to advise the Central Govel'DDlent on such matters 
arising out of the administration of this Act as may be refened to it by 
that Government. includinJ[ matters reiatin.r to the aD_atioD rtf. the Fund. 

45 of 1860. 
.3 '1s~ 
(8) Eech Advisory Committee shall CCiIOsist of such number of per-
sons as may be appointed to it by the Central GoverD.ment and' the 
mf-mbcrs shall-be chosen in such manner as may be prescribed: • 
Provided that each Advisory Committee shall include an equal num-
5 ber of ' members representing the Government, the cine-workers and the 
producers. 
(3) The Chairmr.n of each Advisory Committee shall be appointed by 
the Central Government. 
(4) The Central Government shall publish in the Official Gazette the 
10 nqmes of the members of every Advisory Committee. 
6. (1) The Central Government may constitute a Central Advisory 
Committee to co-ordinate the work of the Advisory Committees constituted 
under section 5 and to advise the Central Government on any matter aris-
ing out of . the administration of this Art. 
15 (2) The Central Arivisory Committee shall consist of eleven mem-
bet's appointed by the Central Government and the members shall be 
chosen in such manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the Central Arivisory Committee shall 'inclurle at least 
three members representing the Government, the cine-workers and the 
20 producers. 
(3) The Chairman of the Central Advisory Committee shall be 
appointed bv the Central Government. 
(4) The Central Government shall publish in the Official Gazette 
the names of the members of the Central Advisory Committee. 
25 '1. (1) i\n Af1vi"ory Cnmmittpe 01" fl.p {"~,..tral ftdvisorv COn'lmittee ma v. 
at any time and fo .. such neMbd as it thinks fit, co-opt any llerson or persons 
to the Advisory Committee. 
(2) A person cc-opterl und<'r sub-sertion (1) ~hall exercise all the 
powers and functions of a member under this Art but shall not he 
30 entitled to vote. 
(3) An Advisory Committee or the Central Advisorv Committee 
may. if it considers it necessary or expedient so to do, invite any person 
to attend its meeting and when surh person flttends anv meeting, he 
shall not be en.titlerl t(' vote thereat. 
35 8. (1) The Central nov.-rnment mav anpoin t a~ mal1V Wf"lfAre Com-
mi".ion~r"l. W .. lfar .. Admin,"tplltop'I Jnsnpctl\r'l and '1urh otJ,el' om .... rs and 
staff as it thinks necessary for the purposes or this Ad and the Cine-
Wo.-kers We!fare Cess Act, 1981. 
(2) TIt .. CentrRI Government may. hv ~eneral o· "me .. ial opder. dired a 
40 Welfare Commi~'oner to "ppoint such staff as is .. I)nside .... d np~es~ary for 
the purposes of this Ad and the Cine-Workers Welfat'e Cess Act, 1981. 
'(3) 'Every person aopoin~d under this section sftaU,be deemed to 
be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal 
Code. i 
45 (4) Any Welfare Commissioner may,-
(0) 'with' such assistl'ln('e, if anv. a~ he mav think fl.t. enter at any 
~asonable time. anv u1ace which he consirters it nel"essarv to e'ltp.r 
for·'CAt'M'inQ out the purposPR of this Act and the Cine-workers WE!l-
faTe Ces~' Act, 1981; 
Central 
Advisory 
Com-
mittee. 
Power 
to 
co-opt, 
etc. 
Appoint_ 
ment of 
Welfare 
Com-
mis-
sioners, 
etc., 
and 
their 
powers. 

\\~,{\ ;& 
Annual 
report 
of 
acti-
vities 
financed 
under 
the Act. 
Power 
to call 
for 
intorma- .J 
tion. 
Power 
to 
make 
rules. 
(b) do within such place anything necessary for the proper dis-
charge of his duties; and 
(c) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed. 
9. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, after the end of 
each financial year, cause to be published in the Official Gazette, a report 5 
giving an account of the activities financed under this Act during tht!! 
financial year, together with a statement of acc<YUIlts. 
1>0. The Central Government may require a producer to furnish, for 
the purposes of this Act, such statistical and other information in such 
form and within such period as may be prescribed. 10 
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Offioial 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power. such rules may provide for-
(a) the manner in which the Fund may be applied for the [5 
measures and facilities specified in su~section (1) of section 4; 
(b) the conditions governing the grant of any loan under clause 
(b) of sub-section (1) of section 4; 
(c) the composition of the Advisory Committees and the Cen-
tral Advisory Committee constituted under sections 5 and 6 respec- lZO 
tively, the manner in which the members thereof shall be chosen, 
the term of office of such members, the allowances, if any, payable 
to them, and the manner in which the Advisory Committees and the 
Central Advisory Committee shall cond\lct their business; 
(d) thE:' recruitment, conditions of service and the duties of all lZ5 
persons appointed under section 8; I 
(e) the powers that may be exercised by a Welfare Commis-
sioner, a Welfare Administrator and an Inspector appointec1 under 
section 8; 
. (f) the furnishing to the Central Government by a producer of 30 
!iluch statistical and other information as may be required to be ~ 
furnished under section 10; I 
(g) the fonn in which and the period within which the statisti-
cal and other information are to be furnished under clause (I>; 
(h) any other matter which has to be, or may be, pre,scribed 35 
bv rules under this Act. 
(3) In making any rule under clause (f) or clause '(q) of sub-section 
-(2), the Central Government may direct that a breach thereot shall be 
punishable with fine which mav extend to two thou.qand rupees, 
(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 40 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
se~"fon" for Ii total period of thirty days which mav be comprised in one 
session or in two ('r more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session immediately followinll the session or the successive sessions 
aforeMid. both Houses aJn'ee in maldnll any modification in the rule or 45 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in sueh modified form or be of no effect, as 
the case mav be; S6, however, that anv such modification or annulment 
shaH be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
undfl'l" that rul" '1 '-... --',--, ~ ~ 

~I,.b 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Welfllre measur€'s' to· meet the needs of indigent cine-artistes are not 
av'tdla:ble. Cine-artistes, like artistes in other performing arts, wither 
owing to changes in styles and trends and due to ageing. There are C88eS 
where artistes who have won great fame and recognition for their 
creative talents have fallen into utter poverty and distress. In order to 
provide assistance in cases of extreme hardsl,ip and for taking up 
related welfare measures for the persons employed in the film industry, 
it is proposed to establish a Cine-workers Welfare Fund. The duty of 
excise levied on feature films under the provisions of the Cine-workers 
Vlelf,re Ces.9 Bill, 1001. after deducting the cost of co11eclion, would be 
credited to the proposed Fund Provision has also been made in th~ 
Bill for the making of grants to the Fund by the Central Government and 
for the receipt of donations to the Fund. 
2. The Fund is intended to provide assistance to Cine-workers in need 
and to take up welfare schemes for the benefit of such workers. The 
purposes for which money from the Fund can be spent, have been men-
tioned in claWle 4: of the Bill. It is proposed to administer the Fund in 
consultation. with Advisory Committees which will be set up in the 
principal film production centres. Power is being taken by the Central 
Government to set up a Central Advisory Committee to co-ordinate the 
activities of the State Advisory Committees to ensure their effective 
functioning. 
:1. The Bill is intended to achieve the above objects. 
N E'.\' DELHI; 
The 30th April, 1981. VASA NT SATHE. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. ~/3/74-FPC Vol. IV, dated the 30th April, 1981 
from Shri Vasant Sathe, Minister of Informa.tion and Broadcasting to the 
Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been infonned of the subject-matter of the 
Cine-workers Welfare Fund Bill, 1981 here"v recommends under article 
117 (3) of the Constitution, the consideration by Lok Sabha of the said 
Bill. 
.• . G 

~~t\ 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Under clause 3. of the Bill, an amount equivalent to the ~ of 
the duty of excise collected under the Cine-workers Welfa1le Cess Bill, 
19fH (reriuced by the cost of collectiOIl) shall, after due approprJatiC'n 
made by Parliament by law, be Cl'edited to a Fund., to be called the 
"Cine-workers Welfare Fund". 
2. Clause 4 of the Bill specifies the purposes for which the money 
from the Cine-workers Welfare Fund can be spent. Clause 5 provides for 
the constitution of Advisory Committees, clause 6 provides for the consti-
tution of a Central Advisory Committee to co-ordinate the work of the 
Advisory Committees and clause 8 provides for the appointment of 
Welfare Commissioners, Welfare Administrators, Inspectorlc; and such 
other officers and stf.ff for the purposes of this Bill and the Cine-workers 
Welfare Cess Bill, 1981. Allowances have to be paid to the members of 
the Advisory Committees and the Central Advisory Committee, including 
co-opted members and special invitees and salaries and allowances have 
to be paid to the Welfare Commissioners, Welfare Administrators, lns-
pectors and other officers ~nd staff appointed under clause '8. It is 
estimated that the expenditure is not likely to exceed Rs. 1'.25 lills per 
annum, being approximately 16 per cent. of the total anticipated cess 
which has been estimated to be of the oTder of Rs. 7:5 lakhs. 
3. The Bill doef; not involve any other expenditure whether of a 
recurring or non-recurring nature. 
6 

MEMORANDuM R£GARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
L 
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying ou.t the provisions of the proposed legislation. The 
matters in respect of which such rules may be made are specified. in that 
clause. They, inter alia, relate to the manner in which the Fund may be 
applied for the meaS'Ures and facilities specified. in clause 4 of the Bill, 
the conditions goventing the grant" of any loan from the Fund, the 
compo:>ition of the Advisory Committees and the Central Advisory Com-
mittee constituted under the provisions of the Bill, the tenn of office of 
the members of such Committees, the recruitment, conditions of service 
and the duties of a Welfare Commissioner, Welfare Administrator and 
Inspectors appointed under the provisions of the legislation and certain 
other matters. The matters with respect to which rules may be made 
are matters of procedure or detail. 
2. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 
,: 

r-, ~. 
~. 7. tOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the financing of activities to promote the welfare of certain 
cine-workers 
(ShTi Vasant Sathe, Minister of Information and Broadcasting) 
) 
• 