BUI No. 72 of 1960 
THE EMPLOYEES' PROVIDENT FUNDS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 9111 SEPTEMBER, 1960) 

19 of 195.3. 
8111 No. 12 of 1"0 
THE EMPLOYEES' PROVIDENT FUNDS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1960 
(As INTItOBVCI'AUN LOK SABHA~ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Employees' Providem Funds Act, 1952. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) 'ntis Act may be cal1ed the Employees' Providel'lt Funds Short titJI 
5 (AmEndment) Act, 1960. and com-mencemeQt. 
10 
(2) It shall come into force- on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In section 1 of the Emp!oy,ees' Pr-oviG€nt Fund~ Act, 1952 AmendmeQt 
(hereinafter referred to as. the principal Act) ,_ of aectioQ 1. 
(i) in sub .. section (3), for the word "fifty", wherever it 
occurs, the word "twenty" .hIll be substituted; 
(ii) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(5) An e.tablishment to which this Act applies shall 
IS continue to be governed by this Act notwithstanding that 
the nurnbw- of perSQllS employed therein at any time falls 
below twenty: 
Provi~d. that where fOf. acontinuaus period of not less 
than ane year the number of persons employed therein has 
20 been less,.than fifteen, the employer in relation to such estab-
lishmm.t m~y cea$e to give effect to the provisions of this 
Act and any ~IUe framed thereu.nde.r, with effect from 

lmertion of 
uew acc:tion 
aA. 
Bstablish-
mentto 
include all 
departments 
and bran-
ches. 
Amendmt>nt 
.r section 6. 
s 
the beginning of the month following the expiry of the said 
period of one year, but he shall, within one month of the 
date. of such cessation, intimate, by registered post, the fact 
thereof to such authority as may be specified by the appro-
priate Government in this behalf.... ~ 
3. After section 2 of the principal Act, the· following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"2A. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that 
where an establishment consists of different de.partments or has 
branches, whether situate in the same place or in different places, It<> 
all such departments or branches shall be· treated as parts of 
the same establishment.". 
4. In section 6 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1), for t~e words "and the dearness 
allowance" and for the words "and dearness allowance", the IS 
words and brackets "dearness allowance and retaining allow-
ance (if any)" shall be substituted; 
(ii) the existing Explanation shall be re-numbered as 
Explanation 1, and after Explanation 1 as so re-numbered, the 
following ExpZanation shall be inserted, namely: - 20 
• ExplanQ.tion 2.-For the purposes of this sub-section, 
"retaining allowance" means an allowance payable for the 
time being to an employee of any factory or other establish-
ment during any period in which the establishment is not . 
working, for retaining his services'. 25 
Amendment 5. In section 16 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the fol-
efleCtioQ 16. lQwing sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
"(1) This Act shall not apply-
(a) to any establishment Ifegistered under the Co-ope-
rative Societies Act, 1912, or under any other law for the 30 ~ of 19~O. 
time being in force in any State relating to co-operative 
societies, employing less than fifty persons and working 
without the aid of power; or 
(b) to any other establishment employing fifty or more 
persons or twenty or more, but less than fifty, persons until 35 
the expiry of three years in the case of the former and five 
years in the case of the latter, from the date on which the 
establishment is, or has been, set up. 

3 
Erplanation.-For the removal of doubts, it is hereby dee-
lared that an establishment shall not be deemed to be newly set 
up merely by reason of a .change in its location.". 
6. In section 19A of the principal Act.- Amendment gf aec:tioa 
5 (i) clause (ia) shall be re-numbered as clause (Ii) thereof; 
(ii) after clause (ii) as so Ire-numbered, for the e,xisting 
clauses (ii) and (iii), the following clauses shall be substituted, 
namely:-
•• (iii) the number of p~rsons employed in an estaOllsn-
10 ment; or 
(iv) the number of years which have elapsed from the 
date on which an establishment has been set up; or"; 
(iii) the existing clause (iv) shall be re-numbered as 
clause (v). 
19A. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Employees' Provident Funds Act, 1952, which initially ap-
plied. to ~lix industries at present applies to 43 industries and estab-
lishments and provides the benefit of compulsory contributory pro-
vident fund to over 26 lakhs of wOt"k~rs in su-eh industries and estab-
lishments. But as the Act is appUcableonly to establishments em-
ploying 50 or more persons, it has not been possible to mend its 
benefit to employees in establishments employing less than 50 per-
sons. There has been a persistent demand for reduction of the 
coverage limit to 20 or more persons. It is accordingly proposed to 
reduce the limit of 50 or more to 20 or more pe!rSOhS. This will con-
siderably widen the scope of the Aet. 
2. In order to ensure that the establishments once covered under 
the Act do not go out of the purview of the Act merely due to a 
small reductiop in their strength, provision is being made that an 
establishment once covered under the Act will continue to be so 
covered despite a reduction in the employment strength, except 
where the employment strength is reduced to less than 15 and 
remains so far a period of one year continuously. 
3. It has also been represented that the "retaining allowance" 
paid to employees in sugar factories durin~ off season is in the 
nature of wages. It is proposed to make this allowance liable for 
provident fund contributions in the case of sugar factories and other 
seasonal establishments to which this Act applies. 
4. It is also proposed to exclude registered co-operative societies 
employing less than 50 persons and working without the aid of 
power. 
5. It is further proposed to grant initial exemption to small-scale 
and cottage industries employing between 20 and 50 persons for a 
period of five years. 
The Bill seeks to achieve these objects. 
.. - , - Gulzarilal Nanda . 
NEW DI:Lm; 
The 3rd September, 1960. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
This am seeks to brittg establiabinertts em:ployl~.10 M'mbre 
persons within the purview of the Empl<>1ets' Provident Fund~ Act, 
1952, and the Scheme framed thereunder. The Act and the Scheme 
are already applicable to establishments belonging to Government 
and employing 50 or more persons. Such establishments employing 
20 or l'nore pet8{ms, if any, will now come within th.e purview'of ·the 
Act. Most of the establishments belonging to the Centr.al Govern-
ment have proviMllt funds of their own. Therefon!,th~ il no like-
lihbOd of any additional expenditure beingiftetHTed ·from the Con-
solidated Fund of India in respect of <»ntrib\ttidll8'to ·theprovi<.lent 
fund. But some expenditure would be involved from the Consolida-
ted Fund of India by way of administrative and in-sp~tioh ~harges, 
which are 3 per cent. and 3/4 per cent. respectively, of the tdt~l of 
employers' ahd employees' coritributions. It is hot, 'httw~, pdssi-
ble to estimate this amount. 

Short title, 
extent and 
application. 
Contri-
butions and 
matters 
which may 
be provid ... d 
for in 
Schemes. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE EMPLOYEES' PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1952 
(No. 19 OF 1952) 
• • • • 
1. • • • • • 
(3) Subject to the provisions contained in section 16, it applies-
(a) to every establishment which is a factory engaged in 
any industry specified in Schedule I and in which fifty or more 
persons are employed, and-
(b) to any other establishment employing fifty or more 
persons or class of such establishments which the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notjfication in the Official Gazette., specify in 
this behalf: 
Provided that the Central Government may, after giving not less 
than two months' notice of its intention so to do, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, apply the provisions of this Act to any establish-
ment employinr, such number _of persons less than fifty as may be 
specified in the notification. 
• • • • • 
6. (1) The contribution which shall be paid by the employer to 
the Fund shaH be six and a quarter per cent. of the basic wages and 
the dearness allowance for the time being payable to each of the 
employees, and the employees' contribution shall be equal to the 
contribution payable by the employer in respect of him and may, if 
any employee so desires and if the Scheme makes provision therefor, 
be an amount not exceeding eight and one-third per cent. of his 
basic wages and dearness allowance: 
Provided that where the amount of any contribution payable 
under this Act involves a fraction of a rupee, the Scheme may pro-
vide for the rounding off of such fraction to the nearest rupee, half 
of a rupee or :quarter of a rupee. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, dearness 
allowance shall be deemed to include also the cash value of any food 
concession allowed to the employee. 
• • • • • 
i.. 6 

16. (1) This Act shall not apply to any est8lblishment until the Act ~ot to 
expiry of three years from the date on which the establishment is r~ant to 
or has been set up. establish-• , menta. 
Explanation.-For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared 
that an establishment shall not be deemed to be newly set up merely 
by reason of a change in its location. 
(2) 1£ the Central Government is of opinion that having regard 
to the financial position of any class of establishments or other cir-
cumstances of the case, it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, 
by notification in the Official Ga.zette, and subject to such conditions 
as may be specified in the notification, exempt that class of estab-
lishments from the operation of this Act for such period as may be 
speCified in the notification . 
• • • • • 
19A. 
• • • • 
(ii) whether fifty or more persons are employed in an estab-
lishment; or 
(iii) whether three years haVE elapsed frem the establish-
ment of an establishment; or 
• • • • • 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties . 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Employees' Provident Funds Act, 1952 
(Shri Gulzarilal Nanda, 
Mmisler of Labour and Employment) 