THE BANKING REGULATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
A
BILL
further to amend the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and to make consequential amendments
in certain other enactments.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Act, 2005.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be
construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 72 of 2005
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(a) “approved securities” means the securities issued by the Central
Government or any State Government or such other securities as may be specified
by the Reserve Bank from time to time;’.
3. In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1),—
(i) for clause ( ii), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(ii) that notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act,1956,
the capital of such banking company consists of—
(a) ordinary or equity shares, and
(b) preference shares issued in accordance with the guidelines
framed by the Reserve Bank specifying the class of, and the terms and
conditions subject to which, the preference shares may be issued:
Provided that no holder of the preference share issued by the company
shall be entitled to exercise the voting right specified in clause ( b) of sub-
section ( 2) of section 87 of the Companies Act, 1956.”;
(ii) the proviso shall be omitted;
(iii) sub-section ( 2) shall be omitted.
4. After section 12A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘12B. (1) No person (hereinafter referred to as “the applicant”) shall, except
with the previous approval of the Reserve Bank, on an application being made,
acquire or agree to acquire, directly or indirectly, by himself or acting in concert with
any other person, shares of a banking company or voting rights therein, which
acquisition taken together with shares and voting rights, if any, held by him or his
relative or associate enterprise or person acting in concert with him, makes the
applicant to hold five per cent. or more of the paid-up share capital of such banking
company or entitles him to exercise five per cent. or more of the voting rights in
such banking company.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(a) “relative” shall have the meaning as assigned to it in section 6 of the
Companies Act, 1956;
(b) “associate enterprise” includes an enterprise which,—
(i) is a holding company or a subsidiary company or a joint venture
of the applicant; or
(ii) controls the composition of the Board of directors or other
body governing the applicant; or
(iii) exercises, in the opinion of the Reserve Bank, significant
influence on the applicant in taking financial or policy decisions; or
(iv) is able to obtain economic benefits from the activities of the
applicant.
(c) persons shall be deemed to be “acting in concert’’ who, for a common
objective or purpose of acquisition of shares or voting rights in excess of the
percentage mentioned in this sub-section, pursuant to an agreement or
10  of  1949.Amendment
of section 5.
Amendment
of section 12.
1 of 1956.
1 of 1956.
Insertion of
new section
12B.
Regulation of
acquisition of
shares or
voting rights.
1 of 1956.

3
understanding (formal or informal), directly or indirectly co-operate by acquiring
or agreeing to acquire shares or voting rights in the banking company.
(2) An approval under sub-section (1) may be granted by the Reserve Bank if it
is satisfied that —
(a) in the public interest; or
(b) in the interest of banking policy; or
(c) to prevent the affairs of any banking company being conducted in a
manner detrimental or prejudicial to the interests of the banking company; or
(d) in view of the emerging trends in banking and international best
practices; or
(e) in the interest of the banking and financial system in India,
the applicant is a fit and proper person to acquire shares or voting rights:
Provided that the Reserve Bank may call for such information from the applicant
as it may deem necessary for considering the application referred to in sub-section (1):
Provided further that the Reserve Bank may specify different criteria for
acquisition of shares or voting rights in different percentages.
(3) Where the acquisition is by way of transfer of shares of a banking company
and the Reserve Bank is satisfied that such transfer should not be permitted, it may, by
order, direct that no such share shall be transferred to the proposed transferee and may
further direct the banking company not to give effect to the transfer of shares.
(4) The approval for acquisition of shares may be subject to such conditions as
the Reserve Bank may deem fit to impose, including a condition that any further
acquisition of shares shall require prior approval of the Reserve Bank and that the
applicant continues to be a fit and proper person to hold the shares or voting rights.
(5) Before issuing or allotting any share to any person or registering the transfer
of shares in the name of any person, the banking company shall ensure that the
requirements of sub-section ( 1) are complied with by that person and where the
acquisition is with the approval of the Reserve Bank, the banking company shall
further ensure that the conditions imposed under sub-section ( 4), if any, of such
approval are fulfilled.
(6) Every application made under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been
granted, unless before the expiry of a period of ninety days from the date on which the
application was received by the Reserve Bank, it communicates to the applicant that
the approval applied for has not been granted:
Provided that in computing the period of ninety days, the period taken by the
applicant for furnishing the information called for by the Reserve Bank shall be excluded.
(7) The Reserve Bank may specify the minimum percentage of shares to be
acquired in a banking company if it considers that the purpose for which the shares are
proposed to be acquired by the applicant warrants such minimum shareholding.’.
5.  In section 20 of the principal Act, after sub-section (5), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(6) The Reserve Bank may, subject to such conditions as may be specified,
grant to any banking company exemption from the provisions of this section in regard
to any restriction on entering into any commitment for granting any loan or advance to
any company referred to in sub-clause (iii) of clause (b) of sub-section (1).”.
Amendment
of section 20.

4
6. In section 24 of the principal Act, —
(a) sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be omitted;
(b) for sub-section ( 2A), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(2A) A scheduled bank, in addition to the average daily balance which it
is, or may be, required to maintain under section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India
Act, 1934, and every other banking company, in addition to the cash reserve
which it is required to maintain under section 18, shall maintain in India, assets,
the value of which shall not be less than such percentage not exceeding forty
per cent. of the total of its demand and time liabilities in India as on the last
Friday of the second preceding fortnight as the Reserve Bank may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, specify from time to time and such assets shall be maintained,
in such form and manner, as may be specified in such notification.”;
(c) sub-section ( 2B) shall be omitted.
7. After section 29 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘29A. (1) The Reserve Bank may at any time direct a banking company to disclose
in its financial statements or furnish to it separately, within such time and at such
intervals as may be specified by the Reserve Bank, such statements and information
relating to the business or affairs of any associate enterprise of the banking company
as the Reserve Bank may consider necessary or expedient to obtain for the purpose of
this Act.
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Companies Act,
1956, the Reserve Bank may, at any time, cause an inspection to be made of any
associate enterprise of a banking company and its books and account by one or more
of its officers or employees or other persons.
(3) The provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 35 shall apply mutatis
mutandis to the inspection under this section.
Explanation.—“associate enterprise” in relation to a banking company includes
an enterprise which—
(i) is a holding company or a subsidiary company or a joint venture of the
banking company ; or
(ii) controls the composition of the Board of directors or other body
governing the banking company; or
(iii) exercises, in the opinion of the Reserve Bank, significant influence on
the banking company in taking financial or policy decisions; or
(iv) is able to obtain economic benefits from the activities of the banking
company.’.
8. After Part IIA of the principal Act, the following Part shall be inserted, namely:—
“PART IIAB
S
UPERSESSION OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF BANKING COMPANY
36ACA. (1) Where the Reserve Bank is satisfied that in the public interest or
for preventing the affairs of any banking company being conducted in a manner
detrimental to the interest of the depositors or any banking company or for securing
the proper management of any banking company, it is necessary so to do, the Reserve
Bank may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, by order, supersede the Board of
directors of such banking company for a period not exceeding six months as may be
specified in the order:
Amendment
of section 24.
2 of  1934.
Insertion of
new section
29A.
Power in
respect of
associate
enterprises.
1 of 1956.
Insertion of
new Part
IIAB.
Supersession
of Board of
directors in
certain cases.

5
Provided that the period of supersession of the Board of directors may be extended
from time to time, so, however, that total period shall not exceed twelve months.
(2) The Reserve Bank may, on supersession of the Board of directors of the
banking company under sub-section (1), appoint an Administrator for such period as
it may determine.
(3) The Reserve Bank may issue such directions to the Administrator as it may
deem appropriate and the Administrator shall be bound to follow such directions.
(4) Upon making the order of supersession of the Board of directors of a banking
company, notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956,—
(a) the chairman, managing director and other directors shall, as from the
date of supersession, vacate their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the
provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 or this Act, or any other law for the
time being in force, be exercised and discharged by or on behalf of the Board
of directors of such banking company, or by a resolution passed in general
meeting of such banking company, shall, until the Board of directors of such
banking company is reconstituted, be exercised and discharged by the
Administrator appointed by the Reserve Bank under sub-section (2):
Provided that the power exercised by the Administrator shall be valid
notwithstanding that such power is exercisable by a resolution passed in the general
meeting of such banking company.
(5) The Reserve Bank may constitute a committee of three or more persons who
have experience in law, finance, banking, administration or accountancy to assist the
Administrator in the discharge of his duties.
(6) The committee shall meet at such times and places and observe such rules of
procedure as may be specified by the Reserve Bank.
(7) The salary and allowances to the Administrator and the members of the
committee constituted by the Reserve Bank shall be such as may be specified by the
Reserve Bank and be payable by the concerned banking company.
(8) On and before the expiration of two months before the expiry of the period of
supersession of the Board of directors as specified in the order issued under sub-
section (1), the Administrator of the banking company, shall call the general meeting of
the company to elect new directors and reconstitute its Board of directors.
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law or in any contract, the
memorandum or articles of association, no person shall be entitled to claim any
compensation for the loss or termination of his office.
(10) The Administrator appointed under sub-section ( 2) shall vacate office
immediately after the Board of directors of such banking company has been
reconstituted.”.
9. In section 51 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), before the words, brackets,
figures and letters “sub-sections ( 1B), (1C) and ( 2) of section 30”, the figures and letter
“29A,” shall be inserted.
10. (1) In section 56 of the principal Act, —
(A) in clause (o) relating to the modification of section 22,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) clause (a) shall be omitted;
1 of 1956.
1 of 1956.
Amendment
of section 51.
Amendment
of section 56.

6
(ii) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall apply
to a primary credit society carrying on banking business at the
commencement of the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Act, 2005,
for a period of one year or for such further period not exceeding
three years as the Reserve Bank may, after recording the reasons
in writing for so doing, extend.”;
(b) in sub-section ( 2),—
(i) for the words, “every primary credit society which becomes a
primary co-operative bank after such commencement shall before the
expiry of three months from the date on which it so becomes a primary
co-operative bank” the words, “every primary credit society which had
become a primary co-operative bank at the commencement of the Banking
Regulation (Amendment) Act, 2005, shall before the expiry of three months
from the date on which it had become a primary co-operative bank” shall
be substituted;
(ii) the words, “other than a primary credit society” shall be omitted;
(iii) in the proviso, —
(a) in clause ( ii), for the words “thereafter; or” the word
“thereafter,” shall be substituted;
(b) clause ( iii) shall be omitted;
(B) in clause ( s) relating to the modification of sections 29 and 30, for the
words and figures, “sections 29 and 30” the word and figures, “section 29” shall be
substituted;
(C) after clause (s), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: —
“(sa) for section 30, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“30. (1) Without prejudice to anything contained in any other law
for the time being in force, where the Reserve Bank is satisfied that it is
necessary in the public interest or in the interest of the co-operative
bank or its depositors so to do, it may at any time by order direct that a
special audit of the co-operative bank accounts, for any such
transactions or class of transactions or for such period or periods as
may be specified in the order, shall be conducted and may by the same
or a different order appoint a person duly qualified under any law for the
time being in force to be an auditor of companies to conduct such
special audit, and the auditor shall comply with such directions and
make a report of such audit to the Reserve Bank and forward a copy
thereof to the co-operative bank.
(2) The expenses of, or incidental to, the special audit specified in
the order made by the Reserve Bank shall be borne by the co-operative
bank.
(3) The auditor referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall have such
powers, exercise such functions vested in and discharge the duties and
be subject to the liabilities and penalties imposed on auditors, if any,
appointed by the law establishing, constituting or forming the co-
operative bank.
Audit.

7
(4) In addition to the matters referred to in the order under sub-
section (1) the auditor shall state in his report —
(a) whether or not the information and explanation required
by him have been found to be satisfactory;
(b) whether or not the transactions of the co-operative bank
which came to his notice have been within the powers of the co-
operative bank;
(c) whether or not the returns received from branch offices of
the co-operative bank have been found adequate for the purpose of
his audit;
(d) whether the profit and loss accounts shows a true balance
or profit or loss for the period covered by such account;
(e) any other matter which he considers should be brought to
the notice of the Reserve Bank and the shareholders of the co-
operative bank.”.
11. The enactments specified in the Schedule are hereby amended to the extent and
in the manner mentioned in the third column thereof.
Amendment
of certain
enactments.
Sl. No.
1
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Short title
The State Financial Corporation
Act, 1951 (63 of 1951)
The State Bank of India Act, 1955
(23 of 1955)
The State Bank of India
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 (38
of 1959)
The Warehousing Corporations
Act, 1962 (58 of 1962)
The Regional Rural Banks Act,
1976 (21 of 1976)
The Industrial Finance
Corporation (Transfer of
Undertaking and Repeal) Act,
1993 (23 of 1993)
The Industrial Reconstruction
Bank (Transfer of Undertakings
and Repeal) Act, 1997 (7 of 1997)
The Unit Trust of India (Transfer
of Undertaking and Repeal) Act,
2002 (58 of 2002)
Amendment
In section 7, sub-section (3), the words and
figures “and the Banking Regulation Act, 1949”
shall be omitted.
In section 12, the words and figures “and the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949” shall be omitted.
In section 20, the words and figures “and the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949” shall be omitted.
In section 5, the words and figures “and the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949” shall be omitted.
In section 7, the words and figures “and shall also
be deemed to be approved securities for the
purposes of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949”
shall be omitted.
In section 10, the words and figures “and the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949” shall be omitted.
In section 11, the words and figures “and the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949” shall be omitted.
In section 17, the words and figures “and the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949” shall be omitted.
10 of 1949.
10 of 1949.
10 of 1949.
10 of 1949.
10 of 1949.
10 of 1949.
10 of 1949.
10 of 1949.
THE  SCHEDULE
(See section 11)

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Banking Regulation Act, 1949 has been in force for more than five decades.  It
empowers the Reserve Bank of India (hereinafter referred to as the Reserve Bank) to regulate
and supervise the banking sector.  The banks are now operating in a liberalised environment.
In this scenario, it has become necessary that the banks in India are able to raise capital in
accordance with international best practices.  To ensure that the control of banks is in the
hands of fit and proper persons, persons who propose to acquire 5% or more of the share
capital of a bank should be required to obtain prior approval from the Reserve Bank and the
Reserve Bank should have the necessary power to impose such conditions as it deems
necessary while granting such approval.  It is, therefore, proposed to remove the restriction
on voting rights concurrently with the stipulation of the statutory requirement of prior
approval for acquisition of shares above the specified limit.  The Reserve Bank should also
be able to specify acquisition of a minimum percentage of shares in a banking company if it
considers necessary.
2. It is necessary to confer more operational flexibility on the Reserve Bank in the
conduct of monetary policy.  For this purpose, the Reserve Bank should have the power to
specify Statutory Liquidity Ratio without any floor or ceiling as also to specify any security
as approved security for this purpose.
3. The present restrictions on lending to directors and the companies or firms in which
the directors are interested is posing a difficulty to banks in appointing competent indepen-
dent directors.  It is, therefore, necessary to empower the Reserve Bank to grant exemption to
banking companies in appropriate cases.
4. Taking advantage of the liberalised environment, banks are engaging in multifarious
activities through the medium of associate enterprises.  The Reserve Bank as the regulator of
banks should be aware of the financial impact of the business of such enterprises on the
financial position of banking companies.   The Reserve Bank should, therefore, be empow-
ered to call for information and returns from the associate enterprises of banking companies
also and inspect the same, if necessary.
5. The Reserve Bank has the power to remove any director or other officers of a bank
but that power is not sufficient if the entire Board of directors of a bank is functioning in a
manner detrimental to the interests of depositors or the bank itself.  To deal with such a
situation it is necessary that the Reserve Bank has the power to supersede the Board of
directors of a bank and appoint an administrator to manage the bank till alternate arrange-
ments are made.
6. For a sound and healthy banking system, it is necessary to ensure that only the co-
operative societies that have been licensed by the Reserve Bank carry on the business of
banking.  To protect the interest of depositors, the primary co-operative societies should
therefore be given a timeframe within which they have to either stop the business of banking
or fulfil all the requirements specified by the Reserve Bank and obtain a licence to carry on
the business of banking.   The Reserve Bank should have the power to order a special audit
of co-operative banks in public interest for a more effective supervision of co-operative
banks.  The proposed legislation aims to make the regulatory powers of the Reserve Bank
more effective.
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; P. CHIDAMBARAM.
The 6th  May, 2005.
8

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 2 of the Bill proposes to confer power upon the Reserve Bank of India to
specify approved securities.
2. Clause 3 of the Bill proposes to empower the Reserve Bank to issue guidelines to
specify the class of, and the terms and conditions subject to which, the preference shares
may be issued.
3. Clause 4 of the Bill confers power upon the Reserve Bank to specify different
criteria for acquisition of shares or voting rights in different percentages.   This clause
further empowers the Reserve Bank to specify the minimum percentage of shares to be
acquired in a banking company by an applicant.
4. Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Reserve Bank to specify such percentage of
value of assets, which shall be maintained in India by every banking company.
5. The matters in respect of which notification or guidelines issued or specified are all
matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them
in the Bill itself.  The delegation of legislative power is, of a normal character.
9

10
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE BANKING R EGULATION ACT, 1949
(10 OF 1949)
* * * * *
5. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,—
(a) “approved securities” means—
(i) securities in which a trustee may invest money under clause (a), clause
(b), clause (bb), clause (c) or clause (d) of section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act,
1882 ;
(ii) such of the securities authorised by the Central Government under
clause (f) of section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, as may be prescribed;
* * * * *
12. (1) No banking company shall carry on business in India, unless it satisfies the
following conditions, namely:—
* * * * *
(ii) that the capital of the company consists of ordinary shares only or of ordinary
shares or equity shares and such preferential shares as may have been issued prior to
the 1st day of July, 1944:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to any banking
company incorporated before the 15th day of January, 1937.
(2) No person holding shares in a banking company shall, in respect of any shares
held by him, exercise voting rights on poll in excess of ten per cent. of the total voting rights
of all the shareholders of the banking company.
* * * * *
24. (1) After the expiry of two years from the commencement of this Act, every banking
company shall maintain in India in cash, gold or unencumbered approved securities, valued
at a price not exceeding the current market price, an amount which shall not at the close of
business on any day be less than 20 per cent. of the total of its demand and time liabilities in
India.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “unencumbered approved securities”
of a banking company shall include its approved securities lodged with another institution
for an advance or any other credit arrangement to the extent to which such securities have
not been drawn against or availed of.
(2) In computing the amount for the purposes of sub-section (1), the deposit required
under sub-section (2) of section 11 to be made with the Reserve Bank by a banking company
incorporated outside India and any balances maintained in India by a banking company in
current account with the Reserve Bank or the State Bank of India or with any other bank
which may be notified in this behalf by the Central Government, including in the case of a
scheduled bank the balance required under section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act,
1934, to be so maintained, shall be deemed to be cash maintained in India.
(2A) (a) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or in sub-section (2),
after the expiry of two years from the commencement of the Banking Companies (Amendment)
Act, 1962,—
(i) a scheduled bank, in addition to the average daily balance which it is, or may
be, required to maintain under section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, and
(ii) every other banking company, in addition to the cash reserve which it is
required to maintain under section 18, shall maintain in India,—
Interpretation.
2 of 1882.
Regulation
of paid-up
capital,
subscribed
capital and
authorised
capital and
voting rights of
shareholders.
Maintenance
of a percentage
of assets.
2 of 1934.
36 of 1962.
2 of 1934.
2 of 1882.

11
(A) in cash, or
(B) in gold valued at a price not exceeding the current market price or in
unencumbered approved securities valued at a price determined in accordance
with such one or more of, or combination of, the following methods of valuation,
namely, valuation with reference to cost price, market price, book value or
face value, as may be specified by the Reserve Bank from time to time,
an amount which shall not, at the close of business on any day, be less than twenty-five
per cent. or such other percentage not exceeding forty per cent. as the Reserve Bank may,
from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, of the total of its demand
and time liabilities in India, as on the last Friday of the second preceding fortnight.
(b) in computing the amount for the purpose of clause ( a),—
(i) the deposit required under sub-section ( 2) of section 11 to be made with
the Reserve Bank by a banking company incorporated outside India;
(ii) any cash or balances maintained in India by a banking company other
than a scheduled bank with itself or with the Reserve Bank or by way of net balance
in current account in excess of the aggregate of the cash or balance or net balance
required to be maintained under section 18;
(iii) any balances maintained by a scheduled bank with the Reserve Bank in
excess of the balance required to be maintained by it under section 42 of the Reserve
Bank of India Act, 1934;
(iv) the net balance in current accounts maintained in India by a scheduled
bank;
(v) any balances maintained by a Regional Rural Bank in call or fixed deposit
with its Sponsor Bank,
shall be deemed to be cash maintained in India.
Explanation.—For the purpose of clause ( a) of this sub-section, the market price
of an approved security shall be the price as on the date of the issue of the notification
or as on any earlier or later date as may be notified from time to time by the Reserve
Bank in respect of any class or classes of securities.
(2B) The Reserve Bank may, by notification in the Official Gazette, vary the
percentage referred to in sub-section ( 2A) in respect of a Regional Rural Bank.
* * * * *
51. ( 1) Without prejudice to the provisions of the State Bank of India Act, 1955,
or any other enactment, the provisions of sections 10, 13 to 15, 17, 19 to 21A, 23 to
28, 29 [excluding sub-section ( 3)], sub-sections ( 1B), ( 1C) and ( 2) of sections 30, 31,
34, 35, 35A, 36 [excluding clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1)], 45Y to 45ZF, 46 to 48, 50, 52
and 53 shall also apply, so far as may be, to and in relation to the State Bank of India or
any corresponding new bank or a Regional Rural Bank or any subsidiary bank as they
apply to and in relation to banking companies:
Provided that—
(a) nothing contained in clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 10 shall
apply to the Chariman of the State Bank of India or to a managing director of any
subsidiary bank in so far as the said clause precludes him from being a director of,
or holding an office in, any institution approved by the Reserve Bank;
(b) nothing contained in sub-clause ( iii) of clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 20 shall apply to any bank referred to in sub-section ( 1), insofar as the
Application
on of certain
provisions to
the State
Bank of India
and other
notified
banks.
23 of 1955.
2 of 1934.

12
said sub-clause ( iii) of clause ( b) precludes that bank from entering into any
commitment for granting any loan or advance to or on behalf of a company (not
being a Government company) in which not less than forty per cent. of the paid-up
capital is held (whether singly or taken together) by the Central Government or the
Reserve Bank or a corporation owned by that bank; and
(c) nothing contained in section 46 or in section 47A shall apply to,—
(i) an officer of the Central Government or the Reserve Bank, nominated
or appointed as director of the State Bank of India or any corresponding new
bank or a Regional Rural Bank or any subsidiary bank or a banking company;
or
(ii) an officer of the State Bank of India or a corresponding new bank
or a Regional Rural Bank or a subsidiary bank nominated or appointed as
director of any of the said banks (not being the bank of which he is an officer)
or of a banking company.”.
* * * * *
PART  V
A
PPLICATION OF THE ACT TO CO-OPERATIVE BANKS
56. The provisions of this Act, as in force for the time being, shall apply to, or in
relation to, co-operative societies as they apply to, or in relation to, banking companies
subject to the following modifications, namely:—
* * * * *
(o) in section 22,—
(i) for sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2), the following sub-sections shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(1) Save as hereinafter provided, no co-operative society shall
carry on banking business in India unless—
(a) it is a primary credit society, or
(b) it is a co-operative bank and holds a licence issued in
that behalf by the Reserve Bank, subject to such conditions, if
any, as the Reserve Bank may deem fit to impose:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a co-
operative society, not being a primary credit society or a co-operative
bank carrying on banking business at the commencement of the Banking
Laws (Application to Co-operative Societies) Act, 1965, for a period of
one year from such commencement.
(2) Every co-operative society carrying on business as a co-operative bank at the
commencement of the Banking Laws (Application to Co-operative Societies) Act, 1965,
shall before the expiry of three months from such commencement, every co-operative bank
which comes into existence as a result of the division of any other co-operative society
carrying on business as a co-operative bank, or the amalgamation of two or more
co-operative societies carrying on banking business shall, before the expiry of three
months from its so coming into existence, every primary credit society which becomes
a primary co-operative bank after such commencement shall before the expiry of three
months from the date on which it so becomes a primary co-operative bank and every co-
operative society other than a primary credit society shall before commencing banking
business in India, apply in writing to the Reserve Bank for a licence under this section:
Act to apply to
co-operative
societies
subject to
modifications.
23 of 1965.
23 of 1965.

13
Provided that nothing in clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall be deemed to prohibit—
(i) a co-operative society carrying on business as a co-operative bank at the
commencement of the Banking Laws (Application to Co-operative Societies)
Act, 1965; or
(ii) a co-operative bank which has come into existence as a result of the
division of any other co-operative society carrying on business as a co-operative
bank, or the amalgamation of two or more co-operative societies carrying on banking
business at the commencement of the Banking Laws (Application to Co-operative
Societies) Act, 1965 or at any time thereafter; or
(iii) a primary credit society which becomes a primary co-operative bank after
such commencement,
from carrying on banking business until it is granted a licence in pursuance of this section or
is, by a notice in writing, notified by the Reserve Bank that the licence cannot be granted to
it.
* * * * *
23 of 1965.
23 of 1965.

14
EXTRACT FROM THE S TATE F INANCIAL C ORPORATION ACT, 1951
(63 OF 1951)
7. (1) * * * * *
(3) The Financial Corporation may, for the purposes of carrying out its functions under
this Act, borrow money from the State Government consultation with the Development Bank
and the Reserve bank on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon.
* * * * *
—————
E
XTRACT FROM THE S TATE BANK OF INDIA ACT , 1955
(23 OF 1955)
12. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Acts hereinafter mentioned in this
Section, the shares of the State Bank shall be deemed to be included among the securities
enumerated in section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, and also to be approved securities
for the purposes of the Insurance Act, 1938, and the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
* * * * *
—————
E
XTRACT FROM THE STATE BANK OF INDIA (SUBSIDIARY BANKS) ACT, 1959
(38 OF 1959)
20. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Acts hereinafter mentioned in this
Section, the shares of a subsidiary bank shall be deemed to be included among the securities
enumerated in section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, and also to be approved securities
for the purposes of the Insurance Act, 1938, and the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
* * * * *
—————
E
XTRACT FROM THE WAREHOUSING CORPORATION ACT, 1962
(58 OF 1962)
* * * * *
5. (1) The shares of the Central Warehousing Corporation shall be guaranteed by the
Central Government as to the repayment of the principal and the payment of the annual
dividend at such minimum rate as may be fixed by the Central Government, by notification
published in the Official Gazette, at the time of the issue of the shares.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Acts mentioned in this sub-section,
the shares of the Central Warehousing Corporation shall be deemed to be included among
the securities enumerated in section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, and also to be
approved securities for the purpose of the Insurance Act, 1938 and the Banking Companies
Act, 1949.
* * * * *
Shares to be
Approved
securities. 2 of 1882.
4  of 1938.
10 of 1949.
Additional
capital of
the financial
Corporation
and its
borrowing
powers.
Shares to be
Approved
securities. 2 of 1882.
4  of 1938.
10 of 1949.
Shares to be
guaranteed
by Central
Government
and to be
trusted or
approved
securities.
2 of 1882.
4  of 1938.
10 of 1949.

15
EXTRACT FROM THE REGIONAL RURAL BANKS ACT, 1976
(21 OF 1976)
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Acts hereinafter mentioned in this
Section, the shares of a Regional Rural Bank shall be deemed to be included among the
securities enumerated in section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, and shall also be deemed
to be approved securities for the purposes of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
* * * * *
—————
E
XTRACT FROM THE INDUSTRIAL FINANCE CORPORA TION
(TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKING AND REPEAL)  A CT, 1993
(23 OF 1993)
10. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the shares, bonds and debentures of the Company shall be deemed to approved securities
for the purposes of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, the Insurance Act, 1938 and the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949.
* * * * *
—————
E
XTRACT FROM THE INDUSTRIAL RECONSTRUCTION BANK
(TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS AND REPEAL) ACT, 1997
(7 OF 1997)
* * * * *
11. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the shares, bonds and debentures of the Company shall be deemed to be approved securities
for the purposes of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, the Insurance Act, 1938 and the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949.
* * * * *
—————
E
XTRACT FROM THE UNIT TRUST OF INDIA
(TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKING AND REPEAL) ACT, 2002
(58 OF 2002)
17. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the shares, bonds, debentures and units of the specified undertaking shall be deemed to be
approved securities for the purposes of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, the Insurance Act, 1938
and the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
* * * * *
Shares,
bonds and
debentures to
be deemed to
be approved
securities.
2 of 1882.
4 of 1938
10 of 1949.
Shares,
bonds and
debentures to
be deemed to
be approved
securities.
2 of 1882.
10 of 1949.
Shares to be
Approved
securities.
Shares, bonds,
debentures
and unit to be
deemed to be
approved
securities.
2 of 1882.
4 of 1938
10 of 1949.
2 of 1882.
4 of 1938
10 of 1949.

LOK SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and to make consequential
amendments in certain other enactments.
—————
(Shri P . Chidambaram, Minister of Finance )
MGIPMRND—910LS(S3)—09.05.2005.