Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
 Bill No. 72 of 2024
THE ANGANWADI WORKERS (REGULARISATION OF SERVICE 
AND WELFARE) BILL, 2024
By
Shri N. K. Premachandran, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for regularisation of the services of Anganwadi Workers and conferring  
the status of not less than those of Group ‘C’ employees of the  
Central Government on such  Anganwadi Workers.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as  
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Anganwadi Workers (Regularisation of Service and 
Welfare) Act, 2024.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) “anganwadi” means an anganwadi centre set up by the Central Government or 
State Government or Union territory Administrator to implement the Integrated Child 
Development Scheme;
(b) “anganwadi worker” means any person working in an anganwadi on regular or 
contract or daily wages basis; and 
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, take 
all such steps as may be necessary to regularize the services of anganwadi workers 
and confer the status of not less than those of Group ‘C’ employees of the Central 
Government on all such anganwadi workers.
(2) The Central Government shall also provide such wages and welfare facilities 
as are available to, or not less than, Group ‘C’ employees of the Central Government.
4. The provision of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the provisions 
of any other law for the time being in force.
5. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out all purposes of this Act ensuring the service status and welfare of the 
Anganwadi workers.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions aforesaid both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity or anything previously done under that rule.
 
Definitions.
5
Regularisation 
of services of 
anganwadi 
workers.
Savings.
Power to make 
rules.
10
15
20
25

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Anganwadi Centres were started in this country by the Central Government and State 
Governments for implementation of the Integrated Child Development Services Scheme. 
It includes the comprehensive development of health awareness among women and child 
welfare.  The contribution of Anganwadi Centres is remarkable and has become an integrated 
and essential part of life in rural areas. The Anganwadi workers are good promoters of 
various schemes of the Central Government and State Government and ensuring the health 
and welfare of child and women. The duties and service rendered by the Anganwadi workers 
are very important for the protection of the health and welfare of women and children. 
The Anganwadi workers do not have job security and the honorarium given to them are 
not sufficient to meet their immediate basic requirements. This may adversely affect the 
working of the Integrated Child Development Scheme.  
The Anganwadi workers are one of the main links between Government and general 
public. They are helping the Government for the effective implementation of women and 
children health and welfare scheme. Considering the importance of their duties and service 
it is highly necessary to protect their service and welfare. 
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                                                                         N. K. PREMACHANDRAN 
July 8, 2024.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for regularisation of the services of anganwadi workers 
and confer the status not less than those of Group ‘C’ employees of the Central Government 
on all such anganwadi workers. It also provides for such wages and welfare measures as are 
available to or not less than Group ‘C’ employees of the Central Government to anganwadi 
workers. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the consolidated 
Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of about rupees three thousand crore is likely to be 
involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees three thousand crore is also likely to be 
involved.
.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purpose of the Bill.  As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative powers is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for regularisation of the services of Anganwadi Workers and conferring  
the status of not less than those of Group ‘C’ employees of the  
Central Government on such Anganwadi Workers.
_______ 
(Shri N. K. Premachandran, M.P .) 