THE  HIV/AIDS BILL,  2012
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. General Declaration of Principles and Interpretation.
CHAPTER II
PROHIBITION OF DISCRIMINATION
4. Prohibition of Discrimination.
5. Prohibition of hate and discriminatory propaganda.
6. Prohibition of victimisation.
CHAPTER III
INFORMED CONSENT
7. Right to autonomy.
8. Informed consent for HIV testing, treatment and research.
9. Exceptions to informed consent for an HIV-related test.
10. HIV Testing.
CHAPTER IV
D
ISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION
11. Right to Privacy.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 72 of  2012
(i)

(ii)
CLAUSES
12. Disclosure of Information.
13. Partner notification.
14. Duty to prevent transmission.
15. Data protection.
16. Prohibition on publication.
CHAPTER V
ACCESS TO TESTING, TREATMENT AND COUNSELLING
17. Right to Health.
18. Protocols for HIV-related treatment.
19. Measures to be taken by State.
CHAPTER VI
S
AFE WORKING ENVIRONMENT
20. Right to Safe Working Environment.
CHAPTER VII
PROMOTION OF STRATEGIES FOR REDUCTION OF RISK
21. Strategies for Reduction of Risk.
CHAPTER VIII
SOCIAL SECURITY
22. Social Security Scheme.
CHAPTER IX
INFORMATION, EDUCATION AND COMMUNICATION
23. Right to Information.
24. Duty of State to promote HIV/AIDS-related IEC.
25. HIV/AIDS information as a health service.
CHAPTER X
A
PPOINTMENT OF HEALTH OMBUD
26. Appointment of Health Ombud.
27. Tenure of office of Health Ombud.
28. Salary and allowances of Health Ombud.
29. Functions of Health Ombud.
30. Powers and Procedure.
31. Findings and Orders.
32. Civil Authorities to carry out Health Ombud Orders.
33. Consequences of breach of Health Ombud Orders.
34. Report to Government.
35. Right of Redressal.
CHAPTER XI
HIV/AIDS A
UTHORITY
36. Constitution of HIV/AIDS Authorities.
37. HIV/AIDS Authority to be body corporate.
38. Office of HIV/AIDS Authority.
39. Composition of HIV/AIDS Authorities.
40. Nomination Committee.
41. Advisory Committee.
42. Appointments to HIV/AIDS Authority and Nomination Committee by
Appropriate Government.

(iii)
CLAUSES
43. Tenure of office of Director and other members.
44. Salary and allowances of Director and members.
45. Meetings of the HIV/AIDS Authority.
46. Committees.
47. Officers and other employees of the HIV/AIDS Authority.
48. Director to be Chief Executive.
49. Transfer of Undertakings, etc.
50. Functions of the HIV/AIDS Authority.
51. Additional Functions of National HIV/AIDS Authority.
52. Additional Functions of State and Union territory HIV/AIDS Authority.
53. Power of HIV/AIDS Authority.
54. Authentication of orders of HIV/AIDS Authority.
55. HIV/AIDS Authority to monitor compliance of Act.
56. HIV/AIDS Authority to consult.
57. Duty to publish information.
58. Appropriate Government to consider HIV/AIDS Authority reports.
59. Budgetary provisions.
60. Accounts and Audit.
CHAPTER XII
I
NSTITUTIONAL OBLIGATIONS
61. Application.
62. General Responsibility of Institutions.
63. Grievance Redressal Mechanism.
64. HIV/AIDS policy.
65. Right of Redressal.
CHAPTER XIII
D
UTIES OF STATE
66. State obligations.
67. Programmatic and Implementation Obligations.
68. Interaction with International Community.
CHAPTER XIV
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
69. Women and Health.
70. Right of Residence.
71. Registration of Marriages.
72. HIV-related IEC before marriage.
73. HIV-positive women who are pregnant.
74. Sexual assault Protocols.
75. Persons in the Care or Custody of the State.
76. Children.
77. Children affected by HIV/AIDS.
78. Protection of Property of Children affected by HIV/AIDS.
79. Recognition of Guardianship of older sibling.
80. De-facto guardian.
81. Living wills, stand by guardianship and testamentary guardianship.

(iv)
CLAUSES
CHAPTER XV
SPECIAL PROCEDURES IN COURT
82. Suppression of Identity.
83. Priority.
84. Maintenance.
85. Sentencing.
86. Powers of Court.
87. Power of Court to order systemic audits.
88. Presumption as to discrimination.
89. Jurisdiction of Courts.
CHAPTER XVI
P
ENALTIES
90. Penalty for contravention of provisions of section 5.
91. Penalty for misleading information.
92. Penalty for contravention of sub-section (4) of section 21 by public servant.
93. Failure to comply with orders of Health Ombud.
94. Penalty for contravention of provisions of clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 82.
95. Offences by Companies.
96. Offences by Government Departments.
97. Court competent to try offences under this Act and take cognizance of offence.
98. Offences to be cognizable and bailable.
99. Offence under the Act to be tried summarily.
CHAPTER XVII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
100. Act to have overriding effect.
101. Member and Staff of HIV/AIDS Authorities etc. to be public servants.
102. Exemption from tax on wealth and income.
103. Report of the HIV/AIDS Authority to be placed before Legislature.
104. Protection of action taken in good faith.
105. Delegation of powers.
106. Power to make Rules and Regulations.
107. Power to remove difficulties.
108. Review and monitoring of Act.

THE HIV/AIDS BILL, 2012
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI  SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for prevention, control and management of HIV epidemic in India; protection
and promotion of human rights of persons living or affected by HIV/AIDS; for
establishment of Authorities at the National, State, Union territory and district level to
promote such rights and to promote prevention, awareness, care, support, treatment
programmes to control the spread of HIV/AIDS  and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS the spread of HIV/AIDS is a matter of national concern;
AND WHEREAS there is a need to prevent and control the spread of HIV/AIDS;
AND WHEREAS there is a need to protect and promote the human rights of persons who are
HIV  positive or are most vulnerable to HIV/AIDS;
AND WHEREAS there is a need for effective and accessible care, support and treatment for
persons living with or affected by HIV/AIDS;
AND WHEREAS there is a need to protect the rights of healthcare providers and other such
persons providing services to person affected to HIV/AIDS;
AND W HEREAS the Government of India has signed various treaties, agreements and
declarations relating to HIV/AIDS, the protection of rights of persons who are HIV positive
or affected by HIV/AIDS or are most vulnerable to HIV/AIDS and prevent the spread of
HIV/AIDS, including the International Convention on Civil and Political Rights, the
Bill No. 72  of   2012
TO BE  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
International Convention on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the United  Nations
General  Assembly  Special  Session Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS;
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to give effect to those treaties and declarations under article
253 of the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows: —
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the HIV/AIDS Act, 2012.
 (2)  It extends to the whole of India.
 (3)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "AIDS" means Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome,—a condition
characterized by a combination of signs and symptoms, caused by HIV , which attacks
and weakens the body's immune system making the HIV-positive person susceptible
to other life threatening conditions and shall include such signs and symptoms as the
National HIV/AIDS Authority may, from time to time, specify;
(b) "appropriate Government" means —
(i) the Central Government in the case of the territory comprising the
whole of India,
(ii) the State Government in the case of territory comprised in a State,
(iii) the Union territory Administration, in the case of territory comprised
in a Union territory having its own legislature, and
(iv) the Central Government, in the case of other Union territories;
(c) "capacity to consent" means an individual's ability determined on an objective
basis irrespective of such individual's age, to understand and appreciate the nature
and consequences of a proposed healthcare service, treatment, intervention, procedure
or research, or of a proposed disclosure of HIV-related information, and to make an
informed decision concerning such service, treatment, intervention, procedure or
disclosure;
(d) "children affected by HIV/AIDS" means persons below the age of eighteen
years who are HIV positive, or have a parent or guardian who is HIV-positive, or have
lost a parent or guardian due to AIDS or live in households fostering children orphaned
by AIDS;
(e) "court" means a civil, criminal or revenue court and includes any tribunal or
any other authority, constituted under any law for the time being in force, to exercise
judicial or quasi-judicial functions;
(f) "discrimination" includes any act or omission including a policy, law, rule,
practice, custom, tradition, usage, condition or situation which directly or indirectly,
expressly or by effect, immediately or over a period of time,—
(i) imposes burdens, obligations, liabilities, disabilities or disadvantages
on,
(ii) denies or withholds benefits, opportunities or advantages from, or
(iii) compels or forces the adoption of a particular course of action by, any
person or category of persons, owing to one or more HIV-related grounds.
Short title,
extent
and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
Explanation.—For the purposes of  this clause, HIV-related grounds
mean—
(i) HIV status, actual or perceived;
(ii) actual or perceived association with an HIV-positive person; or
(iii) actual or perceived risk of exposure to HIV infection; or
(iv) any other ground where discrimination based on that ground—
(a) causes or perpetuates or has a tendency to perpetuate systemic
disadvantage in respect of a category of persons, or
(b) undermines human dignity, or
(c) adversely affects the equal enjoyment of a protected person's
rights and freedoms in relation to HIV/AIDS;
(g) "domestic relationship" means a relationship between two or more persons
who live or have lived together in a shared household, and are related by consanguinity
or marriage or through a relationship in the nature of marriage or adoption or living
together as members of joint family;
(h) "healthcare provider" means an individual whose vocation or profession is
directly or indirectly related to the maintenance of the health of another individual and
includes any physician, nurse, paramedic, psychologist, counsellor or other individual
providing medical, nursing, psychological or other healthcare services of
any kind;
(i) "HIV" means the  Human Immuno Deficiency Virus;
(j) "HIV/AIDS Authority", means a National, State, Union territory or District
HIV/AIDS Authority, as the case may be;
(k) "HIV-positive person" means a person who tests positive for HIV with a
confirmatory HIV test;
(l) "HIV-related information" means any information related to the HIV status of
a person and includes—
(i) information related to or concerning the undertaking, performing or
result of an HIV test; or
(ii) information related to or concerning the HIV or HIV antibody status of
a person; or
(iii) information related to or concerning the care, support or treatment of
a person; or
(iv) any other private information concerning a person, collected, received,
accessed or recorded in connection with an HIV-related test, HIV-related treatment
or HIV - related research or the HIV status of a person; or
(v) information which may identify such person.
(m) "HIV status" means the actual or perceived presence in a person's body of
HIV or symptoms of AIDS;
(n) "HIV test" means a test to determine the presence of the antibody or antigen
of HIV , or of HIV infection;
(o) "HIV-related test" includes an HIV test and tests to determine the presence
of conditions related to HIV;
(p) "IEC" means Information, Education and Communication;
(q) "informed consent"  means consent given, specific to a proposed intervention,
without any force, undue influence, fraud, threat, mistake or misrepresentation and
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
obtained after disclosing to the person giving consent adequate information including
risks and benefits of, and alternatives to, the proposed intervention in a language and
manner understood by such person;
(r) "institution" means any person carrying on systematic activity by co-operation
between two or more persons in the previous twelve months, in one or more places
with functional integrity, for wages, consideration or otherwise, for the  production,
supply or distribution of goods or services with a view to satisfy human wants or
wishes but does not include any seasonal agricultural operation;
(s) "partner" means a spouse and includes a person with whom another person
has a relationship in the nature of marriage;
(t) "person" includes an individual, a Hindu Undivided Family, any other family,
a company, a firm, an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether
incorporated or not, in India or outside India, any corporation established by or under
any Central, State or Provincial Act or a Government company as defined in section
617 of the Companies  Act, 1956, any body corporate incorporated by or under the laws
of a country outside India, a co-operative society registered under any law relating to
co-operative societies, a local authority, and every other artificial juridical person;
(u) "prescribed" means as prescribed in the rules under this Act;
(v) "protected person" means a person who is—
(i) HIV-positive; or
(ii) actually, or perceived to be, associated with an HIV-positive person; or
(iii) actually, or perceived to be, at risk of exposure to HIV infection; or
(iv) actually or perceived to be, a member of  a group actually or perceived
to be, vulnerable to HIV/AIDS.
(w) “reasonable accommodation” means the alteration of policies, practices, or
procedures of or the modification of, or adjustment to, a job or work or other environment
or the way things are usually done that enables an HIV-positive person, who is otherwise
qualified to enjoy equal benefits and privileges of the programme, service, or activity,
or to perform the essential functions of a job or to fulfil the requirements of an
educational programme or course, as a similarly-situated person who is not HIV-positive,
and includes job restructuring, part-time or modified work or education schedules, or
reassignment to a vacant position;
(x) “regulations” means regulations made under this Act;
(y) “significant risk” means,—
(i) the presence of a significant risk body substance; or
(ii) a circumstance which constitutes significant risk for transmitting or
contracting HIV infection; or
(iii) the presence of an infectious source; or
(iv) such other risks as the National HIV/AIDS authority may, from time to
time, specify.
Explanation 1.— “Significant risk body substances” includes blood, blood
products, semen, vaginal secretions, breast milk, tissue and the body fluids —
cerebrospinal, amniotic, peritoneal, synovial, pericardial and pleural.
1 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
Explanation 2.— "circumstances which constitute significant risk of transmitting
or contracting HIV infection” includes,—
(i) sexual intercourse including vaginal, anal or oral sexual intercourse
which exposes an uninfected person to blood, blood products, semen or vaginal
secretions of an HIV-positive person;
(ii) sharing of needles and other paraphernalia used for preparing and
injecting drugs between HIV-positive persons and uninfected persons;
(iii) the gestation, birthing or breast feeding of an infant when the mother
is an HIV positive person;
(iv) transfusion or transplantation of blood, blood products, organs or
other tissues from an HIV-positive person to an uninfected person, provided
such blood, blood products, organs or other tissues have not been tested
conclusively for the antibody or antigen of HIV and have not been rendered
non-infective by heat or chemical treatment;
(v) other circumstances not identified above during which a significant
risk body substance, other than breast milk, of an HIV-positive person contacts
or lay contact mucous membranes including eyes, nose or mouth, non-intact
skin including open wounds, skin with dermatitis condition or abraded areas or
the vascular system of an uninfected person. Such circumstances include but
are not limited to needle-stick or puncture wound injuries and direct saturation
or permeation of these body surfaces by the infectious body substance;
but does not include—
(i) exposure to urine, faeces, sputum, nasal secretions, saliva, sweat,
tears or vomit that does not contain blood that is visible to the naked eye;
(ii) human bites where there is no direct blood to blood, or blood to
mucous membrane contact;
(iii) exposure of intact skin to blood or any other blood substance;
and
(iv) occupational settings where individuals use scientifically
accepted universal precautions, barrier techniques and preventive practices
in circumstances which would otherwise pose a significant risk and such
barriers are not breached and remain intact.
(z) “State” shall have the meaning assigned to it under article 12 of the
Constitution.
(za) “universal precautions” means infection control measures that prevent
exposure to or reduce the risk of transmission of pathogenic agents including HIV and
includes education, training, personal protective equipment such as gloves, gowns
and masks, hand washing, and employing safe work practices.
3. (1) Any person applying this Act must interpret its provisions to give effect to—
(a) the letter and spirit of the Constitution, the provisions of which include the
guarantee of equality, life and personal liberty and the freedom of speech, expression
and movement;
(b) compliance with international law obligations including treaty obligations in
terms of, amongst others, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Convenant on
Civil and Political Rights, the United Nations General Assembly Special Session
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women and customary international law; and
(c) the Preamble of this Act, thereby fulfilling the spirit, purpose and objects of
this Act.
General
Declaration
of Principles
and
Interpretation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

6
(2) In the adjudication of any proceedings, which are instituted in terms of or under
this Act, the Court shall apply the principle of purposive interpretation and in balancing
rights shall follow the principle of the least restrictive alternative.
(3) In the adjudication of any proceedings, which are instituted in terms of or under
this Act, the following principles shall apply:—
(a) the expeditious processing of cases, which facilitates participation by the
parties to the proceedings;
(b) access to justice to all persons in all judicial and other dispute resolution
fora;
(c) the use of corrective or restorative measures in conjunction with measures of
a deterrent nature; and
(d) the development of special skills and capacity for persons applying this Act
in order to ensure effective implementation and administration thereof.
(4) In the application of this Act, the following shall be recognised and taken into
account:—
(a) the existence of systemic discrimination and inequalities, particularly in respect
of class, disability, religion, race, caste, sex and place of birth in all spheres of life as a
result of past and present discrimination, including that brought about by patriarchy;
and
(b) the need to take measures at all levels to eliminate such discrimination and
inequalities.
CHAPTER II
P
ROHIBITION OF DISCRIMINATION
4. (1) No person shall be subject to discrimination in any form by the State or any other
person in relation to any sphere of public activity including,—
(a) denial of, or termination from, employment or occupation unless in the case
of termination,—
(i) a person, who is otherwise qualified, in the written assessment of an
independent healthcare provider qualified to make such an assessment, poses a
significant risk of transmission of HIV to other persons in the workplace, or is
unfit to fulfil the duties of the job; and
(ii) the employer is unable to provide reasonable accommodation due to
undue administrative or financial hardship in which case the employer shall
along with the letter of dismissal provide a written statement to such person
stating the nature and extent of such hardship:
Provided that if the employer fails to provide such written statement, it shall be
presumed that there is no such undue administrative or financial hardship;
(b) unfair treatment in, or in relation to, employment or occupation;
(c) denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment in, healthcare services;
(d) denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment in, educational services;
(e) denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment with regard to, access to, or
provision or enjoyment or use of any goods, accommodation, service, facility, benefit,
privilege or opportunity dedicated to the use of the general public or customarily
available to the public, whether or not for a fee including shops, public restaurants,
hotels and places of public entertainment or the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats,
roads, burial grounds or funeral ceremonies and such other public places;
Prohibition of
Discrimination.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(f) denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment with regard to, the right of
movement;
(g) denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment with regard to, the right to
reside, purchase, rent, or otherwise occupy, any property;
(h) denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment in, the opportunity to stand
for or hold public or private office;
(i) denial of access to, removal from, or unfair treatment in, a State or private
institution in whose care or custody a person may be;
(j) denial of, or unfair treatment in, the provision of insurance unless such unfair
treatment is based on and supported by actuarial studies;
(k) isolation or segregation of a protected person;
(l) HIV testing as a pre-requisite, for obtaining employment, or accessing
healthcare services or education or, for the continuation of the same or, for accessing
or using any other service or facility.
Explanation.— Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of this
Act, Schedule I to this Act is intended to illustrate and emphasise some instances of
unfair treatment, which are discriminatory, in order to address and eliminate such
treatment.
(2) Nothing in this Act shall prevent the State or any other person from taking measures
for the protection, benefit or advancement of protected persons including the greater
involvement of HIV-positive persons for the purpose.
5. No person shall, publish, propagate, advocate or communicate by words, either
spoken or written, or by signs or by visible representations or otherwise against any protected
person, or group or category of protected persons, in general or specifically, anything or
disseminate or broadcast any information, or publish or display any advertisement or notice,
that could reasonably be construed to demonstrate an intention to be harmful or to incite
harm, promote or propagate hatred, or which is likely to expose protected persons to hatred,
discrimination, harm or physical violence.
6. No person shall subject, or threaten to subject any other person or persons to any
detriment on the grounds that such person or persons have taken or intend to take or are
believed to have taken or intend to take any of the following actions:—
(a) make a complaint under this Act; or
(b) bring proceedings under this Act against any person; or
(c) furnish any information, or produce any documents to a person exercising or
performing any power or function under this Act; or
(d) appear as a witness in a proceeding under this Act; or
(e) assert their rights or the rights of any other person under this Act; or
(f) allege that a person has done an act that is unlawful by reason of a provision
of this Act.
CHAPTER III
I
NFORMED CONSENT
7. Every person has the right to bodily and psychological integrity including the right
not to be subject to medical treatment, interventions or research without that person's informed
consent.
Prohibition
of hate and
discriminatory
propaganda.
Prohibition
of
victimisation.
Right to
autonomy.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8
8. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, no HIV-related test or HIV-related treatment
of a person or HIV-related research involving a person, shall be undertaken or performed
except with the informed consent of that person or that person's representative in accordance
with sub-section (2) below.
(2) The informed consent of a person's representative shall be taken only in the following
circumstances:
(a) where the person has died, from that person's partner or if he has no partner
from the next of kin or administrator or executor;
(b) where in the case of an HIV-related test or HIV-related treatment:—
(i) the person is under the age of twelve years, from that person's parent or
legal or de-facto guardian or next friend; and
(ii) the person is between the ages of twelve and sixteen years and, in the
written assessment of the concerned healthcare provider lacks the capacity to
consent, from that person's parent or legal or de-facto guardian or next friend.
(c) where in the case of HIV-related research, the person is below the age of
eighteen years, from that person's parent or legal or de-facto guardian or next friend.
(d) where, in the written assessment of the concerned healthcare provider, the
person lacks the physical or mental capacity to consent, from that person's partner, or
relative or legal or de-facto guardian;
(e) in an emergency situation, where the person is unconscious, or otherwise
unable to give informed consent, from that person's partner, or relative or legal or
de-facto guardian;
(f) in clauses (a) to (e) above, where a representative of the person is not available
to give informed consent, or in clause ( e) above, in the opinion of the healthcare
provider, is not acting in the best interest of the person, then the same shall be taken
from an authorised representative of the concerned institution or an independent
healthcare provider:
Provided that where informed consent is given by a person's representative
under sub-clause (2) (b), (c) and (d) best efforts shall be made to involve the person for
whom informed consent is being given in the informed consent process and where
informed consent is being given by the representative under sub-section ( 2) (e) the
person for whom informed consent is being given shall as soon as possible be informed
of the decision.
(3) Informed consent taken under sub-section (1) or (2) shall be recorded in writing:
Provided that where a person is unable to give informed consent in writing, informed
consent may be taken verbally from that person and a record of such informed consent shall
be entered into records maintained by the person taking the informed consent.
(4) The National HIV/AIDS Authority shall within one hundred and eighty days of its
constitution, notify counselling protocols that shall be applicable to all persons including
counselling protocols for HIV-tests, HIV-related tests, HIV-related treatment and HIV-related
research and counselling protocols for children who are HIV positive including the manner
in which such children shall be involved in the informed consent process and how and who
shall disclose their status to them.
(5) Every institution involved in HIV-related testing, HIV-related treatment or HIV-related
research shall follow counselling protocols for women and children to ensure they have
access to conducive settings that facilitate their individual decision making for HIV-related
testing, HIV-related treatment or HIV-related research.
Informed
consent for
HIV testing,
treatment
and research.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
(6) Informed consent for an HIV-test shall be valid only when the person being tested
is provided pre-test and post-test counselling in accordance with the Regulations:
Provided that where a representative of the person is giving informed consent such
representative shall also receive counselling.
(7) Informed consent for HIV-related treatment shall be valid only when the person
who is to be administered the treatment, and such person's representative, in case the
informed consent is being given by a representative under sub-section (2), is explained the
risks and benefits of the proposed treatment, including the nature of HIV/AIDS, the treatments
available for it, the alternatives that may be available, the stages when they can be administered,
their duration, their side-effects, the likely expenses and the adherence requirements of such
treatment.
(8) Informed consent for HIV-related research shall be considered valid only when the
potential research subject, and such person's representative, in case the informed consent is
being given by a representative under sub-section (2), is comprehensively informed of the
aims, methods, sources of funding, any possible conflicts of interest, institutional affiliations
of the researcher, the anticipated benefits and potential risks of the study, the discomfort it
may entail and the right to abstain from participation in the research or to withdraw consent
to participate in the research at any time without any adverse consequences.
9. Informed consent for an HIV-related test shall not be required in the following
circumstances:—
(a) when an HIV-related test is ordered by a court:
Provided that no court shall order an HIV-related test to be carried out either as
part of a medical examination or otherwise, unless the court,—
(i) determines by an order that the carrying out of the HIV-related test is
necessary for the determination of issues and in the interest of justice in a matter
before it; and
(ii) ensures that the person being tested receives pre-test and post-test
counselling and that the HIV-related information of that person is not disclosed
except in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(b) for HIV-related testing in the procuring, processing, distribution or use of a
human body or any part thereof, including organs, tissues, blood, semen or other
body fluids for use in medical research or therapy or for transplantation, transfusion
to, or artificial insemination of persons:
Provided that if the test results are requested by a donor prior to donation, then
the donor will be referred to a V oluntary Counselling and Testing Centre and shall not
be entitled to the results of the test unless the donor has received post-test counselling
from the V oluntary Counselling and Testing Centre;
(c) for epidemiological or surveillance purposes where the HIV test is anonymous
and unlinked and is not for the purpose of determining the HIV status of a person:
Provided that persons who are subject of such epidemiological or surveillance
studies shall be informed of such studies in accordance with the Regulations.
10. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, no person shall be subject to an HIV test except in accordance with the provisions of
this Act.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, no HIV test may be recommended or performed
except,—
(a) for the voluntary determination of the HIV status of a person; or
Exceptions
to informed
consent for
an HIV-
related test.
HIV testing.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
(b) if it is medically indicated for the appropriate treatment or care and in the best
interest of the person being tested.
(3) An HIV test may be performed only by,—
(a) a V oluntary Counselling and Testing Centre; or
(b) a pathology laboratory, either independent or attached to a healthcare
institution; or
(c) a blood bank licensed under the law for the time being in force:
Provided that the Central Government shall, within three hundred and sixty days of the
commencement of this Act, formulate and notify regulations for the recognition of V oluntary
Counselling and Testing Centres and pathology laboratories by the concerned HIV/AIDS
Authority which shall provide inter alia the requirements for recognition and the time period
within which a decision on recognition shall be taken and existing Voluntary Counselling and
Testing Centres and pathology laboratories shall, within ninety days of the notification of
such regulations apply for such recognition and from the date of such notification only
recognised V oluntary Testing and Counselling Centres, pathology laboratories and blood
banks shall perform HIV tests.
(4) A person who seeks to voluntarily determine their HIV status and who wishes to
remain anonymous shall have the right to do so, and to provide informed consent in writing
by using a coded system that does not link their individual identity with the request or result
of the HIV test.
(5) No person shall market or sell technologies for self-testing of HIV except in
accordance with the regulations.
CHAPTER IV
D
ISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION
11. Every person shall have the right to privacy.
12. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, no person shall be compelled to disclose HIV-related information or any other private
information concerning themselves except when a court determines by an order that the
disclosure of such information is necessary for the determination of issues and in the interest
of justice in a matter before it.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, no
person shall disclose or be compelled to disclose HIV-related information or any other private
information of another person, imparted in confidence or in a relationship of a fiduciary
nature, except with the informed consent of that person or a representative of the person as
specified in sub-section (2) of section 8:
Provided that where the relationship is of a fiduciary nature, informed consent shall be
recorded in writing:
Provided further that all HIV-related information shall be presumed to have been imparted
or received in confidence unless otherwise shown.
(3) Informed consent for disclosure of HIV-related information or private information is
not required in case the disclosure is made,—
(a) by a healthcare provider to another healthcare provider who is involved in
the provision of care, treatment or counselling of a person, when such disclosure is
necessary to provide care or treatment in the best interest of that person; or
(b) by an order of a court when it determines by such order that the disclosure of
such information is necessary for the determination of issues and in the interest of
justice in a matter before it; or
Right to
Privacy.
Disclosure of
Information.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
(c) in suits or legal proceedings between persons, where the disclosure of such
information is necessary in the initiation of such proceedings or for instructing counsel;
or
(d) in accordance with section 13; or
(e) if it relates to statistical or other information of a person that could not
reasonably be expected to lead to the identification of that person; or
(f) in accordance with the regulations under section 15.
(4) Any person to whom disclosure is made under this Chapter is prohibited from
making further disclosure except as provided in this Chapter.
(5) Any person to whom disclosure under clause (e) of sub-section (3) is made shall
not use such information to identify the person to whom it pertains or present it in a manner
whereby such identification is possible.
13. A healthcare provider who is a physician or a counsellor, may inform the partner of
a person under their direct care of such person's HIV-positive status only when,—
(a) the healthcare provider bona-fide and reasonably believes that the partner is
at significant risk of transmission of HIV from such person;
(b) the HIV-positive person has been counselled to inform such partner;
(c) the healthcare provider is satisfied that the HIV-positive person will not
inform such partner;
(d) the healthcare provider has informed the HIV-positive person of the intention
to disclose the HIV-positive status to such partner; and
(e) such disclosure to the partner is made in person and with appropriate
counselling or referrals for counselling:
Provided that the healthcare provider shall have no obligation to identify or
locate the partner of an HIV-positive person:
Provided further that no criminal sanction or civil liability shall arise against a
healthcare provider for the disclosure or non-disclosure, as the case may be, of
confidential HIV related information to a partner in accordance with section 13.
Exception: The healthcare provider shall not inform a partner, particularly in the
case of women, where there is a reasonable apprehension that such information may
result in violence, abandonment or actions which may have a severe negative effect on
the physical or mental health and safety of the HIV positive person, their children or
any person who is close to them.
14. Every person who is HIV-positive, and is aware of such status and, has been
counselled in accordance with this Act or is aware of the nature of HIV and how it is
transmitted, shall take all reasonable measures and precautions to prevent the transmission
of HIV to others which may include adopting strategies for the reduction of risk or informing
in advance any sexual contact or person with whom needles are shared of that fact.
Exception: There shall be no duty to prevent transmission, particularly in the case of
women, where there is a reasonable apprehension that the measures and precautions may
result in violence, abandonment or actions which may have a severe negative effect on the
physical or mental health and safety of the HIV-positive person, their children or someone
who is close to them.
15. Every institution that records or stores HIV-related information of a person shall,
within one hundred and eighty days of the commencement of this Act, formulate and implement
data protection measures in accordance with the Regulations, to ensure that such information
is protected from disclosure.
Partner
notification.
Duty to
prevent
transmission.
Data
protection.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
Explanation.—Data protection measures shall include procedures for protecting
information from disclosure, procedures for accessing information, particularly in
exceptional circumstances, provision for security systems to protect the information
stored in any form and mechanisms to ensure accountability and liability of persons in
the institution.
16. No person shall print, publish, broadcast or in any manner release HIV-related
information or private information of a person without the informed consent in writing of
such person.
CHAPTER V
A
CCESS TO TESTING, TREATMENT AND COUNSELLING
17. (1) Every person shall have the right to enjoy the highest attainable standard of
physical and mental health.
(2) The State shall respect, protect and fulfil the right to the highest attainable
standard of physical and mental health of all persons.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality, of sub-sections (1) and (2), the State shall,
based on principles of availability, accessibility and acceptability, provide,—
(a) free of cost HIV-related prevention, care and support facilities, goods,
measures, services and information, including centres providing voluntary testing
and counselling services in every sub-district in accordance with the Regulations;
and
(b) free of cost treatment for HIV/AIDS for all persons.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Chapter 'treatment' includes health
facilities, goods, measures, services and information for the curative and palliative
care of HIV/AIDS and related opportunistic infections and conditions including,—
(i) counselling;
(ii) the effective and monitored use of medicines for opportunistic
infections;
(iii) post exposure prophylaxis;
(iv) anti-retroviral therapy;
(v) nutritional supplements;
(vi) measures for the prevention of mother-to-child transmission;
(vii) infant milk substitutes; and
(viii ) other safe and effective medicines, diagnostics and related
technologies.
(4) To fulfil its obligations under this Chapter, the State shall, inter alia, ensure that
continuous and sustainable access to HIV-related prevention and treatment is not hampered
or impeded by procedural or other requirements and shall ensure that the process whereby
its obligations are fulfilled is transparent and accountable and is evaluated on a regular
basis.
(5) The appropriate Government shall within one hundred and eighty days of the
coming into force of this Act, ensure the availability of medical infrastructure, including
diagnostic technologies, required for the prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS within its
jurisdiction.
Prohibition
on
publication.
Right to
Health.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

13
18. The National HIV/AIDS Authority shall, within one hundred and eighty days of its
constitution and establishment, notify guidelines for HIV/AIDS related testing and HIV-
related treatment that shall be applicable to all persons through a consultative process and
ensure the wide dissemination of the same.
19. The appropriate Government shall take effective legislative, administrative and
fiscal measures including,—
(a) ensuring the use of all options to promote access to healthcare including
provision of travel subsidies for HIV-positive persons to facilitate access to treatment;
(b) the training and capacity building of healthcare providers and public health
authorities, in consultation with HIV-positive persons and other protected persons,
for the provision, prescription and monitoring of HIV-related treatment and prevention;
(c) ensuring that all other laws are in consonance with the provisions of this
Chapter and in particular that the right to health is not in any manner restricted or
compromised on account of the protection of intellectual property rights;
(d) introducing tax incentives and exemptions on HIV-related treatment in order
to promote its affordability, accessibility and availability;
(e) ensuring that the pricing of medication, diagnostics and related technologies
pursuant to any statute, regulation or order is fixed in a manner that is transparent,
accountable and open to public scrutiny and that promotes its affordability, accessibility
and availability;
(f) ensuring that incentives to encourage investment in research and development
are provided to entities, particularly those run by the State to develop, manufacture,
market and distribute affordable and accessible preventive, curative and palliative
care and treatment.
CHAPTER VI
S
AFE WORKING ENVIRONMENT
20. (1) Every person shall have the right to safe working environment.
(2) Every institution providing healthcare services and every institution where there
is a significant risk of occupational exposure to HIV , shall provide free of cost,—
(a) universal precautions to all persons working or present in such institution
who may be occupationally exposed to HIV , including employees, interns, attendants
and contract workers, and appropriate training for the use of such universal
precautions; and
(b) post exposure prophylaxis to all persons working in such institution who
may be occupationally exposed to HIV/AIDS, including employees, interns, and contact
workers, with appropriate counselling services.
(3) Every institution referred to in sub-section (2) comprising twenty or more persons
shall provide HIV-related treatment and compensation to persons working in such institution
who are occupationally exposed to and acquire HIV.
(4) Every institution referred to in this Chapter, shall within sixty days of the
commencement of this Act,—
(a) ensure that the universal precautions and Post Exposure Prophylaxis protocols
in accordance with the Regulations are complied with in the institution and inform all
persons working in the institution of the details of avilability of universal precautions
and post exposure prophylaxis in the institution and shall make special efforts to
ensure that lower cadre workers in such institutions are trained in using and can
access universal precautions; and
Protocols for
HIV-related
treatment.
Measures to
be taken by
State.
Right to Safe
Working
Environment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
(b) where applicable, notify and widely disseminate a treatment and compensation
policy in accordance with the regulations specifying the procedure for persons to
claim treatment or compensation or both as provided in sub-section (3) including the
medical records, tests and incident reports required to make the claim:
Provided that such policy shall not specify mandatory HIV testing including pre
employment testing as a requirement for claiming treatment or compensation:
Provided further that any person claiming occupational exposure to HIV , in an
institution that does not comply with sub-section (4)(a) and (b), shall be presumed to
have been occupationally exposed to HIV and shall be entitled to treatment and
compensation without any requirement of further proof.
(5) Every healthcare provider and every other person who may be occupationally
exposed to or may occupationally transmit HIV shall use universal precautions in accordance
with the regulations in the course of their work.
(6) Every healthcare provider and every institution providing healthcare services shall
ensure basic cleanliness and hygiene and the implementation of infection control measures
in accordance with the regulations and any other law for the time being in force.
(7) The National HIV/AIDS Authority shall within ninety days of its constitution and
establishment notify protocol for universal precautions and post exposure prophylaxis that
shall be applicable to all persons.
CHAPTER VII
P
ROMOTION OF STRATEGIES FOR REDUCTION OF RISK
21. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force,—
(a) the implementation or use of any strategy for reducing the risk of HIV
transmission; or
(b) the provision or possession of any tool or paraphernalia for reduction of risk
of HIV transmission, or any act pursuant thereto, shall not, in any manner, be prohibited,
impeded, restricted or prevented and shall not amount to a criminal offence or attract
civil liability.
Explanation.—Strategies for reducing risk of HIV transmission means promoting
actions or practices that minimise a person's risk of exposure to HIV or mitigate the
adverse impacts related to HIV/AIDS including,—
(i) the provision of information, education and counselling services relating
to HIV prevention and safe practices;
(ii) the provision and use of safer sex tools, including condoms, lubricants,
female-controlled barrier methods, and safety drug use paraphernalia, including
clean needles, syringes, bleach and other appropriate sterilising equipment
accompanied by information on their use;
(iii) drug substitution, drug maintenance and needle and syringe exchange
programmes in accordance with sub-section 2; and
(iv) the provision of any strategy for reducing risk of HIV transmission
including those contained in sub-sections ( i), ( ii) and ( iii) above to person
below the age of eighteen years who in the opinion of the provider of strategies
for reducing risk of HIV transmission have the capacity to consent to such
strategy.
Illustrations
(a) A, supplies condoms to B, a sex worker or to C, a client of B. Neither A, nor B,
nor C can be held criminally or civilly liable for such actions or be prohibited, impeded,
restricted or prevented from implementing or using the strategy.
Strategies for
Reduction of
Risk.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
(b) M, an intervention project on HIV/AIDS and sexual health information,
education and counselling for men who have sex with men provides safer sex
information, material and condoms to N, a man who has sex with other men. Neither M
nor N can be held criminally or civilly liable for such actions or be prohibited, impeded,
restricted or prevented from implementing or using the interventions.
(c) X, an intervention providing registered needle exchange programme services
to injecting drug users, supplies a clean needle to Y , an injecting drug user who
exchanges the same for a used needle. Neither X nor Y can be held criminally or civilly
liable for such actions or be prohibited, impeded, restricted or prevented from
implementing or using the intervention.
(d) R, an intervention programme for children living on the streets and K, a
counsellor in a school, provide sexual health and safer sex information, education and
counselling, material and small-sized condoms to S, a child living on the street and L,
a student in school, respectively. Neither R, S, K nor L can be held criminally or civilly
liable for such actions or be prohibited, impeded, restricted or prevented from
implementing or using the intervention.
(2) No person shall implement a drug substitution or drug maintenance or needle and
syringe exchange programme unless such programme is implemented in accordance with the
regulations.
(3) Any information obtained or maintained in records by a person implementing a
drug substitution or drug maintenance or needle and syringe exchange programme or any
other strategy for the reduction of risk of HIV transmission shall be considered to be private
information for the purpose of Chapter IV of this Act.
(4) (a) No public servant, including a law enforcement official shall arrest or detain, or
in any manner harass, impede, restrict or otherwise prevent any person implementing or
using strategies for reduction of risk of HIV transmission in accordance with the provisions
of this Act.
(b) A public servant who violates the provisions of clause (a) of sub-section (4) shall
be subject to misconduct proceedings under the relevant Act including the relevant Police
Act and the report of such misconduct shall form part of the confidential records of such
public servant.
CHAPTER VIII
S
OCIAL SECURITY
22. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification within three hundred and
sixty days of the commencement of this Act, formulate, frame and implement health insurance
and social security schemes including inter alia,—
(a) schemes that address HIV/AIDS and related illnesses and mitigate the
social and economic impact of HIV/AIDS and related illnesses;
(b) schemes that cover HIV-positive persons, other protected persons, women,
children, healthcare providers and older persons;
(c) a scheme that provides for access to shelter, food, education and treatment
for children affected by HIV/AIDS;
(d) a scheme that provides cash for HIV-positive women with children; and
(e) a contributory insurance scheme between the appropriate Government,
healthcare institutions and healthcare providers.
Social
security
scheme.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
CHAPTER IX
INFORMATION, EDUCATION AND COMMUNICATION
23. (1) Every person shall have the right to information and education relating to
health and the protection of health from the State.
(2) No person shall be denied access to and availability of HIV/AIDS-related IEC,
including information relating to sexual health, sexuality and safe drug use, by the State:
Provided that where the person is below the age of twelve years and, in the opinion of
the provider of information, is incapable of understanding and appreciating the nature of the
HIV/AIDS-related IEC, the provider may, in the best interests of the person, require the
presence of a person above the age of sixteen years of the person's choice before providing
such information.
24. (1) The State, based on evidence or scientific information, and in a manner that
does not promote gender and sexual stereotypes and is age-appropriate, gender-sensitive,
non-stigmatising, non-discriminatory and promotes gender equality, shall in accordance
with sub-section (3),—
(a) formulate, institute and implement sustained multi-lingual, easily
understood, and regularly updated national, State and local HIV/AIDS-related IEC
programmes, which are accessible and available to all persons;
(b) develop and conduct a multi-lingual national programme of public education
and information to promote an understanding and acceptance of this Act; and
(c) ensure community mobilisation and participation, in the provision of HIV/
AIDS-related IEC at all levels throughout the country.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1), the State shall ensure,—
(a) that women of all ages shall have access to accurate and comprehensive
HIV/AIDS-related IEC focussing on their needs;
(b) that every person below the age of eighteen years has access to adequate and
accurate HIV/AIDS-related IEC including sexual health information and education;
(c) that HIV/AIDS-related IEC is designed and developed for and readily
accessible to and usable by all persons with disabilities;
(d) that in relation to education,
(i) a continuing HIV/AIDS-related IEC programme is implemented in all
formal and non-formal educational settings for all learners, students, educators
and other staff members;
(ii) age-appropriate HIV/AIDS-related IEC forms part of, and is integrated
into, all aspects of the curriculum for all learners and students, including
information on HIV/AIDS, stigma and discrimination related to HIV/AIDS,
modes of transmission, prevention, care, support and treatment available for
HIV;
(iii) all boards of education, authorities of education and all persons
responsible for setting curricula shall, for the academic year following the
commencement of this Act, formulate and institute curriculum, for HIV/AIDS
education including in all curricula related to medical, health, State service,
legal, teaching and social work education, for the following academic year;
(iv) the proper and ongoing training of all educators in relation to HIV/
AIDS-related IEC and its dissemination takes place;
Right to
Information.
Duty of State
to promote
HIV/AIDS-
related IEC.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
(e) that all persons in institutions not covered under Chapter XII receive
minimum information and instruction of HIV/AIDS, particularly relating to
discrimination and disclosure of information in the workplace and shall take proactive
steps to impart HIV/AIDS-related IEC to such persons;
(f) that the Armed Forces, paramilitary forces, law enforcement and drug
enforcement agencies provide all personnel with HIV/AIDS-related IEC particularly
in relation to prevention, discrimination and disclosure of information;
(g) that every HIV/AIDS-related prophylactic including condoms offered for
sale, sold or supplied in any other manner to any person shall be accompanied by
information, including pictorial representations and literature on the proper use of
the prophylactic device or agent, it's efficiency against HIV and sexually transmitted
infections, and the importance of adopting safer sexual practices, in English and the
local language of the region where the prophylactic is supplied;
(h) that HIV/AIDS-related IEC is adeqautely provided at places of entertainment
and travel points including train stations, bus stations, international ports of entry
and exit, domestic airports, and other travel centres;
(i) that HIV/AIDS-related IEC is provided in all State institutions, including in
care and custodial settings; and
(j) that all HIV/AIDS-related IEC is widely disseminated through all forms of
media including print, electronic, mass and digital media.
(3) For the purposes of this section, the State shall hold ongoing and sustained
consultations with different stakeholders including HIV-positive persons, protected persons,
women's groups, persons working in the field of HIV/AIDS, public health experts, children's
groups, and parents and guardians of learners.
25. (1) HIV/AIDS related information dissemination shall form part of the delivery of
health services by healthcare providers.
(2) It shall be the duty of every healthcare provider to make available to the public,
subject to the provisions of this Act, such information as is necessary in the prevention,
care, support and treatment of HIV/AIDS.
(3) Every healthcare institution shall enhance the knowledge and capacity of all
healthcare providers working in or employed by it, to include skills for proper information
dissemination and education on HIV/AIDS and the training of healthcare providers shall
include discussions on HIV-related issues such as discrimination, confidentiality, informed
consent and the duty to provide treatment.
CHAPTER X
A
PPOINTMENT OF HEALTH OMBUD
26. (1) The appropriate Government shall, within ninety days of the commencement of
this Act, appoint by notification in the Official Gazette, one or more Health Ombuds for each
district to exercise the powers conferred upon and perform the functions assigned, under
this Act.
(2) The appropriate Government may appoint as Health Ombud, any person who has
working experience or extensive knowledge of public health or healthcare delivery systems,
is independent, and sensitive to issues addressed in this Act, including a healthcare provider
or a person working in a non-governmental organisation.
(3) A person appointed as Health Ombud under sub-section (1) shall,—
(a) when appointed for a Union territory, be conferred the rank of the Joint
Director of Health and Family Welfare; and
HIV/AIDS
information
as a health
service.
Appointment
of Health
Ombud.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

18
(b) when appointed for a district of the State, be conferred the rank of the Officer
responsible for Health for such district.
(4) The Health Ombud shall within seven days of being appointed, undergo training
on HIV/AIDS and this Act in accordance with the regulations.
(5) The appropriate Government shall within thirty days of the commencement of this
Act launch a website or web page on the Internet dedicated to the offices of each Health
Ombud appointed by it, which shall provide inter alia information relating to the functioning
of the office of the Health Ombud, the procedure for filing and sending complaints, the
number, nature of complaints received, and decisions and directions given by the Health
Ombud:
Provided that the provision of the information on the website shall ensure the
maintenance of the confidentiality of complainants and other parties to the complaints.
27. (1) The Health Ombud shall hold office for a term of three years from the date on
which such person enters office and shall be eligible for reappointment.
(2) The Health Ombud may relinquish office by giving written notice of not less than
three months to the appropriate Government.
(3) The appropriate Government may remove a Health Ombud from office who:—
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudged as insolvent;
(b) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as the Health Ombud;
(c) has been convicted of any offence or has acquired such financial or other
interest which is in the opinion of the appropriate Government likely to prejudicially
affect such person's functions as the Health Ombud; or
(d) has so abused the position as to render continuation in office detrimental to
the public interest:
Provided that a Health Ombud shall not be removed from office without being
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
28. The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of,
the Health Ombud shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that such salary, allowances and other conditions of service shall not be
varied to the disadvantage of the Health Ombud after appointment.
29. (1) The Health Ombud, may suo motu and shall, on a complaint by any person,
inquire, at the request of the appropriate Government or its agencies or order of any court,
into violations of the provisions of this Act by any person in relation to the provision of
healthcare services in such Health Ombud's jurisdiction.
(2) The Health Ombud shall inquire into and decide a complaint promptly and in any
case within fifteen working days:
Provided that in cases of emergency, the Health Ombud shall decide the complaint
within one day:
Provided further that in case the complaint is not decided within the time period
specified above, the proceedings before the Health Ombud shall not lapse and the Health
Ombud shall record in writing reasons for the delay and provide copies of the same to both
parties.
(3) The Health Ombud shall inquire into instances or complaints of the manufacture,
marketing, distribution, provision, prescription and sale of any licensed or unlicensed
substance, service or therapy, or any advertisement or article or any broadcast or telecast
falsely claiming to cure, prevent or alleviate medical conditions associated with HIV/AIDS
Tenure of
office of
Health
Ombud.
Salary and
Allowances
of Health
Ombud.
Functions of
Health
Ombud.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

19
and based on such inquiry may file a complaint with the concerned aurhority including law
enforcement authorities or initiate legal proceedings, and shall report the findings of the
inquiry, along with recommendations, if any , with the appropriate Government and the
concerned authority, if any, for action.
30. (1) The Health Ombud shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed:
Provided that all stages of such procedure shall be readily accessible to and usable by
all persons including persons with disabilities and illiterate persons.
(2) The Health Ombud may receive complaints via post, telephonically or via the
Internet or in any other manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Health Ombud may decide the complaint based on representations of the
parties to the complaint or may require a hearing of the parties to the complaint.
(4) The Health Ombud shall, while inquiring into complaints under this Act, have all
the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses and examining them
on oath;
(b) discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; and
(f) any other matter, which may be prescribed.
(5) The Health Ombud shall have the power to require any person, to furnish information
on such points or matters as, in the opinion of the Health Ombud, may be useful for, or
relevant to, the subject matter of an inquiry and any person so required shall be deemed to be
legally bound to furnish such information within the meaning of sections 176 and 177 of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860.
(6) The Health Ombud or any other officer, not below the rank of a Gazetted Officer,
specially authorised in this behalf by the Health Ombud may enter any building or place
where the Health Ombud has reason to believe that any document relating to the subject
matter of an inquiry may be found, and may seize any such document or take extracts or
copies therefrom subject to the provisions of section 100 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, in so far as it may be applicable.
(7) The Health Ombud shall maintain records in such manner as may be prescribed.
(8) The Health Ombud shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
(9) The Health Ombud may appoint such number of persons as may be necessary to
assist in the functioning of the Health Ombud office including in relation to the inquiry of a
complaint under sub-sections (1) and (3) of section 29.
(10) The Central Government shall prescribe rules for the purposes of this Chapter
within sixty days of the commencement of the Act.
31. (1) The Health Ombud shall, in order to rectify the breach or withdraw the violation
complained of under this Act, have the power to—
(a) pass orders, in cases of emergency without considering the representations
of the parties to the complaints or without hearing them as the case may be, including
directing admissions, operations or treatment and the provision of universal
precautions:
Powers and
Procedure.
5 of 1908.
Findings and
orders.
45 of 1860.
1 of 1974.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

20
Provided that the Health Ombud shall, as soon as may be, after the passing of
such orders, consider the representations of the parties or give them an opportunity to
be heard as the case may be, and pass appropriate orders;
(b) pass orders for the withdrawal and rectification of the violation complained
of;
(c) pass orders directing the person who has committed the violation to undergo
a fixed period of counselling related to the violation committed and a fixed period of
social service;
(d) direct specific steps or special measures or both to be taken; and
(e) direct any person who has committed the violation to make regular reports to
the Health Ombud regarding implementation of the Health Ombud's order.
(2) The Health Ombud shall pass orders that contain brief reasons for the passing of
such orders.
(3) The Health Ombud, may, subject to any rules made in this behalf, make such orders
he may consider reasonable.
(4) An order of the Health Ombud shall be binding on the parties to the complaint.
32. All authorities including civil authorities functioning within the jurisdiction of the
Health Ombud shall be bound by the orders of the Health Ombud and shall assist in their
execution.
33. (1) All orders passed by the Health Ombud under section 31 shall be deemed to be
orders under Order 39 Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and the breach of such an
order shall be dealt with by applications to the Health Ombud which shall be treated as an
application under Order 39 Rule 2A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
(2) For the purposes of this Chapter ‘‘Court’’ in Order 39 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 shall include the Health Ombud.
34. The Health Ombud shall, every six months, report to the appropriate Government,
the number and nature of complaints received, the action taken and orders passed in relation
to such complaints and a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the National HIV/AIDS
Authority and the concerned HIV/AIDS Authority.
35. Nothing contained in this Chapter prohibits, limits or otherwise restricts the right
of a person to other remedies provided under this Act or any other law for the time being in
force to address violations of the provisions of this Act.
CHAPTER  XI
HIV/AIDS  A
UTHORITY
36. (1) The Central Government shall for the whole country, on the appointed date,
constitute and establish, in accordance with the provisions of this Act, a body to be known as
the National HIV/AIDS Authority to exercise the powers conferred upon and perform the
functions assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The appropriate Government for each Union territory and for each State, shall, on
the commencement of this Act, constitute and establish, in accordance with the provisions
of this Act, a State or Union territory HIV/AIDS Authority as the case may be, under such
name as may be specified in the notification to exercise the powers conferred upon, and
perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.
(3) The appropriate Government for each district in a Union territory and the State
Government for each district in a State shall where a District AIDS Control Society exists,
Civil
Authorities
to carry out
Health
Ombud
Orders.
Consequences
of breach of
Health
Ombud
Orders.
Report to
Government.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.
Right of
Redressal.
Constitution
of HIV/AIDS
Authorities.
5 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

21
and may for other districts, constitute and establish, in accordance with the provisions of
this Act a body to be known as the District HIV/AIDS Authority under such name as may be
specified in the notification, to exercise the powers conferred upon and perform the functions
assigned to it, under this Act.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Chapter, the appointed date shall be such
date, being a date not later than six months of the commencement of this Act, as the appropriate
Government may by notification appoint for the constitution and establishment of the
concerned HIV/AIDS Authority.
37. The HIV/AIDS Authority shall be a body corporate with the name aforesaid having
perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to
acquire, hold and dispose off property and to contract, and may, by the aforesaid name, sue
or be sued.
38. (1) The head office of the National HIV/AIDS Authority shall be at Delhi and the
National HIV/AIDS Authority may establish offices at such other places in India.
(2) The head office of State, Union territory and District HIV/AIDS Authorities shall
be at the State capital, Union territory capital and District headquarters respectively and
such HIV/AIDS Authorities may establish offices at other places in their jurisdiction as
may be deemed necessary.
39. (1) The National HIV/AIDS Authority shall comprise—
(a) a full-time Director, being a person with special knowledge or practical
experience in matters relating to HIV/AIDS, to be nominated by the Nomination
Committee concerned;
(b) five full-time members to be nominated by the Central Government;
(c) one person each from the Northern, Southern, Eastern, Western and North-
Eastern State and Union territory HIV/AIDS Authorities to be nominated by the
Central Government on an annual rotating basis;
(d) a full-time member being an HIV-positive person to be nominated by the
Nomination Committee concerned;
(e) five persons to be nominated by the Central Government in accordance with
section 42, to represent HIV-positive persons, other protected persons, healthcare
providers, women, non-governmental organisations working in the field of HIV/AIDS
or any other interest which, in the opinion of the Central Government, ought to be
represented;
(f) a full-time member-HIV/AIDS expert, being a person having special
knowledge or practical experience in respect of matters relating to public health,
human rights and HIV/AIDS, nominated by the Central Government in accordance
with section 42;
(g) a full-time member-secretary, possessing qualifications, knowledge and
experience of various aspects of HIV/AIDS, to be made available by the Central
Government.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, Northern States are Jammu
and Kashmir, Punjab, Haryana, Chandigarh, Delhi, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh,
Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh, Western States are Maharashtra, Gujarat, Madhya
Pradesh, Daman and Diu, Lakshadweep and Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Eastern States
are West Bengal, Orissa, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Sikkim and Andaman and
Nicobar Islands, Southern States are Karnataka, Goa, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Pondicherry
and Andhra Pradesh and North-Eastern States are Manipur, Assam, Meghalaya,
Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura and Arunachal Pradesh.
HIV/AIDS
Authority to
be body
corporate.
Composition
of HIV/AIDS
Authorities.
Office of
HIV/AIDS
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

22
(2) A State or Union territory HIV/AIDS Authority shall comprise —
(a) a full-time Director, being a person having special knowledge or practical
experience in respect of matters relating to HIV/AIDS or a person having knowledge
and experience in administering institutions dealing with the matters aforesaid, to be
nominated by the concerned State or Union territory Nomination Committee;
(b) five full-time members to be nominated by the appropriate Government;
(c) five members, to be nominated by the appropriate Government from amongst
members of local authorities functioning within the State or Union territory, as the
case may be;
(d) a full-time member being an HIV-positive person to be nominated by the
concerned Nomination Committee;
(e) five persons to be nominated by the appropriate Government in accordance
with section 42, to represent HIV-positive persons, other protected persons, healthcare
providers, women, non-governmental organisations working in the field of HIV/AIDS
or any other interest which, in the opinion of the appropriate Government, ought to be
represented;
(f) a full-time member-HIV/AIDS expert, being a person having special
knowledge or practical experience in respect of matters relating to public health,
human rights and HIV to be nominated by the appropriate Government in accordance
with section 42;
(g) a full-time member-secretary, possessing qualifications, knowledge and
experience of various aspects of HIV/AIDS, to be made available by the appropriate
Government.
(3) A District HIV/AIDS Authority shall comprise—
(a) a full-time Director, being a person having special knowledge or practical
experience in respect of matters relating to HIV/AIDS or a person having knowledge
and experience in administering institutions dealing with the matters aforesaid, to be
nominated by the Nomination Committee concerned;
(b) three full-time members to be nominated by the appropriate Government;
(c) two members, to be nominated by the appropriate Government from amongst
the members of local authorities functioning within the District;
(d) a full-time member being an HIV-positive person to be nominated by the
concerned Nomination Committee;
(e) three persons to be nominated by the appropriate Government in accordance
with section 42, to represent HIV-positive persons, other protected persons, healthcare
providers, women, non-governmental organisations working in the field of HIV/AIDS
in that District or any other interest which, in the opinion of the appropriate
Government, ought to be represented;
(f) a full-time member-HIV/AIDS expert, being a person having special
knowledge or practical experience in respect of matters relating to public health,
human rights and HIV to be nominated by the appropriate Government in accordance
with section 42;
(g) a full-time member-secretary, possessing qualifications, knowledge and
experience of various aspects of HIV/AIDS, to be made available by the appropriate
Government.
40. (1) The Central, State and Union territory Nomination Committees shall, on the
appointed date, and subsequently to fill vacancies in the concerned HIV/AIDS Authority,
meet to consider, determine and nominate such persons, as they are required, under section 39,
to appoint.
Nomination
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

23
(2) The Central Nomination Committee shall comprise the Prime Minister, the Minister
for Health and Family Welfare, the leaders of the opposition in the House of the people and
the Council of States, the Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission and an
HIV-positive person appointed by the Central Government in accordance with section 42.
(3) The State Nomination Committee shall comprise the Chief Minister, the Minister in
charge of Health in the State, the leaders of the Opposition in the State Legislative Assembly
and State Legislative Council, in cases where both Houses exist, the Chairperson of the State
Human Rights Commission or where no State Human Rights Commission exists, an expert in
public health, HIV/AIDS or human rights as appointed by the State Government in accordance
with section 42 and an HIV-positive person appointed by the State Government in accordance
with section 42.
(4) (a) The Union territory Nomination Committee shall, where the Union territory has
its own legislature, comprise the Chief Minister, the Minister in charge of Health in the Union
territory, the leaders of the Opposition in the Union territory Legislative Assembly an expert
in public health, HIV/AIDS or human rights as appointed by the Union territory Government
in accordance with section 42 and an HIV-positive person appointed by the Union territory
Government in accordance with section 42.
(b) The Union territory Nomination Committee shall, where the Union territory has no
legislature, be represented by the Central Nomination Committee under sub-section (2).
(5) No appointment by a Nomination Committee shall be invalid merely by reason of
any vacancy in such Nomination Committee.
41. (1) The National HIV/AIDS Authority shall be advised by an Advisory Committee
on matters relating to the enforcement of this Act, the protection and promotion of rights of
protected person, the care, support and treatment of persons living with HIV/AIDS and the
prevention and control of HIV/AIDS.
(2) The Advisory Committee shall comprise:—
(a) the Central Nomination Committee; and
(b) the following persons to be appointed by the Central Government for a
period of two years with eligibility for re-appointment in accordance with section 42,—
(i) two representatives from non-governmental organisations working in
the fields of HIV/AIDS or public health;
(ii) a representative of the Indian Council of Medical Research;
(iii) a representative of healthcare providers;
(iv) a representative of HIV-positive persons;
(v) a representative of protected persons;
(vi) a representative of women;
(vii) a representative of children;
(viii) a human rights activist;
(ix) an epidemiologist; and
(x) a public health expert.
(3) The Advisory Committee shall meet once a year.
Advisory
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

24
42. (1) For any appointment to be made by an appropriate Government under sections
39, 40 and 41, such appropriate Government shall, in the case of a member being appointed
upon the constitution of an HIV/AIDS Authority or a Nomination Committee or the Advisory
Committee and subsequently on the completion of tenure by a member, thirty days prior to
the date upon which a member is to be appointed, call for nominations from all persons for
the post through widespread advertisements including through national and local
newspapers and the internet.
(2) In cases where the need for appointing a member arises due to factors other than
the constitution of an HIV/AIDS Authority or a Nomination Committee or the Advisory
Committee or the completion of tenure, the appropriate Government shall commence the
process of appointment as specified in sub section ( 1) immediately upon such vacancy
arising and shall make the final decision as to appointment within thirty days.
(3) In the appointment of any member of an HIV/AIDS Authority, a Nomination
Committee or the Advisory Committee, the appropriate Government shall take into
consideration the track record of the persons nominated for the post in the field of HIV/AIDS
and health and their experience in their respective fields.
(4) The appropriate Government shall make the process of any appointment public
immediately upon the person's appointment, including through the internet, and in publicising
such appointment shall include the name of the person appointed, their track record and
experience and any other factors that were relevant in the appointment.
43. (1) The Director and every other member of an HIV/AIDS Authority shall hold
office for a term of five years from the date on which such person enters office and shall be
eligible for reappointment.
(2) A member may relinquish office by giving written notice to the appropriate
Government of not less than three months.
(3) The appropriate Government may remove from office any member who—
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudged as insolvent;
(b) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member of the
HIV/AIDS Authority;
(c) has been convicted of any offence or has acquired such financial or other
interest which is in the opinion of the appropriate Government likely to affect prejudicially
such person's functions as a member of the HIV/AIDS Authority; or
(d) has so abused the position as to render continuation in office detrimental to
the public interest: Provided that a member shall not be removed from office without
being given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
44. The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of, the Director and members shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that such salary, allowances and other conditions of service shall not be
varied to the disadvantage of the members after appointment.
45. (1) The HIV/AIDS Authority shall meet at such time and place and shall observe
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be
prescribed.
(2) The Director shall preside at the meetings of the HIV/AIDS Authority.
(3) If for any reason the Director is unable to attend any meeting of the HIV/AIDS
Authority, any member of the HIV/AIDS Authority chosen by the members present shall
preside at the meeting.
(4) All questions which come before any meeting of the HIV/AIDS Authority shall be
decided by a majority of votes of the members of the HIV/AIDS Authority present and
Appointments
to HIV/AIDS
Authority
and
Nomination
Committee
by
appropriate
Government.
Tenure of
office of
Director and
other
members.
Salary and
allowances of
Director and
members.
Meetings of
the HIV/AIDS
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

25
voting and in the event of equality of votes, the Director of the HIV/AIDS Authority or the
person presiding at the meeting shall have, and exercise, a second or casting vote.
(5) Every member who is in any way, whether directly, indirectly or personally, concerned
or interested in a matter to be decided at a meeting shall disclose the nature of such concern
or interest, pecuniary or otherwise, and after such disclosure, such member shall not attend
that item of the meeting.
(6) No act or proceeding of the HIV/AIDS Authority shall be invalid merely by reason
of,—
(a) any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the HIV/AIDS Authority; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as the Director or a member
of the HIV/AIDS Authority; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the HIV/AIDS Authority not affecting the
merits of the act or proceeding.
46. (1) An HIV/AIDS Authority may appoint such committees as may be necessary for
the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its functions under this Act.
(2) Persons appointed as members of a committee under sub-section (1) shall be
entitled to receive such allowances or fees for attending the meetings of the committee as
may be prescribed.
47. Subject to such control and restriction as may be prescribed, the HIV/AIDS
Authority may appoint such officers and other employees as may be necessary for the
efficient performance of its functions and the method of appointment, the salary and
allowances and other conditions of service of such other officers and employees of the HIV/
AIDS Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
48. The Director shall be the Chief Executive of the HIV/AIDS Authority and shall
exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed.
49. (1) On the appointed date, the undertakings in relation to the National AIDS
Control Organisation, a State AIDS Control Society and where a District AIDS Control
Society exists, of that District AIDS Control Society, shall stand transferred to the National
HIV/AIDS Authority, the concerned State HIV/AIDS Authority or the concerned District
HIV/AIDS Authority, as the case may be.
(2) The undertaking of the National AIDS Control Organisation, the concerned State
AIDS Control Society or the concerned District AIDS Control Society, which is transferred
to, and which vests in the National HIV/AIDS Authority, the State HIV/AIDS Authority or
the District HIV/AIDS Authority as the case may be, shall be deemed to include all assets,
rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all properties, movable and immovable, real
or personal, corporeal or incorporeal, in possession or reservation, present or contingent,
of whatever nature and wheresoever situate, including lands, works, cash balances, capital
reserves, reserve funds, investments, tenancies, leases and book debts and all other rights
and interests arising out of such property as were immediately before the appointed date in
the ownership, possession or power of the National AIDS Control Organisation, the
concerned State AIDS Control Society or the concerned District AIDS Control Society as
the case may be, in relation to its undertakings, whether within or outside India, all books
of account and documents relating thereto and shall also be deemed to include all borrowings,
liabilities and obligations of  whatever kind then subsisting of the National AIDS Control
Organisation or the concerned State AIDS Control Society or concerned District AIDS
Control Society, as the case may be, in relation to its undertakings.
(3) All contracts and working arrangements subsisting immediately before the
appointed date and affecting the National AIDS Control Organisation, the State AIDS Control
Society or the District AIDS Control Society, as the case may be, shall, in so far as they
Committees.
Officers and
other
employees of
the HIV/
AIDS
Authority.
Director to
be Chief
Executive.
Transfer of
Undertakings,
etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

26
relate to their undertakings, cease to have effect or to be enforceable against the National
AIDS Control Organisation, the State AIDS Control Society or the District AIDS Control
Society, as the case may be, and shall be of as full force and effect against or in favour of the
HIV/AIDS Authority in which the undertaking has vested by virtue of this Act and enforceable
as fully and effectually as if instead of the National AIDS Control Organisation or the State
AIDS Control Society or the District AIDS Control Society as the case may be, the concerned
HIV/AIDS Authority had been named therein or had been a party thereto.
(4) Any proceeding or cause of action pending or existing immediately before the
appointed date by or against or in relation to the National AIDS Control Organisation or the
State AIDS Control Society or the District AIDS Control Society, as the case may be, in
relation to its undertaking may, as from that day, be continued and enforced by or against the
HIV/AIDS Authority in which it has vested by virtue of this Act, as it might have been
enforced by or against the National AIDS Control Organisation or the State AIDS Control
Society or the District AIDS Control Society, as the case may be, if this Act had not been
passed, and shall cease to be enforceable by or against the National AIDS Control Organisation
or the State AIDS Control Society or the District AIDS Control Society, as the case may be.
(5) With effect from the appointed date, all licenses, permits, quotas and exemptions
granted to the National AIDS Control Organisation or the State AIDS Control Society or
the District AIDS Control Society as the case may be, or in connection with the affairs and
business of the National AIDS Control Organisation or the State AIDS Control Society or
the District AIDS Control Society, as the case may be, under any law for the time being in
force, shall be deemed to have been granted to the HIV/AIDS Authority in which the
undertaking of the National AIDS Control Organisation or the State AIDS Control Society
or the District AIDS Control Society, as the case may be, has vested.
(6) Where any exemption from, or any assessment with respect to, any tax has been
granted or made or any benefit by way of set off or carry forward, as the case may be, of any
unabsorbed depreciation or investment allowance or other allowance or loss has been
extended or is available to or in relation to the National AIDS Control Organisation or the
State AIDS Control Society or the District AIDS Control Society, as the case may be, under
the Income Tax Act, 1961, such exemption, assessment or benefit shall continue to have
effect in relation to the HIV/AIDS authority in which the undertaking of the National AIDS
Control Organisation or the State AIDS Control Society or the District AIDS Control
Society, as the case may be, has vested.
(7) Where any payment made by the National AIDS Control Organisation or the State
AIDS Control Society or the District AIDS Control Society, as the case may be, is exempted
from deduction of the tax at source under any provision of the Income Tax Act, 1961, the
exemption from tax will continue to be available as if the provisions of the said Act made
applicable to the National AIDS Control Organisation or the State AIDS Control Society or
the District AIDS Control Society, as the case may be, were operative in relation to the HIV/
AIDS Authority in which the undertaking of the Natioal AIDS Control Organisation or the
State AIDS Control Society or the District AIDS Control Society, as the case may be, has
been vested.
(8) The transfer and vesting of the undertaking or any part thereof in terms of this
section shall not be construed as a transfer within the meaning of the Income Tax Act, 1961
for the purposes of capital gains.
(9) Any guarantee given for or in favour of or in relation to the National AIDS Control
Organisation or State AIDS Control Society or District AIDS Control Society, as the case
may be, with respect to any loan or lease finance shall continue to be operative in relation to
the HIV/AIDS Authority in which the undertaking of the National AIDS Control
Organisation or the State AIDS Control Society or the District AIDS Control Society, as
the case may be, has vested by virtue of this Act.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
45

27
(10) Every officer or other employee of the National AIDS Control Organisation or
the State AIDS Control Society or the District AIDS Control Society, except the Director, or
the National AIDS Control Organisation or the State AIDS Control Society or the District
AIDS Control Society, as the case may be, serving in its employment immediately before the
appointed date shall, in so far as such officer or other employee is employed in connection
with the undertaking which has vested in the HIV/AIDS Authority by virtue of this Act
become, as from the appointed date an officer or other employee, as the case may be, of such
HIV/AIDS Authority in which the undertaking has vested and shall hold office or service
therein by the same tenure, at the same remuneration, upon the same terms and conditions,
with the same obligations and with the same rights and privileges as to leave, passage,
insurance, superannuation scheme, provident fund, other funds, retirement, pension,
gratuity and other benefits as such officer would have held under the National AIDS Control
Organisation or the State AIDS Control Society or the District AIDS Control Society, as
the case may be, if its undertaking had not vested in the HIV/AIDS Authority and shall
continue to do so as an officer or other employee, as the case may be, of the HIV/AIDS
Authority or until the expiry of a period of six months from the appointed date if such officer
or other employee does not opt to be the officer or other employee of the HIV/AIDS Authority,
within such period.
(11) Where an officer or other employee of the National AIDS Control Organisation or
the State AIDS Control Society or the District AIDS Control Society, as the case may be, opts
under sub-section (10) not to be in the employment or service of the concerned HIV/AIDS
Authority in which the undertaking of the National AIDS Control Organisation or the State
AIDS Control Society or the District AIDS Control Society, as the case may be, has vested,
such officer or other employee shall continue in the employment of the appropriate
Government.
(12) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or in
any other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other
employee of the National AIDS Control Organisation or the State AIDS Control Society or
the District AIDS Control Society, as the case may be, to an HIV/AIDS Authority shall not
entitle such officer or other employee to any compensation under this Act or under any other
law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court or other
authority.
(13) The officers and other employees who have retired before the appointed date from
the service of the National AIDS Control Organisation or the State AIDS Control Society or
the District AIDS Control Society, as the case may be, and are entitled to any benefits,
rights or privileges shall be entitled to receive the same benefits, rights or privileges from
the HIV/AIDS Authority in which the undertaking of the National AIDS Control
Organisation or the State AIDS Control Society has vested.
(14) The trusts of the Provident Fund or Group Insurance and Superannuation Scheme
of the National AIDS Control Organisation or the State AIDS Control Society or the District
AIDS Control Society, as the case may be, and any other bodies created for the welfare of
officers or employees would continue to discharge their functions in the HIV/AIDS Authority
as was being done prior to the appointed date in the National AIDS Control Organisation or
the State AIDS Control Society or the District AIDS Control Society, as the case may be,
and tax exemptions granted to such schemes shall continue to be applied to the concerned
HIV/AIDS Authority.
50. (1) It shall be the function of the HIV/AIDS Authority to:—
(a) prevent and control the spread of HIV;
(b) promote and protect the rights of protected persons;
(c) provide care, support and treatment to HIV-positive persons and those
affected by HIV/AIDS;
14 of 1947.
Functions of
the HIV/
AIDS
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

28
(d) reduce the vulnerability of individuals and communities to HIV/AIDS;
(e) promote awareness, information and education about HIV/AIDS; and
(f) alleviate the socio-economic and human impact of HIV/AIDS; in India or the
State or the Union territory or the District, as the case may be, and to co-ordinate any
such programmes undertaken by any other persons or authorities on behalf of the
appropriate Government as may be necessary.
(2) The HIV/AIDS Authority may, for the purpose of discharging its duties or performing
its functions under this Act enter into any memorandum or arrangement with any agency of
any foreign country or any international organisation.
(3) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the sub-section ( 1), the
National HIV/AIDS Authority for the whole or any part of India a State HIV/AIDS Authority
for the whole or any part of the State, a Union territory HIV/AIDS Authority for the whole or
any part of the Union territory, and a District HIV/AIDS Authority for the whole or any part
of the District, shall—
(a) institute and implement HIV-related programmes including such
programmes as are specified in Schedule II and plan and organise the training of
persons, engaged or to be engaged, in HIV-related programmes and strengthen
programme management capabilities of the appropriate Government, municipal
corporations, panchayat institutions and non-governmental organisations
participating in HIV-related programmes;
(b) inquire, suo motu, on the request of the appropriate Government or its
agencies or any court or in the case of a State or Union territory HIV/AIDS Authority
on the direction of the National HIV/AIDS Authority or in the case of a District HIV/
AIDS Authority on the direction of the National, State or Union territory HIV/AIDS
Authority or on a petition presented to it by any person, into complaints or instances
of violation of the provisions of this Act or negligence in the prevention of such
violation, by any person, wholly or partly in its jurisdiction, and shall submit the
report of such inquiry to the appropriate Government with recommendations as to
steps to be taken to remedy the violation and may institute legal proceedings as
provided in sub-section (c);
(c) institute, or assist complainants in instituting, or intervene in legal
proceedings, involving any allegation of violation of the provisions of this Act in any
court or challenge any order of a court where the HIV/AIDS Authority is a party or
conduct investigations and make recommendations as directed by the court;
(d) maintain, publish and widely disseminate a list of HIV-related services
including care, support and treatment centres and homes, healthcare providers and
healthcare institutions providing care and treatment for HIV/AIDS, help lines, testing
facilities and legal assistance;
(e) advise and report to the appropriate Government, suo motu or when requested
by it, on any matters concerning HIV/AIDS or arising in course of the performance of
the HIV/AIDS Authority's functions, in particular related to persons below the age of
eighteen years and protected persons, including,—
(i) a review of existing and proposed international and national laws and
policies and recommendations on the effective implementation or amendment of
the same;
(ii) a review of laws and policies affecting persons below the age of
eighteen years and children affected by HIV/AIDS including the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection) Act, 2000 and rules related to foster care and adoption;
(iii) recommendations on the need for new laws and policies;
56 of 2000.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

29
(iv) a review of the factors that inhibit the enjoyment of rights of persons;
and
(v) recommendations for instituting programmes for sensitisation of law
enforcement on matters related to this Act.
(f) assess and recommend the strengthening of national, State or local healthcare
systems, as the case may be, including related to the improvement of access to
healthcare, the primary healthcare system, integrating HIV/AIDS within existing health
programmes, improving health education and recommending and assisting in the
formulation and implementation of action plans by the appropriate Government to
ensure the proper provision of healthcare through public healthcare institutions;
(g) promote, commission and finance research in relation to HIV/AIDS and
maintain and update a database of all HIV/AIDS related research being conducted in
its jurisdiction;
(h) carry out HIV/AIDS surveillance in accordance with the regulations;
(i) initiate and ensure ongoing interaction with international agencies and other
countries to ensure that governmental responses to the HIV/AIDS epidemic will continue
to make the best use of assistance, information and knowledge available from the
international community;
(j) encourage the efforts of non-governmental organisations and institutions
working in the field of HIV/AIDS, human rights and public health including through
the provision of material and human resources and allocation of sufficient funding to
support, sustain and enhance their capacity and services;
(k) promote the understanding, acceptance and public discussion of rights of
protected persons and of the provisions of this Act;
(l) formulate three-year action plans for the carrying out of functions under this
Act in consultation with different stakeholders including HIV-positive persons,
protected persons, non-governmental organisations and healthcare providers; and
(m) do anything incidental or conducive to the performance of any of the preceding
functions or for the purposes of this Act.
51. In addition to the functions set out in section 50, the National HIV/AIDS Authority
shall,—
(a) formulate and implement a National HIV/AIDS Policy which shall be
reviewed, and amended if necessary, every three years after widespread consultation;
(b) establish a committee to examine the impact of HIV/AIDS on women, which
shall inter alia—
(i) undertake a review of all laws, in particular personal laws;
(ii) determine the manner in, and extent to which such laws discriminate
against women;
(iii) recommend the reform and repeal of such laws to the appropriate
Government;
(iv) examine the role of women at home and in public life, their sexual,
reproductive and economic rights, including their ability to negotiate safer sex
and make reproductive choices;
(v) examine strategies to increase educational and economic opportunities
for women, sensitise service deliverers on issues related to women, improve
healthcare and social support services for women; and
(vi) examine the impact of religious and cultural traditions on women.
Additional
Functions of
National
HIV/AIDS
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

30
(c) in relation to State, Union territory and district HIV/AIDS Authorities—
(i) supervise their functioning;
(ii) provide technical assistance and guidance to carry out and sponsor
investigations and research relating to HIV/AIDS;
(iii) co-ordinate their activities and resolve disputes among them; and
(iv) make budgetary allocations and monitor their use of funds and
resources.
(d) formulate, circulate and implement a model national HIV/AIDS policy for
the care, support and protection of children affected by HIV/AIDS in educational
institutions;
(e) formulate, modify and publish guidelines, policies or standards including in
relation to,—
(i) programmes specified in Schedule II;
(ii) HIV/AIDS surveillance and counselling;
(iii) establishment of Voluntary Counselling and Testing Centres;
(iv) registration and support of non-governmental organisations, the
disbursement of monies for this purpose while ensuring that such
non-governmental organisations adopt and follow good practices and ethical
guidelines in the running and management of their affairs; and
(v) the avoidance of acts or practices that violate or breach the provisions
of this Act.
52. In addition to the functions set out in section 50, State and Union territory HIV/
AIDS Authorities shall within their jurisdictions—
(a) translate the National HIV/AIDS Policy and other guidelines issued by the
National HIV/AIDS Authority into local and regional languages, ensure their
widespread dissemination and monitor their implementation;
(b) report to the National HIV/AIDS Authority;
(c) in relation to District HIV/AIDS Authorities where such Authorities exist—
(i) supervise their functioning;
(ii) co-ordinate their activities and resolve disputes among them; and
(iii) delegate such of their functions at the District level as they see fit;
(d) establish HIV/AIDS helplines in partnership with NGOs, networks of
HIV-positive persons or other stakeholders in each District in accordance with the
Regulations;
(e) establish Voluntary Counselling and Testing Centres in accordance with
section 17 in every sub-district and at their head offices;
(f) maintain a list of registered counsellors and V oluntary Counselling and Testing
Centres which shall be available to the public free of cost;
(g) under directions and guidelines of and in coordination with the National
HIV/AIDS Authority establish mechanisms for—
(i) the registration of V oluntary Counselling and Testing Centres and
counsellors;
(ii) the training of counsellors;
Additional
Functions of
State and
Union
territory
HIV/AIDS
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

31
(iii) the provision of HIV-related pre-marital information and counselling
services; and
(iv) the setting up of shelter homes for women and children living with
HIV/AIDS.
(h) co-ordinate with the National HIV/AIDS Authority and other State and Union
territory HIV/AIDS Authorities for the purposes of this Act.
53. (1) In proceedings and inquiries before an HIV/AIDS Authority, it shall have all the
powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses and examine them on
oath;
(b) discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(2) The HIV/AIDS Authority shall have the power to require any person, to furnish
information on such points or matters as, in its opinion, may be useful for, or relevant to, the
subject matter of an inquiry and any person so required shall be deemed to be legally bound
to furnish  such information within the meaning of section 176 and section 177 of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860.
(3) The HIV/AIDS Authority or any other officer, not below the rank of a Gazetted
Officer, specially authorised in this behalf by the HIV/AIDS Authority may enter any building
or place where the HIV/AIDS Authority has reason to believe that any document relating to
the subject matter of an inquiry may be found, and may seize any such document or take
extracts or copies therefrom subject to the provisions of section 100 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, in so far as it may be applicable.
54. All orders and decisions of the HIV/AIDS Authority shall be authenticated by the
signature of the Director or any other member authorised by the HIV/AIDS Authority in this
behalf.
55. (1) The HIV/AIDS Authority shall, within one hundred and eighty days of its
constitution and establishment, notify a voluntary, graded rating and compliance system for
all organisations including companies, institutions and non-governmental organisations in
its jurisdiction, which shall provide inter alia:
(a) for the listing of organisations with the HIV/AIDS Authority;
(b) formats for reporting compliance with the provisions of this Act; and
(c) a public notification system for organisations who rate well on the compliance
of this Act.
(2) Based on the rating and compliance system, the HIV/AIDS Authority shall, on an
annual basis, rate organisations on their compliance with the provisions of this Act and shall
report to the appropriate Government such organisations that rate well on compliance.
(3) Based on the report of the HIV/AIDS Authority under sub-section (2), the appropriate
Government shall accord priority and preference to such organisations that rate well on
compliance in relation to various matters including the granting of contracts, licences, funding
and resource allocation.
Power of
HIV/AIDS
Authority.
5 of 1908.
45 of 1860.
1 of 1974.
Authentication
of orders of
HIV/AIDS
Authority.
HIV/AIDS
Authority to
monitor
compliance
of Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

32
(4) The HIV/AIDS Authority shall also report to the appropriate Government such
organisations that have been convicted of offences or awarded adverse orders in terms of
this Act or those which may have been given a poor rating as 'HIV unfriendly' in relation to
various matters including the granting of contracts, licences, funding and resource allocation.
(5) The HIV/AIDS Authority shall publish for wide circulation its rating and compliance
system, the names of organisations that perform well on the rating system and those that are
given a poor rating as 'HIV unfriendly'.
56. (1) The HIV/AIDS Authority shall—
(a) call upon such experts, from the fields of public health, human rights, law
and HIV/AIDS or from any other discipline as it deems necessary to assist it in the
conduct of an inquiry under clause (b) of sub-section (3);
(b) ensure, including through political and financial support, that consultation
with all stakeholders including HIV-positive persons, protected persons, healthcare
providers, persons working in the field of HIV/AIDS, public health experts and human
rights organisations occurs in all phases of HIV/AIDS policy design, programme
implementation and evaluation;
(c) establish formal and regular mechanisms to facilitate ongoing dialogue
with and input from such community representatives into HIV-related government
policies and programmes including through regular reporting by community
representatives to the various government, parliamentary and judicial branches,
joint workshops with community representatives on policy, planning and evaluation
of State responses and through mechanisms for receiving written submissions from
the community;
(d) ensure a greater involvement of HIV-positive persons, other protected
persons, non-governmental organisations, women, children, civil society and
healthcare providers in the formulation and implementation of HIV-related policies,
including through an initiative to strengthen the capacity and co-ordination of
networks of people living with HIV/AIDS and community based organisations; and
(e) work with different stakeholders for the purposes of the performance of its
functions.
(2) All policies, programmes and guidelines formulated by the HIV/AIDS Authority
shall be evidence-based, formulated in a transparent manner and through consultation as
provided in sub-section (1) and shall be open to public scrutiny.
(3) The HIV/AIDS Authority shall continuously collect information on HIV/AIDS,
human rights and health and use this information as a basis for policy and programme
development and reform.
57. (1) The HIV/AIDS Authority shall publish, including through the Internet, and
make available to all persons, all reports and minutes of its meetings and the meetings of its
Committees and where applicable those of the Advisory Committee and the concerned
Nomination Committee, its policies, programmes, guidelines, standards, all data relating
to care, support and treatment, budgetary allocations, statements of audit and accounts and
reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India related to its functioning.
(2) Every person shall have the right to information from the HIV/AIDS Authority and
this information shall be subject to the maintenance of confidentiality in relation to protected
persons.
58. The appropriate Government shall consider the reports and recommendations of
the HIV/AIDS Authority, in particular in relation to review of laws and policies relating to
women, and within three months of their submission, shall, together with its comments,
views and the action it proposes to take in relation to such reports and recommendations, lay
the same before the concerned legislature for their action and publish and make available the
same to all persons.
HIV/AIDS
Authority to
Consult.
Duty to
publish
information.
Appropriate
Government
to consider
HIV/AIDS
Authority
reports.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
50
45

33
59. (1) The appropriate Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament
or the concerned legislature as the case may be, by law in this behalf, make in each financial
year such contributions to the HIV/AIDS Authority as it may think necessary to enable the
HIV/AIDS Authority to perform its functions under this Act.
(2) Each HIV/AIDS Authority shall have its own fund, and all sums which may, from
time to time, be paid to it by the appropriate Government, and in the case of the State,
Union territory and District HIV/AIDS Authorities, by the National HIV/AIDS Authority
and all other receipts by way of gifts, grants, donations, benefactions, fees or otherwise of
that HIV/AIDS Authority shall be carried to the fund of the HIV/AIDS Authority and all
payments by the HIV/AIDS Authority shall be made from there.
(3) The HIV/AIDS Authority may expand such sums as it thinks fit for performing its
functions under this Act and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the
fund of that HIV/AIDS Authority.
(4) The HIV/AIDS Authority shall during each financial year, prepare, in such form and
at such time as may be prescribed, a budget in respect of the financial year next ensuing
showing the estimated receipt and expenditure, and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the
appropriate Government and its supervising HIV/AIDS Authority.
60. (1) The HIV/AIDS Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by
the appropriate Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India.
(2) The accounts of the HIV/AIDS Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India every three years and any expenditure incurred in connection with
such audit shall be payable by the HIV/AIDS Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any person appointed by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India in connection with the audit of the accounts of the
HIV/AIDS Authority under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges in connection
with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India generally has in connection
with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and
to inspect any of the offices of the HIV/AIDS Authority.
(4) The accounts of the HIV/AIDS Authority as certified by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General or any other person appointed by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the
Appropriate Government by the HIV/AIDS Authority and the appropriate Government shall
cause the audit report to be laid as soon as may be after it is received before the concerned
legislature and shall publish the same for wide circulation.
CHAPTER XII
I
NSTITUTIONAL OBLIGATIONS
61. The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to all institutions comprising
twenty or more persons.
62. Every person who is in charge of, or responsible to an institution for the conduct
of the activities of such institution, or both, shall ensure compliance by such institution with
the provisions of this Act on the commencement of this Act.
63. (1) Every institution shall appoint a person of senior rank with full administrative
powers, working full time in the institution, as the Complaints Officer, who shall, on a
Budgetary
provisions.
Accounts and
Audit.
Application.
General
Responsibility
of
Institutions.
Grievance
Redressal
Mechanism.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

34
day-to-day basis, deal with complaints of violations of the provisions of this Act by or in the
institution, in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that where an institution carries on its activity in one or more places with
twenty or more persons in any of such additional places, a separate Complaints Officer shall
be appointed for each of such places.
(2) Every person with a grievance about the violation of the provisions of this Act by
or in an institution has the right to approach the Complaints Officer to attend to such
grievance and shall be informed of such right by the institution.
(3) The Complaints Officer, may inquire suo motu, and shall inquire, upon a complaint
made by any person, into violation of the provisions of this Act by the institution or any
person in the institution.
(4) The Complaints Officer shall act in an objective and independent manner when
inquiring into complaints made under this Chapter.
(5) The Complaints Officer shall inquire into and decide a complaint promptly and in
any case within seven working days:
Provided that in cases of emergency the Complaints Officer shall decide the complaint
within one day.
(6) The Complaints Officer, if satisfied, that a violation of the Act has taken place as
alleged in the complaint, shall first direct the institution to take measures to rectify the breach
or violation complained of, then counsel the person alleged to have committed the act and
require such person to undergo training and social service, and upon subsequent violations
shall recommend to the institution to, and the institution shall, initiate disciplinary action
against such person.
(7) The Complaints Officer shall inform the complainant of the action taken in relation
to the complaint and shall be responsible for ensuring that the complaints, their nature and
number and the action taken are published  on the institution's website or web page where
such a website or web page exists and are reported to the concerned HIV/AIDS Authority on
a six-monthly basis:
Provided that the Complaints Officer shall ensure the maintenance of confidentiality of
complainants and parties to a complaint.
64. (1) The National HIV/AIDS Authority shall within ninety days of its constitution
and establishment, notify model HIV/AIDS policies for institutions formulated in
consultation with different stakeholders including HIV-positive persons and persons
working in the field of HIV/AIDS.
(2) The model HIV/AIDS policies as may be applicable and as may be amended and
updated from time to time by the National HIV/AIDS Authority, shall be deemed to be
adopted by every institution upon their notification.
(3) The text of the HIV/AIDS policy shall be conveyed to all persons working in the
institution and shall be prominently posted by the persons incharge of or responsible to the
institution, or both, in English and in the language understood by the majority of persons
working in or accessing such institution on special boards to be maintained for the purpose
at or near the entrance through which the majority of the persons working in or accessing the
services of the institution enter such institution.
(4) (a) The notice in sub-section (3) shall state the manner in which copies of the HIV/
AIDS Policy may be obtained and persons working in or accessing the services of the
institution shall be entitled to a copy of such policy free of charge.
(b) The HIV/AIDS policy of all institutions shall be available to all members of the
public for a nominal fee.
(c) In the case of educational institutions, learners and thier parents or guardians
shall be given a copy of the HIV/AIDS policy free of charge immediately upon admission of
the learner to the institution.
HIV/AIDS
policy.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

35
(5) The institution shall conduct annual training sessions for persons working in
such institution in understanding and implementing the HIV/AIDS policy of the institution.
(6) The National HIV/AIDS Authority shall ensure that the institutional HIV/AIDS
Policy is reviewed and if necessary, updated and amended on an annual basis.
65. Nothing contained in this Chapter prohibits, limits or otherwise restricts the right
of a person to other remedies provided under this Act or any other law for the time being in
force to address violations of the provisions of this Act.
CHAPTER XIII
D
UTIES OF STATE
66. (1) In compliance with the Constitution and India's commitments under international
conventions to which it is party, the appropriate Government shall—
(a) ensure the right of access to and equitable distribution of health facilities,
goods and services including essential medicines on a non-discriminatory basis;
(b) based on epidemiological evidence and through a participatory and
transparent process, adopt and implement a national public health strategy and plan of
action, to be periodically reviewed, addressing the health concerns of the whole
population and including methods such as right to health indicators and benchmarks,
by which progress can be closely monitored; and
(c) enact, review and amend legislation to promote the rights of protected persons
and to establish a legislative framework in consonance with the objectives of this Act.
(2) In order to fulfil its obligations under this Act, the appropriate Government shall—
(a) take measures to develop and promote awareness among protected persons
of their rights and duties under this Act; and
(b) take measures to develop and implement programmes in order to promote
the rights of protected persons under this Act including promoting and ensuring the
greater involvement of HIV-positive persons and protected persons in programmes,
action plans, policy formulation, decision-making processes and implementation of
plans under this Act in particular and in the field of HIV/AIDS in general.
67. (1) The Central Government shall, in co-ordination with the HIV/AIDS Authorities
establish an effective national framework to respond to HIV/AIDS which ensure a co-ordinated,
participatory, transparent and accountable approach, integrating HIV/AIDS policy and
programme responsibilities, across all branches of Government.
(2) Each Central, State and local ministry shall ensure that HIV/AIDS and human rights
are integrated into all its relevant plans and activities, including ministries and departments
related to—
(a) Education;
(b) Law and justice, including police and corrective services;
(c) Science and research;
(d) Employment and public service;
(e) Welfare, social security and housing;
(f) Immigration, indigenous populations, foreign affairs and development
cooperation;
(g) Health;
(h) Treasury and finance; and
(i) Defence, including armed services.
Right of
Redressal.
State
obligations.
Programmatic
and
Implementational
Obligations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

36
68. (1) The Central Government shall initiate and ensure the ongoing interaction with
neighbouring and other States to ensure that governmental responses to the HIV/AIDS
epidemic will continue to make the best use of assistance available from the international
community and such interaction shall, inter alia, reinforce, cooperation and assistance to
areas related to HIV/AIDS and human rights, in particular relating to access to treatment.
(2) The Central Government shall promote HIV-related human rights in international
forums and ensure that they are integrated into the policies and programmes of International
Organizations.
(3) The Central Government shall consider international guidelines, as they develop,
in the formulation of HIV-related policies and programmes in India.
CHAPTER XIV
S
PECIAL PROVISIONS
69. (1) The State shall develop and implement a comprehensive national strategy for
promoting women's right to health throughout their life span that includes interventions
aimed at the prevention and treatment of diseases affecting women, as well as policies to
provide access to a full range of high quality and affordable healthcare, including sexual
and reproductive healthcare services and policies that ensure the education and
empowerment of the girl child.
(2) In order to promote better health for women, the State shall integrate a gender-
based approach that recognises that biological and socio-cultural factors play a significant
role in influencing the health of women, in its health-related policies, planning, programmes
and research.
(3) The State shall ensure the disaggregation of health and socio-economic data
according to sex for the purpose of identifying and remedying inequalities in healthcare
access and provision.
70. Every protected person who is a woman or who is a person below the age of
eighteen years shall have the right to reside in the shared household, the right not to be
excluded from the shared household or any part of it and the right to enjoy and use the
facilities of such shared household in a non discriminatory manner.
Explanation.— "shared household" means a household where a person lives or at
any stage has lived in a domestic relationship either singly or along with another person and
includes such a household whether owned or tenanted either jointly or singly, any such
household in respect of which either person or both, jointly or singly, have any right, title,
interest or equity and includes a household which may belong to a joint family of which
either person is a member, irrespective of whether either person has any right, title or interest
in the shared household.
71. (1) In addition to and not in derogation of existing laws,—
(a) all marriages solemnised after the commencement of this Act shall be registered
in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(b) a marriage that is not registered after two years from the commencement of
this Act or one year from the date of its solemnisation, whichever is later, shall be
voidable at the option of the woman; and
(c) in the case of a marriage that has been declared void under this section, all
rights and obligations including the right to maintenance, the right of legitimacy of
children who would have been legitimate had the marriage not been dissolved and
rights related to property, shall be such as they would have been had the marriage
been dissolved under the applicable law.
Interaction
with
International
Community.
Women and
health.
Right of
Residence.
Registration
of marriages.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

37
(2) The appropriate Government shall appoint Registration Officers in every sub-
district in the country.
(3) The Central Government in consultation with the State Governments shall within
three hundred and sixty days of the commencement of this Act, prescribe the procedure for
registration of marriages and shall design and implement a system for indexing and
centralising marriage records.
(4) No marriage shall be registered unless the Registering Officer is satisfied that the
persons intending to marry have received HIV-related IEC in accordance with section 72 of
this Act.
72 (1) The National HIV/AIDS Authority shall, within ninety days of its constitution
and establishment, formulate guidelines, content and protocols for the provision of HIV-
related IEC before marriage.
(2) The appropriate Government shall establish a Counselling Centre at each Marriage
Office in each district, which shall implement the protocols formulated under sub-section
(1) above.
(3) All persons intending to get married or whose marriage has not been registered
shall receive face to face and one-on-one HIV/AIDS related information provided and
conveyed in an effective and interactive manner and shall be offered HIV/AIDS related
counselling.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, HIV-related IEC includes information
related to sexual health, contraception, condom usage, sexuality, the methods of transmission
of HIV and other sexually transmitted infections, and voluntary HIV testing.
73. ( 1) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of this Act and
notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, an HIV-positive
woman who is pregnant shall have the right to receive such counselling and information as
to enable her to make a decision about her pregnancy, whether or not to undertake HIV-
related treatment and in relation to other matters affecting her health and pregnancy.
(2) No woman who is pregnant and a protected person shall be subject to forced
sterilisation or abortion.
(3) The National HIV/AIDS Authority shall within sixty days of its constitution and
establishment, develop protocols for the testing, treatment and counselling of HIV-positive
women who are pregnant and every healthcare institution shall implement such protocols
immediately upon their notification.
(4) Protocols formulated under sub-section ( 3) shall provide inter alia counselling
guidelines in relation to care and treatment for the HIV-positive woman and her child, that
informed consent must form the basis for the woman's individual decision, recognition of the
right of the woman to decide, that the decision to use any HIV/AIDS related treatment during
pregnancy should be made by the woman following discussions with her healthcare provider
regarding the benefits and risks to her and her foetus and counselling on feeding and infant
milk substitutes.
74. (1) The Central Government shall, within three hundred and sixty days of the
commencement of this Act, formulate, notify and implement Regulations specifying protocols
for the counselling and treatment of survivors of sexual assault and for the training of
healthcare providers and other service providers in the implementation of such protocols.
(2) The appropriate Government shall, within seven hundred and twenty days of the
commencement of this Act, establish one or more sexual assault crisis centres in each
district in its jurisdiction.
HIV-related
IEC before
marriage.
HIV-positive
women who
are pregnant.
Sexual assault
Protocols.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

38
(3) in fulfilling its obligations under sub-section (1) and (2), the appropriate Government
shall consult different stake holders including women's groups, child rights groups, groups
working on sexuality, sexual health, HIV/AIDS, healthcare providers and forensic experts.
(4) Every survivor of sexual assault, whether or not they have reported the sexual
assault to law enforcement agencies, shall have access to the following services on a
confidential basis,—
(a) counselling;
(b) prevention and management of sexually transmitted infections including
access to testing and prophylactic treatment;
(c) prevention, treatment and management of other medical conditions or injuries
associated with the sexual assault;
(d) HIV/AIDS related counselling and treatment if required and in the best interest
of the survivor;
(e) follow up treatment and care; and
(f) referrals:
Provided that where the survivor of sexual assault is a person below the age of twelve
years, the healthcare or other service provider under whose care such person is, may encourage
the involvement of a parent or guardian, unless it is detrimental to and interferes with the
progress and care of the survivor, in which case the consent of such parent or guardian for
the provision of services shall not be required.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, no
healthcare or other service provider or person in charge of an institution providing services
to a survivor of sexual assault shall report or release information regarding the assault or the
survivor without the written informed consent of the survivor.
Explanation I.—For the purposes of this section, sexual assault is any non-consensual
contact with a sexual purpose including an offence against any person under section 376,
section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D and section 377 of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 whether or not such an act is recognised as a crime by law for the time being in
force and whether or not it is reported to the police.
Explanation II.— For the purposes of this section sexual assault includes non-
consensual sexual contact by a man with his wife.
75. (1) Every person who is in the care or custody of the State shall have the right to
HIV prevention, counselling, testing and treatment services.
(2) The State shall, within one hundred and eighty days of the commencement of this
Act, introduce strategies for risk reduction including age appropriate information, education
and communication for persons below the age of eighteen years, sexual health information,
condoms, needle exchange and drug substitution programmes for all persons in its care or
custody.
(3) A person in the care or custody of the State who has been exposed to the risk of HIV
transmission, shall be referred immediately to a State healthcare institution or a sexual assault
crisis centre, as the case may be, for HIV-related counselling, treatment or other services and
shall be entitled to, if recommended, post exposure prophylaxis and HIV related treatment
from the State.
(4) Every person in the care or custody of the State shall be entitled to receive their
complete medical records upon their release or discharge.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, persons in the care or custody of the
State include persons convicted of a crime and serving a sentence, persons awaiting trial,
Persons in
the Care or
Custody of
the State.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

39
person detained under preventive detention laws, persons under the care or custody of the
State under the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000, the Immoral
Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956, and persons in the care or custody of State run homes and
shelters.
76. (1) The State shall ensure access to child-friendly information about preventive
and health-promoting behaviour and support to families and communities in implementing
these practices.
(2) The State shall adopt effective and appropriate measures to abolish harmful
practices affecting the health of children, particularly girls, including early marriage and
preferrential feeding and care of male children.
(3) The State shall provide a safe and supportive environment for young persons, that
ensures the opportunity to participate in decisions affecting their health, to build life-
skills, to acquire appropriate information, to receive counselling and to negotiate the health
behaviour choices they make.
(4) The State shall ensure the development of youth-friendly healthcare, which respects
confidentiality and privacy and includes appropriate sexual and reproductive health services.
(5) In all policies and programmes aimed at guaranteeing the right to health of
children and young persons their best interests shall be a primary consideration and in the
formulation of such policies and programmes, the State shall consult children and
non-governmental organisations working with children at national, state and local levels.
77. (1) The appropriate Government shall, in consultation with health professionals
and organisations working with children affected by HIV/AIDS, formulate guidelines and
train healthcare providers on various aspects of care, support and treatment of children
affected by HIV/AIDS, including in relation to psychological care and HIV-related treatment.
(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure that children affected by HIV/AIDS can
access educational institutions and shall formulate and implement programmes to address
barriers to education including school fees and other costs.
78. (1) The appropriate Government shall protect the property of children affected by
HIV/AIDS.
(2) The Central Government shall, within ninety days of the commencement of this Act
frame rules for the protection of property of children affected by HIV/AIDS.
(3) Parents or guardians of children affected by HIV/AIDS, or any person acting in
their best interest, or a child affected by HIV/AIDS, may approach the Child Welfare Committee
for the safe keeping and deposit of documents related to the property rights of such child or
to make complaints relating to the threat of such child being dispossessed, actual
dispossession or trespass into such child's house even in the absence of documents related
to the property rights of such  child.
(4) The Child Welfare Committee shall properly maintain and protect all such documents
and shall ensure the maintenance of confidentiality of all protected persons.
(5) The Child Welfare Committee shall pass appropriate orders in the best interests of
children affected by HIV/AIDS, including orders to preserve the property of such children,
to make investments of the property or to take possession of documents related to the
property where both the parents or legal guardian of such children have either died or are
incapacitated.
(6) The Child Welfare Committee shall take the assistance of different stakeholders
including HIV-positive persons, persons working in the field of HIV/AIDS, child-line
organizations and non-governmental organisations working with children in such matters.
56 of 2000
104 of 1956.
Children.
Children
affected by
HIV/AIDS.
Protection of
Property of
Children
affected by
HIV/AIDS.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

40
Explanation.—"Child Welfare Committee" means a committee set up under the Juvenile
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000.
79. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, a
person below the age of eighteen years who is the managing member of a family affected by
HIV/AIDS shall be competent to act as guardian of any other persons below the age of
eighteen years who are members of such family for the following purposes:—
(a) admission to educational institutions;
(b) care and protection;
(c) treatment;
(d) operating bank accounts;
(e) managing property; and
(f) for all other purposes that may be required to discharge duties as a guardian.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, a family affected by HIV/AIDS, is
one where both parents or the legal guardian is incapacitated due to HIV-related illness or
AIDS, those living in households of children orphaned by AIDS or if they are not orphaned,
then the legal guardian or parents are unable to discharge their duties in relation to such
children.
80. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, a person who has no parental responsibilities and rights in respect of a child but who
voluntarily cares for the child either indefinitely, temporarily or partially, including a care-
giver who otherwise has no parental responsibilities and rights in respect of a child, shall,
while the child is in that person's care, have the duty to —
(a) safeguard the child's health, well-being and development; and
(b) protect the child from maltreatment, abuse, neglect, degradation,
discrimination, exploitation and any other physical or mental harm or hazards.
(2) A person referred to in sub-section (1) may exercise parental responsibilities and
rights reasonably necessary to comply with sub-section ( 1), including the right to consent
to HIV/AIDS related treatment of, or other healthcare service for, the child if such consent
cannot reasonably be obtained from the parent or primary care-giver of the child or the
concerned child.
81. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, a
parent or legal guardian of a child affected by HIV/AIDS may appoint, by making a will, an
adult person who is a relative or friend, or a person below the age of eighteen years who is
the managing member of the family affected by HIV/AIDS to act as legal guardian immediately
upon the parent or legal guardian's incapacity or death.
(2) Nothing in this section shall divest a parent or legal guardian of their rights, and the
guardianship referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall cease to operate upon the parent or legal
guardian regaining capacity.
(3) Parent or legal guardians of children affected by HIV/AIDS may make a will
appointing a guardian for care and protection of such children and for the property that such
children would inherit or which is bequeathed through the will.
CHAPTER XV
S
PECIAL PROCEDURES IN COURT
82. (1) In any legal proceeding in which a protected person is a party or such person
is an applicant, the court, on an application by such person, that it is in interest of justice,
may pass any or all of the following orders:
Recognition
of
Guardianship
of older
sibling.
56 of 2000.
De-Facto
guardian.
Living wills,
stand by
guardianship
and
testamentary
guardianship.
Suppression
of identity.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

41
(a) that the proceeding or any part thereof be conducted by suppressing the
identity of the applicant by substituting the name of such person with a pseudonym in
the records of the proceedings in such manner as  may be prescribed;
(b) that the proceeding or any part thereof may be conducted in camera; and
(c) restraining any person from in any manner publishing any matter leading to
the disclosure of the name or status or identity of the applicant.
(2) Any proceeding where an order under sub-section (1) is passed shall be conducted
in such manner as may be prescribed.
83. (1) In any legal proceeding concerning or relating to an HIV-positive person, the
court shall take up and dispose off the proceeding on a priority basis.
(2) In such a legal proceeding, the court shall, as soon as possible, but not later than
one hundred and twenty days of the institution of the proceedings, fix a timetable for the
final hearing and disposal of the proceeding in consultation with the parties.
(3) The timetable so fixed shall take into account any arbitration, mediation or settlement
that may be ordered or the evidence that may be taken and the final oral and written arguments
and judgement that may be pronounced, such that the time taken for disposing of the entire
proceeding, from the date of its institution till final disposal shall, in a proceeding which
requires evidence to be taken be not more than three years, and in any other case be not more
than two years.
(4) The timetable for a trial in any legal proceeding concerning or relating to an HIV-
positive person shall be so fixed that it is conducted on a daily basis.
(5) Evidence in such proceedings shall, to the extent possible, be taken before a
commissioner as provided in Order XVIII of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
(6) Any interim application made in such a proceeding shall not affect the timetable or
be a basis of enlarging the time fixed for the final disposal of the proceeding.
(7) Any party not adhering to the timetable, except in cases of illness of the HIV-
positive person, who is party to or a witness in the proceedings, shall be liable to pay costs
of not less than one thousand rupees per day of the delay to the legal aid fund of the
concerned court:
Provided that each party to the proceeding shall be entitled to three adjournments
during the course of the proceedings to use as they choose to.
(8) All interlocutory applications in any such proceedings  shall be disposed off in a
summary manner on the basis of document before the court  without prejudicing the rights of
the parties or delaying the final disposal of the main proceedings.
(9) In a proceeding in which an HIV-positive person is a party, if the judge presiding
over the matter is transferred, retires or otherwise vacates the court, the judge who has the
power to transfer cases in such court, shall within thirty days transfer the proceeding to
another judge.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section 'judge' includes the President, Principal
Judge, Chief Justice, Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or Chief Judge of the concerned court.
84. (1) In any maintenance application filed by or on behalf of a protected person
under any law for the time being in force, the court shall on the first date after the application
is filed, consider the application for interim maintenance and have the power to grant ad hoc
maintenance on the basis of the application alone until the disposal of or further orders in,
the application.
(2) In passing any order of maintenance the court shall take into account medical costs
and other HIV-related costs that may be incurred by the application.
Priority.
5 of 1908.
Maintenance.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

42
85. In passing any orders relating to sentencing, the HIV-positive status of the person
in respect of whom such an order is passed shall be a relevant factor to be considered by the
court to determine the custodial facility that the person shall be transferred to based on the
availability of proper healthcare services at such facility.
86. (1) Notwithstanding any other law for the time being in force, in the adjudication or
prosecution of any proceedings whether civil or criminal, which are instituted in terms of or
under this Act a court shall, in addition to any other order that it may pass, order the person
who has committed a breach of this Act to undergo a fixed period of counselling related to
the breach committed or a fixed period of social service.
(2) Notwithstanding any other law for the time being in force, in the adjudication of
any proceedings, which are instituted in terms of or under this Act a court may pass
appropriate order in the circumstances of the case to:—
(a) prevent breaches of the provisions of this Act; or
(b) redress breaches of the provisions of this Act by directing:
(i) specific steps, special measures or affirmative actions or both to be
taken;
(ii) the award of damages including specific, general, aggravated and
exemplary damages with interest for past and future losses, personal injuries,
and injury to reputation or feelings;
(iii) the withdrawal of, or ceasing and desisting from, committing breaches
of this Act;
(iv) the employer of a person who has committed a breach of this Act to
initiate disciplinary action against such person;
(v) the employer of the person who has committed a breach of this Act to
put the matter in the employee's Annual Confidentiality Report;
(vi) the inclusion of the matter in the Annual or other report of the person
who has committed a breach of this Act that is available to the public and that is
filed with regulatory authorities, where such person is an institution;
(vii) the person who has committed a breach of this Act to undergo an
audit of specific policies or practices as may be determined by the court, where
such person is a registered company, institution, society or other body;
(viii) an appropriate order of a deterrent nature, including a recommendation
to the appropriate authority, to suspend or revoke the licence of the person who
has committed a breach of this Act;
(ix) any person who has committed a breach of this Act to make regular
progress reports to the court regarding the implementation of the court's order;
(x) the Registrar of the court to report the matter where a criminal offence
is disclosed during the course of the proceedings, to the concerned police
station having jurisdiction for the possible institution of criminal proceedings;
or
(xi) any other order as may be necessary in the interests of justice.
(3) In a proceeding relating to discrimination in employment under this Act, the court
shall have the power to pass any or all of the following orders:
(a) that the person discriminated against be employed;
(b) that the person discriminated against be reinstated;
Sentencing.
Powers of
Court.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

43
S3 \F\BILL 2012\LS\11579LS/1579LS
(c) that the person who has discriminated make arrangements for the reasonable
accommodation of the person discriminated against;
(d) the payment of wages, salary, income, allowances, benefits, perquisites and
privileges that may have been lost on account of non-employment or termination; and
(e) award special, general and exemplary damages on account of the non-
employment, termination, emotional distress and pain or loss of reputation.
87. (1) An HIV/AIDS Authority or any person may petition a court in relation to any
institution with a record of continuous violations of the provisions of this Act.
(2) Based upon a petition under sub-section ( 1), a court may appoint the concerned
HIV/AIDS Authority or such other persons as it deems fit to conduct an audit of such
institution to determine the causes of the continuous violations of the Act and based on the
report of such audit may make such orders as may be necessary to address the systemic
violations of the Act including any or all of the following orders:
(a) rectification of the breaches of the Act;
(b) initiation of disciplinary proceedings; and
(c) training and sensitisation programmes for all or any persons in such institution.
88. When the question is whether a protected person has been discriminated against
under this Act and it is shown that the person against whom such discrimination is alleged
to have taken place is a protected person and that the act or omission alleged as being
discriminatory took place, the court shall presume, that such act or omission is discrimination
under this Act and—
(a) the respondent must prove, on the facts before the court, that the
discrimination did not take place as alleged; or
(b) the respondent must prove that the conduct is not based on one or more of
the prohibited grounds:
Provided that the presumption as to non-existence of undue hardship under
clause ( ii) of sub-section ( a) of section 4 shall operate without prejudice to the
presumption under this provision.
89. Nothing contained in this law prohibits, limits or otherwise restricts the jurisdiction
of civil and criminal courts to address violations of the provisions of this Act.
CHAPTER XVI
P
ENALTIES
90. Notwithstanding any action that may be taken under any law for the time being in
force, whoever contravenes the provisions of section 5 shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which shall not be less than three months but which may
extend to two years and with fine that may extend to one lakh rupees or both.
91. Notwithstanding any action that may be taken under any law for the time being in
force, misinformation on HIV/AIDS prevention and control, including through false and
misleading advertising and claims in any media or the promotional marketing of drugs,
devices, agents, or procedures without prior approval from the Drugs Controller General of
India and the requisite medical and scientific basis, including markings and indications in
drugs and devices and agents, purporting to be a cure or fail safe prophylactic for HIV/AIDS,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term that shall not be less
than three months but may extend to two years or a fine that shall not be less than twenty
thousand rupees but may extend to one lakh rupees or both.
Power of
Court to
order
systemic
audits.
Presumption
as to
discrimination.
Jurisdiction
of Courts.
Penalty for
contravention
of provisions
of section 5.
Penalty for
misleading
information.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

44
92. A public servant who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (4) of section 21
shall, on conviction, be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one year and with fine that may extend to one lakh rupees.
93. (1) Whoever fails to comply with any order given by a Health Ombud within such
time as may be specified in such order shall, on conviction, be liable to pay a fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees and in case the failure continues, with an additional fine
which may extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which such failure continues
after the conviction for the first such failure.
(2) If the failure referred to in sub-section (1) continues beyond a period of one year
after the date of conviction, the offender shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which shall not be less than three months but which may
extend to one year and with fine that shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which
may extend to one lakh rupees.
94. Notwithstanding any action that may be taken under any law for the time being in
force, whoever contravenes an order under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 82 shall
be punished with simple imprisonment for a term that may extend to one year or with a fine
that may extend to one lakh rupees.
95. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by an institution, every
person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to
the institution for the conduct of its activities, as well as the institution, shall be deemed to
be guilty of the offences and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this Act if it is proved that the offence was committed
without the person's knowledge or that such person exercised all due diligence to prevent
the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by an institution and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the institution, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section "director" in relation to a firm means
a partner in the firm.
96. Where an offence under this Act has been committed by any Department of
Government, the Head of the Department shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render such Head of the Department
liable to any punishment it is proved that the offence was committed without such person's
knowledge or that such person exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.
97. No court other than the court of a Judicial Magistrate of First Class shall take
cognizance of or try an offence under this Act.
Penalty for
contravention
of sub-section
(4) of section
21 by public
servant.
Failure to
comply with
orders of
Health
Ombud.
Penalty for
contravention
of provisions
of clause ( c)
of sub-
section ( 1) of
section 82.
Offences by
Companies.
Offences by
Government
Departments.
Court
competent to
try offences
under this Act
and take
cognizance of
offence.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

45
98. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
offences under this Act shall be cognizable and bailable.
99. All offences under this Act shall be tried summarily in the manner provided for
summary trial under the Code of Criminal Procedure.
CHAPTER  XVII
MISCELLANEOUS
100. (1) The provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any
instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
(2) The provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect notwithstanding anything
to the contrary contained in the memorandum or articles of a company, or in any agreement
executed by it, or in any resolution passed by the company in general meeting or by its board
of directors, whether the same be registered, passed or executed, as the case may be before
or after the commencement of this Act.
(3) Any provision contained in the memorandum, articles, agreement or resolution
aforesaid shall to the extent to which it is repugnant to the provisions of this Act, become or
be void, as the case may be.
101. The Director, members, officers and other employees of the HIV/AIDS Authority
shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860.
102. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Wealth Tax Act, 1957, the Income-
tax Act, 1961, or any law for the time being in force relating to tax on wealth, income, profits
or gains, the HIV/AIDS Authority shall not be liable to pay wealth-tax, income-tax or any
other tax in respect of their wealth, income or profits or gains derived.
103. The appropriate Government shall cause to be placed before both Houses of the
concerned legislature once a year a report regarding the performance of the HIV/AIDS
Authority under this Act.
104. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government or HIV/AIDS Authority, or against any officer of the Central Government or the
Director or members or employees of the HIV/AIDS Authority or any person acting under
such Government, or HIV/AIDS Authority for anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done under this Act or any Rule or Regulation thereunder.
105. The appropriate Government may, by general order, direct that any power
exercisable by it under this Act shall, in such circumstances and under such conditions, if
any as may be prescribed in the order, be exercisable also by an officer subordinate to that
Government or the local authority.
106. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules and regulations to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1), the appropriate Government
may make rules to provide for all or any of the following matters:—
(i) the salary and allowances of the Health Ombud under section 28;
(ii) the procedure to be followed by the Health Ombud under sub-section (1) of
section 30;
Offences to
be cognizable
and bailable.
Offences
under the Act
to be tried
summarily.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Member and
Staff of HIV/
AIDS
Authorities
etc. to be
public
servants.
Exemption
from tax on
wealth and
income.
27 of 1957
43 of 1961
45 of 1860
Report of the
HIV/AIDS
Authority to
be placed
before
Legislature.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Delegation of
powers.
Power to
make Rules
and
Regulations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

46
(iii) the receipt of complaints by the Health Ombud under sub-section ( 2) of
section 30;
(iv) additional powers of the civil court that a Health Ombud may enjoy in
making an inquiry under clause (f) of sub-section (4) of section 30;
(v) the manner in which the Health Ombud will maintain records under
sub-section (7) of section 30;
(vi) orders as to cost to be made by the Health Ombud under sub-section (3) of
section 30;
(vii) the salary and allowances of Directors and other members of HIV/AIDS
Authorities under section 44;
(viii) the meeting of HIV/AIDS Authorities and rules of procedure under
section 45;
(ix) the allowances and fees of members of HIV/AIDS Authorities for attending
meetings under sub-section (2) of section 46;
(x) the controls and restrictions in appointment of officers and employees of the
HIV/AIDS Authorities under section 47;
(xi) the salaries and conditions of service of officers and employees of the HIV/
AIDS Authorities under section 47;
(xii) the powers and duties of Directors of HIV/AIDS Authorities under
section 48;
(xiii) additional powers of a civil court that an HIV/AIDS Authority may enjoy in
conducting inquiries under clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 53;
(xiv) the budget of the HIV/AIDS Authorities under sub-section ( 4) of
section 58;
(xv) the records and annual statements of account of HIV/AIDS Authorities
under section 59;
(xvi) the procedure to be followed by a Complaints officer under section 63;
(xvii) the procedure relating to registration of marriages under clause (a) of
sub-section (1) of section 71;
(xviii) the protection of property of children affected by HIV/AIDS under
sub-section (2) of section 78;
(xix) the suppression of identity in court proceedings under sub-section ( 1) of
section 82;
(xx) the conduct of proceedings where suppression of identity and in camera
orders are passed under sub-section (2) of section 82; and
(xxi) the delegation of powers under section 101.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section ( 1), the appropriate
Government may make regulations to provide for all or any of the following matters:—
(i) pre and post test counselling under sub-section ( 6) of section 8;
(ii) epidemiological studies under proviso to clause (c) of section 9;
(iii) recognition of voluntary counselling and testing centres and pathology
laboratories for conducting HIV tests under proviso to sub-section ( 3) of
section 10;
(iv) technologies for self testing of HIV under sub-section ( 5) of
section 10;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

47
(v) data protection under section 15;
(vi) establishment of voluntary counselling and testing centres under
sub-section (3) of section 17;
(vii) universal Precautions and Post Exposure Prophyaxis Protocols under
proviso to sub-section (4) of section 20;
(viii) drug Substitution, drug maintenance and Needle Syringe Exchange
programmes under sub-section (2) of section 21;
(ix) the training of the Health Ombud under section 26;
(x) HIV/AIDS surveillance under clause (h) of sub-section (3) of section 50;
and
(xi) the setting up of HIV/AIDS helplines under clause ( d) of
section 52.
(4) Every rule or regulation made by the appropriate Government under this Act shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the Legislature of such appropriate
Government.
107. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the commencement of this Act.
(2) However, orders made under this section shall be laid, within thirty days, before
each House of Parliament.
108. The Central Government in consultation with the National HIV/AIDS Authority
shall,—
(a) develop and implement effective and strignent monitoring and reporting
mechanisms to oversee the implementation and enforcement of this Act by all persons;
and
(b) undertake a review of the working of this Act every three years to ensure that
it adequately addresses the issues raised by the HIV epidemic, is successful in
promoting and protecting the rights of protected persons and in preventing and
controlling the HIV epidemic and it is consistent with constitutional and international
human rights obligations.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Review and
monitoring
of Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30

SCHEDULE  I
(See section 4)
Illustrative List of  Unfair Treatment in Certain Sectors
1. Employment
(a) Denial of terms and conditions or benefits and privileges of services that other
persons in the same position would enjoy including in relation to:—
(i) Recruitment procedures, advertising and selection criteria;
(ii) Appointments, and the appointments process, including job placement;
(iii) Job classification or grading;
(iv) Remuneration, employment benefits and terms and conditions of
employment;
(v) Employee assistance programmes;
(vi) Workplace and facilities;
(vii) Occupational health and safety;
(viii) Training and development;
(ix) Performance evaluation system;
(x) Promotion, transfer and demotion;
(xi) Disciplinary measures;
(xii) Termination of services;
(xiii) Provident fund;
(xiv) Gratuity and health insurance; and
(xv) Non-renewal of employment contract.
(b) Pressure to leave the employment,
(c) Insistance for resignation/VRS,
(d) Being asked not to report for duty,
(e) Denial of promotions,
( f ) Arbitrary suspension or disciplinary action,
(g) Creation of a non-conducive atmosphere for work,
(h) Prejudicial comments and behaviour,
(i) Public identification, and
( j ) Mandatory isolation or segregation.
2. Healthcare
(a) Provision of medically inappropriate treatment for the condition diagnosed,
(b) Untimely or arbitrary discharge,
(c) Charging higher rates for the same or similar services provided to another person
at any stage (conditional treatment),
(d) Imposing conditions in the form of research,
48

49
(e) Prejudicial comments and behaviour,
(f) Public identification,
(g) Isolation or segregation unless medically indicated,
(h) Pressure to leave the healthcare institution, and
(i) Undignified treatment of a corpse.
3. Education
(a) Arbitrary suspension by or disciplinary action from an educational institution,
(b) Prejudicial comments and behaviour,
(c) Public identification,
(d) Isolation or segregation unless medically indicated,
(e) Denial of participation in benefits or services,
(f) Pressure to leave an educational institution,
(g) Non-provision of reasonable accommodation,
(h) Demanding 'HIV-free' certificate at the time of admission 54 of 57,
(i) Demanding disclosure of HIV test results (irrespective of postive or negative)
from the students, and
(j) Denial of admission on the basis of HIV positive status.
4. Insurance
(a) Non-renewal of insurance contract,
(b) Termination of insurance contract,
(c) Higher premiums,
(d) AIDS caps,
(e) Delay in processing of claims,
(f) Denial of claims,
(g) HIV/AIDS exclusion clauses, and
(h) Exclusion clauses based on actual or perceived association with an HIV-positive
person or of exposure to HIV.
5. Institutions
(a) Prisons, Juvenile homes, Rehabilitation Centers, Mental homes, Adoption homes,
Hospices, NGOs, Night shelters.

SCHEDULE  II
[See section 51 (e)]
1. Prevention
2. Blood Safety: To ensure availability of adequate and safe blood and blood
products for the general population through promotion of voluntary blood
donation in the country
3. Risk Reduction
4. STI Control
5. Condom Programming
6. IEC and social mobilisation
7. Spread HIV - related literacy among various sections of society and promote
awareness of the safeguards available for the protection of the rights of protected
persons through publications, the media, seminars and other available means
8. Care and support for HIV-positive persons
9. Training on HIV/AIDS/STD prevention and control
10. National Family Health Awareness Programme
11. Prevention of Mother to Child transmission
12. V oluntary Testing and Counselling
13. Research and Development
14. Intersectoral collaboration
15. International and bilateral cooperation
16. Programme financing
17. Monitoring and Evaluation
18. External Quality Assurance Scheme
19. Access to Treatment—update WHO essential medicines list
20.  Authority shall collect, update and disseminate scientific knowledge/collect,
compile and publish technical and statistical data relating to HIV and the measures
devised for its effective prevention and control and prepare manuals, codes or
guides and disseminate information connected therewith
21. Sensitisation programmes for judiciary, law enforcement etc.
22. Maintain list of care and support centers and homes, doctors providing care and
treatment for HIV/AIDS, helplines, testing facilities, legal assistance
23. Institute good practices for the proper surveillance of HIV/AIDS
24. Clinical Management of HIV/AIDS
25. Assist in the implementation of good practices within corporates
26. Corporate collaboration as part of social responsibility schemes
27. NGOs
28. Counselling Guidelines
50

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Effective legislation addressing the HIV/AIDS epidemic in India is of extreme importance
in the context of the prevailing situation in the country. The estimated number of people
living with HIV/AIDS as of 2007 are 2.31 million. Of these, an estimated 39% are female and
3.5% are children. These figures significantly under-represent the actual number of people
living with AIDS. Many AIDS deaths go unreported in India, due to unprecedented levels of
stigma and discrimination. HIV and AIDS affect all segments of India's population, from
children to adults, businessmen to homeless people, female sex workers to housewives, and
gay men to heterosexuals. However, HIV prevalence among certain groups like sex workers,
injecting drug users, truck drivers, migrant workers, gays remain high and is currently around
6 to 8 times that of the general population.
The Bill seeks to provide, inter alia, for:—
(i) protection of the rights of persons affected by HIV.
(ii) prevention of discrimination to the persons affected by HIV/AIDS in
employment, healthcare, education, residence, travel, public/private office, access to
services, insurance, etc.
(iii) maintaining confidentiality of HIV related information.
(iv) providing access to treatment to the persons suffering from HIV/AIDS without
any discrimination in Government hospitals and dispensaries.
(v) providing social security and launching welfare schemes for persons suffering
from HIV/AIDS.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
November  8, 2011
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 (1), 274 (1) AND 117 (3) OF
THE CONSTITUTION
————
[Copy of letter No. H. 11018/1/2011-NACO (P&C) dated 3 May, 2012 from Shri Ghulam
Nabi Azad, Minister of Health and Family Welfare to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the HIV/AIDS Bill, 2011
by Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, Member of Parliament, recommends its introduction under
articles 117(1) and 274(1) and consideration under article 117(3) of the Constitution in
Lok Sabha.
51

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 17 of the Bill provides for right to health and certain supports facilities, goods,
measures, service and medical infrastructure. Clause 18 provides for giving wide dissemination
protocols for HIV/AIDS-related testing and treatment methodologies. Clause 19 provides for
healthcare facilities including travel subsidies for HIV-positive persons and training to staff,
tax incentives and exemption and promotion of research and development for prevention
and treatment of HIV/AIDS. Clause 20 provides for right to safe working environment.
Clause 22 provides for implementation of health insurance and social security schemes for
HIV-positive and AIDS patients. Clause 23 provides for right to information and education
relating to health and protection of health, etc. Clause 24 provides for duty of State to
promote HIV/AIDS related information, education and communication. Clause 25 provides
for HIV/AIDS information by healthcare providers. Clause 26 provides for appointment of
Health Ombud in each district. Clause 28 provides for salary and allowances of Health
Ombud. Clause 36 provides for constitution of HIV/AIDS Authorities at National, State and
local levels to perform the functions assigned under this Act. Clause 38 provides for setting
up of offices of HIV/AIDS Authority. Clause 39 provides for composition of HIV/AIDS
Authorities. Clause 41 provides for Advisory Committee to advice the National Authority in
the matters relating to protection and promotion of rights to infected persons, care, support
and treatment of persons living with HIV/AIDS. Clause 42 provides for appointments to
HIV/AIDS Authority and nomination committee by the appropriate Government. Clause 44
provides for salary and allowances of Director and members of the HIV/AIDS Authority.
Clause 45 provides for meetings of the HIV/AIDS Authority. Clause 46 provides for
constitution of the Committees by Authority. Clause 49 provides for transfer of undertakings
under the National Authority or the State Authority concerned and confer the status of
employer and provides them benefits including salary, allowances and other remunerations,
etc. Clause 50 provides for implementation of HIV related programme as specified in Schedule
II. Clause 51 provides for functions of the National HIV/AIDS Authority. Clause 52 provides
for additional functions of State and Union territory HIV/AIDS Authority. Clause 56 provides
for calling upon expert in the fields of health, human rights, law and other discipline for
providing support to HIV/AIDS affected persons. Clause 57 provides for dissemination of
information about reports and minutes of meetings of the Authority. Clause 59 provides for
budgetary provisions for Authority. Clause 64 provides for notification of model HIV/AIDS
policies. Clause 66 provides for certain obligations of State for promotion of right of protected
persons under the Act. Clause 68 provides for interaction with international community and
organizations. It also provides for promotion of HIV related human rights. Clause 69 provides
for developing and implementing strategy to promote women's right to health. Clause 71
provides for appointment of Registration officers in every sub-district for registration of
marriage and for maintaining records. Clause 72 provides for establishment of a Counselling
Centre at each marriage office in each district. Clause 73 provides for right to counselling and
information to the HIV-positive women who are pregnant. Clause 74 provides for setting up
of sexual assault crisis centres in each district by the appropriate Government. Clause 75
provides that every person who is in the care or custody of the State shall have the right to
HIV prevention, counselling, testing and treatment. Clause 76 provides that State shall
provide a safe and supportive environment and healthcare for young persons. Clause 77
provides for care, support and treatment of children affected by HIV/AIDS. Clause 78 provides
for protection of property of children affected by HIV/AIDS. Clause 102 provides exemption
from paying of wealth-tax, income-tax or any other tax to the Authority in respect of their
wealth, income or profits or gain. The Central Government has to bear the expenditure in
respect of Union territories in implementing the provisions of the Bill. The respective State
Government shall bear the expenditure in respect of their States. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure to the tune of rupees five hundred crore is likely to be incurred per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be incurred.
52

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 106 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
Legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
53

LOK SABHA
——————
A
BILL
A Bill to provide for prevention, control and management of HIV epidemic in India;
protection and promotion of human rights of persons living or affected by HIV/AIDS;
for establishment of Authorities at the National, State, Union territory and district
level to promote such rights and to promote prevention, awareness, care, support,
treatment programmes to control the spread of HIV/AIDS  and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
——————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1579LS(S3)—25-07-2012.