AS ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No.  72  of  2023
THE WELFARE OF SHOPKEEPERS IN ANDAMAN AND 
NICOBAR ISLANDS BILL, 2023
By
Sඁඋං Kඎඅൽൾൾඉ Rൺං Sඁൺඋආൺ ,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of Shopkeepers in Andaman and Nicobar Islands and for setting 
up of Shopkeepers’ Welfare Fund and a Board to administer the Fund and  
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Welfare of Shopkeepers in Andaman and Nicobar
Islands Act, 2023.
(2) It extends to the Union Territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands only.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
Short title,
extent and 
commencement.

2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Board" means the Shopkeepers Welfare Board established under section 4;
(b) "Fund" means Shopkeepers Welfare Fund set up under section 3;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under the Act; and
(d) "shopkeeper " means any person who is engaged in sale of goods either retail 
or wholesale or where services are rendered to customers and includes an office, a 
store-room, godown, warehouse or workhouse or workplace. 
3. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette set up 
a Fund to be known as the Shopkeepers Welfare Fund for carrying out the purposes 
of this Act.
(2) The Fund shall consist of contributions from Central Government and the 
Administration of Andaman and Nicobar Islands in such ratio as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish a Board to be called the Shopkeepers Welfare Board.
(2) The Board shall consist of,—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed;
(b) Member of Parliament representing Andaman and Nicobar Islands in the 
House of the People—Vice-Chairperson;
(c) one representative from the Administration of Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed; and
(d) two representatives from Retailers Association of India to be appointed 
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the 
service of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other members of the Board shall be such as 
may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Board shall administer the Fund determine the purposes for which the Fund 
shall be utilized.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), the Fund shall be utilized for the 
following purposes:—
(i) payment of old-age pension at the rate of rupees twenty thousand per month 
after the shopkeeper has attained the age of sixty years and is incapable of performing 
his job on account of physical illness, infirmity or incapacity;
(ii) free healthcare facilities for the shopkeepers and their dependent family 
members at the Government and other designated hospitals;
(iii) free insurance cover to shopkeepers; and
(iv) free housing facilities for shopkeepers.
6. The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
Law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Board for the effective implementation 
of the provisions of the Act.
Establishment 
of Shopkeepers 
Welfare Board.
Deﬁnitions.
Shopkeepers 
Welfare Fund.
Utilisation of 
Fund.
Central 
Government to 
provide Funds.

7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law providing for matters dealt with in this Act.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more  successive    sessions,   and  if,   
before   the   expiry  of  the  session  immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule.
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law in 
force.
Power to make 
rules.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
According to International Labour Organisation, "Social security is the protection 
that a society provides to individuals and households to ensure access to health care and 
to guarantee income security, particularly in cases of old age, unemployment, sickness, 
invalidity, work injury, maternity or loss of a breadwinner". It is a right which is generally 
guaranteed by some act or legislation to people for their economic and social security in the 
time of sickness, disability or old age.
The recent occurrence of coronavirus pandemic has brought the issue of social security 
in India at the forefront. Large scale movement of migrant workers from the various cities 
of India was a great lesson for all the stakeholders. It made people realise the need for 
social security for all the members in the society and thus, there needs to be a great deal of 
discussion on this issue at all the levels. It helps the recipients to ensure their rights to family 
protection and assistance, an adequate standard of living and adequate access to healthcare.
Social security acts as an umbrella for people during adverse situations. Social welfare is 
not possible without social security. It acts as a buffer against all odds in the time of need. It 
helps in lifting millions of people out of poverty and thus, raises people’s standard of living.
This bill can be considered as one of the step in the direction of dealing with provision 
of social security net for shopkeepers in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands by providing: 
(i) payment of old-age pension at the rate of rupees twenty thousand per month 
after the shopkeeper has attained the age of sixty years and is incapable of performing 
his job on account of physical illness, infirmity or incapacity;
(ii) free healthcare facilities for the shopkeepers and their dependent family 
members at the designated Government and other hospitals;
(iii) free insurance cover to shopkeepers; and
(iv) free housing facilities for shopkeepers.
The Bill also seeks to provide for the establishment of a welfare fund for shopkeepers in 
the Andaman and Nicobar Islands with a sense of security in times of need.
 Hence this Bill.
          Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                  KULDEEP RAI SHARMA
      February 28, 2023.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a Shopkeepers’ Welfare Fund for 
welfare for shopkeepers in Andaman and Nicobar Islands. Clause 4 provides for 
constitution of a Board for administration of the Shopkeepers Welfare Fund. It also provides for 
appointment of Chairperson and other member to the Board. Clause 6 provides that the 
Central Government shall provide adequate Funds to the Board for effective implementation 
of the provisions of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from 
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of one hundred crore rupees is 
likely to be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of one hundred crore rupees is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 to provide for the welfare of Shopkeepers in Andaman and Nicobar Islands and for setting 
up of Shopkeepers’ Welfare Fund and a Board to administer the Fund and  
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma, M.P .)