5

20

As INTRODUCED IN 1.06 SABHA

, 1 0६199 |

Bill, No. 126 of 1999

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999

By
Dr. ५. Saroiu, M.P.
ot
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1999,
2. After article 30 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
“31, Every citizen who lives below poverty line shall have the right to—
(i) adequate health care;
(ii) shelter;
(iii) education upto college education;
(iv) guaranteed employment; and
(v) essential items of daily use at concessional rates.
Explanation: For the purposes of this article—

(i) “person living below poverty line” means such person whose monthly
income from all sources is such as may be determined by the State from time to
time after taking into consideration all relevant factors as it may deem fit:

Provided that different levels may be fixed for different classes of persons in
various States and Union Territories.

(ii) “guaranteed employment” means employment which is generated atleast
for a period of 240 days in a year;

(iii) “essential items of daily use” means and includes such items like fuel,
groceries, vegetables, milk and other edible items which are absolutely necessary
for carrying on a decent living”.

Short title.

Insertion of
‘new article 31.

aa
to
citizens liv-
ing below
poverty .
line.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In our country majority of the people are living below poverty line. | several
measures have been taken to improve their lot, their standard of living has not shown any
significant change. The people living below poverty line live in slums and miserable and
unhygenic conditions. For want of adequate health care, they die in their early ages. They
mostly remain illiterate. It is the duty of the Government to take care of those sections of
the society. The people living below poverty line should be given some basic facilities in
order to enable them to lead a reasonably decent living. It is proposed to amend the
Constitution with a view to making it mandatory on the part of the State to provide
certain facility to persons living below poverty line.

Hence this Bill.

New De.ut, ५. SAROJA
November 16, 1999.


. FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for certain facilities like education, health care, shelter
and employment, etc. to people living below poverty line. This would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely that an annual recurring expenditure of
about rupees five*hundred crore will be involved. Non-recurring expenditure to the tune
of rupee one thousand crore is also likely to be involved.


A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Dr: V, Saroja, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2352LS—06-12-1999.