THE CHIT FUNDS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
further to amend the Chit Funds Act, 1982.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Chit Funds (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Chit Funds Act, 1982 (hereinafter referred to as the "principal Act"), in section
2, in clause (b), after the word "kuri", the words, "fraternity fund" shall be inserted.
3. For section 11 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘11. (1) No person shall carry on chit business unless he uses as part of his
name any of the words "chit", "chit fund", " chitty", "kuri" or "fraternity fund" and
no person other than a person carrying on chit business shall use as part of his name
any such word.
Short title and
commencement
Amendment
of section 2.
Substitution of
new section
for section 11.
40 of 1982.
Use of words
"chit", "chit
fund", chitty"
"kuri" or
"fraternity
fund".
Bill No.  72  of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
(2) Where at the commencement of this Act,—
(a) any person is carrying on chit business without using as part of his
name any of the words specified in sub-section ( 1); or
(b) any person not carrying on chit business is using any such word as
part of his name,
he shall, within a period of one year from such commencement, add as part of his name
any such word or, as the case may be, delete such word from his name:
Provided that the State Government may, if it considers it necessary in the
public interest or for avoiding any hardship, extend the said period of one year by
such further period or periods not exceeding one year in the aggregate.’.
4. In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), after the words "two
subscribers", the words "present in person or through video conferencing duly recorded by
the foreman" shall be inserted.
5. In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) after the words "at least two other subscribers who are present", the words
"in person or through video conferencing" shall be inserted;
(ii) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that where two subscribers required to be present under
sub-section (2) of section 16 are present through video conferencing, the foreman
shall have the minutes of the proceedings signed by such subscribers within a
period of two days of the date of the draw.".
6. In section 21 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) in clause (b), for the words "five per cent.", the words "seven per cent." shall
be substituted;
(ii) for clause (f), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
"(f) to substitute subscribers in place of defaulting subscribers;
(fa) to exercise his right to lien against the credit balance in other
non-prized chits; and ".
7. In section 85 of the principal Act, in clause (b), for the words "one hundred rupees",
the words "such amount as may be specified, by notification in the Official Gazette, by the
State Government " shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 16.
Amendment
of section 17.
Amendment
of section 21.
Amendment
of section 85.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Chit Funds Act, 1982 was enacted to provide for the regulation of chit funds
which are indigenous business in India and have conventionally satisfied the financial
needs of the low-income households. The chit is a mechanism which combines credit and
savings in a scheme, in which a group of individuals come together for a pre-determined
duration and subscribe a certain sum of money by way of periodical instalments and each
such subscriber, in his turn as determined by lot or by auction or by tender or any other
specified manner, gets the collected sum. In this way, people who are in need of funds and
those who want to save are able to meet their requirements simultaneously.
2. In past, concerns had been expressed by various stakeholders regarding challenges
being faced by the chit business. Therefore, the Central Government constituted a Key
Advisory Group on Chit Funds to review the existing legal, regulatory and institutional
framework for Chit Funds and its efficacy and to suggest legal and regulatory initiatives
required for orderly growth of the said sector. The Key Advisory Group submitted its
recommendations relating to improvements in the institutional and legal structure to further
develop the chit business in order to reduce the regulatory burden of the chit business and
to protect the interest of the subscribers of the chits.
3. The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Finance (Sixteenth Lok Sabha), in its
twenty-first Report on Efficacy of Regulation of Collective Investment Schemes (CIS), Chit
Funds, etc., had also recommended to finalise the legislative and administrative proposals
for strengthening and streamlining of the registered Chit Fund sector. Further, the said
Committee, in its thirty-fifth Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the twenty-first Report, had recommended the need to quickly
firm up the legislative and administrative proposals for the Chit Funds sector.
4. In view of the above, it has been decided to amend the Chit Funds Act, 1982.
Accordingly, the Chit Funds (Amendment) Bill, 2018, inter alia, proposes—
(a) the use of “fraternity fund” also for chits by amending sections 2(b) and 11;
(b) to allow the mandatory presence of two subscribers, as required under section
16(2), either in person or through video  conferencing duly recorded by the foreman;
(c) that where the presence of the mandatory two subscribers was through video-
conferencing, the minutes of proceedings should be signed by them within two days;
(d) the increase of ceiling of foreman’s commission from five per cent. to seven per
cent. under section 21;
(e) to enable the foreman to have a right to lien for the dues from subscribers, so that
set-off is allowed by the chit fund for subscribers who have already drawn funds, so as to
discourage default by them;
(f) to amend section 85(b), so as to confer power upon the State Government to
specify the amount, by notification, upto which any chit fund shall be exempted under the
said section.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; ARUN  JAITLEY
The 28th February, 2018.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CHIT FUNDS ACT, 1982
(40 OF 1982)
*****
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
*****
(b)  "chit" means a transaction whether called chit, chit fund, chitty, kuri or by
any other  name by or under which a person enters into an agreement with a specified
number of persons that every one of them shall subscribe a certain sum of money (or
a certain quantity of grain instead) by way of periodical instalments over a definite
period and that each such subscriber shall, in his turn, as determined by lot or by
auction or by tender or in such other manner as may be specified in the chit agreement,
be entitled to the prize amount.
Explanation.—A transaction is not a chit within the meaning of this clause, if in
such transaction,—
(i) some alone, but not all, of the subscribers get the prize amount without
any liability to pay future subscriptions; or
(ii) all the subscribers get the chit amount by turns with a liability to pay
future subscriptions;
*****
11. (1) No person shall carry on chit business unless he uses as part of his name any
of the words "chit", "chit fund", " chitty" or " kuri" and no person other than a person
carrying on chit business shall use as part of his name any such word.
(2) Where at the commencement of this Act,—
(a) any person is carrying on chit business without using as part of his name
any of the words specied in sub-section (1); or
(b) any person not carrying on chit business is using any such word as part of
his name,
he shall, within a period of one year from such commencement, add as part of his name any
such word or, the case may be, delete such word from his name:
Provided that the State Government may, if it considers it necessary in the
public interest or for avoiding any hardship, extend the said period of one year by
such further period or periods not exceeding one year in the aggregate.
*****
16. (1)* * * * *
(2) Every such draw shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the chit
agreement and in the presence of not less than two subscribers.
*****
17. (1) The minutes of the proceedings of every draw shall be prepared and entered in
a book to be kept for that purpose immediately after the closure of the draw and shall be
signed by the foreman, the prized subscribers, if present, or their authorised agents, and at
least two other subscribers who are present, and where a direction has been made under
sub-section (3) of section 16, also by the Registrar or the person deputed by him under that
sub-section.
*****
Definitions.
Use of the
words "chit",
"chit fund"
"chitty " or
"kuri ".
Date, time and
place of
conducting
chits.
Minutes of
proceedings.
4

5
21. (1) The foreman shall be entitled,—
*****
(b) to such amount not exceeding five per cent. of the chit amount as may be
fixed in the chit agreement, by way of commission, remuneration or for meeting the
expenses of running the chit;
*****
(f) to substitute subscribers in place of defaulting subscribers; and
*****
85. Nothing in this Act shall apply in respect of—
*****
(b) any chit the amount of which, or where two or more chits were started or
conducted simultaneously by the same foreman, the aggregate amount of which does
not exceed one hundred rupees.
*****
Act not to
apply to
certain chits.
Rights of
foreman.

MGIPMRND—4350LS(S3)—01-03-2018.
LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Chit Funds Act, 1982.
—————
(Shri Arun Jaitley, Minister of  Finance and  Corporate Affairs)