1
THE  GAZETTED OFFICERS OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
(COMPULSORY MILITARY TRAINING) BILL, 2015
By
MAJ GEN B C  KHANDURI A VSM (RETD), M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory military training for all able-bodied gazetted officers of the
Central Government and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Gazetted Officers of the Central Government compulsory
Military Training) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “gazetted officer” means a Group 'A' or Group 'B' gazetted officer, below the
age of forty-five years, of the Central Government and includes officers belonging to
All India Services but does not include officers of Indian Police Service, Central Armed
Police Forces and Armed Forces; and
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under the Act.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 72 of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5
10

2
Compulsory
military
training to
Gazetted
Officers of
the Central
Government. 5
10
15
20
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within a period of five years from the date of
selection or promotion, as the case may be, to a gazetted post provide military training to all
able-bodied Gazetted Officers for a period of not less than one year.
(2) The military training referred to in sub-section (1) shall be imparted in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall establish such number of institutions and take
such other necessary steps, as it may deem fit, to give effect to the provisions of sub-section (1).
4. Every gazetted officer who successfully completes training under sub-section (1) of
section 3—
(i) shall be awarded a certificate to that effect by the Central Government; and
(ii) may, in situations of the natural and civil emergencies, be deputed to assist
the Armed Forces, police or disaster management personnel.
5. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Awarding of
certificate on
completion of
training.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is definitely a good idea to have a well trained civilian as well as a trained army.
Compulsory military training to all able-bodied Gazetted Officers of the Central Government
will instill a more strong sense of self-discipline, character building, leadership qualities and
patriotism among them. Such a step will provide our Armed Forces with trained volunteers
whose services can be utilized during civil or natural emergencies like earthquake, tsunami,
cloudburst, hailstorm or floods in an efficient manner. Moreover, Army trained officer will be
able to instill a strong sense of loyalty, duty and discipline among their subordinate and
contribute to core values and ethos of the country. These trained officers will also realize the
importance of service being rendered by members of Armed Forces . The training will make
them more smart, fit, mature and motivated.
The Government should take effective steps for implementation of the proposal that
whoever enters the Government service including Public Sector Undertakings must
compulsorily serve in the Armed Forces for a minimum period of two or three years.
Alternatively, the Government may consider giving incentives in promotion, place of posting
etc. to those who enter the Government service, after serving a minimum period of two or
three years in the Armed Forces.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for compulsory military training to all Gazetted
Officers of the Central Government with a view to develop a more strong sense of loyalty,
duty and self-discipline among them and prepare a trained manpower in reserve to meet any
eventuality or natural calamity.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; B C KHANDURI
February 12,  2014
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for military training to be imparted to all able-bodied
gazetted officers of the Central Government. It further provides for setting up of training
institutions for the purpose of imparting military training. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of rupees three hundred crore will be incurred per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees three hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory military training for all able-bodied gazetted officers of the
Central Government and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Maj Gen B C Khanduri,  AVSM  [Retd.], M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4762LS(S3)—04-03-2015.