THE  ILLEGAL  IMMIGRANTS  AND  OVERSTAYING  FOREIGN
NATIONALS (IDENTIFICATION AND DEPORTATION) BILL, 2009
BY
SHRI BAIJAY ANT PANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for identification of illegal immigrants and those foreign nationals who
are overstaying in the country or have gone missing after the expiry of their visas
and for their deportation to the countries of their origin and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Y ear of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Illegal Immigrants and Overstaying Foreign Nationals
(Identification and Deportation) Act, 2009.
(2)It extends to the whole of India.
Short title and
extent.
Bill No. 72 of 2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “Commission” means the National Commission on Illegal Immigrants and
Foreign Nationals established under section 3;
(c) “foreign national” means a foreign national who is overstaying in India even
after the expiry of period referred to in the visa or other document issued to him by the
designated authority of the Government of India;
(d) “illegal immigrant” means any person who comes to India without any proper
and valid documents issued by the designated authority of the Government of India;
and
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(2) words and expression used and not defined in this Act and defined in the Foreigners
Act, 1946 shall have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in that Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, establish a Commission to be
known as the National Commission for Identification and Deportation of Illegal Immigrants
and Foreign Nationals;
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue and be sued.
(3) The Commission shall consist of,—
(i) a chairperson who shall be a serving or a retired judge of the Supreme Court
to be appointed by the President in consultation with the Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court; and
(ii) four other Members to be appointed by the President, in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(4) The Chairperson and other Members of the Commission shall hold office for a
term of five years and shall be entitled to such salaries and allowances as may be prescribed.
(5) The Head Office of the Commission shall be at Bhubaneshwar in the State of
Orissa.
(6) The Commission shall have a Secretariat consisting of a Secretary and such
other officers and employees to assist the Commission in discharging its functions with
such terms and conditions of service as may be determined by the Central Government from
time to time.
(7) The Commission shall meet at such intervals and observe such procedure in the
transaction of its business, as may be prescribed.
(8) The quorum to constitute any sitting of the Commission shall be such as may be
prescribed.
4. The Commission shall perform the following functions, namely: —
(a) identify illegal immigrants/foreign nationals and their nationality;
(b) prescribe guidelines for the State Commission for identifying illegal
immigrants/foreign nationals and their nationality;
(c) hear any complaint or appeal against the findings of any State Commission;
(d) recommend to the appropriate Government for deportation of illegal immigrants
and foreign nationals;
(e) facilitate speedy hearing of cases against illegal immigrants and foreign
nationals; and
(f) take such measures as it may deem necessary for the purposes of this Act.
Definitions.
Establishment
of National
Commission
for
Identification
and
Deportation
of Illegal
Immigrants.
Functions of
the
Commission.
31 of 1946
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a State Commission for Identification and Deportation of Illegal Immigrants and Foreign
Nationals for a State or a group of States.
(2) The State Commission shall consist of, —
(i) a Chairperson who shall be a serving or retired judge of a High Court; and
(ii) four other members.
(3) The Chairperson and other Members of the Commission shall hold office for a
term of five years and shall be entitled to such salaries and allowances as may be prescribed.
(4) The Head office of the Commission shall be in the capital city of the State or at
such other place as may be prescribed.
(5) The Commission shall have a Secretariat consisting of a Secretary and such
other officers and employees to assist Commission in discharging its functions with such
terms and conditions of service as may be determined by the Central Government from time
to time.
(6) The Commission shall met at such intervals and observe such procedure in the
transaction of its business, as may be prescribed.
(7) The quorum to constitute any sitting of the Commission shall be such as may be
prescribed.
6. The State Commission shall perform the following functions, namely: —
(a) carry out necessary exercise as per the guidelines issued by the Commission
to identify illegal immigrants/foreign nationals in areas under its jurisdiction;
(b) prepare and forward the list of identified illegal immigrants and foreign
nationals to the Commission and the appropriate Government for their deportation
from the country; and
(c) discharge such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Commission.
7. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Commission may recommend to the appropriate Government for, —
(i) stopping all assistance enjoyed by the illegal immigrants and foreign nationals
with immediate effect;
(ii) impounding the ration cards, voter identity cards in the possession of illegal
immigrants and foreign nationals;
(iii) deleting the names of illegal immigrants and foreign nationals from the
electoral rolls;
(iv) terminating the services of illegal immigrants and foreign nationals in case
they have got employment either in public or private sector;
(v) taking necessary action to recover the loans borrowed by illegal immigrants
or foreign nationals; and
(vi) ensuring deportation of the illegal immigrants and foreign nationals to their
countries.
(2) The appropriate Government shall, as soon as possible, take action on the
recommendations of the Commission.
8. (1) Any person, aggrieved or who has any complaint against a decision or finding of
any State Commission shall be entitled to represent to the Commission who shall hear and
dispose of the representation within one month from the date of its receipt by the Commission,
(2) Every person, who represents to the Commission under sub-section ( 1), shall be
given an opportunity of being heard before his representation is disposed of by the
Commission.
Establishment
of State
Commission
for
Identification
and
Deportation
of Illegal
Immigrants
and Foreign
National.
Functions of
the State
Commissions.
Recommendations
of the
Commission to
the appropriate
Government.
Representations
to the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
9. The appropriate Government and the State Commission shall ensure that no
inconvenience is caused to any bonafide citizen of the country while enforcing the provisions
of this Act.
10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
11. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
12. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Inconvenience
not to be
caused to
bonafide
citizens.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There are millions of illegal immigrants in our country most of whom have come from
our neighbouring countries. Unfortunately, their infiltration into our country is going on
unabatedly. Our country is already overpopulated and struggling to provide the basic
necessities of life to its own citizens and cannot in any way afford to feed and sustain these
illegal immigrants. They are not only increasing the number of our booming population, but
also indulging in criminal and anti-national activities. They are helping the extremist activities
against our nation and are responsible for creating law and order problem in the country. The
population of illegal immigrants has swelled even in the national capital which is becoming
an unsafe place to live in for the citizens. Since they are from the neighbouring countries,
they easily mix up with the local population and it is not easy to detect them. Similarly,
thousands of foreign nationals who come to our country on a short time visa disappear and
overstay even after the expiry of their visa period. They too are indulging in terrorist activities.
Unfortunately, many of them have also managed to get themselves enrolled as voters in the
country and have acquired ration cards and elector cards to show themselves as Indian
citizens. As such they are creating difficulties for the genuine citizens and usurping their
rights. It has, therefore, become necessary to identify them and deport them to countries of
their origin.
The Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Act, 1983 was enacted to deal with
the illegal immigrants but the same has been declared ultra vires by the Supreme Court of
India. At present, except the Foreigners Act, 1946 there is no other law to deal with illegal
immigrants in the country. Hence it has become necessary to have a stringent legislation to
deal with this serious issue.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BAIJAYANT PANDA
June 5, 2009
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Commission for
Identification and Deportation of Illegal Immigrants and Foreign Nationals. Clause 5 of the
Bill provides for the establishment of State Commissions for a State or for a group of States.
Clause 10 provides that Central Government shall provide adequate funds for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees two hundred crore will be
involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved as a non-recurring expenditure.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for identification of illegal immigrants and those foreign nationals who are
overstaying in the country or have gone missing after the expiry of their visas
and for their deportation to the countries of their origin and for
 matters connected therewith or
 incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Baijayant Panda, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4154LS(S5)—03.11.2009.