1
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL,  2010
By
SHRI J. P. AGARWAL,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first  Year of the Republic of  India  as follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Representation of  the People (Amendment)
Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Representation of the People Act, 1951, in Part IV A, after section 29A, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘29AA. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law, bye-law,
rule or order for the time being in force,—
(i) the Election Commission shall not register or give recognition as a National
political party or a State political party, as the case may be, to any association or body
of individual citizens of India calling itself a political party, if such association or body
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  72 of  2010
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Insertion of
new section
29AA.
43 of 1951.
Restriction on
the Registration
of political
party to contest
election.
5
10

2
of individual citizens uses the name of any religious deity or the word ‘sena’ in its
name; and
(ii) no person shall be eligible to contest any election if he is a member of an
association or body of individual citizens which uses the name of any religious deity
or the word ‘sena’ in its name." 5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our Republic which was founded on the principles of democracy and secularism is
now facing serious challenges from religious fanaticism and communal forces. Political parties
are using the name of venerable deities or the word ‘sena’ in their names which is not in
consonance with the spirit of our Constitution. All our deities are sacred and one cannot
ignore the fact that venerable deities like Lord Rama, Shiva, Vishnu, Hanuman, Mahavira,
Prophet Mohammed and others belong to the whole mankind rather than to any particular
individual or party.  People worship them with great reverence and devotion. Thus, people's
sensibilities get offended when organizations or parties are formed using the name of Gods
to contest elections.
Similarly, the expression ‘sena’ too belongs to the whole nation rather than to any
particular individual or party and it symbolizes our honour. All citizens hold our armed forces
in high esteem and look up to them with great respect. If the term 'sena' is allowed to be used
by organizations or political  parties, the morale of our armed forces will get affected. Therefore,
in such a situation, it is not appropriate to use the term ‘sena’ in the name of parties or
organizations contesting elections.
We are a democratic republic and if these tendencies are allowed to grow, they have
the potential to damage the concept of India as a pluralistic nation. Therefore, it is necessary
to bring forward a legislation to prevent any person or organization or political party, which
uses the name of any venerable deity or the expression 'sena' in its name from contesting
elections to either House of Parliament or State Legislatures.
The proposed amendment to the Representation of the People Act, 1951, seeks to fulfil
the above objectives.
J. P.  AGARWAL
N
EW DELHI;
April 19, 2010
3

LOK  SABHA
————————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
————
(Shri J.P . Agarwal, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2963LS(S4)—16-07-2010.