Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
3 of 1988.
Amendment
of section 3.
Bill No. 72 of 2008
THE  COMMISSION  OF  SATI  (PREVENTION)  AMENDMENT  BILL, 2008
By
SHRI L. RAJAGOPAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Commission of Sati (Prevention) Act, 1987.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Commission of Sati (Prevention) Amendment Act,
2008.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In section 2 of the Commission of Sati (Prevention) Act, 1987 (hereinafter referred to
as the principal Act), in clause (e), after the words 'constructed or made', the words "on or
after the 16th day of August, 1947" shall be inserted.
3.  In section 3 of the principal Act, for the words "six months or with fine or with both",
the words, "five years or fine which may extend to two lakh rupees or with both" shall be
substituted.
5
10
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Substitution of
new section for
section 5.
4. In section 4 of the principal Act,—
(i) in clause (1), for the words "shall also be liable to fine.", the words, "shall also
be liable to fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees." shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (2), for the words "shall also be liable to fine.", the words, "shall
also be liable to fine which shall not be less than two lakh rupees." shall be substituted.
5.  For section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
"5. Whoever does any act for the glorification of sati shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend
to seven years and with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which
may extend to five lakh rupees.".
6.  In section 6 of the principal Act, in clause (3), for the words "imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to seven years and with fine
which shall not be less than five thousand rupees but which may extend to thirty thousand
rupees", the words "imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but
which may extend to seven years and with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees
but which may extend to five lakh rupees" shall be substituted.
7.  In section 7 of the principal Act, in clause (1), for the words "in existence for not less
than twenty years", the words, "in existence from or after the 16th day of August, 1947" shall
be substituted.
Amendment
of section 4.
Punishment
for
glorification
of Sati.
Amendment
of section 6.
Amendment
of section 7.
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Sati or the burning or burying alive of a widow or a woman is revolting to the feelings
of human nature and is nowhere enjoined in any of the religions of India as an imperative
duty. It is necessary to take effective measures to prevent the commission of Sati and its
glorification as it is no less a deplorable act and, justifiably, a heinous crime against women.
There is a feeling among people that the practice of sati is another tool to oppress women. It
is ridiculous that such a burden is placed only on the women whose existence is considered
meaningless after the death of her husband.
Parliament has enacted the Commission of Sati (Prevention) Act, 1987, with a view to
provide for more effective prevention of the commission of Sati and its glorification in the
country. In spite of enactment of this legislation, incidents of Sati are reported from various
parts of the country, particularly northern India. The incident of sati in the year of 2005 at
Bahundari village in the State of Uttar Pradesh where an old woman was forced to commit
Sati come to light and evoked sharp reaction from all sections of the society. Other incidents
have also taken place after this but many of them are not coming to light due to various
reasons. The conviction rate in offences under the Commission of Sati (Prevention) Act,
1987 is very low. The punishment which can be awarded to culprits under the Act is not
deterrent.
In view of this and to eliminate the barbaric custom of consigning a vibrant life to the
flames of a funeral pyre in the country, the Bill is proposed to make the provisions in the
existing legislation more stringent so that it works as deterrent to those who commit Sati or
involve in the abetment of Sati or glorify Sati in the country.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI;
October 20, 2008. L. RAJAGOPAL
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE COMMISSION OF SATI (PREVENTION) ACT, 1987
(NO. 3 OF 1988)
* * * * * * *
PART I
PRELIMINARY
2. (a)* * * *
    (b)* * * *
     (c)* * * *
     (d)* * * *
(e) "temple" includes any building or other structure, whether roofed or not, constructed
or made to preserve the memory of a person in respect of whom Sati has been committed or
used or intended to be used for the carrying on of any form of worship or for the observance
of any ceremony in connection with such commission.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), whoever
attempts to commit sati and does any act towards such commission shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine or with both:
Provided that the Special court trying an offence under this section shall, before
convicting any person, take into consideration the circumstances leading to the commission
of the offence, the act committed, the state of mind of the person charged of the offence at
the time of the commission of the act and all other relevant factors.
4.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), if
any person commits sati, whoever abets the commission of such sati, either directly or
indirectly, shall be punishable with death or imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to
fine.
(2) If any person attempts to commit sati, whoever abets such attempt, either directly
or indirectly, shall be punishable with imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, any of the following acts or the like
shall also be deemed to be an abetment, namely:—
(a) any inducement to a widow or woman to get her burnt or buried alive along
with the body of her deceased husband or with any other relative or with any article,
object or thing associated with the husband or such relative, irrespective of whether
she is in a fit state of mind or is labouring under a state of intoxication or stupefaction
or other cause impeding the exercise of her free will;
(b) making a widow or woman believe that the commission of sati would result in
some spiritual benefit to her or her deceased husband or relative or the general well
being of the family;
(c) encouraging a widow or woman to remain fixed in her resolve to commit sati
and thus instigating her to commit sati;
(d) participating in any procession in connection with the commission of sati or
aiding the widow or woman in her decision to commit sati by taking her along with the
body of her deceased husband or relative to the cremation or burial ground;
(e) being present at the place where sati is committed as an active participant to
such commission or to any ceremony connected with it;
(f) preventing or obstructing the widow or woman from saving herself from
being burnt or buried alive;
Definitions.
Attempt to
commit Sati.
Abetment of
Sati.
4

5
(g) obstructing, or interfering with, the police in the discharge of its duties of taking
any steps to prevent  the commission of sati.
5. Whoever does any act for the glorification of sati shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to seven
years and with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees but which may extend
to thirty thousand rupees.
PART III
P
OWER OF COLLECTOR OR DISTRICT MAGISTRATE TO PREVENT OFFENCES RELATING TO SATI
6.  (1)* * * *
(2)* * * *
(3) Whoever contravenes any order made under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2)
shall, if such contravention is not punishable under any other provision of this Act, be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may
extend to seven years and with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees but
which may extend to thirty thousand rupees.
7. (1) The State Government may, if it is satisfied  that in that any temple or other
structure which has been in existence for not less than twenty years, any form of worship or
the performance of any ceremony is carried on with a view to perpetuate the honour of or to
preserve the memory of, any person in respect of whom sati has been committed, by order,
direct the removal of such temple or other structure.
* * * * * * *
Punishment
for
glorification
of Sati.
Power to
prohibit
certain acts.
Power to
remove
certain
temples or
other
structures.

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Commission of Sati (Prevention) Act, 1987.
————
(Shri L. Rajagopal, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3951LS(S5)—22-11-2008.