10

१ ६ NOV 7006

As INTRODUCED IN Lox SaBHa

Bill No. 72_of 2006

THE ELECTORAL REFORMS COMMISSION BILL, 2006
By
‘Suri C.K. CHANDRApPAN, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for setting up of an Electoral Reforms Commission and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Electoral Reforms Commission Act, 2006.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. (1) The Central Government shall, within three months from the date of
commencement of this Act, set up an Electoral Reforms Commission.

(2) The Cominission shall consist of:

(i) a retired judge of the Supreme Court, who shall be the Chairman of the
Commission, to be appointed in consultation with the Chief Justice of India;
i) one retired Chief Election Commissioner as member; and

(di) one serving Election Commissioner to be appointed in consultation with the
Chief Election Commissioner, as member.

Short title and
commence-
ment.

Electoral
Reforms
Commission.


(3) The Commission shall have its office in New Delhi.

(4) The Central Government shall provide such number of. officers and staff to the
Commission as is required for its efficient functioning.
Functions of 3. (7) The Commission shall examine the existing electoral system and recommend to

the Commis- the President the reforms, needed in the system.
sion.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provision of sub-section (/), the
Commission shall examine the following: —

(i) proportional representation election system or the List system in at least fifty
per cent of the total constituencies of Lok Sabha/Legislative Assemblies of the States
and Union territories including provision of fifty per cent reservation for women therein;

(ii) provision of fifteen per cent reservation for women in other constituencies of
Lok Sabha/Legislative Assemblies of the States and Union territories;

(iii) provision of reservation of one-third of seats for women in the Council of
States filled up on the basis of election as well as nomination;

(iv) method of determining constituencies for the purpose of extending
reservation to various groups or individuals as per the provisions of different laws;

(v) state funding of elections;

(vi) putting restriction on various activities including plying of private vehicles
and sale of liquor during elections; and

(vii) any other matter connected with the conduct of elections to the House of
the People, Council of States, Legislative Assemblies of Statesand Legislative Councils.

Commission 4. The Commission shall submit its report to the President as soon as possible, but not
to submit its Jater than one year after the date of its constitution.

report within

one year. हि

Laying of 5. (1) The Central Government shall lay the report of the Commission on the Table of

ee pee ‘each House of Parliasaent within a period of thirty days of its submission to the President.
each House

Parliament (2) The Central Government shall-implement the recommendations contained in the
= Li report of the Commission and present an ‘action taken report within one year from the date

action taken Of receipt of the report.

report.

20

25



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

India is one of the countries in the world with rich experience in democracy, democratic
institutions and successful practice of democracy. Democratic elections is one of the essential
ingredients of democracy. But there are seen certain glaring weaknesses in our electoral
system. These have to be rectified at the earliest to strengthen democracy and democratic
institutions in the country.

In the present system of elections, if a candidate gets more votes than his nearest
Opponent, he gets elected. The votes polled may bea very small Percentage and the winning
candidate wins the seat with negligible support. The polling Percentage, of late, is gradually
coming down everywhere. Money power, caste politics, religious considerations play a vital
role in deciding the fate of the candidates. There are many other issues too, such 85 enabling
women to be represented in greater numbers in legislatures, state funding of elections to
Temove money power from our electoral system, introducing innovative methods of election
to ensure majority support for winning candidate and so on, which need closer examination
by an expert body.

In view of this, an Electoral Reforms Commission is Proposed to be set up which shall
examine all issues relating to our present electoral system threadbare and come up with

Tecommendations to make it more vibrant and Ppeople-responsive and to strengthen and
sustain our democracy.

Hence the Bill.

New Delhi; C.K.CHANDRAPPAN
July 25, 2006.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for setting up of an Electoral Reforms Commission. It
further provides that the Commission shall have its own office and staff. Clause 5 provides
for the laying of report of the Commission on the Table of each House of Parliament and as
such some expenditure will be involved in the printing etc. of the sufficient number of copies
of the report. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore will be
involved.

No recurring expenditure is likely tobe involved. _



LOK SABHA

A
BLL

to provide for setting up of an Electoral Reforms Commission and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri C.K. Chandrappan, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—2124LS(S-5)—10-08-2006.