As INTRODUCED IN: LoK SABHA ON 
Bill No. 73 of 1983 
-- .---- ........ ;&: 
THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION (DELHI AMENDMENT) BILL, 1983 
BILL 
further to amend the Societies Registration Act, 1860 III in fMCt in the 
Union territory oJ Delhi. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Sol'ieties Registration 
Amendment) Act, 1983. 
(Delhi Short 
(2) It shall be deemed to have com£' into force on the 22nd day of 
5 June, 1983. 
10 
15 
2. In the Societies Registration Act, 1860, as in force in the Union 
territory of Delhi (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),-
(a) in the'long title, for the words "Literary, Scientific, and 
Charitable Societies". the words "Welfare, Literary, Scientific and 
Charitable Societies" shall be substituted; 
(b) in the preamble, for the words "promotion of literature, 
science, or the fine arts", the words "promotion of social welfare, 
activities conducive to the protection and improvement of the natural 
environment (including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life), com~ 
passion for living creatures, literature, science, sports, games or the 
fine ~" shall be substituted; 
(e) in section 20, for the words "promotion of science, literature, 
or the fine arts", the words "promotion of social wellare, activities 
title 
and 
~om­
SIlence-
meat. 
Amend-
mentol 
Act 2.1 of 
1860. 

Repeal 
and 
I8Ving. 
2 
. conducive to the protection and improvement of the natUNl environ-
ment (including forests, lakes, rivers and wild. life), compassion for 
living creatures, litern ture, science, sports, games or the fine arts" 
shall be substituted. 
3. (1) The Societies Registration (Delhi Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 5 8 of 
is hereby repealed. 1983. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended 
by this Act. I () 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In the context of a welfare state, societies can play a very useful role 
.and State action can be taken more conveniently through the agency of 
a s9ciety in the sphere of activities which are not carried out with com-
mercial motives. 
2. The Societies Registration Act, 1860 (relatable to entry 32 of the 
State List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution), as in force in 
the Union territory of Delhi, provides for registration of sOcieties estab-
lished for literary, scientific, charitable and certain other specified pur-
poses. It does not provide for registration of, and the benefits of the Act 
are not available in the case, 'of,. societies established for a number of 
purposes which are important from the point of view of promotion of 
the objectives of a welfare state, though the benefit of registration under 
the Act ought to be available in the case of such societies also. The Act 
has already been amended in some other States to bring within its pur-
view societies for purposes which are important for the promotion of the 
objectives of a welfare state. In Maharashtra and Gujarat, the Act ha:; 
been amended to bring within its purview societies for the promotion 
·of sports. In Pondicherry, the Act has been amended to cover societies 
for the dissemination of social education, protection of the interests and 
the welfare of the public or a section of the public and non-trading 
associations with objects confined to the Union territory or with any 
such other object as may be notified by the Government as being bene-
ti.cial to the public or a section of the public. In some other States, the 
Act has been repealed and replaced by new' Acts. Amongst these, men-
tion may be made of the Tamil N adu Societies Regis4'ation Act, 1975, 
which covers, inter aU a., societies formed for purposes connected with 
social reforms, crafts, cottage industries, athletics, sport~, recreation, 
public health, social service, cultural activities and diffusion of useful 
knowledge. The Madhya Pradesh Societie.'! Registration Adhiniyam, 
1973, covers, inter aLia, societies for the promotion of social welfare and 
societies for the promotion of gymnastics. The West Bengal Societies 
Registration Act, 1961, which also repealed and replaced the 1860 Act, 
covers, among:;t other societies, societies for the alleviation of the suffer-
ings of animals and societies for the relief of aged persons. 
3. The deficiency of the Societies Registration Act, 1860, as in force 
in the Union. territory of Delhi, with regard to its coverage came into 
sharp focus in connt:ction with ttte processing of a proposal of the Depart-
ment of Sports for establishing a society by the name of thE" Sports 
Development Authority of India for the purpose of looking after the 
stadia and other facilities constructed, renovated or created for the Ninth 
A!ilian Games, 1982, and also for the purpose of promoting sports. In 
view of the urgent need for processing the proposal, the President pro-
mulgated ~he Societies Registration (Delhi Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 
(3 of 1983), for amending the Act in its application to the Union territory 
3 

4 
of Delhi. The opportunity was availed of to bring within the 
purview of the Act not only societies for the promotion of sports and 
games but also other types of societies which are important from the 
point of view of the concept of welfare state and the Directive Principles 
in the Constitution. The Ordinance brought within the purview of the 
Act SOCieties for the promotion of social welfare, sports, games, activities 
conducive to the protection and improvement of the natural environment 
(including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life and compassion for livinl 
creatures) . 
4. The Bill seeks to l'ep1ace the aforesaid Ordinance. 
NEW DI:Lm; JAGAN NATH KAUSHAL. 
The 28th July, 1983. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE SocIETIES RIlGIsTRATION ACT, 1860 
(21 OF 1860) 
An Act for the Registration of Literary, Scientific, and Charitable Societies. 
WHEREAS it is expedient that 'provision should be made for improving Preamble. 
the legal condition of societies established for the promotion of literature, 
science. or the fine arts, or for the diffusion of useful knowledge, the 
diffusion of political educa~ion or for charitable purposes; It is enacted 
ail follows:-
'" '" '" '" '" 
ZI). The following societies may be registered under this Ac:t:-
Charitable societies, the military orphan funds or societ:.es estab-
lished at the several presidencies of India, societies establithed for 
the promotion of science, literature, or .the fine arts, for instruction, 
the diffusion of useful knowledge, the diffusion of political education, 
the foundation or maintenance of libraries or reading-rooms for gene-
ral use among the members or open to the public, or public museums 
and galleries of paintings and other works of art, collections of natural 
hiatory, mechanical and philosophical inventions, i;nstruments, 01' 
'tiesign.s. 
• 
To what 
societies 
Act 
applies. 

LOK SABHA 
, 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Societies Registration Act, 1860 88 in force iri the 
Union territory of Delhi. 
(Shri Ja9""flGth. Kau'hal, Miniater 01 Law, Juatice and Company Affair,) 