THE EMPL()YEES' PROVIDENT 
FUNDS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1956 
AI PASSED" I l.iL tIl SAlMA 

LOK SABRA 
CORRI Gi!:NDA 
to 
THE EMPLOYEES' PrlOVIDENT FUNDS (AMENDM~NT) 
BILL, 1956. 
-iit! intI 0 dUC\id 1rx Lok Sybhg) 
AI PASS£D .~ TriE LIK SAIHA 
1. P3ge 1, line 8,-
fQ.! "c ant aine d" re ad II co nt aine d" 
2 • P c1 g e 10,-
for line 17, ~ -
"to believe to be or to have been an 
employee in the f"=lctory;" 
NEW DELHI, 
The 23rd November, 1956. 

Bnt No. '73 of ItS' 
TIlE EMPLOYEES' PROVIDENT FUNDS (AMENDMENT) 
, BILL, 1956 
A 
AI PAIISI BY THE LOK SAl"" 
further to amend the Employees' Providen~ Fund.! Act, 1952. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Employees' Provident Funds Short dde. 
(Amendment) Act, 1956. 
, !. For sub-section (3) of section 1 of the Employees' Provident AmeadmtDt 
19 of IPSa. Funds Act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the of HCtioD I. 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
<, 
10 
15 
"(3) Subject to the provisions cantained in section 16, it 
applies-
(a) to every establishment which is a factory engaged 
in any industry specified in Schedule I and in which tUty or 
more persons are employed, and 
(b) to any other establishment employing fifty or more 
persons or class of such establishments which the Central 
Government may. by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify in this behalf: 
Provided that the Central Government may, after giving not 
less than two months' notice of its intention so to do, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, apply the provisions of this Act to 
any establishment employing such number of persons less than 
fifty as may be specified in the notification." 

2 
SubstitutiOll 3. In sub-section (4) of section 1, clauses (f) and (1ff) of section 
:e::~=Ih- 2, sections 5, 8, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17 and clauses (ii) and (iii) of 
eltabliah- section 19A of the principal Act for the words "factory" "a factory" ment' aDd ' , 
'eltab/ilh- and "factories" wherever they occur, the words Uestablishment", "an 
era' for, establishment" and Uestablishments" respectively shall be substi- S 
act ~ tuted. 
f8ct ea'. 
Afmmdm~ 
of 1CCti0D 2. 
Substitution 
dnew 
leCtioo for 
lectioD 3. 
Power to ap-
ply IV!t to m 
estAblish-
mentwhich 
has a com-
mon provi-
4. In section 2 of the principal Act,-
(a) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(a) "appropriate Government" means-- 10 
(i) in relation to an establishment which is a fac-
tory engaged in a controlled industry, or a mine or an 
oil field, the Central Government, and 
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the 
State Governmentj" 1$ 
(b) for clause (e), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
II (e) 'employer' means-
(i) in relation to an establishment which is a fac-
tory, the owner or occupier of the factory, including 20 
the agent of such owner or occupier, the legal represen-
tative of a deceased owner or occupier and. where a 
person has been named as a manager of the factory 
under clause <I) of sub-section (1) of section 7 of the 
Factories Act, 1948, the person so named; and 25 63 of 1948. 
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the per-
son who, or the authority which, has the ultimate control 
over the affairs of the establishment, and where the said 
affairs are entrustea to a manager, managing director 
or managing agent, such manager, managing director or 30 
managing agent;". 
5. For section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"3. Where immediately before this Act -becomes applicable 
to an establishment there is in existence n provident fund which 35 
is common to the employees employed in that establishment and 
employees in any other establishment, the Central Government 

, 
10 
3 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the provi- d~ lun~ 
sions of this Act shall also apply to such other establishment." :tatill:b-
meat. 
6. In section 19A of the principal Act, for clause (i), the follow- 'rendJnCDt 
ing clauses shall be substituted, namely:- ~~ 
"(i) whether an establishment which is a factory, is engag-
ed in any industry specified in Schedule I. 
(ia) whether any particular establishment is an establish-
ment falling within the class of establishments to which this Act 
applies by virtue of a notification under clause (b) of sub-sec-
tion (3) of section 1.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Employees' Provident Funds Act, 1952, applied originally to 
factories engaged in the six industries specified in Schedule I, namely, 
cement, cigarettes, electrical, mechanical or general engineering 
products, iron and steel, paper and textiles. Section 4 of the Act, 
provides for the extension of the A~t to other factories by a notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette. Of late, there has been a persistent 
demand for the extension of provident fund benefits to all industrial 
workers, and the Act has recently been extended to seventeen addi-
tional factory industries by notification. Section 4, however, provides 
for application of the Act to factory industries only. There is no 
provision in the Act enabling its extension to other establishments 
like plantations, mines, commercial establishments, etc. It is, there-
fore, proposed to include an enabling provision in the Act to the 
effect that, subject to the exemptions provided in section 16. the Act 
shall apply to any establishment or class of establishmeBts as may 
be specified by the Central Government by notification in the Oftlcial 
Gazette. 
The Bill seeks to provide for this object. 
KHANDUBHAI K. DESAI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 7th November, 1956. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill contemplates the extension of the Employees' Provident 
Funds Act and the Scheme framed thereunder to non-factory indw;. 
tries like plantations, mines, commercial establishments, etc. The cost 
of administering the Act and the Scheme will mainly be recovered 
from employers. The Centre's responsibility will be confined to super-
vision and co-ordination. For this purpose some additional 
staff may be required in the Central Secretariat. It is not possible 
to estimate accurately at present the extra staff required for the 
purpose, but the extra cost on this account is not likely to exceed 
Rs. 25,000/- per annum. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 2 of the Bill amends sub-section 3 of section 1 of the Act 
relating to its application. The new section empowers the Central 
Government to bring under the purview of the Act, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, any establishment or class of establishments, 
in respect of the employees whereof it is of the opinion that a Pro-
vident Fund Scheme should be framed under the Act. The section 
as it now stands only provides for the extension of the Act to factory 
industries and so power is being obtained to cover other establish-
ments. ' 
The delegation is of a normal character. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE EMPLOYEES' PROVIDENT FuNDs ACT, 1952. 
(19 01' 1952) 
• • • • • • 
1. (1) 
• • • • • • 
Short ride. 
extent ani 
commence-
(3) Subject to the provisions contained in section 16, it applies ment. 
in the first instance to all factories engaged in any industry specified 
in Schedule I in which fifty or more persons are employed, but the 
Central Government may, after giving not less than two months' 
notice of its intention so to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
apply the provisions of this Act to all factories employing such 
number of persons less than fifty as may be specified in the notifica-
tion and engaged in any such industry. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3) of 
this section or sub-section (1) of section 16, where it appears to the 
Central Government, whether on an application made to it in this 
behalf or otherwise, that the employer and the majority of employees 
in relation to any factory have agreed that the provisions of this Act 
should be made applicable to the factory, it may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, apply the provisions of this Act to that factory. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) lIappropriate Government" means--
(i) in relation to a factory engaged in a controlled in-
dustry or in an industry connected with a mine or an oil-
field, the Central Government, and 
(ii) in relation to any other factory. the State Govern-
ment; 
• • • • • 
(e) lIemployer" in relation to a factory means the owner or 
occupier of the factory, including the agent of such owner or 
occupier, the legal representative of a deceased owner or 
occupier and, where a person has been named as a manager of 
the factory under clause (/> of sub-section (1) of section 7 of the 
Factories Act, 1948 (LXIII of 1948), the person so named; 
(f) "employee" means any person who is employed. for 
wages in any kind of work, manual or otherwise, in or in con-
nection with the work of a factory, and who gets his wages 
7 

8 
directly or indirectly from the employer. and includes any per-
son employed by or thrm,tgb a contractor in or in connection 
with the work of the factory; 
• • • • • • 
(fii> "exempted factory" means a factory in respect of 
which an exemption has been granted under section 17 from the 
operation of all or any of the provisions of any Scheme, whether 
such exemption has been granted to the factory as such or to any 
person or class of persons employed therein; 
• • • • • • 
Po~r Ato 3. Where immediately before this Act becomes applicable to a 
app y ct to f t th .. . t 'd t f d h' h ' t establish- ac ory ere IS 1D eXIS ence a provI en un w IC IS common 0 
mh eDt which the employees employed in a factory to which this Act applies and as a 
common employees in any other establishment the Central Government may, 
f.!'~~i!: a by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the provisions of 
factory. this Act shall also apply to that establishment. and thereupon the 
Employees' 
Provident 
Fund 
Schemes. 
Mode of 
lCCoyery of 
mont:ys due 
from em-
ployers. 
establishment shall be deemed to be a factory for all the purposes of 
this Act. 
• • • • • 
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, frame a Scheme to be called the Employees' Provident Fund 
Scheme for the establishment of provident funds under this Act for 
employees or for any class of employees and specify the factories or 
class of factories to which the said Scheme shall apply and there 
shall be established, as soon as may be after the framing of the 
Scheme, . a Fund in "l!co~'(bnce with the provisions of this Act and 
the Scheme. 
(2) A Scheme framed under sub-section (1) may provide that 
any of its provisions shall take effect either prospectively or retros-
pectively on such date as may be specified in this behalf in the 
Scheme. 
• • • • 
8. Any amount due-
(a) from the employer in relation to a factory to which any 
Scheme applies in respect of any contribution payable to the 
Fund, damages recoverable under section 14B, accumulations re-
quired to be transferred under sub-section (2) of section 15 or 
any charges payable by him under any other provision of this 
Act or of any provision of the Scheme; or 
(b) from the employer in relation to an exempted factory in 
respect of any damages recoverable under section 14B or any 
charges payable by him to the appropriate Government under 

o 
any provision of this Act or under any of the conditions speeifted 
under section 17, 
may, if the amount is in arrear, be recovered by the appropriate Gov-
ernment in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue . 
• • • • 
11. Where any employer is adjudicated insolvent or, being a com- Priority ot 
pany, an order for winding up is made, the amount due-- pa)'DlCtribDt !3f 
cal UUODS· 
(4) from the employer in relation to a factory to which any ~:~.~cr 
Scheme applies in respect of any contribution payable to the 
Fund. damages recoverable under section 14B, accumulations re-
quired to be transferred under sub-section (2) of section 15 or 
any charges payable by him under any other provision of this 
Act or of any provision of the Scheme; or 
(b) from the employer in relation to an exempted factory in 
respect of any contribution to the provident fund (in so far u 
it relates to exempted employees), under the rules of the 
provident fund, damages recoverable under section 14B or any 
charges payable by him to the appropriate Government under 
any provision of this Act or under any of the conditions specified 
under section 17, 
ahall, where the liability therefor haa accrued before the order of 
adjudication or winding up is made, be deemed to be included.. 
12. No employer in relation to a factory to which any Scheme BmplOJV 
applies shall, by reason only of his liability for the payment of any =~ 
contriblHion to the Fund or any charges under this Act or the WIll", etc. 
Scheme, reduce, whether directly or indirectly. the wages of any 
employee to whom the Scheme applies or the toW quantum. of bene-
fits in the nature of old age pension, gratuity or provident fund to 
which the employee is entitled under the terms of his employment, 
express or implied. 
13. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Inepectors. 
otfteial Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be Inspectors 
for the purposes of this Act or of any Scheme, and may define their 
jurisciIetion. 
(2) Any Inspector appointed under sub-section (1) may, for the 
purpose of inquiring into the correctness of any information furnish-
ed in connection with this Act or with any Scheme or for the pur-
pose of ascertaining whether any of the provisions of this Act or of 
any Scheme have been complied with in respect of a factory to which 
any Scheme applies or for the purpose of 8IIOeriaining whether the 

10 
provisions of this Act or any Scheme are applicable to any factory 
to which the Scheme has not been applied or for the purpose of 
determining whether the conditions subject to which exemption was 
granted under section 17 are being complied with by the employer 
in relation to an exempted factory-
(a) require an employer to furnish such information as he 
may consider necessary; 
(b) at any reasonable time enter any factory or any pre-
mises connected therewith and require anyone found in charge 
thereof to produce before him for examination any accounts. 
books, registers and other documents relating to the employment 
of persons or the payment of wages in the factory; 
(c) examine, with respect to any matter relevant to any of 
the purposes aforesaid. the employer, his agent or servant or 
any other person found in charge of the factory or any premises 
connected therewith or whom the Inspector has reasonable cause 
or other documents maintained in relation to the factory; 
Cd) make copies of, or take extracts from, any book, register 
or other documents maintained in relation to the factory; 
(e) exercise such other powers as the Scheme may provide. 
(3) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public 81ervant with-
in the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (Act XLV of 
1860). 
• • • • 
s~ pro.. 15. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 17, every employee VlSIOUS re- • 
lating to who is a subscriber to any prOVIdent fund of a factory to which this 
:J~~l~o- Act applies shall. pending the application of a Scheme to the factory-
D •• in which he is employed, continue to be entitled to the benefits 
accruing to him under the provident fund, and the provident fund 
shall continue to be maintained in the same manner and subject to 
the same conditions as it would have been if this Act had not been 
passed. 
(2) On the application of any Scheme to a factory, the accumu-
lations in any provident fund of the factory standing to the credit 
of the employees who become members of the Fund established 
under the Scheme shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in any law for the time being in force or in any deed or 
other instI1l1rient establishing the provident fund but subject to the 
provisions. if any, contained in the Scheme, be transferred to the fund 
established under the Scheme, and shall be credited to the accounts 
of the employees entitled thereto in' the Fund. 

II 
18. This Act shall not apply to- Act not to apply to 
I al factories (a) any factory belonging to the Government or a oc belonging to 
authority, and Government 
or local 
(b) any other factory, established whether before or after ::~~r::,Yto 
the commencement of this Act, unless three years have elapsed infant 
from its establishment. factories. 
1'1. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Power to 
Official Gazette, and subject to such conditions as may be specified aempt. 
in the notification, exempt from the operation of all or any of the 
provisions of any Scheme-
(a) any factory to which this Act applies if, in the opinion of 
the appropriate Government, the rules of its provident fund with 
respect to the rates of contributio~ are not less favourable than 
those specified in section 6 and the employees are also in enjoy-
ment of other provident fund benefits which on the whole are not 
less favourable to the employees than the benefits provided under 
this Act or any Scheme in relation to the employees in any other 
factory of a similar character; or 
(b) any factory if the employees of such factory are in 
enjoyment of benefits in the nature of provident fund, pension 
or gratuity and the appropriate Government is of opinion that 
such benefits. separately or jointly, are on the whole not less 
favourable to such employees than the benefits provided under 
this Act or any Scheme in relation to erqployees in any other 
factory of a similar character. 
Explanation.-The following conditions shall be deemed to be 
always included in the conditions which may be specified in a noti-
fication under clause (a), namely:-
(i) the amount of accumulations in the provident fund shall 
be invested in such manner as the Central Government may 
direct; 
(ii) the amount of accumulations to the credit of an employee 
in the provident fund shall, where he leaves his employment 
and obtains re-employment in another factory to which this Act 
applies. be transferred, within such time as may be specified in 
this behalf by the Central Government, to the credit of his 
account in the provident fund of the factory in which he is re-
employed or, as the case may be, in the Fund established under 
the Scheme applicable to the factory. 
(2) Any Scheme may make provision for exemption of any per-
son or class of persons employed in any factory to which the Scheme 

Power to 
remove: dUll 
culdes. 
r2 
applies from the operation of all or any of the proviaioDl of the 
Scheme, if such person or class of persons is entitled to benefits in 
the nature of provident fund. gratuity or old age pension and such 
benefits, separately or jointly, are on the whole not less favourable 
than the benefits provided under this Act or the Scheme: 
Provided that no such exemption shall be granted in respect of a 
class of persons unless the appropriate Government is of opinion that 
the majority of persons constituting such class desire to continue to 
be entitled to such benefits. 
(3) Where any person or class of persons employed in a factory 
is exempted from the operation of all or any of the provisions of any 
Scheme under sub-section (2), the employer in relation to such a 
factory-
(4) shall; in relation to -the provident fund, old age pension 
and gratuity to which such perlOn or class of persons is entitled, 
maintain such accounts, submit such returns, make such invest-
ment, provide for such facilities for inspection and pay such in-
spection charges, as the Central Government may direct; and 
(b) shall not, at any time after the exemption, without the 
leave of the Central Government. reduce the total quantum 
of benefits in the nature of old age pension, gratuity or provident 
. fund to which such person or class of persons was entitled at the 
time of the exemption. 
• • • • 
ItA. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act. ~d in particular, if any doubt arises as to-
(0 whether a factory is engaged in any industry specified 
in Schedule I j or 
(ii) whether fifty or more persons are employed in a factory; 
or 
(iii) whether three years have elapsed from the establish-
ment of a factory; or 
• • • • 

• 
LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Employees' Provident Funds Act, 1952 
The President has in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 of the 
Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the consi-
deration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL. 
Secretary. 
(Shri Khandubhai K. Desai, 
Minister of Labour) 