5 
10 
20 
As INTRODtJCFD IN 1.o1t SABIU ON 
Bill No. 73 of 1986 _ ....... _ ........... 
THE COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1986 
• 
BILL 
further to amend the CommisS'i~ of Inquiry Act. 1952. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Commissions of Inquiry (Amend- ~~:~Dd 
ment) Act, 1986. com-
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 14th day of 
May. 1986. 
2. In section 3 of the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act), after sub-section (4), the following 
'Sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:-
II (5) The provisions of sub-section (4) shall not apply if the 
appropriate Government is satisfied that in the interests of the 
sovereignty and integrity of India. the security of the State, friendly 
relations with foreign States or in the public interest, it is not 
expedient to lay before the House of the People or, as the f)ase may 
be, the LegislatiVe Assembly of the State, the report, or "ny part 
thereof, of the' Commission on the inquiry made by the CtJlnmi'Ssion 
under sub-sectiO'l1 (1), and issues a notification to that effect in the 
Official Gazette. 
(6) Every notification issued under sub-section (5) shall be laid 
before the House of the People or, as the case may be, the Legislative 
mence-
meat. 
Amend-
ment 
Of Act 60 
of 1952. 

Repeat 
.ad 
BBvilll. 
l 
Assembly of the State, if it is sitting, as soon as may be after the issue 
"of the no~tion, and if it is not sitting, within seven days of its re'-
'~, ." >\~~bfy, ~ the approp.riate Government shall seek the approval 
of the House of the People or, as the case may be, the Legislative 
Assembly of the State, to the notification by a resolution moved 5 
within a period of fifteen days beginning with the day on which the 
notification is so laid before the House of the People or, as the case 
may be, the Legislative Assembly of the State and if the House of the 
People or, as the case may be, the Legislative Assembly of the 
State makes any modification in the notification or directs that the 10 
notification should ce'ase. to have effect, the notification shall thereafter . 
have effect only in 'Such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may ~.". 
3. (1) The Commissions oi Inquiry (Amendment) Ordinance, 1986, 
is hereby repealed. . 15 
(2) Notwithstanding such .repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deem-
ed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended by 
this Act. . 
6 of 1986. 
• 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Sub-section (4) of section 3 of the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 
provides that the appropriate Government shall cause to be laid before 
the House of the People or, as the case may be, the Legislative Assembly 
0'[ the State, the report. if any, of any Commission on the inquiry made 
by it together with a memorandum of the action taken thereon, within a 
period of six months of the submission of the report by the Commission 
to the appropriate QQvernment. 
2. To provide for the situations where the fulfilment of the statutory 
obligation to lay the report of the Commission before the House of the 
People or the Legislative Assembly of a State involves practical difficul-
ties or where a Commission of Inquiry is appointed to inquire into sen~i­
tive matters of public importance and the inquiry report may c:ll!tain 
matters of sensitive nature on account of which it may not be desirable 
in the public interest to lay such report before the House of the People 
or the Legislative Assembly, the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 
1952 was amended by the Commissions of Inquiry (Amend-
ment) Ordinance, 1986 (6 of 1986) promulgated by the President on 
the 14th May, ]986. The Ordinance inserted two new sub-sections (5) and 
(6) in section 3 of the Act. New sub-section (5) provides that the provi-
sions of sub-section (4) of the said section 3 shall not apply in cases 
where the appropriate Government, being satisfied that in the interests 
of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friend-
ly relations with foreign States or in the public interest, it is not ex-
pedient to lay such report before the HoUSe of the People or the Legis-
lative Assembly of the State, issues a notification to that effect in the Offi-
ctal Gazette. By virtue of the new sub-section (6), the appropriate Gov-
ernment is required to lay every notification issued under sub-section (5) 
before the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly and seek 
approval thereon within the period mentioned therein. 
3. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance. 
NEW DELIlI; 
, 
The Ird July. 1986. BUTA SINGH. 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952. 
(S'hri Bu'" S:ngh, Ministe,. of Home A:I1Gif".) 