8W No. 73 of IU'· 
THE CONSTITUTION (EIGHTH 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1955 
(As INTaODUCBD IN LOK SABIIA) 

Bill No. 73 of 195$ 
THE CONSTITUTION (EIGHTH AMENDMENT) 
BILL, I955 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the ·Constitution of India: 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Eighth Amendment) Short title. 
Act, 1955. 
5 2. In article 3 of the Constitution, for the proviso, the following Amendment 
proviso shall be substituted, namely:- of article 3· 
"Provided that no Bill for the purpose shall' be introduced 
in either House of Parliament except on the recommendation 
of the President and unless, where the proposal contained in 
the Bill affects the area, boundaries or name of any of the 
10 States specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule, the 
Bill has been referred by the President to the Legislature of 
that State for eKpressing its views thereon within such period 
as may be specified in the reference or within such further 
15 period as the President may allow and the period so specified 
or allowed has expired." 

2 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the pr6viso to article 3 of the Constitution, no Bill for the 
purpose of forming a new State, increasing or diminishing the area 
of any State or altering the boundaries or name of any State can 
be introduced in Parliament, unless the views of the State Legisla-
tures concerned with respect to the provisions of the Bill have been 
ascertained by the President. The intention of this proviso is to 
ensure that all the States affected by a reorganisation proposal have 
a reasonable opportunity of expressing their views. It is considered 
desirable that when a reference is made to the State Legislatures 
for this purpose, the President should be able to prescribe the period 
within which the States should convey their views, and it should 
be open to the President to extend such period whenever he con-
siders it necessa,ry. It is also considered desirable to provide that 
the Bill shall not be introduced until after the expiry of such period. 
It is proposed to amend the proviso to article 3 of the Constitution 
accordingly. 
NEW DELm; C. C. BISWAS. 
The 6th December, 1955. 

• 
3 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA • 
• • • / 
3. Parliament may _by law- Formation of 
neW States 
(a) form a new State by separation of territory from any ~d alftera-, , . tlon 0 areas, State or by umtmg two or more States or parts of States boundaries 
or by uniting any territory to a part of any State; or.naDltin, el of eXlB g 
(b) increase the area of any State; States. 
(c) diminish the area of any State; 
(d) alter the boundaries of any State; 
(e) alter the name of any State: 
Provided that no Bill for the purpose shall be introduced in 
either House of Parliament except on the recommendation of the 
President and unless. where the proposal contained in the Bill 
affects the boundaries of any State or States specified in Part A or 
Part B of the First Schedule or the name or names of any such 
State or States, the views of the Legislature of the State or, as the 
case may be, of each of the States both with respect to the proposal 
to introduce the Bill and with respect to the provisions thereof have 
bee·n ascertained by the President. 

LO~ SABlJA 
A 
lULL 
further to amend the Constitution of India 
(Shri C.C. Bimw, Minister of lArD) 
G IPD-LAD-f62LS-7- 111-55- 1,600 