L0K S,;J3HA 4~ 
CURHIGE!'DU1 
to 
! THE MARITIME ZCNES CF I '!cH,u. (nEGJLATIL' CF FISHING OY 
F(;REIGN VESSELS) BILL, 1981 
(10• !"'e!As int r()d~ced in Lok Sp!?bA) 
.. 
Page 3, line 14,-
i2!. "lice nce U 
NEW DELHI; 
Mat 6 1<)81 
Va s ak~il 16, 1903 {Sakal 
re l1 d "a licence" --

(0 
As INTRODUCED IN LaB: SABRA. 0. 
k: 8 MAY 1381 ~~ 
Bill No. 73 of 1981 ... 
't't-lE MARITIME ZONES OF INDIA (REGULATION OF FISHING BY 
FOREIGN VESSELS) BILL, 1981 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
.......... 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPrER II 
REGULATION OF FISHING BY FOREIGN VESSELS 
3, Prohibition of fishing in maritime zones of India by foreign 
vessels. 
4. Grant of licences. 
5. Prohi11ition of fishing by Indian citizens, etc., using foreign 
vessels. 
6. Cancellation or suspension of licence or permit. 
7. Foreign vessel entering m:lritime zones of India without licence 
or permit to stow gear. 
8. Fishing for scientific research, investigation, etc. 
CHAPTER III 
POWERS OF SEARCH AND SEIZURE 
9. Authorised officers and their powers. 
CHAPTER IV 
OFFEN1:::ES AND pENALTIES 
10. Penalty for contravention of section 3. 
11. Penalty for contravention of licence. 
12. Penalty for contravention of permit. 
13. Confiscation of vessels, etc. 
14. Penalty for contravention of section 7. 
15. Penalty for obstruction of authorised officers. 
16. Court to pass certain orders. 
17. Offences by c.'Ompanies. 

~~ 
(ii) 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
CL..\usts 
1'8. Offenees to be cognizable. 
19. Cognizance and trial of offertees. 
20. Magistrate's power to impose enhanced penalties. 
21. Place of trial. 
22. Presumptions. 
23. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
24. Ar.t to supplement other laws. 
23. Power to make rules. 
26. Removal of difficulties. 
.~ 

BOot 1970. 
4b) 
Bill No. 73 of 1981 
THE MARITIME ZONES OF INDIA (REGULATION OF FISHING BY 
FOREIGN VESSELS) BILL, 1981 
A 
BILL 
to p·rovide for the regulation of fishing by foreign vessels in certain 
maritime zones of India and for matters connected therewith. 
BE: it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-second Year of the 
R~mblic ot India as fonows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) True Act may be called the Maritime Zones of India (Regula- Short 
tion of Fishing by Foreign Vessels) Act, 1981. title 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Cemtral Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: 
Provicled tbatdiffereJ:lt dates may be appointed for different provi-
10 sions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the com-
mencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming 
into force of that provision. 
15 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
'''~/uexduaive economic zone of India" means the exclusive 
e80nami~ ·ZOIle..of India in accordance with the provisions of section 
7 .;Qf·.the. Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, E~lusive Economic 
Zone and other Maritime Zones,Act, 1976; 
and 
com-
mence. 
ment. 
Defini-
tions. 

~yJ(' 
c, 
2 
(b) "fish'" means any aquatic animal, whether piscine or not, 
and includes shell fish, crustacean, molluscs, turtle (chelonia), 
aquatic mammal (the young, fry, eggs and spawn thereof), holthu-
'nans, coelenterates, sea weed, coral (porifera) and any other aquatic 
life; S 
(c) "fishing" means catching, taking, killing, attracting or pur-
suing fish by any method and incl'lldes the processing, preserving, 
transferring, receiving and transporting of fish; 
(d) "foreign vessel" means any vessel other than an Indian 
vessel; 10 
(e) "Indian vessel" means-
(I) a vessel owned by Government or bv a corporation 
established by a Central Act or a Provincial or State Act, or .-
(II) a vessel-
(i) which is owned wholly by persons to each of whom '5 
any of the following descriptions applies:-
(1) a ritizp.n of India; 
(2) a company in which not less than sixty per cent 
of the share capital is held by citizens of Innia; 
(3) a registered co-operative society every member 20 
whereof is a citizen of Indio Or where any other co-opera-
tive society is a member thereof, every individual who 
is a member of such other co-cQerative society is a citizen 
of India; and 
(ii) which is registered under the Merchant Shipping 25 
Act, 1958. or under any other Central Act or an'.' Provincial or 
State Act. . 
t 
44 of 1958. 
.1 
I 
~ I 
~ 
j 
, 
F..rplanation.-For the purposes of this clause, "registered co- ...j 
operative society" means a society registered or deemed to be regis- , 
tered unner the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912, or any other law go 2 of 1912. \, 
relClting to co-operative societies for the time being in force in any 
State; 
(f) "licence" means a licence granted under section 4; 
(g) "maritime zones of India" means the territorial waters of 
India or the exclusive economic zone of India; 35 
(h) "master", in relation to a vessel. means the person for the 
time being having command or charge of the vessel; 
(i) "owner", in relation to a vessel, includes any association of 
J)Qfsons, whether incorporated or not, by whom the vessel is owned 
or chartered; , , 40 
<J) "permit" me::tns a permit granted Of deemed, to have been 
granted under section 5; , 
(k) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act- ' ' 
, , 
(l) "processing", in relation to fishing, incl'lldes cleaning, be- 43 
heading, filleting. shelling, peeling, icing, freezing, canning, salting, 
smoking, cooking, pickling, drying and otherwise 'preparing or pre.-
serving fish by any other method; 
~ 
.,'1 

I ,'30 ot 1976. 
~ 
, 
3. . '1~~ 
!) 
10 
(om) "specified ports" means such ports as the Central Goven.· 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify for the 
purposes of this Act.; 
(n) "territorial waters of India" means the territorial waters· of 
India in accordance with the provisiohs ¢ section 3 of the Terri-
torial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and 
other Maritime Zon~ Act, 1976; 
(0) "vessel" includes any ship, boat, sailing vessel or other 
description of vessel. 
CHAPI'ER II 
RlI'.GULATION 0 .. FISlflNG BY FOREIGN VESSELS 
3. Subiect to the provisions of this Act, no foreign vessel shall, except 
under and in accordance with-
(a) licence granted under section 4; or 
15 (b) a permit granted under section 5. 
bv the Central Government, be used for fhhing within any maritime zone 
of India. . ,- I ~ 
4. (1) The owner of a forei!:!Tl vessel or anv other person [not being in 
either case anv person to whom ~my of the descriptions specified in sub-
20 item;l (1) to (3) of item (i) of sub-clause (II) of clause (e) of section 2 
a,pliesl who intends to use such vessel for fishing within any maritime 
zone of India. may make an application to the Central Government for 
the grant of a licence. 
(2) Every appliclltion under sub-section (1) shan be in <:l'ch form 
~5 and <!hall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed. 
go 
(3) No licen<'e shall be granted unless the C;p·'h''11 Government. 
having rellaI'd to such matters as mav be prescr:bed in the puhH,. intel'est 
in thi'3 behalf and after making such inquiry in respect of such other 
matters as may be relevant, is sati~fied that the licence may be granted. 
(4) Evel"'r order grantin(1' Or reiecting an application for the issue of 
a Ucence shall be in writing. 
(5) A licence pTanted under this section-
(a) shall be in such form as may be prescribed; 
(b) shall be valid for such areas, for such per:od, for such 
35 method of fishing and fnr such purposes as may be specified therein; 
40 
(c) may be renewen from time to time; and 
(d) shall be subject to such conditions and restrictions as may 
be prescribed and to such additional conditions and restrictions as 
may be specified therein. 
(6) A person holdinJ!' a licence under this section shall ensure that 
every person employed by him complies, in the course of such employ-
Prohibi-
tion ot 
fishing 
in mari-
time 
zones of 
India 
by 
foreign 
vessels. 
Grant 
of 
licences. 

~1~ 4; 
Prohibi-
tion of 
fishing 
by 
Indian 
citizens, 
etc., 
using 
foreign 
vessels. 
Cancel-
lation or 
suspen-
sion of 
licence 
or 
permit. 
ment, wi'th the provisions of this Act, or any rule or order-made there-
under and the conditions of such licence. 
5. (1) Every Indian citizen and every person to Whom any of the 
deBeEiptiolllS specified in sub-item (2) or (3} of i-tem (i) of sub-clause (II) of 
clawse (e}'of section 2 applies, who ,intends to use any foreign vessel for S 
fishing within any maritime zone of Inciia, may make an application to 
the Central Government for a permit to use such vessel for such purpose. 
(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be made in such 
form and shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed. 
(3) No permit shall be granted unless the Centr!il Government, 10 
having regard to such matters as may be prescribed in the publi'c interest 
in this behalf and after making such inquiry in respect of such other 
matters as may be relevant, is satisfied that the permit may be granted. 
(4) Every order granting or rejecting an application for the grant 
of such permit shdl be in writing. IS 
(5) A permit granted under this section-
(a) shall be in such form a~ may be prescribed; 
(b) shall be valid for such areas, for such per;od, for such 
method of fishing and for such purp"ses as may be specified therein; 
(c) may be renewed from time to time; and 
(d)' shall be subject to such conditions a'1I1d restrictions as may 
be prescribed and to such additional conditions and restrictions as 
may be specified therein. 
flO 
(6) A Qerson holding a permit under this section shall ensure 
that every person employed by him compli'es, in the course of such em- ~5 
ployment, with the provisions of this Act or any rule or order made 
thereunder and the conditions of such permit. 
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the fore~oing provisions 
of this section, or in section 3, any permission granted to an Indian 
eitizen to USe or em!p}oy foreign fishin~ vessels in any maritime ZORe of 30 
India and in force immediately before the commencement of this Act 
shaU, if the terms and conditions of such permission are not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to be a permit ~ante'd tinder 
this section and'such permission shall continue to be in force after such 
commencement on thE': same terms ano conditions. includinq tl,e condi- 35 
ttons alt to the arm- of o~ration' and the J)l!!riod of its, validi,ty., and the 
provisions -(if this .Actshall, so far- IK tnay he, apply to sllchpermission. 
8. (1) The Central Government may, if there is any reasonable 
cause to believe that the holder of ~ny li~ence or permit bas tnade any 
statement in. or in relation' to, any appUeation for the grant' or 40 
renewal of such licence or permit whiell' i" il1COi't'e'Ct or false in 
material particular!; or has contravened any of the provisions of this Act 
or Imy rule or order made thereUnder or of the proviSions of any lic'ence 
orp'E!rtnft or any conrlitions or restrictions specified therein, suspend 

:, 
5 
'1 ') I 
such licence or. :permit, as the case may be. pending the completion 
of any inquiry against such holder for making such incorrect or false 
statement or for such contravention, as the case may' be. 
(2) Where the Central Government is satisfied, !aftermsking such 
-5 inquiry as is necessary, that the holder of any licence or permit 
has made such im·.jlTect or false statement as is referred to in sub-
section (1) or has cnnlravened the provisions of this Act, rule or order 
made thereunder o'r of the provil,;ions of any licence or permit or 
any conditions or restrictions specified therein, it may, without pre-
10 judice to any other penalty to whicn such holder may be liable under 
the provisions of this Act, cancel such licence or permit, as the case 
may be. 
(3) EVeTY person whose licence or permit has been suspended 
under sub-section (1) shall, immediately after such suspension, stop, 
15 using the foreign 'fishing vessei in respect of which such licer.ce or permit 
is given and shall not resume such fishing until the order of suspension 
. has been revoked. 
(4) Every holder of a licence aT permit which is suspended or can-
celled shall, immediately after such suspension or cancellation, sur-
20 render such licence or permit, 25 the case may be, to the Central Govern-
ment. 
7. Where any foreign vessel enteTs any maritime zone of India with-
out a valid licence or permit granted under this Ad, the fishing gear, if 
any, of such vrosel shall, at all times while it is in such zone, be kept 
2S stowed in the prescribed manner. 
8. NotwithstandinJt anything contained in section 3, the Central Gov-
~rnment may, in writing, permit a foreign vessel to be used for fishing 
withln any maritime zone of India for the purpose of carrying out any 
;:cientitlc research o i.' investigation or for any experimental fishing in 
30 accordance with such terms r..nd conditions as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER III 
POWERS OF SEARCH AND SEIZURE 
9. (J) Any officer of the Coast Guard cOllstituted under the Coast 
300t 1978. Guard Act, 1978,er sucla other offirer of Government as may he authorised 
~S by the Central Government may, for tbe. purpose of ascertaining 
. wtMtIlep·or >not·the·requirements of this Act have beetl complied with, 
,.,tt.. ·with, GIl witheut a warl'ant,-
(a), stop or ~board a, f~eign vessel. in any marUi.e, .,ne of India 
and search such vessel for ibJJl.aad-'or:.,ea~tuaed,ot"capable 
40 of heinr used for flshinr: ,> __ 
Foreign 
vessel 
entering 
mari-
time 
zones 
of India 
without 
licence 
or 
permit 
10 
stow 
gear. 
Fishing 
for 
scientific 
research, 
investi-
gation, 
etc. 
Authorised 
officers 
and 
their 
powers. 

"tV e 
(b) require the master of sueh vessel to produc~ 
(i) any licence, permit, 10, book or other document relating 
to the vessel and examine or take copies of such licence, permit, 
log book or document; .. -•• ' 
(ii) any catch, net, fishing gear or other equipment on board 5 
such vessel or belonging to the vessel and examine 'luch fish, 
net, gear or equipment; 
(c) make sum ilDquiries as may be necessary to ascertain whe-
ther any otlence under this Act has been committed. 
(2) Where the officer referred to in sub-section (1) (hereinafter re- 10 
feITed to as authorised officer) has reason to believe that any foreign 
vessel has been, is being, or is about to be, used for committing 
an offence under this Act, he may, with or without a warrant.-
(a) seize and detain such vessel, including any fishing gear, fish, 
equlpment, stores or cargo found on boarci. such vessel or belonging Ie 
to the vessel, and seize and detain any fishing gear abandoned by') 
the vessel; 
(b) require the master of the vessel so seized or detained to 
bring such vessel to any specified port; 
(c) arrest any person who. such officer has reason to believe, 
has rommitted such an offence. 
(3) In taking any action under sub-section (2), the authorised officer 
may use such force as may be reasonably necessary. 
(4) Where any vessel or other things are seized, or any person has 
been arrested, under sub-section (2),-
(a) the vessel or other things so seized shall, as soon as possible, 
20 
25 
be produced bC'fore a Magistrate competent to try an offence under 
this Act who shall make such order as he may ci.eem fit for the 
retention or cllstody of such vessel or things with Government or 
with any other authority pending the completion of any proceedings 30 
for the prosecution of any offence under this Act or for its use by 
such authority during such retention or custody on such terms and 
conditions as the Magistrate may think fit to impose: 
Provided that the Magistrate may, on an application made by 
the owner or master of such vessel in the prescribed form, order the 
release of the vessel or other things so seizeci. on the owner Or master :15 
furnishing security in the form 'of cash or a bank guarantee 
for an amount not less than fifty r.,Jer cent. of the value of the vessel 
or things so seized: 
Provided further that where any fish so seized is subject to 
deterioration, the Magistrate may authorise the sale of such fish and 40 
the o.epositing of the proceeds of. such sale in Court; 
(b) the arrested person shall, as soon as possible, be informed 
of the grounci.s for such arrest and he shall, without unnecessary 
delay, be produced before such Magistrate; and 
(c) the Central Government shall be informed of such seizure 4S 
or arrest and the details thereof. .. 
. ",. 
i .. 
, .. 

7 '173 
(5) Where. in pursuance of the commil8ion of any offence under this 
Act, any foreign vessel is pursued beyond the limits of the exclusive 
economic zone of India, the powers conferred on an authorised otBcer by 
tht. section may be exercised beyond such limits in the circumstances and 
5 to· the exteftt recognised by intemational law and State practice. 
10 
CHAPTER IV 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
10. Where any foreign vessel is used in contravention of the provi-
sions of section 3, the owner or master of such vessel shall,-
(0) in a case where such contravention takes ~lace in any area 
within the territorial waters 'Of India, be punishable with imprison-
ment for a term not exceeding three years or with fine not exceeding 
rupees fifteen lakhs or with both; and 
(b) in a case where such contravention takes pl:tce in any area 
IS within the exclusive economic zone of ImHa, be punishable with fine 
not exceeding rupees ten lakhs. 
11. Whoever contravene~ the provisions of any licence shall be punish-
able with fine not exceeding rHlJeeS ten lakhs. 
12. Whoever contravenes the provisions of any nermit shall be punish-20 . . 
able,-
2S 
(a) whprp. such contravention rphtes to the :11'1':\ of oner:ltion or 
method of flshin!! l':necifled in such permit, with flne not ex('eedin~ 
rupees flvp lakh~; lmct 
(b) in any other case. with fine not exceedin~ rupees fifty 
thousand. 
13. (1) Where any pprson is convicten of an offence unner s9Ction 10 
or section 11 or section 12. th(' fo1'eiQ"n vessel usen in or in connection with 
the comm'ssion of the sn;n offencp. to(tether with its fishinrt ~ear. ertuip-
ment. stores ann carf,to and any flsh on board such sh;p or the pl"o(,C"P.d~ of 
30 the snle of anv fish ordered to be sold under thf' se<'ond proviso to clause 
. (a) (If .mb-section (4) of section 9 shall also be liable to confi.c;cation. 
(2) The forei.!!n vE"S..~el Ot' other things confiscated under suh-section 
(1) shall vest in the Central Government 
14. Where anv forei~ vessel is found in anv maritime zone of India in 
35 contravention of the pl"Ovis'on~ of sect;on 7. the owner or master of such 
ves~el shall be punishable with fine not exeeedin.!5 rupees five Inkhs. 
40 
IS. If anv person- II '1'. .., 
«(I) Intentionally obstructs :tny 3uthorlstro offtcer in the r.xercise of 
any pow,ers conferred under this Act; or 
(b) fails to afforn reasonable facilitiec; to the authorlSP.d officer 
or hfs assistants to board the "(e~el or tn l'ro~de fat' ~d~uat~ .. ~ -
Penalty 
for 
contra-
vention 
of 
section 
3. 
Penalty 
for 
contra-
vention 
of 
licence. 
Penalty 
for 
contra-
vention 
of 
permit. 
Contlsca_ 
tionof 
vessels, 
etC'. 
Penalty 
for 
contra-
vention 
of 
section 
1 . 
Penalty 
for 
obstruc':' 
tion or 
authorf8ed 
ofllce~ 

Court 
to 
P .... 
certain 
orders. 
Offences 
by 
com-
panies. 
'co 
otr~ea 
tobe, 
~. 
b~. 
~I~ 
8 
security to :such officer and assistants at the time' of entry Into the 
vessel or w.ben they are on board such vessel;, or 
(c) faiols to stop the vessel or produee the licence. permit, 
log book or other document or any fish, net, ftahlng, gear· or,o$ber 
equipment on board such vessel, when required to do so by the 5 
authorised officer, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to one year or with fine not exceeding rupees fifty thousand or with both. 
16. Where any ~erson is convicted of an offence unrler this Act, the 
Court may, in addition to awarding any punishment, order that any costs 10 
incurred in connection with the retention or custody of the vessel during 
the pendency of any proceedings for the prosecution of an offence under 
this Act,as rerluced by the amount, if any, realised out of the use of 
tbe vessel by the authority with whom such vessel was retained or kept 
in custo'dy, shall be payable by the person convicted. 15 
17. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a com-
pany, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in 
charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the 
business of the company, as well as the company, shalL be deemed to 
be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be, proceeded against and 20 
punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any such punishment provided in this Act if he 
proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge Or that he 
had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 25 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an 
offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved 
,that the offence has been committed with the consent or cennwanee of, 
01' is attributable to any ne.glect on the part of, any director, manager, 
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, 30 
Secretary or ather officer shall also be deemed· to be guilty of that offence 
and· shall be liable to be proceeded against and pl1nished acCOrdingly, 
E.rplanat~.-For the 'Purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means' a body corporate and includes a firm or 
other association of inruviduals' and 
'. ' 35 
(b) "'director", in relatio~ to a firm, means a partneJ: ill the firm. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
,18. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code at Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1973, every offence punishable under. this Act shlill ~ cogniza.ble, 40 2 of 1974. . - . -

0" ~?:; 
1': (1) 'No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this'· ACt· except on a report· In writing of the facts constituting such 
ofNnce made by, an authorised officer. 
(2) No Court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Juw-
5 cial, Magistrate of the first class shall try' any offence unner this Act. 
20. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 29 of the Code of 
2 of 1974. Criminal Procedure, 1973, it shall be lawful for any Metropolitan Magis-
trate or any Judicial Magistrate of the first class s,ecially empowered 
by the State Government in this behalf to pass any sentence authorised 
10 by this Act. 
21. Any person committing an offence under this Act or any rules 
made thereunder may be tried for the offence in such place as the Central 
Government may, by general or special orner, published in the Official 
Gazette, direct in this behalf. 
15 22. (1) Where any offence is alleged to have been committed under 
the provisions of this Act, the place of commission of such offence shall 
be presumed on the basis of the certified copy of the relevant entry in 
the log book or other official record of the vessel or aircraft which was 
used in connection with the detection of the offence. 
20 (2) Where any foreign vessel is found within any maritime zone of 
India and the fishing gear of such vessel is not stowed in the prescribed 
manner or fish is found on board such vessel, it shall be presumed, unless 
the contrary is proved, that the said vessel was used for fishing within 
that zone. 
25 23. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
any person for anything which is in good faith done or intenden to be 
done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Govern-
ment for any damage caused or likely to be caused for anything which 
30 is in good faith done or intendert. to be done in pursuance of the Qrovi-
sions of this Act. 
24. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in dero-
gation of the provisions of any other law for the time being in force. 
25. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
35 Gazette, malte rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
40 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power) such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
(4) the form in which an application for a licence or permit may 
be made and the fees that shall accompany such application; 
(b) the matters which may be taken into account in the grant-
ing of licences and permits; 
Cogniza .. 
nceand 
trial of 
offence •. 
Magis-
trate's 
power 
to 
impose 
enhanced 
penalties. 
Place 
of 
trial. 
Presump-
tions. 
Protec-
tion ot 
action 
taken 
in 
good 
faith. 
Act 
to 
supple-
ment 
other 
laws. 
Power 
to 
make 
rules. 

,,~I\a Ie)' 
(c) the form of licences and permits and the conditions ~ 
restrictions subject to which licences and permits may be sranted; 
Removal 
of 
diftlcul-
ties. 
(d) the manner in which the fishing gear of a foreign vessel 
shall be kept stowed under section 7; 
(e) the terms and conditions under which a foreign vt:ssel may 5 
be permitted to be used for fishing within any maritime zone of 
India for the purpose of carrying out any scientific research or in. 
vestigation or for any experimental fishing uncler section 8; 
(j) the form in which an application may be made for releasinf 
the vessel or other things seized under the first proviso to clause (a) 10 
of sub-section (4) of section 9; 
(g) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, pres-
cribed.' 
(3) In making any rule under this section, the Central Government 
may provide that a contravention thereof shall be Qunishable with fine 15 
which may extend to fifty thousand rupees. 
(4) Every rule made uncler this section shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions. and if. before the expiry of the 20 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions afore-
said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made. the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such mociified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so. however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 25 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
rule. 
26. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official 
Gaz~tte, make such It)rovisions not inconsistent with the provisions of 30 
this Act as may appear to it to be necessary for removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no oreier shall be made under this section after the 
expiry of three years from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 35 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone 
and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976, defines the scope and extent of the 
dlfierent maritime zones of India and provides for the exploration, e"ploita-
tion and protection of the resources in the continental shelf and exclusive 
economic zone. That Act was in the nature of an umbrella legislation and 
it was envisaged that separate legislation for dealing in greater detai.l with 
the regulation, exploration and exploitation of particular resources in our 
maritime zones should be undertaken in due course. 
2. There has been an increase in poaching activities of foreign fishing 
vessels in our exclusive economic zone. There have also been instances 
of foreign fishing vessels chartered by Indian parties indulging in such 
activities. To prev~t such activities and to protect our fishermen from 
the hardship caused by poaching vessels, it is necessary to regulate fishing 
activities by foreign fishing vessels and to provide for deterrent punish-
ment by way of heavy fines and confiscat10n of foreign fishing vessels 
engaged in such act:i.vities. The Bill seeks to regulate fishing activities of 
foreign fishing vessels in the territorial waters of India and the exclusive 
economic zone of India. 
3. The following are the salient features of the Bill:-
(i) No foreign vessel shall be used for fishing within any maritime 
zone of India except under and in accordance with a licence or a permit 
granted under the provisions of the Bill. 'The owner of such vessel or 
any foreigner wishing to use such vessel has to obtain a licence while 
an Indian citizen wishing to use such vessel has to obtain a permit. 
(ii) Officers of the Coast Guard and any officer of Government 
authoriseri by it in this behalf would be cOIDQetent to stop or board a 
foreign fishing vessel i.n any marit1me zone and search such vessel for 
ascertaining whether or not the requirements of the legislation have 
been complied with. Such officers will also have the power to seize 
and detain such vessel and to require the master of the vessel to bring 
such vessel to any ports specified by the Government in this behalf. 
The officers w;U also have the power to arrest any person who is 
suspected to have committed an offence. 
(iii) The Bill provides for heavy penalties for the use of any 
foreign vessel for fishing in any maritime zone of India without a valid 
l1cence or permit and also for confiscation of such vessel. 
(iv) Provision has been made in the Bill for the custody of the 
foreign vessel impounded by the authorised ofticer during the pendency 
of prosecution. !. ~ 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW Dam; RAO BIRENDRA SINGH. 
The 5th Ma1/. 1981. 
II 

, "FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM·) 
According to clause 3 of the Bill, no foreign vessel shall be used for 
fishing- within! any' maritime zone'of India eoxeel>t" under and in accor-
dance with a licence granted under se~ti.ol\·4, or a permit gTantcd under 
sectIon 5 by th~ Central GO'Q'ernmel'lt. Clause 9 of tne Bill seeks to 
empower'the officers of the Coast Guard and such other officers of Gov-
ernment as' may be' authorised liy the Central Government to exercise 
the various powers provided for therein for the enforcement of the pro-
visions of the legislation. These ptovisions will involve the creation 
of the necessary mach.inery for the,graq.ting,ofJ.ioences.and permits and 
matters connected therewith lind for the eni-orcement of the provisions 
of the legislation, and as such. would involve expenditure both of re-
curring and non-re~urring nature from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
2. A special cell is, however, proposed to be created for the granting 
of licences and permits, monitoring of the oper::tions, recording of the 
reports of viplations of the provisions of the legislation, etc. It is 
estimated that this may involve an annual recurring expenditure of 
Rs. 2.50 lakhs and a non-recurring expenditure of Rs. 50,000. 
It is not possible at this stage to indicate precisely the quantum of 
the ether expenditure, which will be involved on account of the afore-
mentioned provisions as that will depend upon the number of applica-
tion" which will be made for licences and permits and the number and 
nature of violations (i.e. use of foreign fishing vessels for fishing in our 
maritime zones without licence or permit) of the legislation. 
{ i; I, ( 
., 
12 

4?~ 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 25 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rul~ 
for carrying out the purposes of the proposed legislation. The matters 
in respect of which such rules may be made are specified in sub-clause 
(2) of that clause. They, inter alia, relate to the form in which an appli-
cation for licence or permit may be made, the fees payable on such appli-
cations, the matters which may be taken into account by the Central 
Government in the grant of licences and permits, the form of lkence or 
permit and the conditions or restrictions subject to which such licences 
Or permits may be granted, the manner in which the fishing gear of 2-
foreign vessel shall be kept stowed under clause 7 of the Bill and the 
terms under which a foreign vessel may be permitted to be used for 
fishing within any maritime zones of India for the purpose of carrying 
out scientific research or investigation and certain other matters. 
2. Clause 26 of the Bill empowers the Central GJvernment to remove 
by order published in the Official Gazette any difficulty which may arise 
in giving effect to the provisions of the legislation. As all the problems 
which may arise cannot be envisaged, this provision has been i!Jcluded 
by way of abundant caution. It is al!'ro made clear "in the clause that 
sllch a removal of difficulties order shJuld not b? inconsistent with tht' 
provisions of the legislation. 
3. The delegation of legislative power under the aforesaid clauses 
relates to matters of procedure Or detail or to matters which cannot b€ 
visualised at this stage. Hence, the delegation of legisb.tive power is of 
a normal character. 
!' • ~ 
1;"; (3 

\~~ 
LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the regulation of fishing by foreign vessels in certain 
marjtjrne zones of India and for matters connected therewi:h. 
(Shri Roo Birendra Sin-riB, 
MiniSter of Agriculture, Irrigation 
and Rural ReconstructiOn.) 