1 • 
2. 
3. 
4. 
lDK SABHA 
OORRIGENDA 
to 
THE BRENTFDRD . EI.JEcrRIC (INDIA) LD1ITED (ACQUISITION AND 
TRANS]'E[i. 01' LJl'ilJ.t!ifI:AKINGS) BILL. 1987 
(To be/A2 introduced in 10k Sapha) 
Page (11) in the arrangement of clauses, 
against clalise 21, !2.r. "Commissioner of''' 
~ "Chmmissioner to" 
Page 6, line 48,-
for "30th January," -
read "30th day of January, It 
-
Page 6, line 49,-
for "shal" ~ "sha.l2" 
Page 9, line 15,-
for "wthin" ~ nwithin" 
Sravana 2, 19 9 (Saka) 

As INTROJ)UCED IN LOI[ SABHA O'H 
BUI No. 73 01 1987. 
THE BRENTFORD ELECTRIC (INDIA) LIMITED (ACQUISITION 
AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 1987 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
Pu:uMtNARY 
CLAUSIB 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
AcQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF 'nIE COMPANY 
Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the under-
takings of the Company. 
4. General effect of vesting. 
5. Company, to be liable for certain p.rior liabilities. 
6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting ot the under-
takings of the Company ib Andrew Yule. 
CHAPTER nl 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
7. Payment of amount. 
8. Payment of further amounts. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY 
9. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company. 
10. Duty of persons in cbarge of management of the undertakings of 
the Company to deliver all assets, etc. ( 
11. Duty of ~sons to account for assets, etc., in their possession. 
CHAPTER V 
Pltov:tSIoNs RELATINO TO Tal) EMPLOYEES OF nu: COMPANY 
CLA1J&I:S 
12. Continuance of employees. 
13. Provident fund and other fund!!. 
(I) 

CHAPTER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments. 
1$. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner. 
16. Certain powers of the Central ~rnment er Andrew Yule. 
17. Claims to be made to the Commissioner. 
18. Priority of claims. 
19. Examination of claims. 
20. Admission or rejection of claims. 
21. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner of claimants. 
22. Disbursement of amounts to the Company. 
23. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general 
revenue account. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
24. Act to have overriding effect. 
25. Contracts to cease to have eft'ect unless ratified by the Central 
Government or Andrew Yule. 
26. Penalties. 
27. Offences by companies. 
28. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
29. Delegation of powers. 
30. Power to make rules. 
31. Power to remove difficulties. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

8&af 1961. 
BDI No. 73 of 1187. 
'I:'Q U&'NTFQIJ) ILICTBlC (INDIA) I.JMI'I'ED (ACQUISITION 
AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 1987 
A 
BILL 
to provicbe for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of the 
Brentford Electric (In.diI&) Ltm.ited, with a view to securing the pr0-
per ~ of' 8'Uch u,M,e,-taking8 so as to subsert7e the iAterests 
of the general public by ensuring the con'f'nued manu.factu.re cmd 
production oj electrical equipmenu whAck are essential to the need.! 
of the economy of the country and for mattJer8 conn~d therewith 
or~l~. 
WlI*-a\s the B!'entford Electric (India) ~imited had been engaged in 
the,..mataeture andpr&duction of articles mentioned ~ the FiJ!st ~ 
dule·.tBe:fAduattles ~lopment and Reeu1ation) Act, 1951, namely. 
electrical equipments; 
5 AND WHERBAs the management of the undertakings of the Brentford 
Eleetrlc (India) Limited was taken over by the Central Government 
under section 18AA of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act. 
65ofttSl. 1951; 
AM WHJREA8 'it 'is' n~tY to acquire the undertakings of the B&--eat-
10 forcliEleotric '(India)" Lbri.i~ to ensure that the intecests 61 ·the ge" 
~"Il'e ~'by the cCmtin~ce, by the undertaki.13f5 of *"~ 
patIf. "" .... ~ U2d. prociuetion of ihe,donIMicl ~ ,.... 
are eeiIeIltM'" the needs of the economy of the country; 

ShOl't title 
and con,· 
mence-
rnent. 
Deflni-
tiOJll. 
Transfer 
to, and 
veetint; In, 
the Cal-
tralGov-
emment 
of the 
undertak-
ings oft!ie 
CompaDJ. 
GenIInl 
efteet tJl 
velttftl. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Brentford Electric (India) Limited 5 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1987. 
(2) The provisions of sections 26 and 27 shall come into force at once 
and the remaining provisions of this Act shall be deemed to have come 
into force on the 1st day of April, 1986. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requtres,- 10 
(a) "Andrew Yule" means the Andrew Yule and Company Limit· 
ed, Calcutta, a company formed and registered under the Companies 
Act, 1956; 1 of 1868. 
(b) "appointed day" means the 1st day of April, 1988; 
(c) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Payments 1S 
appointed under section 14; 
(d) "Company" means the Brentford Electric (India) Limited. 
a company within the meaning of the Companies Act, 19S6, and 1 ot 18M. 
having its registered office at 8, Clive Row, Calcutta, in the State 
of West Bengal; ! 20 
(e) "notifica.tion" means a notification published in the Oftlclal Gazette; -'.. I 
(f) "prescribed" means preseribed by rules made· Uftder this 
Act; 
(g) "specifted date", in relation to any provision of thil Act, 25 
means such date as the Central Government may, by notiftcation, 
specify for the purposes of that provision and dHrerent dates may be 
specified for different provisions of this Act; 
(h) words and exprdssions used herein and not defined but 
defined in the Companies Act, 1956, shall have the meanings respee- 30 10f 1811, 
tlvely assigned to them in that Act, ' 
CHAPTER n 
AcqUIsmoN AND 'l'RANSFEJI OF 'mE UNDERTAKINGs or'l'llZ COMPAn 
3. On the appointed day, the UIldertakinp of the COmpany,'" tM 
right, title- and interest of tbe Company in relatloD. to Ita 1IIlderfaJdn .. , 35 
shall, by vtftue of this Ad, .Caud transferred to, ..... veR in, tile Cntnl 
Government. '1 • ; 
.. (1) The undertakings of the Company shaD. be deemed to iDcIucle 
all .URts, rights, lease-holds, powers, authorftifJI and prlvUeps, I!Jd 111 
pru(Mlitr, .movable .and immovable, including l.~ds .. ¥cUnP, ~ 40 
~~..,., fMtruments, machinery and eQuipment,. cub ~ -.Ja: .' 
on 1iIhI/ellliWtues; demand drafts. reserve funds, "i,nveetmeftt8 .. ~ delttw, 

·s 
and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property as 
were immediately before the appointed day in the ownership, possession, 
power or control of the Company, whether within or outside India, and 
all books of account, registers, records and all other documents of what-
5 ever nature relating thereto. 
(2) AU properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central 
Government under section 3 shall. by force of such vesting, be freed and 
discharged from any trust, obliga'tion, mortgage. charge, lien and all 
other incumbrances affecting them, and any attachment, injunction, 
10 decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority restricting the 
use of such properties in any manner shall be deemed to have been 
withdrawn. 1 
(8) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Act 
in the Cen'tral Government and every person holding any charge, lien or 
IS other interest in, or in relation to, any such property, shall give, within 
such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the 
Commissioner of such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest. 
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mort-
gagee of any property referred to in sub-section (3) or any other person 
20 holding anv char~e. lien or other interest in, or in relation to, anv such 
prope.rtv shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rie:hts and 
interests. payment of the ml)l'b!'ae:e money or other dues, in whole or in 
part. out of the amount sne('iiied in section 7 and also out of the amounts 
25 determtned under section R. but no such morte-Me, chare:e, lien or other 
interest shall be enforceable against any property which has vested in 
the Central Government. 
(5) Any licenre or other inRtrument eTanted to the Comnany in re-
'~tion to any undf'rlakin~ which h:lc:; vested in the Cf'ntral Government 
unner ~prtion :J at anv tim~ hefore the annnfnterl day and in force fmme-
30 diatelv hefore th:lt rhlv ~ha'l contiTlllp. to be in forre 0" and 1!fter sur.h day 
In Ilc~orii::lnce with its tenor in Tela'tion to and for the nl1rno~e~ of Ruch 
unnertakinq :lnd on Il"n from the Ihte of vestln~ of stlch unriprfRkf"lt 
under sertlon 6 in Andrf'w Yule. that comnanv shall he riel'>men to be 
substituterl in sllch 11l'en('e or othpr instrllmen't ac:; if S1lch 'icenC'e or 
35 other instrument hllo been PTanted to An~rew Yule 1!nd that comnany 
shall hold it for the remainder of thf' nerlori for which the Company 
would have held it under 'the terms thereof. 
'(01 Tf. on the ::Innointeif d:lv. any suit. ;mneal Or other nrO('P"ninQ' 
of wh'ltever naturp In rl'>1::.tion to any nronertv whirh h:lC:; vpc:;ted fn the 
40 Centml C"rllvernment llnrler sedion ~. inl'!tftuted or nreforren bv or a{Jainst 
the Company is nending. the 811me shall not ahate he discontinued or be, 
in any wav. preiudicla'lv affected hv reason of the tran~fer of the under-
takin~s of the Company or of anything contained in this Act. but th~ 
!mit, appeal or other nroceedfn~ may be C'Ontinued. nrosecuted or enforced 
4S bv or ag-ainst the Central Government or where th€' und'ertakinl!S nf the 
Company are directed, 'fmner se('tion 6, fo vest in Andrew Yule. hy or 
against Andrew Yule. 
5. '(1) Every liabflftv of the Company. other than the lfabilities speci-
fted in sub-seetfnn m, in resnect of any period orior to the atmofnted day. 
SO shl'ln be the l'l'Ibflftv of the Comnanv anrt shall be enforceable a~:lfnc:;t It 
and not ~gafnst the Central Government. or, wherE' the ,mt!ertaldng! 
0'0wlPUIr. to he 
Uable_ 
certaID 
prtqr ... 
bDltte& 

Power of 
Central 
Govern-
ment t" 
direct 
vesting o! 
the under-
takings 
of the 
Company 
tnAndrew 
Yule. 
4 
of the Company are directed, under section 6, to vest in Andrew 
Yule, against Andrew Yule. 
(2) Any liability arising in respect of advances made to the Company 
for the supply of articles, or in respect of materials supplied to the Com-
pany, after the management of the undertakings of the Company bad 5 
been taken over by the Central Government shall. on and from ~ 
appointed day, be the liability of the Central Government or of Andrew 
Y1lle, aathe case may be, and shall be discharged by that Government 
or Andrew Yule, as and when payment for such advances or supplies 
becomes due and payable. 10 
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that,-
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this section or in 
any other provision of this Act, no liability of the Company, In 
. respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be enforce-
able against the Central Government, or where the underialdngs 15 
of the Company are directed. under section 6, to vest in Andrew 
Yule, against Andrew Yule. 
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other 
authority in relation 'to the undertakings of the ComPlUlY, pused 
after the appointed day in resp£:Ct of any matter, claim or dispute, 20 
which arose before that day, shall be enforceable against the Central 
Government or wher(S the undertakin~ of the Company are directed, 
under section 6, to vest in Andrew Yule, against Andrew Yule; 
(e) no liability incurreO by the Company before the appointed 
day for the contravention of any provision of law for the 'time befng 25 
in force shall be ~nforeeable allainst the Central Government or 
where the undertakin~ of the Company are directed: under section ft, 
to vest in Andrew Yule, against Andrew Yule. 
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, the 
Central Governmen't may. subject to such terms. and conditions as it 30 
may think fit to impose, direct. by notification, that the undertaldn~ of 
the Companv. and the rilrht, title and interest of the Company in relation 
to its undertakjngs, which have ve-<;ted in the Central Government under 
section ~. shall. instead of continuing to Vet:l't in the Centt'al Government, 
vest in Andrew Yule, either on the date of the notification Or on sueh 35 
earlier or later date (not beinl! a nate earlier than 'the appointed day) 
as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) Wherp the rif!ht. title and interest, and the liabiUties referred tn 
in sub-section (2) of section 5. of the Companv in relation to its under-
takings vest in Andrew Yule under ~mb-sectio~ (1). Andrew Yule shall, 40 
on and from the date of such vesting. bf:' dpemecl to ha,re become the 
OWller in relation 'to such undertflkin{!s and all the ril!hts and liabflitie!'f 
of the Central Government in relation tn such undertakings shall. on and 
from the date of such vestinll re dp't>med to have "t;ecome the right .. and 
liabilities. respectively, of Andrew Yule. . . . '45 
.' '...... . '" CHAPTER m , w·. of. ~' •• ..- •• ____ 0 
, ., .. ,':' 
hi...... '.1'01' dae • .tramfer tft. anti ~eeaR til •• eenfnl' t".oftftnlleftf. under 
of ~.. ;lItIctlon 3, of the andeTtak1ng~ Q' f"~ Company. ,nd the rirrJJ( fftle 1'''. 

baterest of the Company in relation to its undert.ddngs, there shall be 
paid lIy die Central Government to the Compeay in cash, and in the 
manner speeiflod in Chapter VI, an amount of rupees thirty-seven lakhs 
ami fifty thou,and. 
5 8. (1) For the deprivation of the Company of the management of its 
undertakinrs, there shall be paid by the Central Govel'nment to the 
Company in cash, an amount calculated at the rate of five thousand 
rupees per anD urn for the period commencing on the date on which the 
management of the undertakings of the Company was taken over in pur-
10 suance of the order made by the Central Government under section 18AA 
65 o~ ]~l. of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, and ending on 
the appointed day. 
(2) In consideration of the retrospective operation of the proVISIons 
of sections 3, 4 and 5 there .hall also be paid by the Central Govern-
J 5 ment to the Company in cash, an amount calculated at the rate of five 
thousand rupees per annum for the period commencing on the appointed 
day and ending on the date on which this Aet receives the aaent of the 
President. ,.. • 
(3) The amounts specified in section 7, and the alDfMlts ~ .. 
20 acco.rdance with the provi~io.us of sub«ctiGns (1) BDd (2), shall amoy 
simple interest at the rate of four per cent per annum for the period 
~encing on the appointed day and ending on the date on which pay-
mut of such amounts is made by the Central Government to the Com-
mluioner. 
25 (4) The amounts determined in accordance with the provisions of 
suJt.1eCtIeas (1). (2) and (3) sbalI be paitl by the Central Govemmeat to 
the ComplUly ... addition to the amount specified in section 7. 
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabilities 
of the Company, in relation to its undertakings which have vested in the 
30 Central Government under section 3, shall be discharged from the amount 
referred to in section 7, and also from the amounts determined under 
su~ctions (1) t (2) and (3), in accordance with the rights and interests 
of. the creditors of the Company. 
CHAPTER IV 
35 MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF TIlE COMPANY 
9. The general superintendence, direction, control and management 
of the aftairs and business of the undertakings of the Company, the 
right. title and interest in relation to which have vested in the Central 
Government under section 3, shall, where a direction has been made by 
40 the Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 6, vest in 
Andrew Yule, and thereupon Andrew Yule shall be entitled to exercise, 
to the exclusion of all other persons, all sttch powers and do all suell 
thinas as the Companv W'8I authorised to exercise and do in relation to 
its. undertakings. . , 
P~ment 
of further 
amounts. 
Manage-
ment, etc., 
of the 
under-
takings of 
the Com-
pany. 

Duty of 
persol1l 
ineharge 
of mana-
gement 
ottha 
undertak-
inpof 
tbeCom-
panyto 
deUverall 
.... etc. 
Dutyot 
penonato 
aeeou;nt 
for_ta, 
etc., ill 
thelrpoe-
M!IIIon. 
io. (1) On the vesting of the management of the undertakings of the 
Company in Andrew Yule, all persons in charge of the management of 
the undertakings of the Company immediately before such v~ting shall 
be bound to deliver to Andrew Yule all assets, books of account, registers 
or other documents in their custody relating to the undertakings of the 5 
Company. 
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may 
deem desirable in the circumstances of the case to Andrew Yule as Hi 
its powers and duties and A.ndrew Yule may also, if it so desires, apply 
to the Central Government at any time for instructions as to the manner 10 
!n which the management of the undertakings of the Company shall be 
conducted by it or in relation to any other matter arising in the course 
of such management. 
11. (1) A:JJ.y person who has, on the appointed day, in his possession 
or under his control, any assets, books, documents or other papers relat.- 15 
ing to any undertaking owned by the Company, which have vested in the 
Central Government or in Andrew Yule under this Act and which belong 
to the Company or would have so belonged, if the undertakings owned by 
the Company had not vested in the Central Government or Andrew Yule, 
shall be liable to account for the said assets, books, documents and other 20 
papers to the Central Government or Andrew Yule and shall deliver them 
to the Central Government or Andrew Yule or to such person or persona 
as the Central Government or Andrew Yule may specify in this behalf. 
(2) The Central Government or Andrew Yule may take or cause to 
be taken all necessary steps for securing possession of the undertakings of 25 
the Company which have vested in the Central Government or Andrew 
Yule under this Act. 
(3) The Company shall, within such period as the Central Government 
may allow in this behalf, furnish to that Government a t::omplete inven-
tory of all its propprties and assets, as on the appointed day, pertaining 30 
to the undertakings which have vested in the Central Government under 
section 3 and for this purpose, the Central 9'<>vernment or Andrew Yule 
shall dord to the Company all reasonable facilities. 
CHAPTER V 
PRoVISIONS RlLAnNG TO THE EMPLOYEa OF TIm COMPA.NY 35 
12 .. (1) Every person who has been, immediately before the appointed 
day, employed in any undertakings of the Company shall become,-
,(a) on and from the appointed day, an employee of the Central 
Government, and 
(b) where the undertakings of the Company are directed under 40 
sub-6ection (1) of section 6 to vest in Andrew Yule, an employee of 
Andrew Yule on and from the date of such vesting; 
and shall hold office or service under the Central Government or Andrew 
Yule, as the case may be, with the rights and privileges as to pension, 
gratuity and other matters admissible to him immediately before the S 
appointed day, as modified by the Memoranda of Settlement signed by 4 
the representatives of the management and the employees of the Com-
pany on the 28th day of January, 1986 and the 30th January, 1986, and 
shal continue to do SO unless and until his employment under the 
Central Government or Andrew Yule, as the case may be, is duly termi- SO 
natecl or l.Ultil his remuneration and other conditions of service are duly 
altered by the Central Government ~ Andrew Yule, as the case may be. 

7 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes 
:i4 of 1947. Act, 1947, or in any othot;!r law for the time being in force, the transfer 
of the services of any officer or other person employed in any undertak.· 
ing of the Company, to. the Central Government or And~w Yule shall 
5 not entitle such officer or' other employee to claim any compensation under 
this Act or under any other law for the time being in force and no such 
claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority. 
13. (1) Where the Company has established a provident fund, super- Provt-' 
annuation fund. welfare fund or any other fund for the benefit of the dent 
10 persons employed in any of its undertakings, the moneys relatable to the tUnd and 
officers or other employees, whose services have become transferred by other 
or under this Act to the Central Government or Andrew Yule shall, funds. 
out of the moneys standing, on the appointed day,. to the credit of such 
. provident fund, superannuation fund, welfare fund or other fund, stand 
15 transferred to, and vest in, the Central Government or Andrew Yule, as 
the case may be. 
(2) The moneys which stand transferred under sub-section (1) to the 
Central Government or Andrew Yule, as the case may be, shall be 
dealt with by thnt Government or Andrew Yule in such manner, as 
20 ltlay be prescribed. 
CHAPI'ER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF' PAYMENTS 
14. (1) The Central Govcrnm~nt shall, for the purpose of disbursing Appoint-
the amounts payable under sections 7 and' 8 to tht.\ Company, by notifi- ment ot 
25 cation," appoint a Commissioner of Payments. Commil .. 
(2) The Cpntral Government maY..appoint such other persons as it lionerot,· 
may think fit to assist the Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner Pay" 
may authorise one or more of such persons also to exercise all or any of menu. 
the powers exercisable by h'im under this Act and different persons may 
30 be authorised to exercise different powers. 
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of 
the powers exercisable by the Commissioner may exercise those powers 
in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have been 
conferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of authori-
35 sation. 
(4) The salaries and allowance~ of the Commissioner and otber per-
sons appointed under this section shall be defrayed out of die CCMI8O ... • 
ted Fund of India. 
~. (1) The Central Government shall, within thirty days from. the 
40 specIfied date, pay, in cash, to the Commissioner, for payment to the 
Company,_ 
(a) an amount equal to the amo\lrtt specified in section 7; and 
(b) further amount equal to the amounts payable to the Com,. 
pany under section 8. 
45 . (2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government 
m favour of the Commissioner in the Public Account of India, and 
every amount paid under this Act to the Cdmn1.issioner shall b~ depdsited 
by him to the credit of the said deposit account and the said deposi' 
account shall be operated by the Commissioner; 
Patfttlnt 
by the 
CeDt.ra1 
Govern-
mentto 
the CoDi' 
... 
sioner: 

Certain 
POWers 
ofSbe 
Central 
Govern-
mentor 
Andrew 
Yule. 
Claims 
tobl 
made \0 
the Com-
mIa· 
ldoner. 
8 
(8) Records shall be maintained by the Commissioner in reapect of 
the undertakings of the Company in relation to which payments have 
been made to him under this Act. 
(4) Interest accruing on the amounts standing to the credit of the 
deposit account referred to in sub-section (2) shall enure to the benefit 5 
of the Company. 
16. (1) The Central Government or Andrew Yule, as the case may 
be, shall be :entitled to receive up to the specified date, to the exclusion 
of all other persons, any money due to the Company, in relation to its 
undertakings which have vested in the Central Government or Andrew 10 
Yule, and realised after the appointed day notwithstanding that the 
realisation pertains to a period prior to the appointed day. 
(2) The Central Government or Andrew Yule, as the case may be, 
may make a claim to the Commissioner with regard to every payment 
made by that Government or Andrew Yule, after the appointed day, for 15 
discharging any liability of the Company, not being any liability specified 
in sub-section (2) of section 5, in relation to any periOd prior to the 
appointed day; and every such claim shall have priority in accordance 
with the priorities attaching, under this Act, to the matter in relation 
to which such liability has been discharged by the Central Government or 20 
Andrew Yule. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilit~s of the 
Company, in respect of any transaction prior to the appOinted day, 
which have not been discharged on or before the specified date, shall 
be the liabilities of the Company. 25 
17. Every person having a claim against the Company with regard to 
any of the matters specified in the Schedule, pertaining to any of its 
undertakings, shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within 
thirty days from the specified da te: 
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was 30 
prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the claim within the said 
period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further period 
of thirty days, but not thereafter. 
Priority 18. The claims made under section 17 shall have priorities in accor-
ofclabnl. dance with the following principles, namely:- 35 
(4) Category I shall have precedence over all other categories 
and Category II shall have precedence over Category III, and so on; 
(b) the claims specified in each of the categories shall rank 
equally and be paid in full, but, if the amount is insufficient to meet 
such C'lairns in full, they shall abate in equal proportions and be paid 40 
accordingly; and 
(c) the question of diltcharaing any liability with regard to a 
matter specified in a lower category shall arise only if a surplus is 
left after meeting all tht! liabilities specified in the immediately 
higher category. d 
It. (1) Oll receipt of the claims made under section 17, the Commis-
sl()ner shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in the 
SchedUle and examine the same in accordance with such order ot 
priotities . 

9 
(2) If, on an examination of the claims, the Commissioner is of 
opinion that the amount paid to him under this Act is not sufficient to 
meet the liabilities specified in any lower category, he shall not be reo-
qui red to examine the claims in respect of such lower category. 
5 20. (1) After examining the claims with reference to the priorities 
set out in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a certain date on or 
b:efore which every claimant shall file the proof of his claim. 
, 
(2) Not less than fourteen days' notice of the date so fixed shall be 
given by advertisement in one issue of any daily newspaper in the 
10 English language having circulation in the major part of the country and 
one issue of any daily newspaper in such regional language as the Com-
missioner may consider suitable, and every such notice shall call upon 
the claimant to file the proof of his claim with the Commissioner within 
the period specified in the advertisement. 
15 (3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim wthin the 
period specified by the Commissioner shall be excluded from the dis.-
bursements made by the Commissioner. 
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his 
opinion, be necessary and after giving the Company an opportunity of 
20 refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a reasonable oppor-
tunity of being heard, by order in writing, admit Or reject the claim in 
whole or in part. 
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own 
procedure in all matters arising out of the discharge of his funCtions, 
25 including the place or places at which he may hold his sittings and shall, 
for the purpose of making an investigation under this Act, have the same 
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
lof 19G8. 1908, while trying a suit, in respect Of the following matters, namely:-
-'5 of 
1880. 
J 011974. 
30 
(a) the summoning and enfoI"cing the attendance of any witness 
and examining him on oath; 
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other 
material object producible as evidence; 
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of wit-
35 nesses. 
(6) Any investigation before the Conunissioner shall be deemed 
to be a judicial pro~eding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of 
the Indian Penal Code and the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a 
civil court for the purposes of section 195, and Chapter XXVI, of the Code 
40 of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commis-
Sioner, may prefer an appeal against such decision to the principal civil 
court of original jurisdic.tion within the local limits of whose jurisdiction 
the registered office of the Company is situated: 
4~ Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is 
appo:nted to be the Commissioner, the appeal shall lie to the High Court 
at Calcutta, and such appeal shall be heard and disposed oJ by no't l"s 
than two Judges of that High Court, 
Admit· 
staaor 
reJee. 
tion o' 
alaiDil-. 

Disbur. 
sement 
of moncy 
by the 
Commis-
JiG_. 
to 
c1\limaats. 
Qisburse· 
~eDl of 
amounts 
to the 
Company. 
UDdI!.-
bursedor -
unclaim· 
edam-
ountto 
be de· 
poIIlted 
totbe 
..... 1 
l'e'ftnue 
account. 
Act to 
have 
over-
ridtng 
dect. 
Con-
tracts to 
cease 
to have 
effect 
UDl.-
ratlftec1 
by the 
CeJltral 
Govern-
mea.tor 
Andrew 
Yule. 
10 
21. After admit.ting a claim under this Act, the amownt due in respect 
of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or persons 
to whom such amount is due and on sllch payment, the liability of the 
Company in respeot of such claim shall stand discharged. 
22. (1) If, out of the moneys paid to him in relation to the undertak- 5 
ings of the Company, there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities 
specified in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse such balance 
to the Company. 
(2) Where the possession of any machinery, equipment or other pro-
. perty has vested in the Central Government or Andrew Yule under this ]0 
Act, but such machinery, equipment or other property does not helong 
to the Company, it shall be lawful for the Central Governm~nt or 
Andrew Yule, to Continue to possess such machinery or equipment or 
other property on the same terms and conditions under which they 
were possessed by the Company immediately before the appointed day. 15 
23. Any money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed 
or unclaimed on the date immediately preceding the date on which the 
office of the Commissioner is finally wound up, shall be 1ransferred by 
the Commissioner, before his office is finally wound up, to the general 
revenue account of the Central Government; but a claim to any money lZO 
so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the 
person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such 
transfer had not been made, and the order, if any, for payment of the 
claim, being treated as an order for the refund of revenue. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
24. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any-
thing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being 
25 
in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law, other 
than this Act. or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or other 30 
authority. 
fZ5. Every contract entered into by the Company in relation to its 
undertakings which has vested in the Central Government under section 
3, for any service, sale or supply and in force immediately before the 
appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry of a period of one hundred 35 
and eighty days from the date on which this Act receives the assent of 
the Pre~ident, cease to have effect unless such contract is, before the 
expiry of that period, ratified, in w.riting, by the Central Government 
or Andrew Yule in which such undertakings have been vested under 
this Act, and in ratifying such contract, the Central Government or 40 
Andrew Yule may make such alteration or modification therein as it 
may.think fit: 
Provided that the Central Government or Andrew Yule shall not 
omit to ratify a contract and shall not make any alteration or modifica-
tion in a contraot- 45 
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous or 
Juts 'been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental to the interests 
Of the Central Government or Andrew Yule, and 

5 
11 
(b) except after gIVmg to the parties to the contract a reason-
able opportunity of being heard and except after recording in writing 
its reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any altera-
tion or modification therein. 
26. A:ny person who,-
(a) having in his possession, custody Or control any property 
forming part of the undertakings of the Company, wrongfully with-
holds $uch property from the Central Government or Andrew Yule; 
or 
10 (b) . wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property 
forming part of the unde.rtakings of the Company; or 
(c) wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Govern-
ment or Andrew Yule or any person Or body of persons specified by 
that Government or Andrew Yule, as the case may be, any document 
15 relating to the undertakings, which may be in his possession, 
custody or control; or 
(d) fails to deliver to the Central Government or Andrew Yule 
or any person or body of persons specified by that Gove.rnment or 
And·rew Yule, as the case may be, any· assets, books of account, 
20 registers or other documents in his possession, custody or control 
relating to the undertakings of the Company; or 
(e) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part 
of the undertakings of the Company or prefers any claim under this 
Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be false 
25 or grossly inaccurate, 
Jhall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or 
with both. 
Penal-
tiM. 
27. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a Offences 
30 company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed by com-
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company, for toe conduct panies. 
of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be 
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shaH be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly: 
35 Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he pro~s that the. offence was' 
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due 
Qiligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
40 any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or conniv-
ance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any dirE'ctor, 
manager, secretary Or other officer of the company, such direCtor, 
manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that 
45 offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punisbed accord-
ingly, I 

Protec· 
tlbDjaf 
action 
taken 
inlOod. 
faith. 
Delela· 
tionof 
pow... 
Power to 
Jnab 
rules. 
12 
E.rplaMtion.-For the purposes of this section,-
(4) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm 
or other association of individuals; and 
(0) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
fi~. 5 
f41. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the Central Government or any officer of that Govemment or Andrew 
Yule or other person authorised by that Government or Andrew Yule 
tor anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under 
this Act. 10 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
Government or any officer ot that Government or Anckew Yule or other 
person authorised by that Government or Andrew Yule tor any damage 
caused or li~ly to be caused by anything which is in good faith done 
or intended 't~ be done under this Act. 15 
219. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that 
all or any of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the 
powers conferred by this section and seCtions 30 and 31, may also be 
exercised by such person or persons as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub-section 20 
(1), the person to whom such power has been delegated shall act under 
the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government. 
30. (1) The Central Government may, by notification. make rul~ 
for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 25 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any ot the following 
matters, namely:-
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an inti-
mation referred to in sub-section (3) of Section 4 shall be given; 
(0) the manner in whiCh the moneys in any provident fund or 30 
other fund, referred to in section 13 shall be dealt with; 
(e) an~ other matter which is required to be, or may be, pres-
cribed. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each HoUSe of 3S 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two Or more successive sessions, 
and if, ~fore the expiry of the session. immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modifit:ation in the rule or both Houses agr~ that the 40 
l"Ule should not be made, the ru.Je shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified fonn or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to 
the validity of anything previou6ly done under that rule. 

it. if any difttculty arises in giving effect to the provisions 01 tll~ 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, remoVe the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall. be ma~ after the expiry of a 
5 period of two yeats from the date on which this Act receives the assen~ 
of the President. 
JO 
Category 1-
THE SCHEDULE 
[See sections 17, 19(1),20(1) and 22(1)] 
ORDER OF PRIORI'lUS 
Post-take-ode?' management period 
(a) Wages, salaries and other dues payable to the employees of the 
Company. 
(b) Deductions made from the salaries and wages of the employees 
15 of the Company for provident fund, the Employees' State I Insurance 
Fund, premium relating to the Life Insurance Corporation of India or 
for any other purpo~. 
20 
Category II-
Principal amount of loans advanced by-
(i) the Central Government; 
(ii) a State Government; 
(iii) banks and financial institutions; 
(iv) any other source. • ! 
25 Category III-
(a) Arrears in relation to contributions to be made by the Company 
to provident fund, the Employees' State Insurance Fund Or under any 
other law for the time being in force providing for such contributions. 
(b) Any credits availed of by the Company for the purpose of carry .. 
30 ing on any trading Or manufacturing operations, other than those speci-
fied in sub-section (2) of section 5. 
(c) Any dues of State Electricity BoardS or other Government or 
.emi-Government institutions against supply of goods or aervice8, othet 
than those specified in sub-section (3) of section 5. , 
3S (d) Arrears of interest on loans and advances. 
Category IV-
(a) Reveri'¥l taxes, cesses, rates or other dlles to the Central GOY· 
ernment, a State GoverIiment or any local authority. 
(b) ~1 bther dues. 
40 Pre-take-c>ver management period 
Category v ...... 
(a) Wages, ilalaries and othet dilles payable to the employees ot the 
Company. ' 
Powerid 
remove 
di1ftcul-
ties. 

(b) . Deductions made from the salaries and wages of the employeei 
of the Company for provident fund, the Employees' State Insurance 
Fund, prtmlium relating to the Life Insurance Corporation of India or 
for any ~ther purpose. 
Category VI-
(a) Principal amount of secured loans advanced by-
(i) the Central Government; 
(ii) a State Government; 
(iii) banks and financial institutions. 
5 
(b) Arrears in relation to contributions to be made by the Company 10 
to provident fund, the Employees' State Insurance Fund or under any 
other law for the time being in force providing for such contributions. 
Category VII-
Principal amount of unsecured loans advanced by-
(i) the Central Government 
(ii) a State Government; 
(iii) banks and financial institutions. 
Category VlII-
(a) Any credits availed of by the Company for the purpose of 
15 
carrying on any trading or manufacturing operations. 20 
(b) Any dues of State Electricity Boards or other Government or 
semi-Government institutions against supply of goods or services. 
(c) Arrears of interest on loans and advances. 
(d) Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other d~s to Central Govern-
ment, a State Government or any local authority. 25 
(e) Any other loans or dues. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Brentford Electric (India) Limited, Calcutta, (BElL), established 
in 1964, has been in existence for about 23 years and has been engaged in 
the manufacture of regulators of up to 5000KV A, rectifiers, special 
transfonners, distribution transformers, etc. The products of the com-
pany are of high quality and are reqUlred for defence establishments, 
State Electricity Boards and atomic energy establishments. The company 
is at prescnt emploY;Ilg about 200 persons. 
2. BElL started incurring losses from 1975 and ran into serious finan-
cial difficulties in 1976. The management of the company was taken over 
by the Central Government under section 18AA of the Industries (Deve-
lopment and Regulation) Act, 1951 and Andrew Yule and Company 
Limited, a Government company, was appointed as the 'authorised person' 
for managing its affairs. The period of takeover of the management of 
BElL was extended from time to time and is presently stands extended 
up to the 25th November, 1987. At the time of bike over, the accumulated 
losses of BElL were Es. 90.37 lakhs and its liabilities to third parties 
aggregated to Rs. 87.33 lakhs. However, the sales turnover of the com-
pany has improved considerably in the post-take-over period and it has 
been able to turn the corner by 1979-80, thus establishing that its opera-
tions are technically lind commercially viable. During the years 19'79-80, 
1980-81, 1981-82 and 1985-86, the company earned profits. During the 
years 1982-83 and 1984-85, the undertaking incurred losses mainly due 
to labour problems and lock-out. 
3. Considering the fact that the company had heavy losses on the date 
of take over, it is evi~ent that it would never be able to service its old 
liabilities. though its current operations, without the drag of the pre-take-
over liabilities, are viable. The company cannot at the same time be run 
for an indefinite period Under the provisions of the Industries (Develop-
ment and Regulation) Act, 1951. 
4. Studies made to determine the future set up of the company 
revealed that the undertakings of the company should be nationalised in 
order to consolidate the gains of management and to ensure uninterrupted 
supply of critical items required by defence establishments, etc. In view 
of the importance and high demand of the products manufactured by toe 
company and the loss of employment to about 200 persons, if the company 
were to be closed down, it is considered necessary to take aver the under-
takings of the ,company. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid object. Apa.t't from provid-
ing for t1:e acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of the company, 
the'Bill provides for the payment of an amount for such acquisition. vest-
ing of the undertakings of the company in the A.ndNw Yule, a Govern-
ment .company, appointment of a Commissioner of Payments for the pur-
poieof disbursing the 8DlOWlt payable tothe.company and for other 
incidental and consequential matters. 
NEW DELHI; J. VENGAL RAO. 
The 25th July, 1987. 
IS 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the transfer to, and vesting in, the 
Central Government of the undertakings of Brentford Electric (India) 
Ltd., Calcutta. Clause 7 provides for the payment in cash and in the 
manner specified in Chapter VI of the Bill, of an amount of RS. 37,50,000 
for the transfer to, and vesting in the Central Government, the right, 
title and interest of the company in relation to its undertakings. 
2. Sub-c1auJe (1) of clause 8 of the Bill provides for payment of a 
further amount in cash, in consideration of the deprivation of the company 
of the management of its undertakings, calculated at the rate of rupees 
five thousand per annum, for the period commencing on the date on whicn 
the m:magement of th(., undertakings of the company was taken over by 
the Central Government and ending on the 1st April, 1986, the appoint-
ed day. It is estimated that this amount will be of the order of Rs. 35,000. 
3. Sub-clause (2) of clause 8 of the Bill provides for payment of a 
furU".er amount to the company in cash, in consideration of the retroo;pp.c-
tive operation of the provisions of clauses 3, 4 and 5, calculated at the 
rate of rupees five thousand per annum, for the period commencing on the 
appointed day and cnding on the date on which the Bill receives the assent 
of the President. It is estimated that this amount will be of the order 
of Rs. 5,000. 
4. Sub-clause (3) of clause 8 of the Bi11 provides for payment of simple 
interest at the rate of four per cent. per annum in respect of amounts pay-
able under clause 7 and sub-clauses (1) and (2) of clause 8 for the period 
commencing on the appointed day and ending on the date on which pay-
ment of such amounts is made by the Central Government to the Com-
missioner of Payments. It is estimated that this amount is likely to be of 
the order of Rs. 13.00~ per month. 
5. Clause 14 of the Bill .provides for the appointment of a Commis-
sioner of Payments by the Central Government with adequate staff to 
assist him for the r.urpose of disbursing the amounts payable to the com-
pany. Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the salaries and allow-
ances of the Commissioner of Payments and the other persons to assist 
him will be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The estimat.-
ed Expenditure on this account is likely to be of the order of Rs. 10,OUO 
~r month. 
6. Separate budgetary provision will be made for protecting the secur-
ed pre-take-over dues and post-take-over dues of banks and financial in-
stitutions and the post-tak~ver dues of the Andrews Yule, to the tune 
of approximately Rs. 76 lakhs and which cannot be met by the compen-
sation amount. 
7. The Bill it enacted, is not likely to involve any other recurring or 
non-recurring expenditure. . 
]6 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 30 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules 
to carry out the provif:jons of the Bill. The matters in respect of which 
rules may be made, inter alia, relate to the time within Which, and the 
manner in which, intimation regarding any mortgage, charge, lien, etc., 
on the properties which have vested in the Central Government may 00 
given to the Commissioner of Payments and the manner in which the 
moneys in any provident fund, superannuation, welfare Or other fund 
maintained by the company shall be dealt with by the Central Govern-
ment or the Andrew Yule and Company. 
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters 
of procedure and adm::nistrative detail. The delegation of legislative 
power is thus of a normal character. 
&'7 

LOK SABHA 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of the 
Brentford Electric (India) Limited, with a view to securing the 
proper management of such undertakings so as to sub serve the 
interests of the general public by ensuring the continued manufacture 
and production of electrical equipments which are essential to the 
needs of the economy of the count.ry and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri J. Vengal Rao, ·Minister of Indu~ry). 