As INTRODUCED IN Log SABRA OK 
r I 
Bill No. 73 of 1976 
THE BRAITHWAITE AND COMPANY (INDIA) LIMITED 
(ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) 
BILL, 1976 
CLAUSES 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
P1u:I.l:MINARY 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY 
3. Acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of the Company. 
4. General effect of vesting. 
5. Central Government or the Government oompany not to be liable 
for prior liabilities. 
6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings 
of the Company in a Government company. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
7. Payment of amount. 
8. Payment of further amount. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY 
9. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company. 
10. Duty of persons in charge Qf management of the undertakings of 
the Company to deliver all assets, etc. 
11. Accounts and audit. 
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY 
12. Employment of certain employees to continue. 
13. Provident and other funds. 
CHAPTER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments. 
15. Payment by the Central Government tQ the Commissioner. 
16. Certain powers of the Central Government or Government 
company. 

eU) 
euuns 
17. Claims to be made to the Commissionet. 
18. Priority of claims. 
19. Examination of claims. 
20. Admission or rejection of claims. 
21. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants. 
22. Disbursement of amounts to the Company. 
23. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general 
revenue account. 
CHAPTER VII 
MIscELLANEOUS 
24. Act to have overriding effect. 
25. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central 
Government or Government company. 
26. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
27. Delegation of powers. 
28. Penalties. 
29. Offences by companies. 
30. Power to make rules. 
31. Power to rem~ve difficulties. 
32. Declaration as to the policy of the State. 
33. Repeal ano. saving. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

Bill No. 73 of 1976 
THE BRAITHWAITE AND COMPANY (INDIA) LIMITED 
(ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) 
BILL, 1976 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of Messrs. 
Braithwaite and Company (India) Limited for the purpose of ensuring 
the continuity of production of goods which are vital to the needs 
of the country, and fo'r matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 
WHEREAS Messrs. Braithwaite and Company (India) Limited was 
engaged in the manufacture and production of railway wagons, structural 
steel works for bridges and heavy workshop buildings, pressed steel 
tanks, cranes, road roJlers, jute carding machines, roll formers, power 
S sweepers, grey iron castings and steel forgings and also in the machining 
of intricate components of large sizes; 
AND WHEREAS as a result of heavy losses suffered by the Company, 
there had been a closure of certain works owned by the Company; 
AND WHEREAS for the purpose of speedily bringing the closed works 
10 of the Company into operation, the management of the undertakings of 
the Company was taken over by the Central Government, for a limited 
period, under section 18A of the Industries (Development and Regula~ 
65 of 1951. tion) Act, 1951; 

Short title 
and com-
menC'e-
ment. 
Definitions, 
Acquisi-
tion and 
transfer 
of the 
under-
takings 
of the 
Company. 
General 
effect of 
Vesting. 
2 
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to acquire the undertakings of the Com-
pany to ensure the continuance of the production of goods which are 
vital to the needs of the country; 
BE 'it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-&eventh Year of the Re-
public of India as follows:- 5 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Braithwaite and CQIllpany (India) 
Limited (Acquisition and Transfer 01. Undertakings) Act, 1976. 
(2) The provisions of sections 28 and 29 shall come into force al1 once 10 
and the remaining provisions of this Act shall be deemed to have come 
into force on the 1st day of April, 1975-. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed day" means the 1st day of April, 1975; 
(b) "Company" means the Braithwaite and Company (India) IS 
Limited, being a company as defined in the Companies Act, 1956, 
and having its registered office at 5, Hide Road, Calcutta-700043; 
(c) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Payments ap-
pointed under section 14; 
(d) "Ordinance" means the Braithwaite and Company (India) 20 
Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1976; 
(e) "notification" means a nQtification published in the Official 
Gazette', . . • -." 
.' · ... 1 
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(g) "specified date" means such date as the Central Govem- 25 
ment may, for the purposes of any provi'Sion of this Act, by notifica-
tion, specify and different dates may be specified for different pro-
visions of this Act; 
(h) words and expressions used herein and m~t defined but de-
1 of 1956. 
7 of 1976. 
fined in the Companies Act, 1956, shall have the meanings, respec- 30 1 of 1956. 
tively, assigned to them in that Act. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISmON AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY 
3. On the appointed day, the undertakings of the Company, and the 
right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings, 3S 
shall, by virtue of this Act, be transferred to, and shall vest in, the Cen-
tral Government. 
4. (1) The undertakings of the Company shall be deemed to include 
all assets, rights, lease-holds, powers, authorities and privileges, and all 
property, movable and immovable, including lands, buildings, workshops, ~ 
&tores, instrumenUj, machinery and eqUipment, cash b~lances, cash on 

3 
hand, reserve funds, investments, book debts and all other rights and in-
terests in, or arising out of, such property as were immediately before the 
appointed day in the ownership, p<JISSession, power or control of the Com-
pany, whether within or outside India, and all books df account, registers 
5 and all other documents of whatever nature relating thereto. 
(2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Gov-
ernment under section 3 shall, by force of such vesting, be freed and 
discharged frwn any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and all other 
incumbrances affecting it, and any attachment, injunction or decree or 
10 order of Any court restricting the use of such property in any manner 
or appointing any receiver in respect of the whole or any part of such 
property shall be deemed to have been withdrawn. 
(3) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this 
Act ill the Central Government and every person holding any charge, 
IS lien or other interest in, or in relation to. any such property, shalll give. 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation 
to the Commissioner of such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest. 
(4) For the removal of douhts, it is hereby declared that the mortga-
gee of any property referred to in sub-section (2) or any other person 
20 holding any: charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such 
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and 
interest, payment of the mortgage money or other dues, in whole or in 
part, out of the amounts specified in section 7, and also out of the monies 
determined under section 8. but no such mortgage, charge, lien or other 
25 interest shaU he enforceable against any property which has vested in 
the Cf;'ntraI Government. 
(5) If, on the appointed day, any suit. appeal or other proceedinu, of 
whatever nature in relation to any property which has vested in the 
Central Government, under section 3, instituted or preferred by or against 
30 the Company is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or 
be, in any way, prejudicially affected by reason of transfer of the under-
takings of the Company or of anything contained in this Act, but thp 
suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued. prosecuted or enforced 
by or against the Central Government, or where the undertakings of the 
35 Company are directed under section 6, to vest in a Government company, 
against that Government company. 
S. (1) Every liability of the Company in respect of any period prior to 
the appointed! day, shall be the liability of the Company and shall be en-
forceable against it and not a~aim;t the Central Government,. or, where 
40 the undertakings are directed, under section 6. to vest in a Government 
company, against that Government company. 
45 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that.-
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this section or in any 
other' provision of this Act, no liability of the Company in respect of 
any period prior to the appointed day, shall be enforceable nllainst 
the Central Government, or. where the undertaking'l'1 of the Com-
pany are directed under section 6 to vest ina Government company. 
against that Government companYi 
Central 
Govern-
ment 
or the 
Govern-
ment 
company 
not to be 
liable for 
prior 
liabilities. 

Power of 
Central 
Govern-
mentto 
direct 
vesting of 
the under-
takings 
of the 
Company 
in a 
Govern-
ment 
company. 
Payment 
of amount. 
Payment 
of further 
amount. 
4 
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other 
authority in relation to the undertakings of the Company, passed 
after the appointed day, in respect of any matter, claim or dispute 
which arose before that day, shall be enforceable against the Central 
Government, or, where the undertakings of the Company are direct- 5 
ed under section 6 to vest in a Government company, against that 
Government comparlY; 
(c) no liability incurred by the Company before the appointed 
day. for the contravention of any provision of law for the time being 0 
in force, shall be enforceable against the Central Government, or, I 
where the undertakings of the Company are directed under section 6, 
to vest in a Government company. against that Government company. 
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4. the 
Central Government may, if it is satisfied that a Government company 
is willing to comply, or has complied. with such terms and conditions as IS 
that Government may think fit to impose, direct. by notification, that the 
undertakings of the COmpany, and the right, title and interest of the 
Company in relation to its undertakings, which have vested in the 
Central Government under section 3, shall, instead of continuing to vest 
in the Central Government. vest in the Government company either on 20 
the date of the notification or on such earlier or later date (not bein~ 
a date earlier than the appointed day) as may be speCified in the noti-
fication. 
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to 
its undertakings, vest in a Government company under sub-section (1), 25 
the Government company shall, on and from. the date of such vesting, 
be deemed to have become the owner in relation to such undertakings, 
and all the rights and liabilities of the Central Government in relation to 
such undertakings shall, on and from the date of such vesting. be deemed 
to have become the rights and liabilities, respectively, of the Government 30 
company. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
7. For the transfer to, and vestin,; in, the Central Government, under 
section 3. of the undertaking..; of the Company and the right, title and in- 35 
terest of the Company in relation to its undertakings, there shall be 
given by ·the Central Government to the ComllllDY, in cash, and in the 
manner specified in Chapter VI, an amount of rupees sixteen crores and 
twenty-five lakhs. 
8. (1) For the deprivation of the Company of the management of its 40 
undertakings, there shall be given to the Company by the Central Gov-
ernment an amount calculated at the rate of rUpees fifty thouand per 
annum for the period ('ommencing on the date on whirh the management 
of the undertakinsrs of tbe Comoony wa~ taken over hy the Centra' Gov-
ernment and endin~ on the appointed .tay. 45 
(2) In consideration of the retTmlpective oueration of the provisions of 
sections 3, 4 and 5, there shall also he given, in cash, by the Central Gov-
ernment to the Com.pany, an amount equal to an amount calculated at 
the rate of rupees fifty thousand per annum for the period commencing 

5 
On the appointed day and eudin, on the date of promuJption of the 
Ordinance. 
(3) The amount specified in section 7 and the amounts determined 
under sub-sections (1) and (2) shall carry sbnple interest at the rate of 
5 four per cent. per annum for the period commencing on the date of 
promulgation of the Ordinance and cnding on the date on which payment 
of such amounts is made by the Central Government to the Commissioner. 
(4) The amounts determined in accordance with the provisions of sub-
sections (1), (2) and (3) shall be given by the Central Government to 
10 the Company in addition to the amount specified in section 7. 
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the Iiabili-
tiE's of the Company, in relation to its undertakings which have vested 
in the Central Government under section 3, shall be discharged from the 
amounts referred to in section 7, and also from the amounts determined 
15 under sub-sections (1), (2) and (3), in accordance with the rights and 
interests of the creditors of the Company. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY 
9. (1) The general superintendence, direction, control and manage-
20 ment of the affairs and business of the undertakings of the Company, the 
right, title and interest in relation to which have vested in the Central 
Government under section 3, shall,-
25 
(a) where a direction has been made by the Central Government 
under SUb-section (1) of section 6, vest in the Government company 
specified in such direction, or 
(b) where no such direction has been made by the Central Gov-
ernment, vest in one or more Custodians appointed by the Central 
Government under sub-section (2), 
and thereupon the Government company so specified or the Custodian so 
30 appointed, as the case may be, shall be entitled to exercise all such powers 
and do all such things as the Company i'S authorised to exercise and do 
In relation to its undertakings. 
(2) The Central Government may appoint one or more individuals 
or a Government company a'S the Custodian of the undertakings of the 
35 Company in relation to which no direction has been made by it under 
sub-section (1) of section 6. 
10. (1) On the vesting of the management of the undertakings of the 
Company in a Government company or on the appointment of a Custo-
dian, all persons in charge of the management of the undertakings of 
40 the Company immediately before such vesting or appointment, shall be 
bound to deliver to the Government company or the Custodian, as the 
case may be, all assets, books of account, registers or other documents 
in their custody relating to the undertakings of such Company. 
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may 
deem desirable in the circumstances of the case to the Government 
4S company or the Custodian as to its or his powers and duties and the 
Government company or Custodian may also, if it or he so deSires, apply 
Manage. 
ment, etc., 
of the 
under. 
ta·kings 
of the 
Company. 
Duty of 
persons in 
charge of 
manage-
m-ent 
of the 
under-
takings 
of the 
Company 
to deliver 
all assets, 
etc. 

Accounts 
and audit. 
Emp)oy-
mentof 
certain 
employees 
to con-
tinue. 
. 
6 
to the Central Government at any time for instructions as to the manner 
in which the management of the undertakings of the Company shall be 
conducted by it or him or in relation to any other matter arising in the 
course of such management. 
(3) The Custodian 'Shall receive from the funds of the undertakings S 
of the Company such remuneration as the Central Government may fix 
and shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government. 
11. The Custodian of the undertakings of the Company shall main-
tain an account of the undertakings of the Company in such form and 
manner and under such conditions as may be prescribed and the provi- 10 
~ions of the Companies Ad, 1956, shall apply to the audit of the account 1 of 1956. 
so maintained as they apply to the audit of the accounts of a company. 
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY 
12. (1) Every person who is a workman within the meaning of the IS 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, and has been, immediately before the 14 of 1947. 
appointed day, employed in any undertaking of the Company shall 
become, on and from the appointed day, an employee of the Central 
Government or, as the case may be, of the Government company in 
which the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its 20 
undertakings, have vested under this Act, and shall hold office or ser-
vice under the Central Government or the Government company, as the 
case may be, with the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity 
and other matters as would have been admissible to him if there had 
been no such vesting and shall continue to do so unless and until his 2S 
employment under the Central Government or the Government com-
pany, as the case may be, is duly terminated or until his remuneration 
and other conditions of service are duly altered by the Central Govern-
ment or the Government company, as the case may be. 
(2) Every person who is not a workman within the meaning of the 30 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, and who has been, immediately before 14 of 1947. 
the appointed day, employed in any undertaking of the Company shall 
become, as from the appointed day, an employee of the Central Govern-
ment or the Government company, and shall hold office or service 
therein by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the 3S 
same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as 
to pension and gratuity and other matters as would have been admis-
sible to him if the undertakings of the Company had not been trans-
ferred to, and vested in, the Central Government or the Government 
company, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment 40 
in the Central Government or the Government company is duly termi-
nated or until his remuneration, terms and conditions of employment 
are duly altered by the Central Government or the Government com-
pnny, as the case may be. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes ~ 
Act, 1947, or in allY other law for the time being in force, the transfer 14 of 1947. 
of the services of any officer or other person employed in any under-
taking of the Company to the Central Government or the Government 
.::ompany shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any compen-
otion under thit Act or under any other law for the time being iD ,0 

7 
force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or 
c.'ther authority. 
(4) Where, under the terms of any contract of service or otherwise, 
any person, whose services become transferred to the Central Govern-
S ment or the Government company by reason of the provisions of this 
Act, is entitled to any arrears of salary or wages or any payments for 
any leave not availed of or any other payment, not being payment by way 
of gratuity or pension, such person may enforce his claim against the 
Company, but not against the Central Government or the Government 
10 company. 
13. (1) Where the Company has established a provident, super-
annuation, welfare or other fund for the benefit of the peraons employed 
in any of the undertakings of the Company, the monies relatable to the 
officers or other employees, whose services have become transferred by 
IS or under this Act to the Central Government or the Government com-
pany, shall, out of the monies standing, on the appointed day, to the 
credit of such provident, superannuation, welfare or other fund, stand 
transferred to, and shall vest in, the Central Government or the Govern-
ment company, as the case may be. 
20 (2) The monies which stand transferred under 'Sub-section (1) to 
the Central Government or the Government company, as the case may 
be, shall be dealt with by that Government or that Government company 
in such manner as may be prescribed. 
CHAPrER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
14. (1) The Central Government shall, for the purpose of disbursing 
the amounts payable to the Company under sections 7 and 8, by noti-
fication, appoint a Commissioner of Payments. 
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persoDs as it 
30 may think fit to assist the Commissioner and .tbereupon the Commis-
sioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to exereUe all 
or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act and dUfereat 
persons may be authorised to exercise different powers. 
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercUe aay of 
35 the powers exercisable by the Commissioner may exercise those powers 
in .the same manner and with the same effect as if they bave been COD-
ferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of l8utho-
risation. 
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commission«'r and other 
40 persons appointed under this section shall be defrayed out of the Conso~ 
lidated Fund of India. 
4S 
IS. (1) The Central Government shall, within thirty days from the 
specified date, pay, in cash, to the Commissioner, for payment to the 
Company-
(a) an amount equal to the amount specified in section 7, and 
(b) an amount equal to the amount payable to the Company 
under section 8. I •. 
Provident 
and~ 
funda. 
Appoint-
mentof 
CommlJ-
alonerot 
Payment •. 
Payment 
by the 
Central 
Govern-
m.entto 
the Com-
missioner. 

Certair. 
powers 
of the 
Central 
Gov'ern-
mentor 
Govern-
men' 
company 
Claims to 
be made 
to the 
Commis-
sioner. 
Priority 
of claims. 
8 
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government hi 
favour of the Commissioner, in the Public Account of India, and ev~ 
amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be deposited by 
him to the credit of the said deposit account and the said deposit account 
shall be operated by the Commissioner. 5 
(3) The interest accruing on the. amount standing to the credit of the 
deposit account referred to in sub-section (2) shall enure to the benefit 
of the Company. 
16. (1) The Central Government or the Government company, as the 
case may: be, shall be entitled to receive up to the specified date, to the 10 
exclusion of all other persons, any money due t()l the Company, in relation 
to its undertakings which have vested iIll the Central Government, or the 
Government company, realised after the appointed day notwithstanding 
that the realisation pertains to a period prior to the appointed day. 
(2) The Central Government or the Government company, as the case 15 
may be, may make a claim to the Commissioner with regard to every 
payment made by it after the appointed day for discharging any liability 
of the Company in relation to any period prior to the appointed day; and 
every such claim shall have priority in accordance with the priorities 
attaching, under this Act, to the matter in relation to which such liability 20 
has been discharged by the Central Government or the Government 
company. 
(3) Save' as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of the Com-
pany in respect of any transaction prior to the appointed day, which have 
not been discharged on or before the specified date, shall be the liabilities 25 
of the Company. 
1:1. Every person having a claim against the Company shall prefer 
such claim before the Commissioner within thirty days from the specified 
date: 
Provided that if the Commissioner U. satisfied that the claimant was 30 
prevented by suftlcient cause from preferring the claim within the said 
period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further period 
of thirty days and not thereafter. 
• The claims arising out, of the matters specified in the Schedule 
shall have priorities in accordance with the following principles, namely:- 35 
(a); Category I will have precedence over all other categories and 
Category II will have precedence over Category III, and so on; 
(b) the claims specified in each of the categories, except Cate-
gory VI, shall rank equally and be paid in full, but, if the amount 
is insufficient to meet such claims in full, they shall abate in equal 40 
proportions and be paid accordingly; 
(c) the liabilities specified in Category VI shall be discharged, 
subject to the priorities specified in this section, in accordance with 
the terms of the secured loans and the priOrity, inter se, of such loans; 
and 
(d) the question of discharging any liability with regard to a 45 
matter specified in a lower category shall arise only if fl surplus is 

9 
left after meeting all the liahlities specified in the immediately 
higher category. 
1$. (1) On receipt of the claims made under st!Ction 17, the Commis-
sioner shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in the 
5 Schedule and examine the same in accordance with such order ot 
priorities. 
(2) If, on examination of the claims, the Commissioner is of opinion 
that the amount paid to him under this Act is not sufficient to meet the 
liabilities specified in any lower category, he shall not be required to 
10 examine the claims in respect of such lower category. 
20. (1) After examining the claims with reference to the priorities set 
out in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a certain date on or 
before which every claimant shall file the proof of his claim or be exclud-
ed from the benefit of the disbursements made by the Commissioner. 
15 (2) Not less than fourteen days' notice of the date so fixed sl.all be 
given by advertisement in one issue of a daily newspaper in English 
language and 'in one issue of such daily newspaper in the regional langu-
age as the Commissioner may consider suitable, and every such notice 
shall call upon the claimant to file the proof of his claim with tne Com-
20 missioner within the time specified in the advertisement. 
(3)1 Every claimant who fails to ftle the proof of his claim within the 
time specified by the Commissioner shall be excluded from the disburse-
ments made by the Commissioner. 
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his 
25 opinion, be necessary and after giving the Company an opportunity of 
refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a reasonable opportunity 
of being heard, in writing, admit oc reject the claim in whole or in part. 
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own pro-
cedure in all matters arising out of the discharge of his functions, includ-
30 ing the place or places at which he will hold his sittings and shall, for the 
purpose of making an investigation under this Act, have the same powers 
6 of 1908. as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, 
while trying a suit, in respect of the follOWing matters, namely:-
35 
40 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness 
and examining him on oath; 
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other 
material object producible as evidence; 
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 
(d) the issuing of any commisSion for the examination of wit-
nesses. 
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be 
a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the 
45 of 1860. Indian Pena]! Code and the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a civil 
court for the purposes of section 345 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of 
2 of 1974. 4S Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
Examina-
tion of 
claims. 
AdnUs-
ajon or 
rejection 
ofelaima. 

Diaburse-
mentol 
money by 
the Com-
~er 
to 
claimants. 
Diaburre-
mentol 
amounts 
to the 
Company. 
Undis-
bursed or 
unclaimed 
amount 
lobe 
deposited 
to the 
general 
revenue 
account. 
Act 
to have 
overriding 
effect. 
10 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commis-
lioner, may prefer an appeal against the decision to the principal civil 
court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction 
the registered office of the Company is situated: 
Provided that where a person who is a Judge o·f a High Court is ap- S 
pointed to be the Commissioner, the appeal shall lie to the High Court 
at Calcutta, and such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not less 
than two Judges of that High Court. 
21. After admitting a claim under this Act, the amount rlue in respect 
of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or persons 10 
to whom such sums are due, and, on such payment, the liability of the 
Company in respect of such claim shall stand discharged. 
ZZ. (1) If, out of the monies paid to him in relation to the undertak-
ings of the Company, there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities 
as specified in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse such balance IS 
to the Company. 
(2) Where the possession of any machinery, equipment or other 
property, has vested in the Central Government or a Government com-
pany under this Act, but such machinery, equipment or other property 
does not belong to the Company, it shall be lawful for the Central 20 
Government or the Government company to continue to possess 'Bucn 
machinery or equipment or other property on the same terms and condi-
tions under which they were possessed by the Company immediately 
before the 1st day of April, 1975. 
23. Any money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed 2S 
or unclaimed for a period of three years from the last day on which the 
disbursement was made, shall be transferred by the Commissioner to the 
aeneral revenue account of the Central Government; but a claim to any 
money so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by 
the person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such 30 
transfer had not been made, the order, if any, for payment of the claim 
being treated. as an order for the refund of the revenue. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
%4. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstandini any- 3S 
thinlg inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being In force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law, 
other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority. 

11 
25. (1) Every contract entered into by the C'Ompany in relation to its 
undertakings for any service, sale or supply. and in force immediately 
before the appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry of one hundred 
and eighty days from the date of promulgation of the Ordinance, cease 
S to have effect unless such contract is, before the expiry Qf that period, 
ratified, in writing, by the Central Government or Government com-
pany, and', in ratifying 'Such contract, the Central Government or Govern-
ment company may make such alteration or modification therein as it 
may think fit: 
10 Provided that the Central Government or Government company shall 
not omit to ratify a contract, and shall not make any alteration or modi-
fication in a contract, unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly 
onerous or has been entered into in bad faith or detrimental to the in-
terests of the Central Government or the Government company. 
IS (2) The Central Government or Government company shall not omit 
to ratify a contract, and, shall not make any alteration or modificatior. 
therein, except after giving to the parties to the contract a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard and except after recording, in writing, its 
reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any alteration or 
20 modification therein. 
28. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the Central Government or any officer of that Government cxri the Cus-
todian or the Government company or any officer or other person autho-
rised by that Government or Government company for anything which 
25 is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
Government or any of its officers or other employees or the Government 
company or any officer or other person authorised by that company for 
any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good 
30 faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
27. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all 
or any of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the 
power conferred I by section 30, may also be exercised by such person or 
persons as may be specified in the notification. 
35 (2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub-section (1), 
40 
45 
the person to whom such power has been delegated shall act under the 
direction, control and supervision of the Central Government. 
28. Any person who.-
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property 
forming part of any undertaking of the Company, wrongfully with-
holds such property from the Central Government or Government 
company; or 
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property 
forming part of any undertaking of the Company or wilfully with-
holds or fails to furnish to the Central Government or Government 
company or any person or body of persons specified by that Govern-
ment or Government company, any document relating to such 
undertaking which may be in hi'S possession, custody or control or 
Contracts 
to cease 
to have 
effect 
unless 
ratified 
by the 
Central 
Govern-
mentor 
Govern-
ment 
company. 
Protection 
of action 
taken in 
good 
faith. 
Delega-
tion of 
powers. 
Penalti-. 

Offences 
by com-
paniea. 
Power 
to make 
rules. 
12 
fails to deliver to the Central Government or Government company 
or any person or body of persons specified by that Government or 
Government company, any assets, books of account, registers or 
other document,; in his possession, custody or control, relating to the 
undertaking of the Company; or S 
(c) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part 
of any undertaking of the Company or prefers any claim under this 
Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be false 
or grossly inaccurate, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 10 
two years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with 
both. 
29. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was 
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company,for the conduct of the IS 
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly: 
Provided" that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was 20 
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due dili-
gence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or conniv- 2S 
ance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, 
manager, secretary or other officer shalL be deemed to be guilty of that 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. 
ExpZanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or 
other association of individuals~ 
(b) "director", in relation to a finn, means a partner in the firm. 
30 
30. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 3S 
carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, sucb rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:- " 
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an intima- 40 
tion shall be giV"en to the Commissioner under sUb-section (3) of 
section 4; 
(b) the form apd the manner in which, and the conditions under 
which, the Custodian shall maintain accounts as required by section 
11; 4S 
(c) the manner in which the monies in any provident or other 
fund referred to in section 13 shall be dealt with; 

7 of 1976. 
it 
(d) any other matter which Is required to be, or may ~, pres .. 
Cribed. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia-
5 meni, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately follOwing the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifica-
tion in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be marie, the 
10 rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previ-
ously done under that rule. 
31. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Power to 
15 Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the ~=~ies. 
provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period 
of two years from the date on which this Act receives the assent of the 
President., 
20 32. It is hereby declared that this Act is for giving effect to the policy 
of the State towards securing the principles specified in clause (b) a!. 
article 39 of the Constitution. 
Explanation.-In this section, "State" has the same meaning as in 
article 12 of the Constitution. 
2S 33. (1) The Braithwaite and Company (India) Limited (Acquisition 
and Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1976, is hereby repealed. 
(2) NotWithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the Ordinance so repealed shall be deemed to have been done or 
taken under the corresponding proviSions of this Act. 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See sections 18, 19 and 20) 
ORDER OF PRIORITIES FOR THE DISCHARGE OF LIABILITIES OF 'l'H1t COMPANY 
PART 'A' 
Post-take-over management period 
3S Category 1-
Wages, salaries and other dues of the employees of the Company. 
Category 11-
(a) (i) Loans advanced by the Central Governtnent. 
(ii) Secured loans advanced by banks and financial institutions. 
40 Categ()lT'Y 111-
(a) Any other loans. / 
Declara-
tion as 
to the 
policy of 
the State. 
Repeal 
and 
savin,. 

14 
(b) Credit availed of by the Company for the purpose of carrying on 
any trading or manufacturing operations. 
Categcwy IV-
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other dues of Central Government or 
a State Government. S 
Category V-
PART 'B' 
Pre-take-oveT management pe'riod 
Arrears in relation to contributions to be made by the Company to 
the provident fund, salaries and wages and other amounts due to em- 10 
ployees. 
Categor]/ VI-
Secured loans. 
CategO'1'1/ V1JI-
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or any other dues to the Central Gov- IS 
ernment, a State Government, a local authority or a: State Electricity 
Board 
Category VI1I-
(a) Any credit availed of by the Company for the purpose of trading 
or manufacturing operations. 20 
(b) Any other dues. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Messrs. Braithwaite and Company (India) Limited were engaged in 
the manufacture and production of railway wagons, structurals and 
other commodities which were vital to the needs of the country. The 
Company began to show steady decline in production !from 1968 onwards 
and incurred heavy losses which resulted in closure of some of the 
works of the Company. After an investigation into the affairs of the 
Company, the management of its undertakings was taken over by the 
Central Government under section 18A of the Industries (Development 
and Regulation) Act, 1961, in March, 19'71. Since early action was 
necessary to reduce the interest charges on loans and for restructuring 
of the capital of the Company, the undertakings of the Company were 
acquired by the Braithwaite and Company (India) Limited (Acquisition 
and Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1976. The Bill seeks to 
replace the said Ordinance. 
NEW DELHI; T.A. PAl. 
The 4th Au.gu.st, 1976. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 1 (22) /76/HM-III, dated the 5th August, 1976 
from Shri T. A. Pai, Minister of Industry and Civil Supplies to the 
Secretary-General, Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the Bill 
to provide for the replacement O/f the Ordinance 'The Braithwaite and 
Company (India) Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings)-
(Nationalisation) Ordinance, 1976 (No. 7 of 1976), by Act of Parliament, 
recommends, under clauses (1) and (3) of article 117 of the Constitution, 
the imtrociuction of the said Bill and its coosideration by Lok Sabha. 
JS 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 7 of the Bill provides for the payment, in cash, and in the 
manner specified in Chapter VI of the Bill, an amount (jf Rs. 16,25,00,000 
(Rupees sixteen crores and twenty-five lakhs), for vesting in the Central 
Government, the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to 
the undertakings owned by it. 
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 8 provides for payment Qf further amount 
in cash, in consideration for the deprivation of the Company of the 
management of its undertakings, an amount to be calculated at the rate 
of Rs. 50,000 (Rupees fifty thousand only) per annum, for the period 
commencing on the date on which the management of the undertakings 
of the Company was taken over by the Government ending on the 
appOinted day. It is estimated that this amount will be of the order of 
Rs. 2,00,000 (Rupees two lakhs only). 
3. Sub-clause (2) of clause 8 provides that in consideration of the 
ret.ro!SPeCtive operation of the provisions of sections 3, 4 and 5, there 
shall be given, in cash, by the Government to the Company, an amount 
equal to an amount calculated at the rate of Rs. 50.000 (Rupees fifty 
thousand only) per annum for a period commencing on the appointed 
day and ending on the date of promulgation of the Ordinance, i.e., 23rd 
June, 1976. This amount is estimated to be of the order of Rs. 0.65 
lakhs. 
4. Sub-clause (3) of clause 8 provides for payment of simple interest 
at the rate of 4 per cent per annum, for the period commencing from 
23k'd June, 1976 and ending on the day on which the payment of these 
amounts is made by the Central Government to the Commissioner of 
rayments. It is estimated that the interest-payment in terms of the 
provisions of the said sub-clause is likely to be of the order of Rs. 5.43 
lakhs per month. 
5. Clause 14 of the Bill provides !for the appointment of the Commis-
sioner of Payments by the Government with adequate staff to 8Slist him 
for the purpose of disbursing the amounts payable to the Company. 
The salm:r and allowances <d the Commissioner of Payments and his 
staft and expenditure on otftce and establishment will be defrayed out 
of the Consolidated Fund of India. The estimated expendIture on this 
account is likely to be of the order of Rs. 10,000 per month. 
6. At the time of take ()ver in March, 1971, loans !from State Bank of 
India and National and Grindlays Bank were outstanding and in the 
interest of continuing the facilities from the Banks, Govenament had no 
alternative but to guaranteeing the pre-takeover secured loans along 
with guarantees for post-takeover loans as well. The post-takeover 
loans advanced by the State Bank amounted to Rs. 3.72 crores and loans 
advanced by Financial Institutions worked out to Rs. 0.18 crores as on 
tbe 31st March, 1975. During the pre-takeover peri,od, as on 31st March, 
1971, the Government guaranteed secured loans from State Bank and 
16 

17 
National and Grindlays Bank which would be roughly rupees two crores. 
It was, therefore, felt that the Government having guaranteed the loans 
for both the pre-takeover and post-takeover periods, it would not be 
proper to go back on the guarantees if the amounts provided in the Blll 
fell short of discharging the liabilities on this account. It was, there-
fore, decided that the Government on its own would take note of the 
short-fall and pay up the amounts to the Banks and the Financial Insti-
tutions to' the extent the guarantees are called up after being met out 
of the amounts provided in the Ordinance. This short-fall is expected 
to be about Rs. 2. crores against post-takeover loans and Rs. 2 crores 
against pre-takeover loans. Thus the total estimated expenditure on 
this account is likely to be of the order of Rs. 4 coores. The Bill does 
not, however, provide for any payment in pursuance of the guarantee. 
Payment in pursuance of the guarantee will be made after due appro-
priation by Parliament by law. 
7. Funds will also have to l;>e provided to the undertaldllgs of tl e 
Company for modernisation and expanSion. The expenditure on moder-
nisation is necessary to make these undertakings financially viable. The 
total estimated expenditure during the remaining period of the Fifth 
Plan is estimated to be of the order Qf Rs. 1 crore (one crore only). 
8. The Bill, if enacted, is not likely to involve any other recurring 
or non-recurring expenditure. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 30 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make. 
rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill. Such rules may provide for 
matters, such as-
{ja) the time within which and the manner in which an inti-
mation referred to in sub-clause (3) of clause 4 of the Bill shall be 
given; 
(b) the manner in which monies in any provident or other 
fund referred to in clause 13 shall be dealt with. 
2. The matters in respect of which such rules may be made are 
matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable 
to provide for them in the Bill it.self. The delegation of legislative 
power is, therefore, of a normal character. 

MEMORANDUM EXPLAINING THE MODIFICATIONS CONTAINED 
IN THE BILL TO REPLACE THE BRAITHWAITE AND COMPANY 
(INDIA) LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDER-
TAKINGS) ORDINANCE, 1976. 
Apart from changes of a formal, drafting and consequential nature, 
sub-section (2) of section 22 of the Ordinance has been modified in the 
Bill to enable the Central Government or a Government company to 
possess machinery, equipment or other property, which though not 
belonging to the Company, were under its possession O!' control, on the 
same terms and conditions under which such machinery, eqUipment or 
other property. was possessed by the Company immediatdy before the 
1st day of April, 1975. 
19 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition and transfer CYf the undertakings of Messrs. 
Braithwaite and Company (India) Limited for the purpose of ensur-
ing the continuity of production of goods which are vital to the needs 
of the country, and for matters connected th9rewith or incidental 
thereto. 
(Shri T. A. Pati, 
M in-ister of Ift.dumy). 