8W No. 73 of 1962 
THE STATE OF NAGALAND 
BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA 
• ON 21ST AUGUST, 1962) 
t' A 1't U A ~r. i. N 'f LI ciftAi'U 
N~)'J' ... ~ .. ,. ........ ., ............ ... 
i)II.(,( .~.l: .. U~L~_ 

THE STATE OF NAGALAND BILL, 1962 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSlIS 
I. Short title. 
2. Definitions: 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
PART II 
FORMATION OF THE STATE OF NAGALAND 
3. Formation of State of Nagaland. 
4. Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution. 
S. Amendment of Sixth Schedule to the Constitution . 
. PART III 
RlIPRESBNTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES 
Th8 Council of States 
6. Representation in Council of States. 
7. Bye-election to fill vacancy. 
8. Term of office. 
The House of the People 
9. Representation in House of the People. 
10. Provision as to sitting member. 
Th8 Legislative Assembly 
II. Strength of Legislative Assembly. 
12. Rules of Procedure. 
PART IV 
HIGH CoURT 
13. Common High Court for Assam and Nagaland. 
14. Provisions as to Advocates. 
IS. Practice and procedure in common High Court. 
16. Custody of Seal of common High Court. 
(i) 
1439 (B) LS-1. 

(il) 
CLAuSBS 
17. Form of writs and other processes. 
18. Powers of Judges. 
. 19. Principal seat of common High Court. 
20. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court. 
21. Pending suits, appeals and proceedings. 
PART V 
FINANCIAL PRoVISIONS 
22. Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by Legislature. 
23. Distribution of revenues. 
24. Property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations. 
25. Arrears of taxes. 
PART VI 
I...BGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
26. Continuance of existing laws and their adaptation. 
27. Power to construe laws. 
28. Provisions as to continuance of courts and of officers, etc. 
29. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956. 
30. Effect of provisions of Act inconsistent with other laws. 
31. Power to remove difficulties. 
32. Power to make rules. 
33. Repeal. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

aiD No. 13 of I,.Z 
THE STATE OF NAGALAND BILL, 1900 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide jor the formation of the State of Nagaland and for matters 
connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: -
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Th~ Act may be called the State of Nagaland Act, 1962. Short title. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,··- DefinitiOll8. 
(a) "appointed day" means the day which the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; 
(b) "article" means an article of the Constitution; 
(c) "assembly constitueIllCY" and "'Parliamentary consti-
tuency" have the same meanings as in the Representation of the 
People Act, 1950; 
(d) "law" includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, 
older, bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or other instrument or 
custom or usage having the force of law; 
(e) "Naga Hill-Tuensang Area" means the Naga Hills-Tuen- . 
sang Area specified in Part B of the Table appended to paragraph ... 
20 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, comprising the areas 
which at the commencement of the Constitution were known as 
the Naga Hills District and the Naga Tribal Area; 
<f) "regiQnal C9\mcil" means the regional council referred to 
in article 37lA, 

Formation of 
Slate of 
. Nagaland. 
2 
PART II 
FORMATION OF THE STATE OF NAGALAND 
to (1) As fmm the appointed day, there shall be formed a new 
State to be known as the State of Nagaland comprising the territories 
which immediately before that day were compr.ed in the Naga 5 
Bills-Tuensaug Area and thereupon the said territories shall cease 
to form part of the State of Assam. 
(2) Without prejudice to the power of the State Government to 
alter after the appointed day; the name, extent or boundaries of 
any district, the State of Nagaland shall consist of three districts 10 
to be called the Kohima district, Mokokchung district and Tuensang 
district, each comprising the areas respectively set out in the Schedule. 
Amendment 4. As from the appointed day, in the First Schedule to the Con-
of Fint stitution, under the heading "I. THE STATES",- . Schedule to 
~~~ti- (a) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State IS 
of Assam, the following shall be added at the end, namely:-
Amendment 
of Sixth 
Schedule 
to the Cons-
titution. 
Representa-
tion in 
Council of 
States. 
"and the territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of 
the St8lte of Nagaland Act, 1962"; 
(b) after entry 15, the following entry shall be inserted, 
namely:- 20 
"16. Nagaland .. The territories specified in sub-sec-
tion (1) of section 3 of the State of 
Nagaland Act, 1962.". 
5. As from the appointed day, in the Sixth Schedule to the Con-
stitution- 25 
(a) in paragraph 20-
(i) sub-paragraph (2B) shall be omitted, 
(ii) in su~paragraph (3), the brackets and words" (other 
than the Naga Hills-Tuensang Area)" shall be omitted; 
(b) in the Table appended to paragraph 20, in Part B. the 30 
item 1/2. The,Naga Hills-Tuensang Area" shall be omitted. 
PART III 
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES 
The Council of States 
6. As from the appointed day- 35 
(a) there shall be allotted one seat to the State of Nagaland 
in the Council of States; 

3 
(b) in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, in the Table-
(i) entries 16 to 19 shall be renumbered as entries 17 to 
20, 
(ii) after entry 15, the following entry shall be inserted, 
S namely:-
"16. Nagaland .... : ... 1", 
(iii) at the end, for the figures "224", the figures "225" 
shall be substituted. 
"I. As soon as may be after the appointed day, there shall be held a Bye-election 
10 bye-election to fill the vacancy in the seat allotted to the State of :C:cy, 
Nagaland in the Council of States. 
8. The term of office of the member for the first time elected to Term of 
fill the seat allotted to the State of Nagaland in the Council of States office. 
shall expire on the 2nd day of April, 1968. 
IS The HotUle of the People 
9. (1) As from the appointed day- RJE:7:nta -
(a) there shall be allotted one seat to the State of Nagaland Hhouse of 1 .' I t e Peop e. 10 the House of the Peop e; 
(b) in the First Schedule to the Representation of the People 
20 Act, 1950,-
(i) the entry "25. Naga Hills-Tuensang Area ............ 1" 
shall be omitted; 
(ii) entries 16 to 24 shall be renumbered as entries 17 to 
25; 
2S (iii) after entry 15, the following entry shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"16. Nagaland.· ..... 1". 
(2) The whole of the State of Nagaland shall form one parliament-
ary constituency to be called the parliamentary constituency of Naga-
30 land for the purpose of filling the seat allotted to that State in the 
House of the People. 
(3) For the period referred to in clause (2) of article 371A, section 
130 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, shall apply in rela-
tion tc the parliamentary constituency of Nagaland with the mOdiftca-
is tion that it shall be necessary to prepare and revise separately the 
electoral roll for that part of the said parliamentary constituency 
which comprises the Tuensang district and the provisions of Part III 

ProvisioD II 
to aittiq 
member. 
of that Act shall apply in relation to the said part as they apply in 
relation to an assembly constituency. 
10. The sitting member of the House of the People representing, 
immediately before the appointed day, the Naga Hills-Tuensang Area 
shall, as from that day, represent the State of Nagaland in that House S 
and shall continue to do so until a person is elected in accordance with 
law to fill the seat allotted to the pa.rliamentary constituency of 
Nagaland. 
The Legislative Assembly 
e:r-tive of 11. (1) The total number of seats to be filled by persons chosen 10 
AaembIJ. by direct election in the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland shall be 60: 
Provided that for the ,period. referred to in elause (2) of article 
371A, the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of 
Nagaland shall be 46, of wbich-
(a) six seats shall be, allocated to the Tuensang district and IS 
shall be filled by persons chosen by the members of the regional 
council from amongst themselves in such manner as the Governor, 
after consulting that council, may by notification in the Official 
Gazette specify, and 
(b) the remaining forty seats shall be filled by persons zo 
chosen by direct election from nssembly constituencies in the 
rest of the State of N agaland. 
(2) In the Representation of the People Act, 1950,-
(a) in section 7, the following proviso shall be inserted at 
the end, namely: _ as 
"Provided that for the perjod referred to in clause (2) 
of article 371A, the total number of seats allotted to the 
Legislative Assembly of Nagaland shall be 46, of which-
(a) six seats shall be allocated to the Tuensang 
district and shall be filled by persons chosen by the 30 
~mbers of the regional council referred to in that 
article from amongst thetp.selves in such manner as the 
Governor, after consulting that council, may by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette specify, and 
,b) the remaining forty seats shall be filled by 35 
persons chosen by direct election from assembly consti-
tuencies in the rest of tge ~tate of Nagaland."; 
, I 
43 of I9SOo 

5 
. 
(b) in the Second Schedule, after entry 14, the following 
entry shall be inserted, namely:-
"15. Nagaland .. 60 [for the period referred to in 
clause (2) of article 37lA, 46].". 
(3) In the Representation of the People Act, 1951, in section 5, 
in clause (c), the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:-
"Provided that for the period referred to in cla\1se (2) of 
article 37lA, a person shall n.ot be qualified to be chosen to fill 
any seat allocated to the Tuensang district in the Legislative 
Assembly of N agaland unless he is a member of the regional 
council referred to in that article.". 
(4) The Election Commission shall delimit· the assembly consti-
tuencies in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution on 
the basis of the latest census figures, and in doing so the Commission 
shall have regard to the following provisions, namely:-
(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, consist of 
geographically compact areas, and in delimiting them, regard 
shall be had to physical features, existing boundaries of adminis-
trative units, facilities of communication, public convenience and 
linguistic affinities of the people, 
(b) all constituencies shall be single-member constituencies, 
and . . ' . ". Ii ,. {;:'J 
(c) the population of each constituency shall not, as far as 
practicable, be more than six thousand. 
(5) For the purpose of assisting the Election Commission in the 
performance of its functions under this section, the Commission shall 
associate with itself five persons of whom three shall be elected by 
the members of the Interim Body established under section 3 of the 
Nagaland (Transitional Provisions) Regulation, 1961, from among 
themselves and two shall be nominated by the Central Government: 
Provided that none of the'said associate members shall have a 
right to vote or to sign any decision of the Election Commission. 
(6) The Election Commission shall-
(a) formulate its proposals in regard to the matters mention-
ed in sub-section (4) and publish them in the Official Gazette 
of the State of Assam and in such other manner 88 the Com-
mission may consider fit, together with a notice inviting objections 
and suggestions in relation to the proposals and specifying a 

IlaleI of 
Pzocedure. 
Common 
High Court 
for Assam 
and Naga-
land. 
6 
• date on or after which the proposals will be further considered 
by it; . 
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have 
been received· by it before the date so specified, and for the 
purpose of such consideration hold one or more public sittings 5 
at such place or places as it may think fit; 
(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which 
may have been received by it before the date so specified, 
determine the matters mentioned in sub-section (4) by one or 
more final orders and cause such order or orders to be published 10 
in the Official Gazette of the State of Assam; and upon such 
publication the order or orders shall have the full force of law 
and shall not be called in question in any court; 
(d) amend the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
Constituencies Order, 1961, so as to include therein the parlia- IS 
mentary constituency of Nagaland and the assembly consti-
tuencies delimited under this section. 
12. The rules as to procedure and conduct of business in force 
immediately before the appointed day with respect to the Legislative 
Assembly of Assam shall, until rules are made under clause (1) of 20 
article 208, have effect in relation to the Legislative Assembly of 
Nagaland, subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be 
made therein by the Speaker thereof: 
PART IV 
HIGH COURT 
• 13. (1) As from the appointed day,-
(a) there shall be a common High Court for the State of 
Assam and the State of N agaland to be called the High Court of 
Asaam arid N agaland (hereinafter referred to as the common 
2S 
High Court) ; 30 
(b) the Judges of the High Court of Assam holding office 
immediately before that day shall, unless they have elected 
otherwise, become on that day the Judges of the common High 
Court. 
(2) Expenditure in respect of the salaries and allowances of the 35 
Judges of the common High Court shall be allocated between the 
State of Assam and the State of Nagaland in such proportion as the 
President may by order determinF. \0 i 

7 
, . 
Provildcia It. ll) As from the appointed day,-
(a) in the Advocates Act, 1961, in section 3, in 
(1), for clause (b), the followinl clause shall be 
namely:-
•• to 
sub-section Advocate.; 
5 
substituted, . 
.. (b) for the States of Assam aud Nagaland and the 
Union territory of Manipur, to be known as the Bar Council 
of Assam and Nagaland;"; 
(b) the Bar Council of Assam shall be deemed to be the Bar 
Council of Assam and N agaland. 
10 (2) Any person who immediately before the appointed day is an 
advocate entitled to practise in the High Court of Assam shall be 
entitled to practise as an advocate in the common High Court. 
(3) All penons who immediately before the appointed day are 
advocates on the roll of the Bar Council of Assam shall as from that 
IS day become advocates on the roll of th! Bar Council of Assam and 
Nagaland. 
. ' 
(4) The right of audience in the common High Court shall be 
regulated in accordance with the like principles as, immediately 
before the appointed day, are in force with respect to the right of 
20 audience in the High Court of Assam: 
Provided that as between the Advocate-General of Assam and the 
Advocate-General of Nagaland the right of audience shall be deter-
mined with reference to their respective dates of enrolment as advo-
cates. 
2S 15. Subject to the provisions of this Part, the law in force imme- Practice and 
diately before the appointed day with respect to practice and proce- proc:edure fa 
dure in the High Court of Assam shall, with necessary modificatioDs, Wi;h~. 
apply in relation to the common High Court. 
16. The law in force immediately before the appointed day with Custody of 
30 respect to the custody of the Seal of the High Court of Assam shall, ~n!.:n 
with necessary modifications, apply with respect to the cUJtoc:ly of High Court. 
the Seal of the common High Court. 
17, The law in force immediately before the appointed day with Form of 
respect to the form of writs and other processes used, issued or writ. and 
35 ' other pro-awarded by the HIgh Court of Assam shall, with 'necessary modifiea- CClICI. 
tions, apply with respect to the form of writs and other proceues 
used, issued or awarded by the common High Court. 
1439 (B) LS-2. 

Powers of 
Judp.. 
8 
18. The law in force immediately before the appointed day whh 
respect to the powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and division 
courts of the High Court of Assam and with respect to all matters 
ancillary to the exercise of those powers shall, with necessary modifi-
cations, apply in relation to the common High Court, , 
Principal 19. The principal seat of the common High Court shaU, unless seat of common otherwise determined by the Chief Justice after consultation with 
High Court. the Governors of Assam and Nagaland, be at the same place as the 
principal seat of the High Court of Assam immediately before the 
appointed day; 10 
Procedure as 20. The law in force immediately before the appointed day relat-
to appeals ing to appeals to the Supreme Court from the High Court of Assam 
to Supreme Court, and the Judges and division courts thereof shall, with necessary modi-
fications, apply in relation to the common High Court. 
Pe,ndinJ 21, All suits, appeals and proceedings, civil, criminal or otherwise, IS 
swts, appeals pending in the High Court of Assam immediately before the and pro-
ceedings, appointed day shall, on that day, stand removed to the common High 
Court and the common High Court shall have jurisdiction to hear 
and determine the same, and the judgments, decrees, sentences and 
orders of the High Court of Assam delivered, passed or made before 20 
the appointed day shall have the same force and effect as if they had 
been delivered, passed or made by the common High Court. 
PART V 
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS 
Authori .. tion 22. The President may, at any time before the aPPOinted day ... , 
of expendi- authorise such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State ".' 
tare pending . ita sanction of Nagaland as he deems necessary for a penod of not more than six 
~~_ Legi,la· months beginning with the appointed day, pending the sanction of .... e. 
such expenditure by the Legislature of the State of Nagaland: 
Provided that the Governor of N agaland may, after the appointed 30 
day, authorise such further expenditure as he deems necessary 
I from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Nagaland for any period 
not extending beyond the said period of six months. 
0 , 'buti 23. (1) The President shall by order determine the srants-in-aid 
Ultrl on 
of reveDuee. of the revenues of the State of Nagaland and the share of that State 3S 
in the Union duties of excise, estate duty and taxes on income and for 
that purpose amend thereby the, rt«evilnt provisions of the Union 

~ of 1p62. 
" of 19.57. 
, of 196~. 
C.0.63. 
5 
9 
Duties of Excise (Distribution) Act, 1962. the Additional Dutlea of 
Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act. 1957, the Estate Duty 
(Distribution) Act, 1962, and the Constitution (Distribution of 
Revenues) Order, 1962, in such manner as he thinks fit. 
(2) The grants-in-aid so determined shall be charged on the Con-
solidated Fund of India and the share so determined shall be paid out 
of the revenues from the said duties or taxes retained by the Union 
or attributable to th~ Union territories. 
24. (1) All property and assets situated in, or used for or in con- Property, 
I::> nection with the administration of. the Nap. Hills-Tuensan. Area ~r:b.~~'. lia-
and vested in the Union immediately before the appointed day ~~~:;~ 
(other than any property or aasets so vested for purposes of the 
Union) shall, as from that day, vest in the State of Nagaland: 
Provided that the cash balances in the treasuries in the Xaga 
IS Hills-Tuensang Area immediately before the appointed day shall, 
as from that day, vest in the State of Nagaland. 
(2) All rights, liabilities and obligations of the Central Govern-
ment, whether arising out of any contract or otherwise which are, 
immediately before the appointed day, the rights, liabilities and obU-
20 gations of the Central Government arising out of or in connection 
with the administration of the Naga Hills-Tuensang Area shall, as 
from that day, be the right!;, liabilities and obligations of the Govern-
ment of the State of Nagaland. 
25. The right to recover arrears of any tax or duty (being a tax Arreara of 
25 or duty enumerated in the State List in the Seventh Schedule to the taxes. 
Constitution) which have fallen due in the Naga Hills-Tuensang 
Area shall pass to the State of Nagaland. 
PART VI 
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
~ 26. (1) All laws in force. immediately before the appointed day, C..onti~u~nc:c 
in the Naga Hills-Tuensang Area shall continue to be in force in the I!w:~~~ng 
State of Nagaland until altered, repealed or amended by a compe- th~ir adap-tallon. 
tent Legislature or other competent authority. 
(2) For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to 
3S the State ofNagaland of any law made before the appointed day, the 
appropriate Government may, witbin two years from that day, by 
order make BUch adaptations and mod~c;ations of the law, whether by . . . . 

Power to 
CIODIInae 
I.,... 
10 
way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and 
thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations 
and modifications so made until altered, repealed or amended by a 
competent Legislature or other competent authority. 
Ezplanation.-In this section, the expression "appropriate Govern- 5 
ment" means, as respects any law relating to a matter enumerated 
in the Union List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the 
Central Government; and as respects any other law, the Government 
of Nagaland. 
21. Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has 10 
been made under section 28 for the adaptation of a law made before 
the appointed day, any court, tribunal or authority required or em-
powered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its 
application in relation to the State of Nagaland, construe the law in 
luch manner not affecting the substance as may be necessary or proper 15 
in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or authority, as the 
case may be. 
Proviaion. •• 28. (1) All courts and tribunals and all authorities discharging 
to continu- lawful functions throughout the N aga Hills-Tuensang Area or any Ince of 
CClUrts and part thereof immediately before the appointed day shall, unless their 20 of officeR, etc. continuance is inconsistent with the proviSions of this Act or until 
other provision is made by a competent Legislature .or other compe-
tent authority, continue to exercise their respective functions. 
(2) Evelj' person who, immediately before the appointed day, is 
holding or discharging the duties of any post or office in connection 25 
with the administration of the N aga Hills-Tuensang Area or any part 
thereof shall, except where by virtue or in consequence of the provi-
lions of this Act such post or offtce ceases to exist on that day, 
continue to hold the same post or office in the State of N agaland, and 
shall be deemed, as from that day, to have been duly' appointed to 30' 
such post or offtce by the Government of, or other appropriate 
authority in, such State. 
(3) Nothing in sub.-section (2) shall be deemed to prevent a com .. 
petent authority, after the appointed day, from passing in relation to 
any such person any order affecting his continuance in such post or 35 
ofBce. 
• 
A.end_ent 19. As from the appointed day, in section 15 of the States Reorga. 
: :.J7 nilBtlcm Act, 1956, tn clause (c), for the words, "and Asam-, the 
words "Aslam ud NagalaAd" Ihtll \le iwl»tituted. 

11 
3i). Th~ provisions of th:s Act shall have effect notwithstanding E«~.or 
anything iucon')istent therewith contained in any other law. r~vi~':':_ of 
.istent with 
other laws. 
31. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Power to . .• • remo\'e 
Act. th~ ,President may, by order, do anythmg not inconsistent with difficulties. 
5 such provisions which appears to him to be necessary or expedient 
for the purpose of removing the difficulty. 
32. (1) The Central Government may, by notificat:on in the Powker to I maeruel. 
Oftlcial Gl:zette, make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Every, rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as 
10 may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is 
Ul session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised In 
one session or two or more !!uccessive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the successive sessions 
aforersaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
I S rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, al the case ,may be; so however that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule. 
20 33. A5 from the apPOinted day, the Nagaland (Transitional Provi- Repell. 
~ons) Regulation, 1961, shall Iftaod repeal~ 

District 
1. Kohima 
2. Mokokc:hung 
3. Tuensang 
THE SCHEDULE 
[Set section 3 (2) ] 
Areas 
The areas which immediately before the 
1st day of December, 1957, were com- 5 
prised in the N aga Hills District 
excluding the areas in Mokokchung 
district as specifted in item No.2. 
The areas which immediately before the 
1st d~y of December, 1957, were com- 10 
prised in the Mokokchung sub-division 
of the Naga Hills District. 
The areas which immediately before the 
1st day of December, 1957, were com-
prised in the Tuensang Frontier Divi- 15 
sion of the North East Frontier Agency. 

STATEMENT 6r OBJ!eTS AN!) dASONS 
in July 1960 the Government of India. in pursuance of an agree-
ment with the leaders of the Naga Peoples Convention. decided that 
the Naga Hi11s-Tuensang Area (Nagaland). which is at present a 
Part 'B' tribal area within the State of Assam. should be formed 
into e separate State in the Union of India. 
2. The Bill provides for the formation of the Naga Hills-Tuen-
sang Area into a separate State and amends the Sixth Schedule to 
the Constitution so as to omit all references therein to the said area. 
The Bill also makes the necessary supplemental and incidental pro-
visions relating to representation in Parlia.ment and in. the State 
Legislature. the apportionment of assets and liabilities between the 
Central Government and the State Government and other matters. 
The Bill further provides for the constitution of e. common High 
Cc·urt for Assam and Nagaland and a common Bar Council. 
3. The Bill also seeks to repeal. from the date of the formation of 
the State. the Nagaland (Transitional Provisions) Regulation. 1961. 
which 'MlS promulgated .by the President to bring into force the 
interim arrangements pending formation of the State of Nagaland. 
4. A3 required by the proviso to article 3 of the Constitu.tion. this 
Bill was referred by the President to the Legislature of the State 
of Assam and its views will also be placed before the Parliament. 
NEW DEI..m. JAWAHARLAL NEHRU. 

The Naga Hills-Tuensang Area is at present administered, as If 
it were a Union Territory, under sub-paragra,ph (2) of paragraph 
18 of the Sixth Schedule tc the Constitution read with Article 240 
thereof. The expenditure both in relation to the administration as 
well as the development thereof is borne by the Central Governm '?nt 
out of the Consolidated Fund of India and amounts to abeut Rs. 5,00 
lakhs. At present the revenue receipts from the N aga Hills- Tuen-
sang Area amount to about RI. 30 lakhs only and are credited to the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 
2. When the new State of Nagaland comprising the present Naga 
Hills-7.uensang Area comes into existence, the Central Governm~nt 
will have to continue to give grants-in-aid of the revenues of the 
State of Nagaland to 'meet the cost of administration as well as of 
development of that Sbate. Upcn the formation of the State and 
consequent introduction of the normal a.pparatus of a State, the cost 
of administration is likely to increase to some extent. Further, the 
tempo of the develcpment in the State is likely to increase year by 
year, with consequent increase in expenditure on that account. While 
efforts will be made to increase the revenues of the Srote, the G()V-
ernment of India will have to fill the gap between the revenue re-
ceipts of the new State and its expenditure for a number of years. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED l.EGISLATION 
Clause 32 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to give effect to the provisions of the Bill when enacted. The 
rules, if any, will be confined to matters of ·procedure and other 
matters of minor detail relating to the enforcement of the provisions 
of this Bill. 
The proposed delegation of legislative powers is of a normal 
character. 
,. 
, 
15 

ANNEXURE 
BrrRAcrs PROM THB CoNSTlTlrl'lON OF INDIA 
• • 
Name 
• • 
2. Assam 
• • 
• • 
20. Tribal areu.-
• • 
• • • 
FIRST SCHEDULE 
(Articles I and 4) 
I. THE STATES 
• 
• 
T emlones 
• • 
The territories which immedia-
tely before the commence-
ment of this Constitution were 
comprised in the Province of 
Assam, the Khasi States and 
the Assam Tribal Areas, but 
excluding the territories" speci-
fied in the Schedule to the 
Assam (Alteration of Bound-
aries) Act, 1951. 
• • 
SIXTH SCHEDULE 
• • • 
• • 
(2B) The Naga Hills-Tuensang Area shall comprise tie areas which 
, at the commencement of this Constitution were known as the Naga Hills 
District and the Naga Tribal Area. 
(3) Any reference in the table below to any district (other than the United 
Khasi-Jaintis Hills District and the Mizo District)· or administrative area 
(other than the Naga Hills-Tuensang Area) shall be construed as a reference 
to that district or area at the commencement of this Constitution: 
Provided that the tribal areas specified in Part B of the table below shall 
not include any such areas in the plains as may, with the previous approval 
of the President. be notified by the Governor of Assam in that behalf . 
• • • • 
16 

17 
ExTRAcr PROM THE STATES REoRGANISATION Aer, 1956 
C37 OF 1956) 
• • • • * 
PART III 
ZoNES AND ZoNAL CoUNCILS 
• • • * • 
Establish- IS As from the appointed day there shall be a Zonal Council for each ment or •. ' Zoaal Coun- of the followmg five zones. namely ;--. 
cils. 
~tate Bar 
Council •. 
.' • .' • • 
(c) the Eastern Zone, compnsmg the States of Bihar, West 
Bengal, Orissa and Assam, and the Union territories of Manipur and 
Tripura; 
• • * • • 
ExTRAcr PROM THE ADvOCATES Aer, 1961 (25 OF 1961) 
• • • * • 
CHAPTER II 
BAR COUNCILS 
3. (1) There shall be a Bar Council--
Ca) for each of the States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gu;arat, Madhya 
Pradesh, Madras, Maharashtra, Mysore, Orissa, Rajasthan and Uttar 
Pradesh, to be known as the Bar Council of that State; 
(6) for the State of Assam and the Union territory of Manipur, 
to be known as the Bar Council of Assam; 
• • • • • 
ExTRACTS PROM THE RBPRBSBNTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 
1950 (43 OP 1950 ) 
• * • • 
The State Legis/ativ/! Assemblies 
Total num- 7. The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State 
~~h~rLe-:~ specified in the first column of the Second Schedule, to be filled by persons 
lative AlIe- chosen by direct election, shall be the number specified in the second column 
mblies. thereof opposite to that State . 
• • • • • 

18 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 3) 
• • 
Allocation of seats in the House of the People 
Name of State, Union territory or area Total number of seats 
• • • • • 
25, Naga Hills- Tuensang Area 
• • • • • 
EXTRACT FROMjTHB RBPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 
I9S1 (43 OF I9SI) 
'1 
Chapter lI'-'Qualifications for Membership of 
State Legislatures 
, I 
. S. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the Legisla- Qualifiea-
tive Assembly of a State unless··-- tiona for . memb~rahip 
of a Letitla-
tive AssCJD • 
• ' .' .' .' .' bly, 
(c) in the 'case1of any other seat, he is an elector for any Assembly 
c()nstituency .?n .. that State. 
• .. .' .' .' 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL . 
to provide for the fonnation of the State of 
Nagaland and for matters connected therewith. 
(Sh,i JaflJQhar LDl Nehru, 
Prime Minister.) 