20011963. 5 
As Dn'RODt1ClQ) tN LoK SAIIHA ON 
iut No. 13 ot ltd 
THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORIES (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1985 
A 
BILL 
fllr,h~ to "",en,1 the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963. 
.' ... 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as followj;;-
1. This Act may be called the Government of Union Territories 
(Amenoment) Act. 1985. 
2. In the Government of Union Terr~tories Act. 1963 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act), in section 13, in clause (a) of sub-
section (2), for the word and figures "section 14", 1he words, figures and 
letter "section 14 or section 14A" shall be substituted. 
Short 
title. 
Amend-
ment oC 
section 
13. 

Insertion 
of new 
section 
14A. 
Disquali-
fication 
on itround 
of defec-
tion for 
being a 
member. 
.: 
3. After section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shaU be 
inserted, namely:- .. ~ 
"14A. The provisions of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution 
shall, subject to the necessary modifications (including modificationi 
for construing references therein to the Legislative Assembly of 5 
a State, article 188, article 194 and article 212 as references, respec-
tively, to the Legislative Assembly of a Union territory, section 11, 
section 16 and section 37 of this Act). pp!)ly to and in relation to the 
members of the Legislative Assembly of a Union territory as they 
apply to and in relation to the members of the Legislative Assembly 10 
of a State, and accordingly,-
(a) the said Tenth Schedule as so modified shall be deemed 
to form part of this Act; and 
(b) a person shall be disqualified for being a member of 
the Legislative Assembly of a Union territory if he is so dis- 15 
qualified under the said Tenth Schedule as so modified.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
With a view to combating the evil of political' defections and pre-
venting it from undermining the very foundations of our democracy 
and the principles which sustain it, Parliament enacted the Constitution 
(Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, to include in the Constitution a 
new Schedule providing for disqualification on ground of defection for 
membership of Parliament and State Legislatures This Bill seeks to 
amend the Government of Union Territones Act"1963, to provide for a 
similar disqualification for membership of Legislative Assemblies of 
Union territories and to make the provisions as to disqualification on 
ground of defection contained in the said Schedule applicable for the 
purpose. 
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object. 
NEW DELHI; S. B. CHAVAN. 
The 23rd March, 1985. 
3 

New section 14A. as proposed to be inserted in the Government of 
Union Territories Act, 1963, by clause 3 of the Bill seeks to make the 
provisions of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution relating to diaquali .. 
fication on ground of defection applicable to and in relation to members 
of the Legislative Assembly of a Union territory. As a result, the pre~ 
siding officers of the Legislative Assemblies of Union territories would 
become vested with powers to make rules under paragraph 8 of the said 
. Tenth Schedule as so applicable in relaiion to those Legislative Asaem~ 
bUes. The matters provided for in the said paragraph 8 pertain to 
m~~t~rs of d,tlij,il and procedure. The delegation of legislative power 
is of a normal character. 
4 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORIEs ACT, 1963 
(20 OF 1963) 
• • • • 
13. (1) ... ... ... ... • 
(2) If a member of the Legislative Assembly of a Union territory-
(a) becomes subject to any disqualification mentioned in section 
14 for membership of the Assembly, or 
(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the 
Speaker, 
his seat shall thereupon become vacant . 
• • ... • • 
. " . 5 
Vacation of 
!lcat!. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
furtner to ~menq t~e Qovernmen~ of UnlOn Ter~itor~es Act, ~963~ 
(Sltrl S, B. Chavan, :;(;rristtr of Home Aflairs) 