THE MAH.ENDRA PARTAB SINGH 
ESTATES (REPEAL) BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 14TH NOVEMBER, 1960) 

Bill No. 73 of 1960 
THE MAHENDRA PARTAB SINGH ESTATES (REPEAL) 
BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to repeal the Mahendra Partab Singh Estates Act, 1923 and to pro-
vide for matters incidental thereto. 
BB it enacted. by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called. the Mahendra Partab Singh Estates Short titl •. 
(Repeal) Act, 1960. 
S Z. The Mahendra Partab Singh Estates Act, 1923, is hereby Repeal of 
repealed Act 24 of • 1933. 
3. On and from the commencement of this Act, all conditions and Certain am-
provisions attached. to the Sanad granted to Prem Partab Singh- ~= o~ 
(a) prohibiting his heirs to render assistance or support to ~~. no 
10 Mahendra Partab Singh either pecuniarily or otherwise in any 
manner whatsoever, or 
(b) in so far as they prohibit his heirs to alienate any pro-
perty referred to in the Sanad to Mahendra Partab Singh with-
out the sanction of the Government, 
IS shall cease to have any effect. 
Explanation.-In this section, "Sanad" means the Sanad, dated 
the 7th day of September, 1924 granted to Prem Partab Singh in 
pursuance of the~ Act repealed by section 2. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Mahendra Partab Singh Estates Act, 1923 (XXIV· of 1923) 
was enacted during the British regime to provide for the forfeiture 
of the estates and other property of Shri Mahendra Partab Singh 
and for their grant to his son subject to certain conditions. In order 
to justify such an enactment, it was alleged that Shri Mahendra 
Partab Singh "did treasonably ally himself with and assist His 
Majesty's enemies in the late war" and was a fugitive from justice. 
The object of the Mahepdra Partab Singh Estates (Repeal) Bill, 
1960, is to remove this objectionable measure from the statute book. 
Opportunity has also been taken to make ineffective all conditions 
imposed by means of a Sanad, dated the 7th September, 1924 on 
Shri Mahendra Partab Singh's heirs prohibiting them from alienat-
ing the property to Shri Mahendra Partab Singh or from rendering 
assistance or support to him either pecuniarily or otherwise in any 
manner. 
G. B. PANT. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 24th September, 1960. 

ANNEXURE 
(SANAD GRANTED TO PREM PRATAP SINGH DATED THE 7TH DAY OF 
SEPTEMBER, 1924.) 
[C OF A] 
SANAD 
To 
Prem Pratap Singh. 
WHEREAS Mahendra Pratap Singh, formerly a resident of Hathras 
in the District of Aligarh in the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh, 
son of the late Raja Ghansham Singh Bahadur and adopted son of 
the late Raja Har Narayan Singh, did treasonably ally himself with 
and assist His Majesty's enemies in the late great war and is now 
a fugitive from justice. 
AND WHEREAS the estates of the said Mahendra Pratap Singh 
have been and are now attached under the provisions of the Bengal 
State Prisoners Regulation (III of 1818). 
AND WHEREAS by an Act called the Mahendra . Pratap Singh 
Estates Act, 1923 (Act No. XXIV of 1923), the Government of IncUa 
did forfeit unto His Majesty all the estate, right, title, interest, claim 
and demand whatsoever of the sa.id Mahendra Pratap Singh in, to 
or upon the property specified in the Schedule thereto annexed and 
in, to or upon any other immovable or movable property of what-
ever description in British India and in, to or upon all liberties, 
privileges, benefits, easements and appurtenances whatsoever be-
longing or in anywise appertaining thereto or usually held or enjoy-
ed therewith (all which· estate, right, title, interest, claim and de-. 
mand is hereinafter referred to as the property and did vest the 
property in His Majesty). 
AND WHEREAS since the passing of the said Act certain of the 
property specified in the said Schedule has been realised and the 
proceeds invested in other properties and certain other properties 
not specified in the said Schedule have been ascertained and the 
property so specified with such alterations and additions as aforesaid 
is specified in the Schedules (not annexed) A, Band C hereto an-
nexed which Sched\lles also specify so far as is possible which of 
the said property is ancestral and which is self-acquired. 
AND WHEREAS it was further enacted by the said Act that the 
property .hould be granted by the Governor-General in Council 
3 

4 
upto Prem Pratap Singh, son of the said Mahendra Pratap Singh, 
subject to such provisions, restrictions, conditions and limitations 
over as he the said Governor-General in Council might think fit. 
Now THEREFORE in order to carry out the intention of the said 
Act the Governor-General in Council both by this Sanad grant unto 
the said Prem Pratap Singh absolutely all the estate, right, title, 
interest, claim and demand that the said Mahendra Pratap Singh 
held and enjoyoo in the property set forth in the Schedules A, B 
and C hereto annexed and in, to or upon any other immovable or 
movable property of whatsoever description in British India and 
in, to or upon all liberties, privileges, benefits, easements and 
appurtenances whatsoever belonging or in anywise appertaining 
thereto or usually held or enjoyed therewith' (all which estate, 
right, title, inte\"est, claim and demand are hereinafter referred to 
as the said properties). To Hold the same unto and to the use of 
the said Prem Pratap Singh and his heirs upon the same terms as 
the said Mahendra Pratap Singh held the same. 
Subject to the following conditions and provisions:-
1. That the said Prem Pratap Singh and his heiri will be 
faithful and bear true allegiance to His Majesty King George 
the fifth, his heirs and successors according to law:. 
2. That he or his heirs shall maintain Rani Sarup Kuar the 
surviving widow of Raja Har Narayan Singh his grandfather 
in the manner in which the said Rani Sarup Kuar has been 
maintained heretofore. 
3. That he or his heirs shall maintain and provide for the 
expenses of the marriage of his sister Bakvti Bai in a manner 
befitting her position. 
4. That neither he nor his heirs shall during the lifetime 
of Mahendra Pratap Singh alienate any of the said properties 
that is to say either the. estate, right, title, interest, claim and 
demand hereby granted to him and his heirs or any property 
that may have accrued to him and his heirs as a member of a 
Joint Hindu family without the sanction in writing of the Gov-
ernment of the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh. 
5. That neither he nor his heirs shall render assistance or 
support to the said Mahendra Pratap Singh either pecuniarily 
or otherwise in any manner whatsoever. 

.; 
6. That neither the said Prem Pratap Singh nor his heirs 
nor anyone claiming through or in trust for him shall bring any 
action, suit, claim or ~mand against the Government of India, 
the Government of the United. Provinces of Agra and Oudh, 
the Board of Revenue for the· United Provipces of Agra and 
Oudh or any official acting on behalf of the said Governments 
or the said Board of Revenue with regard to any action taken 
or anything done by the aforesaid Governments, Board of 
Revenue or their officials-tooching any matter in any way re-
lating to the hereinbefore mentioned attachment or forfeiture. 
AND it is hereby declared. that if the said Prem Pratap Singh or 
any of his heirs is proved to the satisfaction of the Governor-General 
in Council to have broken or to have failed to observe any of the 
conditions hereinbefore contained. on his or their part to be observ-
ed and performed, then and in any such case it shall be lawful for 
the Governor-General in Council to forfeit all the said properties 
hereby grantE'd unto the said Prem Pratap Singh and his heirs or 
the share of the person who has broken ar failed to observe any of 
the conditions aforesaid and upon such forfeiture the said properties 
or the said share as the case may be shall become vested In H1s 
Majesty, his heirs .and lftlICee&B0I'8. 
Dated this 7th day of September, 1924. 
Sd.I- READING. 
Viceroy and Governor-General of IndiG. 

LOKSABllA 
A 
DILL 
lC repeal the Mahendra Partab Singh Estates Act, 1923 and to 
provide for matters incidental thereto . 
. 
I c. • i; 
(Shri GO'Dind l3aIlabh Pam, 
Afinister qf Home Affairs.) 