THE TREATMENT OF ATTEMPT TO SUICIDE AS A
NON-PUNISHABLE OFFENCE BILL, 2008
BY
SHRI C.K. CHANDRAPPAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for not treating the attempt to commit suicide as a criminal offence and for
matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.   (1) This Act may be called the Treatment of Attempt to Suicide As a Non-Punishable
Offence Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint but which shall not be later than three months from the date of
assent.
2. Section 309 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 shall be omitted.
3.  The Central Government shall set up adequate number of counselling centres
having such facilities and such number of qualified counsellors as may be prescribed, to
provide counselling to the persons who attempt to commit suicide or have such tendencies.
4.  The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Omission of
Section 309.
Bill No. 73 of 2008
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Counselling
Centres.
Power to
make rules.
45 of 1860
5
10

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
A person takes the extreme step of committing suicide because of deep frustration
when one develops the feeling of total isolation and helplessness and the society as a whole
is unsympathetic to his or her needs and problems. It is a cumulative effect of psychological
breakdown.
Extreme poverty, unemployment, family discord, destitution, loss of dear relations and
frustration from failure in examinations, love affairs, etc. are some of the reasons behind
persons committing suicide. We are also facing incidents of suicide of farmers and peasants
because of the unprecedented crises in the agricultural sector. The helplessness created by
economic crises which has consequences that affects the social status of individuals as they
are not able to fulfil their social or family commitments which lead to frustration and ultimately
prompts them to commit suicide. It is a manifestation of a diseased condition of mind deserving
of treatment, care and understanding rather than punishment. Therefore, attempt to commit
suicide should not be treated as a crime.
It is said that people who develop suicidal tendencies show signs of frustration and
disappointment and they keep themselves aloof from the society and family. If these symptoms
are noticed then proper counselling could be provided to such persons to help them to deal
with their problems thereby preventing them from taking the extreme step of suicide.
Hence, the need is to create social awareness, and set up necessary institutions including
counselling centres to provide help and counselling to such persons. It is rather unfortunate
for a modern society like us to treat people trying to commit suicide as criminals. Even the
Law Commission of India, in its 210th Report, have recommended that section 309 of the
Indian Penal Code relating to the offence of attempted suicide be omitted as it considered the
provision inhuman.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; C.K. CHANDRAPPAN.
November 6, 2008.

3
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of necessary institutions including counselling
centres by the Central Government to provide counselling to persons with suicidal tendencies.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure  from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore will be incurred
per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
incurred.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill.
As the rules relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a
normal character.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
(ACT NO. 45 OF 1860)
* * * * * * *
309. Attempt to commit suicide.—Whoever attempts to commit suicide and does any
act towards the commission of such offence, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for
a term which may extend to one year or with fine, or with both.
* * * * * * *
Attempt to
commit
suicide.
5

LOK   SALOK   SABHABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for not treating the attempt to commit suicide as a criminal offence
and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri C.K. Chandrappan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4002LS(S5)—05.12.2008.