 
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 73 of 2025
THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY 
EDUCATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025
By
Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant, M.P.
a
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education 
(Amendment) Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause (b), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:—
“(ba) “Central Board for Secondary Education” means a National-level board of 
education in India for public and private schools, controlled and managed by the 
Government of India to oversee and regulate education which is responsible for setting 
Short title and 
commencement.
5
Amendment of 
section 2.
10
35 of 2009.

educational standards, uniform curriculum development, teacher training, assessment 
methods, and ensuring the overall quality of primary education in the country to 
provide a uniform and high-quality education system.”.
3. After section 8 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“8A. ( 1) The appropriate Government shall establish mechanisms for quality 
assurance and continuous monitoring of schools imparting elementary education 
to ensure effective implementation of a uniform curriculum as prescribed by the 
Central Board of Secondary Education.
(2) The appropriate Government shall conduct periodic assessment to monitor the 
academic progress of students and the effectiveness of the uniform curriculum with the 
results of these assessments to be made publicly available in such manner as may be 
prescribed.”
4. After section 29 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“29A. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
Central Board of Secondary Education the governing body to regulate the curriculum 
for elementary education across the country.”.
29B. With respect to elementary education, the Central Board of Secondary Education 
shall,—
(i) prescribe a uniform syllabus for elementary education, in consultation with 
State Governments and educational experts, which shall be applicable to all primary 
education schools in the country;
(ii) ensure that a uniform syllabus is comprehensive, age-appropriate and designed 
to provide a holistic education to students, ensuring the development of knowledge, 
skills and values;
(iii) ensure that the curriculum also inculcates the regional and linguistic diversity; 
and
(iv) ensure that schools abide by the curriculum designed by it for primary education 
across the country.
29C. (1) Every recognized school imparting elementary education shall be required to 
implement the prescribed uniform curriculum recommended by the Central Board of 
Secondary Education within one year from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) The appropriate Government shall provide the necessary support and resources 
to facilitate the effective implementation of the uniform curriculum; 
“29D. The appropriate Government shall provide sufficient funds to meet the 
administrative expenditure incurred for following the uniform curriculum of 
Central Board of Secondary Education.”.
“29E. ( 1) An elementary education school which fails to implement the prescribed 
uniform curriculum of Central Board of Secondary Education shall be liable for 
penalties including suspension or cancellation of recognition.
(2) The penalties under sub-section ( 1) shall be determined by the appropriate 
government and shall be commensurate with the level of non-compliance.”.
Insertion of new 
section 8A.
10
5
25
20
30
15
35
40
Insertion of new 
sections 29A, 
29B, 29C, 29D 
and 29E.
2
Quality 
Assurance and 
Monitoring of 
schools 
 imparting  
Primary  
Education.
Role of CBSE 
in designing 
uniform  
curriculum for 
primary  
education.
Implementation 
of uniformity 
in education 
by Recognised 
schools.
Fund.
CBSE to act as 
Governing body 
for primary 
education.
Penalties for 
Non-compliance.

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The current state of elementary education in India exhibits a notable lack of uniformity 
in the curriculum, particularly within the various state and educational boards. In order to 
bridge the gap, a uniform curriculum for primary education needs to be set up for an equal 
foundation for the children. In the constitution, article 21A which enshrines the Right to 
Education, should be interpreted in a manner that aligns with Article 14, Article 15, and the 
Preamble of the Constitution. This interpretation calls for the elimination of any form of 
discrimination in the quality of education across all regions of India. 
To realize the full scope of a child’s right, it is essential that the concept extends beyond 
mere free and compulsory education. It must encompass the establishment of a standardized 
education system, with no discrimination based on a child’s social, economic, religious, 
or cultural background. Recently, a PIL on ‘One Nation, One Board’ was also filed in the  
High Court which demanded the implementation of uniform school and education boards 
across the country thereby showcasing the need of forming a uniform curriculum and  
ensuring the fundamental right of education to every child. 
Notably, despite the Right To Education Act 2009 ensuring free and compulsory  
education for children in the 6-14 age group, students in state-funded public schools,  
particularly in state-funded minority schools, do not appear to be on an equal footing with 
their peers in Central Board of Secondary Education, Indian Certificate of Secondary  
Education or State Board affiliated government and private schools.  Therefore, a  
value-based uniform education system, complete with a common syllabus and curriculum, 
has become an imperative need of the hour.
A uniform education system with a common syllabus and curriculum at the  
primary level will offer several advantages. First, it will ensure equal opportunities for all 
students across India, in accordance with the principles articulated in Articles 14-16 of the  
Constitution. Such a system will promote fraternity, unity, and national integration among 
students from different educational boards. Secondly, It will mitigate linguistic and regional 
divisions and eliminate disparities related to economic backgrounds, creating a level playing 
field for all students in pursuit of their aspirations.
Hence, this amendment to Right to Education 2009 proposes to establish CBSE as 
the sole governing education board which will be responsible for bringing uniformity in 
the curriculum for primary education. CBSE will also be responsible for keeping in check 
the quality of the syllabus as well as monitoring and assessment of various stakeholders  
involved in the process.  
Hence this Bill.
      New Delhi;                                                                        ARVIND GANPAT SAWANT
March 18, 2025

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill vide proposed section 8A stipulates that the appropriate 
Government shall establish mechanism for quality assurance and continuous monitoring of 
schools for effective primary education. Clause 4, vide proposed section 29C provides for 
necessary support and resources to be given by the appropriate Government for effective 
implementation of the uniform curriculum. Further proposed section 29D provides for funds 
to be given by the appropriate Government to meet the administrative expenditure incurred 
for uniform curriculum. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from 
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees  
fifty crore per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
4

LOK SABHA
_______
a
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
_______
(Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant, M.P .)