As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 73 of 2022
THE COMPULSORY SENSITIVITY TRAINING IN EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2022
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide compulsory sensitivity training to students and teachers pertaining
to social issues such as caste, gender and overall inclusion in all
educational institutions and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Sensitivity Training in Educational
Institutions Act, 2022.
   (2) It extends to the whole of India.
    (3)  It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

Definitions.
2
5
10
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of State, the Government
of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “Board” means the Advisory Board for Sensitivity Training
established under section 4;
(c) “curriculum” means the instructional and the educative programme
for sensitivity training meant for the students to achieve their goals, ideals
and aspirations of life;
(d) “educational institution” means a primary or a middle or a secondary
or a senior secondary level school imparting education to children or any
college, institute or university imparting higher education recognised or
established under an Act of the appropriate Government, by whatever name
such institution is called;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this  Act; and
(f) “sensitivity training” means the training based on values enshrined
in the Constitution including Justice, liberty, equality and fraternity aimed at
sensitizing  students on gender, caste, religion or any other topic deemed
necessary for the promotion of equality and fraternity amongst all citizens of
the country to end all forms of discrimination.
3. The appropriate Government shall take appropriate measures to compulsorily
impart sensitivity training to students and teachers in all educational institutions
within its territorial jurisdiction  in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette
establish  a Board to be known as the Advisory Board for Sensitivity Training for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
    (2) The Board shall consist of,–
(a) one representative each from the Union Ministries of Education,
Social Justice and Empowerment and Women and Child Development;
(b) such number of eminent teachers from educational institutions;
(c) one eminent transgender person;
(d) one representative each from the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes
and Other Backward Classes section of the society;
(e) one representative each from major religious communities; and
(f)  seven representatives including one female, one male, one
transgender person, one student belonging to LGBTQIA community and one
student each from the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other
Backward Classes,
   to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) The members of the Board shall elect one of the members from amongst
themselves to act as the Chairperson of the Board.
Compulsory
imparting of
sensitivity
training to
students and
teachers.
Establishment
of Advisory
Board for
Sensitivity
Training.
15
20
25
30
35
40

(4) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and
employees to the Board as is required for its efficient functioning.
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of Chairperson, members, officers and employees of the Board shall be such
as may be prescribed.
5. The Board shall,–
(a) recommend to the appropriate Government, the curriculum for
sensitivity training to students;
(b)  recommend to the appropriate Government, the certificates to be
given to the teachers in sensitivity training after satisfactorily completing the
training programme;
(c) conduct routine checks to ensure that sensitivity training is being
imparted in educational institutions and submit a roster of reports in this regard
to the appropriate Government;
(d)  oversee and direct the activities of students under this Act;
(e) suggest punitive measures against teachers contravening the
provisions of this Act; and
(f)  undertake any other functions as deemed necessary by the appropriate
Government.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no marks or any award shall
be granted to any student or teacher for undertaking sensitivity training:
Provided that the teachers who have been imparted sensitivity training shall be
tested periodically and provided certificates upon completing the said training
programme satisfactorily in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. The appropriate Government shall create a helpline for teachers, students
and parents to redress their grievances with regards to issues with the sensitivity
training or the curriculum not being imparted in any educational institution.
8. (1) The appropriate Government shall take cognizance of any issue pertaining
to the curriculum not being taught properly by teachers or teachers defaulting on
teaching the curriculum and any other problem brought to their notice in this regard
in such manner as may be prescribed.
  (2) The appropriate Government shall take such necessary measures against
defaulting teachers within three months of receiving the  complaint and not later than
six months in the case of extenuating circumstances in such manner as may be
prescribed.
9. The appropriate Government shall, on the recommendation  of the Board,
ensure that,–
(a) any person prior to appointment as teacher in any educational
institution shall mandatorily complete the sensitivity training programme certified
by the Board; and
Marks or
awards not to
be granted for
undertaking
sensitivity
training
programme.
Appropriate
Government
to create a
helpline for
redressal
within
educational
institutions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
3
Functions of
the Board.
Appropriate
Government
to take
cognizance of
issues and
take action
against
defaulters.
Mandatory
sensitivity
training for
teachers.

(b) any person who is already teaching in any educational institution
shall mandatorily complete the sensitivity training programme certified by the
Board within one year of the commencement of this Act:
Provided that if any person fails to complete the sensitivity training, he
shall not be eligible to be appointed as teacher in any educational institution.
10.  The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
11. The provisions of this Act and the  rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the
time being in force.
12. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
     (2)  Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
 (3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
5
4
Central
Government
to provide
fund.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Both globally and in India, it is agreed upon that equitable access to
education for children of all ages is of the utmost importance. This is enshrined
in the Sustainable Development Goal 4 of the United Nations Declaration on the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, to which India is a signatory. To quote,
it “aims at ensuring inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong
learning opportunities for all”.
While the availability of school education has certainly increased leaps and
bounds over the last few decades, with the force of progressive legislations such as
the Right to Education Act, 2009 providing legislative backing, the “inclusivity” and
“equitability” leaves much to be desired.
Children from the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the Other Backward
Classes and the LGBTQIA communities and many others continue to face
discrimination in schools even today. Whether it is in the form of prejudice, ill-treatment,
or neglect, students from marginalised communities are subjected to this treatment
not only from their peers, but also at times, their teachers. This is despite the fact that
article 15 of our Constitution guarantees us all the right against discrimination. The
Right to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 goes even further and recognises
and prohibits discrimination of any form against disadvantaged and economically
weaker sections.
This ill-treatment and neglect has far-reaching consequences, and can impact
the entire life of a child. Studies have shown that discrimination within schools leads
to lower grades, higher drop-out rates, and numerous debilitating mental health issues.
This in turn leads to an unbreakable cycle of poverty, leaving some children behind,
while others prosper.
Considering that the years of schooling are the most formative time of a child’s
life, it is imperative that every child is provided not only the simple availability of a
school, but also a holistic, nurturing environment to learn, think, and grow, free from
discrimination.
Hence, to bring about this goal of zero-discrimination both within the classroom
and beyond it, this bill proposes the following two intervention:
(1)  mandatory “sensitivity education” to be incorporated into the school
curriculum, right from the level of primary education onwards, in order to create
awareness amongst our youth about the problems that plague Indian society.
The aim of this curriculum is to ensure that our children, our leaders of tomorrow,
are equipped with the mindset to treat their fellow countrymen with kindness,
a spirit of equality, and a lack of discrimination; and
(2)   mandatory “sensitivity training” to be provided to all teachers within
the country in order to be officially certified, and for its tenets to be enforced to
ensure that no student faces any discrimination.
The sensitivity education which is proposed to be taught to students is in
accordance with the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, to which
India is a signatory. Firstly, articles 2, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 19 pertain to the Child’s rights
in education, which include the right to non-discrimination, participation, protection
from abuse and violence, and freedom of thought, expression, and religion. Articles
29 and 42 of this Convention pertain to the Child’s rights through education, which
refers to education where children are able to know and understand their rights and
to develop respect for human rights, including their own human rights.
5

Experts have stated that educational systems do not function in isolation, but
are instead in tandem with the society that they exist in. Hence, if our educational
institutes do not expose our children to the reality of our society at large, they will
be divorced from this reality and hence will not be equipped to deal with it with a
sense of empathy and morality. A similar sentiment was echoes by the National
Curriculum Framework 2005, set-up by the National Council of Educational Research
and Training (NCERT). It stated that: “Hierarchies of caste, economic status and
gender relations, cultural diversity as well as the uneven economic development that
characterise Indian society also deeply influence access to education and participation
of children in school”.  Hence, it is of the utmost importance for educational institutes
to facilitate a dialogue to help children think, learn and even unlearn internalisations
of the world they live in.
Additionally, the National Advisory Council in its report titled ‘Towards Ending
Discrimination in Schools’ in 2013, addressed important methods in which effective
education on discrimination can be made possible. To sum it up, the Council had
some pertinent recommendations, namely:–
(1) stakeholders shall  prioritise an environment that openly acknowledges
discrimination within the school system at all levels and that they must “initiate steps
towards a process of dialogue and discussion on discrimination within schools and
in the education system”;
(2)  teachers are the frontline of the education system, and specific measures
towards reform of teacher education must be undertaken to prepare teachers to
understand discrimination, to prevent discriminatory behaviour on their part; and to
enable them to become partners in the movement to eliminate discriminatory behaviour
on part of any other actor in the education system, including by other children,
parents, education officers, and others; and
(3) children themselves must engage with the topic of diversity in the process of
learning and classrooms must be structured in order to facilitate this.
The core aim of training teachers and facilitating the learning and discussion of
students in “sensitivity education” is to ensure that children have a safe, nurturing
environment to critically analyse prejudices, problems, and inequalities, equip them
with the skills to engage with them equitably and shape them into citizens who not
only understand their own rights, but also the rights of others.
While we have numerous legislations, rules, and recommendations from
educational bodies condemning discrimination, they will not meet their intended targets
until real change is made. Education is a tool of social transformation, and this change
can only begin within classrooms.
Hence this Bill.
     NEW DELHI;     SUPRIYA SULE
January 17, 2022.
6

7
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides establishment of Advisory Board for Sensitivity
Training. It also provides for appointment of Chairperson, members and other officers
and employees to the Board. Clause 7 provides for the appropriate Government to
create a helpline for teachers, students and parents to redress their grievances with
regard to issues with the sensitivity training. Clause 10 provides that the Central
Government shall provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. At
this stage, it is not possible to estimate the amount to be incurred.
However, the Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees
one thousand crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifteen hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
8

LOK SABHA
––––––
A
BILL
to provide compulsory sensitivity training to students and teachers pertaining
to social issues such as caste, gender and overall inclusion in all
educational institutions and for matters connected therewith.
––––––
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P .)