THE BEEDI WORKERS WELFARE BILL, 2011
By
SHRI BHAUSAHEB R. WAKCHAURE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of the Beedi Workers’ Welfare Fund and also a Board to
administer the Fund for welfare of beedi workers in the country and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Beedi Workers Welfare Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(ii) “beedi worker” means any person engaged in making of beedi, tobacco,
cigar or cigarette and involving any process of making of beedi, cigar or cigarette and
includes a person engaged on contract or temporary basis;
(iii) “Fund” means Beedi Workers Welfare Fund set up under section 3; and
(iv) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under the Act.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No.  73 of  2011
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Fund to be known as the Beedi Workers’
Welfare Fund.
(2) The Fund shall consist of contributions from Central Government, the State
Governments and owners of beedi factories in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by a Board, consisting of—
(a) one Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government;
(b) one representative of each State Government where beedi making is a major
occupation;
(c) two representatives of beedi workers to be nominated in such manner as may
be prescribed; and
(d) one representative of owners of beedi factories.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
service of Chairman and other members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Board shall determine the purposes for which the Fund shall be utilized.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), the Fund shall be utilized for the
following purposes:—
(i) payment of old-age pension at the rate of rupees five thousand per month
after the beedi worker has attained the age of sixty years and is unable to perform his
job on account of infirmity or incapacity;
(ii) free healthcare facilities for the beedi worker and dependant family members
at the designated Government and other hospitals;
(iii) free education facilities including supply of books, uniform, writing materials,
transport to and from school to residence, hostel facilities for the children of beedi
workers;
(iv) free insurance cover to beedi workers; and
(v) free housing facilities for beedi workers.
5. Every beedi worker shall be entitled to such assured minimum wage as may be fixed
by the appropriate Government, irrespective of the number of beedis rolled by him.
6. If any employer does not comply with the provisions of sections 3 and 5, he shall be
punished with a fine which may extend to rupees fifty thousand.
7. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to provide adequate fund to the Board
for effective implementation of the provisions of the Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law providing for matters dealth with in this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the role or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Workers to be
assured
minimum
wage.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate fund.
Act to be not
in derogation
of other laws.
2
Beedi
Workers
Welfare Fund.
Functions of
the Board.
Penalty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The beedi workers in the country are facing unbearable problems. Several lakhs of
workers including women are engaged in beedi making in different parts of the country.
These workers contract various types of diseases during the course of their employment but
there is no proper facility for their treatment. They live in poverty. With no means to afford
education,  the wards of workers are forced by situation to join the same profession of beedi
making where their parents have already spent their lives. Hundreds of workers die before
they attain age of sixty years because of diseases they contract during the course of their
work. There is no insurance cover available to them.
In old-age these beedi workers become feeble and left with no option either to continue
in beedi making or any other avocation for their survival. In view of above, it is necessary to
provide social security and welfare measures to lakhs of beedi workers in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHAUSAHEB  R.  W AKCHAURE
July 25,  2011.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 provides for setting up of a Beedi Workers Welfare Fund for welfare of beedi
workers. It further provides for constitution of a Board for administration of the Beedi Workers
Welfare Fund. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate Fund
to the Board for effective implementation of the provisions of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted,  will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that a sum of rupees two hundred crore is likely to be involved out of the
Consolidated Fund of India per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of the Beedi Workers’ Welfare Fund and also a Board to
administer the Fund for welfare of beedi workers in the country and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Shri Bhausaheb R. Wakchaure, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1473LS(S3)—25-08-2011.