As Sse? हु ‘CEC 23

Bill No. 73 of 2003
a ०५+>3०-4»4»««4

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003
By
Suri G.M. Banatwatta, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:-— रे

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003.

2. In article 103, clause (1), after the words and figure “in clause (1)”, the words and
5 figure “or clause (2)” shall be inserted.

3. In article 192, clause (1), after the words and figure “in clause (1)”. the words and
figure “or clause (2)” shall be inserted.

4. In the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution, —

(@) in paragraph 1, clause (b), the words and figure “or paragraph 3” shall be
10 omitted.

Short title.

Amendment
of article
103.

Amendment
of article
192.

Amendment
of the Tenth
Schedule.


Provision
regarding
unattached
member.

A person
disqualified
for being a
member of
Parliament/
State
Legislatures
shall not be
appointed as
Minister, etc.

(8) in paragraph (2),—
(i) in sub-paragraph (1), the figure “3”, shall be omitted;

(i) the existing Explanation shall be numbered as Explanation land after
the Explanation I as so re-numbered, the following Explanations shall be in-
serted, namely:—

“Explanation II—The expression ‘any direction’ occurring in clause (०)
of sub-paragraph (J) shall mean direction to vote or abstain from voting on a
matter where the fall of the Government is involved or where the matter is directly
related to a matter of policy and programme of the political party on the basis of
which it approached the electorate and where such direction clearly indicates
that voting or abstaining from voting contrary to the direction may lead to a
question as to the member becoming subject to disqualification under clause (b)
of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2.

Explanation Iil—The expression “amatter where the fall of the Government is
involved” includes a motion of confidence or No-confidence in Council of Ministers,
amotion for an adjournment of the business of the House, financial business, motion
of thanks on President’s address or any other matter or motion prescribed under rules
made under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 8.”

(c) Paragraph 3 shall be omitted.

(व) In paragraph 4, after sub-paragraph (2), the following sub-paragraph shall be

inserted, namely:—

“(3) Incase of amerger in accordance with this paragraph, amember who claims
to have become member of such other political party with which his original political
party has merged or as the case may be, of anew political party formed by such merger,
shall, notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, not be qualified for being appointed
asa Minister or for appointment to any public office or post for a period of three years
from the date of the merger.”

(e) Paragraph 6 shall be omitted.
() For paragraph 7, the following paragraph, shall be substituted, namely:—

“7, Where a member has been expelled or suspended from the: membership of his
political party for any period, the Speaker or the Chairman, on being so informed by his ex-
political party, may declare the member as ‘unattached member’ and on being so declared
themember concemed shall become free from the effect of any direction under clause ७)
of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2, issued by the political party from which he has been
expelled or suspended and shall have the right to continue as such unattached member
or jain another political or legislature party or form a new party or rejoin his original
political party which had suspended him, on the expiry or cessation of the period of his
suspension.

7A. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, a person disqualified
for being a member of either House of Parliament or of the Legislative
Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State under this Schedule shall be
disqualified for being appointed as a Minister and shall also be disqualified
for appointment to any public office or post for a period of three years.”

10

20

25

30

35

40


5

2

(g) In paragraph 8, in sub-paragraph (1), for clause (d), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—

(४) the matter or motion referred to in Explanation ILI to paragraph 2
which may be considered as a matter where the fall of the Government is
involved.”


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Experience has revealed several serious lacunae, in the working of the Tenth Schedule
of the Constitution which contains provisions as to disqualification on ground of defection.
‘These lacunae have already inflicted considerable damage to our body politic and necessitate
urgent amendments. The Bill seeks to make necessary amendments to the Schedule.

The Schedule makes a distinction between individual defection and group split. The
distinction is unfair. It merely facilitates group or mass defections and has been widely
misused or abused in a manner unbecoming of the dignity and prestige of parliamentary
democracy. There is also nothing sacrosanct about the figure ‘one-third’ which according to
paragraph 3 legitimises mass defections under the garb of a ‘split’ in the legislature party.
The Bill seeks to omit the concept of ‘split’.

Explanations I and II] proposed to be inserted in paragraph 2 of the Schedule restrict
the occasions on which whips and directions which entail disqualification can be issued.
This is in the interest of maintaining the fundamental privilege of members guaranteed under
articles 105 and 194 of the Constitution, namely, that of freedom of speech and expression in
the House of the Parliament and State Legislatures. It is provided that the whip or the
direction shall be such as to relate to a matter where the fall of the Government is involved
(that is, a motion of confidence or no-confidence, adjournment motion, financial business,
motion of thanks on President’s Address or any other matter prescribed under Rules) or
where itis a matter of policy and programme of the political party on which it had approached
the electorate. It is also made mandatory that the whip or the direction shall clearly indicate
that voting or abstaining from voting contrary to the whip or the direction might lead to a
question as to the members becoming subject to disqualification on ground of defection.

The Bill also seeks to provide that in case of merger, the member ‘concerned shall not be
qualified for being chosen as a Minister or for appointment to any public office or post for
the period of three years. So also the Bill makes a provision with respect to a member
incurring disqualification under defection provisions.

The Bill also clarifies the position of an ‘unattached member’. Where a member is
expelled or suspended by his political party, the Speaker or the Chairman may declare him
‘unattached’. Such a member shall not be subject to any whip of direction of his original
political party and shall have the right to continue as such unattached member or join any
other party or form a new party or rejoin his original political party on the expiry or cessation
of the period of his suspension.

It is also undesirable ‘and inadvisable to involve the exalted office of the Speaker or the
Chairman in the controversial matter of deciding on questions as to disqualification on
ground of defection. Clauses 2 and 3 of the Bill seek to amend article 103 with respect to
members of Parliament and article 192 with respect to members of the State Legislatures and
seek to revert to the established procedure on decisions on all questions as to disqualification.
Like all other questions as to disqualification of members, questions of disqualification on
ground of defection shall also be referred to the President or, as the case may be, to the
Governor, who shall obtain the decision of the Election Commission and shall act according
to such opinion.

New DELat, G.M. BANATWALLA.
August 19,2003



ANNEXURE (S)

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * * *

103. (1) If any question arises as to whether a member of. either House of Parliament has
become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) of article 102, the
question shall be referred for the decision of the President and his decision shall be final.

(2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the President shall obtain the
opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion.

* * * * * *

192. (1) If any question arises as to whether a member of a House of the Legislature of
a State has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) of article
191, the question shall be referred for the decision of the Governor and his decision shall be
final.

(2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the Governor shall obtain the
opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion.

* * * * * *
TENTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 102(2) and 191(2)}
Provision as to disqualification on ground vf defection
1. In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) * * * = *

10) “legislature party”, in relation to a member of a House belonging to any political
party in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 or paragraph 3 or, as the case may be,
paragraph 4, means the group consisting of all the members or that House for the time being
belonging to that political party in accordance with the said provisions;

* * * * * *

2. (1) Subject to the provisions of paragraph 3, 4 and 5, amember of a House belonging
to any political party shall be disqualified for being a member of the House—

(a) * * * * *
(b) * * * * *
Explanation—For the purposes of this sub-paragraph,—

(a) an elected member of a House shall be deemed to belong to the political party,
if any, by which he was set up as a candidate for election as such member;

(0) anominated member of a House shall,— -

(i) where he is a member of any political party onthe date of his nomination
as such member, be deemed to belong to such political party;

Gi) in any other case, be deemed to belong to the political party of which
he becomes, or, as the case may be, first becomes, a member before the expiry of
six months from the date on which he takes his seat after complying with the
Tequirements 01 article 99 or, as the case may be, article 188.

* * * * * *

Decision on
questions as
to disqualifi-
cations of
members.

Decision on
questions as
to disqualifi-
cations of
members.

Interpreta-
tion.

Disqualifica-
tion on
ground of
defection.


Disqualifica-
tion on
ground of
defection not
to apply in
case of split

Disqualifica-
tion on
ground of
defection to
apply in case
of merger.

Decision on
questions as
to disqualifi-
cation on
ground of
defection.

Bar of
jurisdiction of
courts.

6

3. Where a member of a House makes a claim that he and any other members of his
legislature party constitute the group representing a faction which has arisen from as a result
of the split in his original political party and such group consists of not less than one-third
of the members of such legislature party,—

(a) he shall not be disqualified under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 on the
ground—

(@ that he has voluntarily given up his membership of his original political
party; or

(ii) that he has voted or abstained from voting in such House contrary to
any direction issued by such party or by any person or authority authorised by
it in that behalf without obtaining the prior permission of such party, person or
authority and such voting or abstention has not been condoned by such party,
person or authority within fifteen days from the date of such voting or abstention;
and

(b) from the time of such split, such faction shall be deemed to be the political
party to which he belongs for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 and to
be his original political party for the purposes of this paragraph.

4. (1) A member of a House shall not be disqualified under sub-paragraph (1) of
paragraph 2 where his original political party merges with another political party and he
claims that he and any other members of his original political party—

(a) have become members of such political party or, as the case may be, ofanew
political party formed by such merger; or

(b) have not accepted the merger and opted to function as a separate group,

and from the time of such merger, such other political party or new political party or group, as
the case may be, shall be deemed to be the political party to which he belongs for the
purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 and to be his original political party for the
purposes of this sub-paragraph.

(2) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph, the merger of the ori; iginal
political party of a member ‘of a House shall be deemed to have taken place if, and only if, not
less than two-thirds of the members of the legislature party concerned have agreed to such
merger.

* * * * * *

“6. (1) If any question arises as to whether a member of a House has become subject to
disqualification under this Schedule, the question shall be referred for the decision of the
Chairman or, as the case may be, the Speaker of such House and his decision shall be final:

Provided that where the question which has arisen is as to whether the Chairman or the
Speaker of a House has become subject to such dis-qualification, the question shall be
referred for the decision of such member of the House as the House may elect in this behalf
and his decision shall be final.

(2) Alll proceedings under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph in relation to any question
as to disqualification of a member of a House under this Schedule shall be deemed to be
proceedings in Parliament within the meaning of article 122 or, as the case may be, Proceedings
in the Legislature of a State within the meaning of article 212.

7. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, no court shall have any jurisdiction
in respect of any matter connected with the disqualification of a member of a House under
this Schedule. :


u
8. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-paragraph (2) of this Paragraph, the Chairman or
the Speaker of a House may make rules for giving effect to the provisions of this Schedule,
and in particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, such rules may
provide for—

(a) * * * * *
(d) the procedure for deciding any question referred to in sub-paragraph (1) of

paragraph 6 including the procedure for any inquiry which may be made for the purpose
of deciding such question.

* * * x * *

Rules.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India

(Shri G.M. Banatwalla, MP)

MGIPMRND—3447L S—22-11-2003.