1
THE ARMED FORCES (ONE RANK ONE PENSION) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI DEEPENDER SINGH HOODA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for payment of uniform pension to armed forces personnel retiring in the
same rank with the same length of service irrespective of their date of retirement
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Armed Forces (One Rank One Pension) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 73 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Armed Forces personnel" means the retired personnel of the military or
naval or air forces of the Union of India, and includes those personnel who opt for
premature retirement; and
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Every Armed Forces personnel retiring in the same rank with the same length
of service shall be entitled to uniform pension, as may be determined by the Central
Government, from time to time, irrespective of his date of retirement.
(2) Any future enhancements in the rates of pension shall be automatically passed on
to the past pensioners.
(3) The pension referred to in sub-section (1) shall be disbursed to armed forces
personnel by the Central Government through nationalised banks in such manner as may
be prescribed.
4. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as the Armed Forces Personnel Pension Fund, for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made
before each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions
aforesaid both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
such rule.
Definitions.
One Rank
One Pension.
Constitution
of Armed
Forces
Personnel
Pension Fund.
Power to
make Rules.
5
10
15
20
25

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The emotive issue of One Rank One Pension to retired armed forces personnel is
surrounded by a vast and tumultuous history affecting the morale of the serving armed
forces personnel, be they Officers or other personnel serving in other ranks. The struggle of
the ex-servicemen intensified since 2012 only to get a pension enhancement, packaged as
One Rank One Pension and as, notified by the Government on 7th November, 2015. This
notification brought into effect a One Rank One Pension Scheme, much different from the
definition as recommended by the Petitions Committee of Rajya Sabha in 2011 and as
announced by the then Union Government on 17 February, 2014. The need is to make way
for a meaningful implementation of One Rank One Pension Scheme and removing the
anomalies existing in its present form. It is high time that the struggle of veteran soldiers
come to an end so that they are able to lead a dignified life.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DEEPENDER SINGH HOODA
March 1, 2017.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the payment of uniform pension for the same rank and
the same length of service to retired armed forces personnel. Clause 4 of the Bill provides for
the constitution of Armed Forces Personnel Pension Fund by the Central Government. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that a sum of rupees seven thousand crore will be involved as recurring
expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty thousand crore is also likely to
be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the Rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for payment of uniform pension to armed forces personnel retiring in the
same rank with the same length of service irrespective of their date of retirement
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto
————
(Shri Deepender Singh Hooda, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5288LS(S3)—29-03-2017.