$s

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

3 DEC 2008

Bill No. 73 of 2004

THE REGIONAL RURAL BANKS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004
By
‘Suri Basupes Acuaria, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called the Regional Rural Banks (Amendment) Act, 2004, Short title and
commencement,
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In section 2 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976, (hereinafter referred to as the Amendment
principal Act),— of section 2.

(i) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(@) “notified area” means a State or a Union Territory or a group of
States and/or a group of Union Territories or such limits, specified under sub-
section (1) of section 3, within which a Regional Rural Bank shall operate.’


Substitution of
new section
for section 3.

Establishment
and incorpora-
tion of
Regional Rural
Banks.

‘Amendment
of section 4.

‘Substitution of
new section
for section 5,

Authorised
capital.

2
(ii) for clause (०), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act or by
any specific direction issued by the Central Government or any other competent
=~ authority.”
(iif) for clause (g), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

*(g) “Sponsor Bank” in relation to a Regional Rural Bank means the
“National Bank” or any such nationalised commercial bank as may be
determined by the Central Government from time to time;

(iv) for clause (A), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(h) “State Government” means,—

(0 in relation to a regional Rural Bank established in a Union
Territory or group of Union Territories, the Central Government;

(ii) in relation to a Regional Rural Bank established in a State or
group of States, the Government of the State or the group of States
concerned.”

3. For section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,

namely:—

“3, (Z) The Central Government may, if considered necessary and expedient
in the interest of the people of a particular ar¢a, or State or Union Territory or
@ group of States, by notification in the Official Gaiette, establish in the concerned
area or State or Union Territory or a group of States one Regional Rural Bank
with such a name as may be specified in the notification, or may by the said or
any subsequent notificstion, specify the limits within which the Regional Rural
Bank shall 1

nal Rural Bank shall be a body corporate with perpetual
bmimon seal with power, subject to the provisions of the Act, to
pose of property and to contract and may sue and be sued in

acquire, hold
its name.
4. In section 4 of the principal Act—

(0 in sub-section (/), for the words, “after consultation with the National
Bank and the Sponsor Bank” the words “after consultation with the Reserve Bank
of India” shall be substituted.

(i) in sub-section (2), after the words “notified area”, the words “and with
the permission of the Reserve Bank, outside the notified area under such conditions
as may be imposed” shall be added.

5. For section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,

namely:—

“5. The authorised capital of each Regional Rural Bank shall be five hundred
crores of rupees divided into five lakhs of fully paid up shares of rupees ten
thousand each:

Provided that the Central Government, may after consultation with the Reserve

Bank, increase or reduce such authorised capital in consideration of the population,
topography, preponderance of people belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes in the area and other relevant features of the notified area of the concerned
Regional Rural Bank; so, however, that the authorised capital shall not be reduced below
fifty crores of rupees and the shares shall be in all cases, fully paid up shares of rupees
ten thousand each.”


3
6. In section 6 of the principal Act,— Amendment

f section 6.
(0 in sub-section (1), for the words, “twenty-five lakhs of rupees or exceed
‘one crore of rupees”, the words, “rupees five crore” shall be substituted.

(ii) for sub-section 2, the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely,—

(2) OF the capital issued by the Regional Rural Bank under sub-

section (1), fifty per cent. shall be subscribed by the Central Government,

fifteen per cent. by the concerned State Government, or the group of State
Governments, in such proportion as may be prescribed hy the Central t
Government, and the remaining thirty five per cent. shall be subscribed by

the National Bank or any other. nationalised Bank that may be notified by

the Central Government under clause (g) of section 2.”

(iii) for sub-section 3, the following sub-section shall be substituted, fhlamely,—

“(3) The Board may after consultation with the National Bank and the
State Government or the group of State Governments conceriied and with
prior approval of Central Government from time-to-time increase the issued
capital of the Regional Rural Bank where additional capital is issued, such
capital shall also be subscribed in the same proportion as is specified in sub-
section (2).”. ee +

7. In section 9 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-sectian Amendment
shall be substituted, namely,— of section 9.

“(1) The Board of Directors shall consist of the Chairman appointed under
sub-section (7) of section 11 and the following other members, namely,—

(०) two directors who are not officers of the Central Government, State
Government, Reserve Bank, National Bank, Sponsor Bank, or any other Bank,
to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst eminent persons
with experience in the field of economics, agriculture, rural development,
banking, etc.;

(6) one director who is an officer of the Reserve Bank, to be nominated
by the said Bank;

(c) one director who is an officer of the National Bank, to be nominated
by the said Bank;

(@) two directors who are officers of the sponsor Bank, to be nominated
by that bank provided that in cases where the National Bank has been
assigned to be the Sponsor Bank, one of the Directors shall be a non-official
of the concerned area/State with adequate knowledge in rural development,
agriculture, economics, banking;

(०) two directors to be nominated by the concerned State Government
or the group of State Governments by rotation for one year each;

(A) one director to be nominated by the largest association of officers
of the Regional Rural Bank concerned from amongst their members who are
working in the bank; and

(g) one director to be nominated by the largest association of employees
of the Regional Rural Bank concemed from amongst their members who are
working in the bank.”.

8. In section 10 of the principal Act, for the words and the brackets “(other than Amendment
the Chairman)”, the words and the brackets “(other than the Chairman and the Director of section 10
appointed under the clause (e) of section 9)” shall be ‘substituted.


4

Amendment 9. In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section )—
of section 11,

“(i) for the words “the Sponsor Bank”, the words “the Central Government or
any other authority prescribed by the Central Government for the purpose” shall be
substituted; and

(i) in the proviso, in clause (@), for the words “national bank”, the words,
“sponsor bank” shall be substituted.

Amendment 10, In section 17 of the principal Act, in the second proviso to sub-section (/), for the
of seston 17. portion beginning with the words “and, in determining such remuneration,” and ending with
the words “status in the notified area” the words “(fom time-to-time in terms of periodical
\wage revisions of officers and employees of nationalised commercial banks and in determining
the said remuneration, the Central Government shall have due regard to the award tothe
National Industrial Tribunal headed by Hon'ble Justice Shri Obul Reddy read withthe relevant
verdict ofthe Hon'ble Supreme Court pronounced on 31st October, 2001,” shall be substituted.

Amendment 11, In section 18 of he principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (b), the following
of section 18, clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“() for granting loans and advances to the State Government and State Sponsored
autonomous bodies for the purpose of creation of rural infrastructure like roads,
transport, electricity, irrigation facilities and any other matter connected with rural
development and generation of rural employment”.

Amendment 12, Section 22 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (J) thereof and
of section 22. after sub-section (7) asso renumbered, the following sub-section chall he inserted, namely:—
j\2) All term Deposit Certificates issued by Regional Rural Bank for a maturity

Period of not less than five years shall be entitled to rebate as allowed under sections
30 and 88 of the Income Tax Act, 1961.”,

Amendment 13, In section 238 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3),—
Londen
234, tion “0 in clause (a), the words and brackets (excepting such of them as not being

workmen within the meaning of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 are specially mentioned
in the notification)” shall be deleted:

(i) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“(e) the manner in which the shares ofa Particular Sponsor Bank held in the transferor
Regional Rural Bank shall be transferred to the Sponsor Bank of the transferee Regional

Rural Bank
lasertion 14. After section 244 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
of new namely:—

Section 24B.

Constitution “24B. (1) The Central Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank and
Ra arora the National Bank may by a notification in the Official Gazette or by a separate Act of
a {he Parliament constitute a National Rural Bank of India or by such other name as

Specified in the notification or Act, with a Chairman and such other number of
memebrs, as it may specify in the said notification or in the specified Act, drawn from
banks, financial institutions, academicians and experts in rural development and
rural banking.

(2) The apex authority so constituted shall recommend to the Central Government
about the policy guidelines to be followed by Regional Rural Bank and Sponsor Banks and
in particular help the Central Government in matters of selection of Chairman of Regional
Rural Banks and act as the negotiating forum for settlement of demands and disputes with
trade unions of officers and employees of Regional Rural Banks,

(3) The authority shall perform such other functions as may be assigned to it from time
19 time and exercise such powers as may be prescribed by the Central Government."

wo

30

35

40

45


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) have come to stay as an inseparable part of the
country's rural credit system, Around 38 Per cent. of the cases implemented so far in the
country under different poverty alleviation schemes have been negotiated by these
Regional Rural Banks which also organise and finance over 50 Per cent. of the country's
self-help groups. The Regional Rural Bank-System has, therefore, to be nurtured and
strengthened in the interest ofthe rural masses. The merging needs of the rural economy
would be very high and in the scenario on the anvil with agriculture being highly
industrialized, massive investment in the rural economy would be imperative. The Regional
Rural Banks, therefore, have to be geared up to assume a pivotal role in the process of
economic regeneration of rural India with funds mobilized from the rural areas. In order
to make the Regional Rural Banks more responsive to the needs of the rural masses as
enshrined in the preamble to the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 and to remove their
inbuilt limitations, some changes in their physical, operational and administrative structure
are urgently required. A few suggestions to improve and strengthen the system of
Regional Rural Banks have been given in the Bill as mentioned under:—

(@ to enhance the spatial coverage of Regional Rural Banks and to extend
their areas of coverage;

(8) to strengthen the resource-base of the banks by infusion of funds from
different agencies;

(iti) to delink the Sponsor Bank to the maximum possible extent from the
affairs of Regional Rural Banks in order to provide recognised banks a level playing
field in the current competitive scenario;

iv) to ensure unity of approach, unity of command and accountability of the
functionaries at different levels;

(0 to allow employees’ participation in the management and decision-making
and to have a negotiating forum of their own.

The proposed amendments are likely to enhance viability of RRBs, make them
financially sound and attitudinally pro-people by nurturing and exploiting the rich
experience and inner dynamism developed in the course of the last two and a half decades
and at the same time, provide the rural people a strong bank of their own to face the
challenges of the changing scenario,

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

New Deu; BASUDEB ACHARIA
June, 7, 2004,

PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 (1), 274 (1)
AND 117(3) OF THE CONSTITUTION

{Copy of letter No. 12(1)/2004-RRB, dated 11 August, 2004 from Shri P. Chidambaram,
Minister of Finance to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha}.

The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Regional Rural
Banks (Amendment) Bill, 2004 (Amendment of section 2, etc.) by Shri Basudeb Acharia,
Membér of Parliament, recommends the introduction under articles 117(1) and 274(1) and
consideration of the Bill under article 117(3) of the Constitution in Lok Sabha.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to establish Regional Rural Banks. Clause 5 seeks to
5
five hundred crores of rupees. Clause 6 seeks to increase the issued capital of each
Regional Rural Bank from the existing limit of minimum twenty-five lakit of rupees and
maximum one crore of rupees to five crores of rupees.

Clause 14 envisages to constitute an apex National Rural Bank of India which would
also involve some recurring and non-recurring expenditure for creating and maintaining
the infrastructural facilities for the apex authority.

The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore per annum is
likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.

non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be involved
from the Consolidated Fund of India.



ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE ReGionaL RuRAL Banks Ac?, 1976

CHAPTER I
* . . * * *
1. (7) . . * * *
(2) . * . . *
Q) * * * * *
2. (a) . . * * *
(6) » * * * .
(०) * * * * *

(४) “notification area” means the local limits, specified under sub-section (1) of
section 3, within which a Regional Rural Bank shall operate;

(©) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
0 नि . + + *

(8) “Sponsor Bank”, in relation to a Regional Rural Bank, means a bank by which
such Regional Rural Bank has been sponsored;

(४) “State Government” means,—

(A in relation to a Regional Rural Bank established in a Union territory, the
Central Government;

(ii) in relation to a Regional Rural Bank established in a State, the Government
of that State;

* * * * * *

CHAPTER IT

3. (1) The Central Government may, if requested so to do by a Sponsor Bank, by
notification in the Official Gazette, establish in a State or Union territory, one or more
Regional Rural Banks with such name as may be specified in the notification and may by
the said or subsequent notification, specify the local limits within which each Regional
Rural Bank shall operate.

. * * . * *

4. (1) A Regional Rural Bank shall have its head office at such place in the notified
area as the Central Government may, after consultation with the “National Bank” and the
Sponsor Bank, specify by notification in the Official Gazette.

(2) A Regional Rural Bank may, if it is of opinion that it is necessary so to do,
establish its branches or agencies at any place in the notified area.

5. The authorised capital of each Regional Rural Bank shall be “five crores of rupees
divided into five lakhs” of fully paid-up shares of one hundred rupees each:

Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the “National

Bank” the Sponsor Bank, increase or reduce such authorised capital; so, however, that
the authorised capital shall not be hundred rupees each.

sf

Short title,
extent and
commencement.

Definitions.

Establishment
and
incorporation
of Regional
Rural Banks.

Offices and
agencies.

Authorised
capital.


Issued capital

Board of
directors.

Term of office
of director.

Chairman.

Staff of
Regional Rural
Banks

6. (1) The issued capital of each Regional Rural Bank shall, in the first instance, be
such as may be fixed by the Central Government in this behalf, but it shall in no case
be less than twenty-five lakhs of rupees or exceed one crore of rupecs.

(2) Of the capital issued by a Regional Rural Bank under sub-section (1), fifty per
cent. shall be subscribed by the Central Government; fifteen per cent. by the concemed
State Government and thirty five per cent. by the Sponsor Bank;

(3) The Board may, after consultation with the "National Bank" the concerned State
Government and the Sponsor Bank and with the prior approval of the Central Government,
from time to time, increase the issued capital of the Regional Rural Bank; and, where
additional capital is issued, such capital shall also be subscribed in the same proportion
as is specified in sub-section (2).

* * . ’ . .

9. (7) The Board of directors shall consist of the Chairman appointed under sub-
section (/) of section 11, and the following other members, namely:—

(a) two directors, who are not officers of the Central Government, State
Government, Reserve Bank, National Bank, Sponsor Bank or any other bank, to be
nominated by the Central Government;

(6) one director, who is an officer of the Reserve Bank, to be nominated by
that Bank;

(c) one director, who is an officer of the National Bank, to be nominated by
that Bank;

(d) two directors, who are officers of the Sponsor Bank, to be nominated by
that Bank; and

(©) two directors, who are officers of the concerned State Government, to be
nominated by that Government.

. . . . . *

10. A director (other than that Chairman) shall hold office for such period not
exceeding two years, from the date when he assumes office, as the authority nominating
him may specify at the time when the nomination is made, and may, on the expiry of the
said period, continue to hold office until his successor has been nominated and shall also
be eligible for re-nomination.

11. (7) “The Sponsor Bank” shal! appoint an individual to be the Chairman of a Regional
Rural Bank and specify the period, not exceeding five years, for which such individual shall,
subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), hold office as the Chairman.

. * . . * *

(6) Ifthe Chairman is, by infirmity or otherwise, rendered incapable of carrying out his
duties or is absent, on leave or otherwise, in circumstances not involving the vacation of
office, the Central Government may appoint another individual to act as the Chairman during
the absence of the first-mentioned Chairman.

. + * * * +

17. (1) ARegional Rural Bank may appoint such number of officers and other employees
as it may consider necessary or desirable in such manner as may be prescribed for the
efficient performance of its function and may determine the terms and conditions of their
appointment and service:

Provided that it shall be lawful for a Sponsor Bank, if requested so to do by a Regional
Rural Bank sponsored by it, to send, such number of officers or other employees on deputation
to the Regional Rural Bank as may be necessary or desirable to the efficient performance of
its functions:


|.

Provided further that the remuneration of officers and other employees appointed by
a Regional Rural Bank shall be such as may be determined by the Central Government, and,
in determining such remuneration, the Central Government shall have due regard to the
salary structure of the employees of the State Government and the local authorities of
comparable level and status in the notified area.

न . . . . न
18. (7) + . . . .
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), every
Regional Rural Bank may, in particular, undertake the following types of business, namely: —
(a) . * . . नि
(6) the granting of loans and advances, particulary to artisans, small entrepreneurs

and persons of small means engaged in trade, commerce or industry or other productive
- activities, within the notified area in relation to the Regional Rural Bank.

. . . . * .
22. For the purpose of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), or any other enactment for

the time being in force relating to any tax on income, profits or gains, a Regional Rural Bank
shall be deemed to be a co-operative society.

. . . . . .
23. (A) (1) . . . . .
(2) . . . * .

(3) Every notification issued under sub-section (7) may also provide for all or
any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the continuance in service ofall the employees of the transferor Regional
Rural Banks (excepting such of them as not being workmen with the meaning of
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 are specifically mentioned in the notification)
in the transferee Regional Rural Bank at the same remuneration and on the same
terms and conditions of service, which they were getting or, as the case may be,
by which they were being governed, immediately before the date on which the

amalgamation takes effect;
(6) * . . . .
(०) * * . + पु

(d) the continuance by or against the transferee Regional Rural Bank of any pending
legal proceeding by or against any transferor Regional Rural Banks and such consequential,
incidental and supplemental provisions, as may, in the opinion of the Central Government, be
necessary to give effect to the amalgamation.

. * + * . .
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS

24. (7) A Regional Rural Bank shall, in the discharge of its functions, be guided by
such directions in regard to matter of policy involving public interest as the Central Government
may, after consultation with the Reserve Bank, give.

(2) Ifany question arises as to whether any such direction relates to a matter oF policy
involving public interest, the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final.

. . . * . .

Business which
3 Regional
Rural Bank
may transact.

Regional Rural
Bank to be
deemed to be 2
co-operative
society for

+ purpose of the

Income Tax
Act, 1961

‘Amalgamation
of Regional
Rural Banks.

Power of
Central
Government
to give
directions,


A
BILL
further to amend the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976.

(Shri Basudeb Acharia, M.P)

MGIPMRND—1756LS—21.09.2004.