1
Bill No. 73 of 2015
THE HEALTH INSURANCE SCHEME FOR DISABLED PERSONS
BILL, 2015
By
SHRI PANKAJ CHAUDHARY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for a health insurance scheme for disabled persons and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Health Insurance Scheme for Disabled Persons Act,
2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “beneficiary” means a disabled person who has been issued health insurance
card under Section 4;
(c) “disabled person” means a person suffering from not less than forty per cent
of any disability as certified by a medical authority and whose income from all sources
is not more than ten thousand rupees per month;
(d) “disability” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( i) of
section 2 of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights
and Full Participation) Act, 1995;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under the Act; and
(f) “scheme ” means the Health Insurance Scheme framed under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall formulate a Comprehensive Health Insurance
Scheme for disabled persons.
(2) The Central Government shall pay the premium of insurance, payable by disabled
persons, to the insurer for providing health services to the beneficiaries covered under the
Health Insurance Scheme.
4. (1) The Central Government shall designate an Agency for issuing health insurance
cards to disabled persons.
(2) The card issued under sub-section (1) shall contain such particulars of the beneficiary
as may be prescribed.
5. (1) Every beneficiary shall be entitled to health facilities free of cost from such
hospitals, including privately owned hospitals, as may be specified by the appropriate
Government from time to time.
(2) The free health facilities shall include:—
(i) consultation;
(ii) outpatient treatment;
(iii) diagnostic and laboratory services;
(iv) indoor treatment;
(v) surgery; and
(vi) medicines.
(3) No beneficiary shall be charged any amount for availing any healthcare facility
mentioned in sub-section (2) by any hospital, including privately owned hospitals, specified
under sub-section (1) by the appropriate Government.
6. (1) The Central Government shall enter into an agreement with all Nationalized
Insurance Companies for implementation of the provisions of this Act.
(2) The Nationalized Insurance Companies shall enter into agreement with privately
owned hospitals to provide health services to the beneficiaries covered under the Health
Insurance Scheme.
(3) The Nationalized Insurance Companies shall make payment to privately owned
hospitals at such rates, as may be agreed upon by both the parties, for providing health
services free of cost to the beneficiaries covered under Health Insurance Scheme.
Formulation
of a
Comprehensive
Health
Insurance
Scheme.
Health
Insurance
Card to be
issued to all
the disabled
persons.
Provision of
free health
facilities.
Agreement
with
Nationalized
Insurance
Companies
and private
hospitals.
1 of 1996.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide in each financial year such sums of money to the State Governments
and Nationalized Insurance Companies as it thinks necessary for implementation of the
provisions of this Act.
8. If any beneficiary intends to surrender his health insurance card issued under
section 4, he shall inform in writing to such Authority as may be designated for the purpose
by the appropriate Government.
9. (1) Any Nationalized Insurance Company which has entered into an agreement with
private hospital under section 6, may either itself or through an agency designated in that
behalf, inspect privately owned hospitals from time to time to ensure that provisions of this
Act are complied with.
(2) If any private hospital does not comply with the provisions of this Act, the hospital
shall be liable to pay such compensation, as may be prescribed in the agreement under
section 6.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule
should be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Release of
funds.
Surrender of
Health Card.
Inspection of
hospitals.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Persons born as disabled or becoming disabled after birth have to depend on others.
Adequate healthcare facilities are not available to disabled people in our country. Disabled
persons are not in a position to bear the cost of treatment in private hospitals, Government
hospitals, medical colleges and medical institutions like Postgraduate Institute of Medical
Education and Research, Chandigarh and All India Institute of Medical Sciences. The State
Governments also are not providing adequate healthcare facilities to the disabled person.
The cost of medical treatment alongwith medicines is out of reach for disabled persons.
Every disabled person is forced to die after living a very tormented life due to lack of money
for meeting the expenses of his medical treatment.
Therefore, it is proposed to provide adequate healthcare facilities to all disabled persons,
free of cost. Private hospitals should also be made accountable for providing healthcare
facilities to all disabled persons.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; PANKAJ  CHAUDHARY
February 3, 2015

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for formulation and implementation of a Comprehensive
Health Insurance Scheme for disabled persons by the Central Government. Clause 5 provides
for certain health facilities free of cost to disabled persons. Clause 7 provides for supply of
funds to the State Governments and Nationalised Insurance Companies for the purposes of
the Bill by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure to
the tune of rupees five thousand crore is likely to be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for a health insurance scheme for disabled persons and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Pankaj Chaudhary, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4751LS(S3)—04-03-2015.