Short title, extent 
and  
commencement.
5
AS introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 73 of 2023
THE ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS (RIGHT TO HEALTH) 
BILL, 2023
By
Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for right to health for residents of Andaman and Nicobar Islands and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Andaman and Nicobar Islands (Right to Health) Act,
2023.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands
only.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.

2
5
10
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “clinical establishment” means establishments defined as a clinical establishment 
under clause (c) of section 2 of the Clinical Establishment (Registration and Regulation) 
Act, 2010;
(b) “Government” means the Administration of Andaman & Nicobar Islands and in 
all other cases, the Central Government. 
(c) “health care” means testing, treatment, care, procedures and any other service 
or intervention towards a preventative, promotive, therapeutic, diagnostic, nursing, 
rehabilitative, palliative, convalescent, research and/or other health related purpose 
or combinations thereof, including reproductive health care and emergency medical 
included any of these as a result of participation in a medical research program;
(d) “health care establishment” means the whole or any part of a public or private 
institution, facility, building or place, whether for profit or not, that is operated to 
provide inpatient and/or outpatient health care, and a “public health care establishment” 
shall accordingly refer to a health care establishment set up, run, financed or controlled 
by the Government or privately owned;
(e) “health care provider” means a medical doctor, nurse, other paramedical 
professional, social worker or other appropriately trained and qualified person with 
specific skills relevant to particular health care, nursing, rehabilitation, palliative, 
convalescent, preventative or other health services, and any reference to “service 
provider” shall mean the same unless specifically stated otherwise;
(f) “health impact assessment” means a combination of procedures, methods, and 
tools for identifying, predicting, evaluating, and mitigating potential effects of a proposed 
law, policy, program, project, technology, or a potentially damaging activity, in relation 
with health prior to taking decisions thereon and making commitments thereunder, on 
the health of the population, and other relevant effects, and the distribution of those 
effects within the population, and any reference to health impact assessment shall mean 
the same;
(g) “informed consent” means consent given, specific to a proposed health 
care without any force, undue influence, fraud, threat, mistake or misrepresentation 
and obtained after disclosing to the person giving consent, either for himself, or in 
representative capacity wherever it is necessary, all material information including costs, 
risks, benefits and other significant implications of, and alternatives to, the proposed 
health care in a language and manner understood by such person;
(h) “Panchayati Raj Institutions” means institutions of local self-Government 
established under any of the Union territory’s Panchayati Raj Laws at village, block or 
district level, like Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti, or Zilla Parishad, or by whatever 
other name called, and any reference to “PRI” shall mean the same;
(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(j) “public health” means the health of the population, as a whole, especially as 
monitored, regulated, and promoted by the Government;
(k) “public health institution” means governmental organizations that is operated 
or designed to provide in-patient or out-patient treatment, diagnostic or therapeutic,  
interventions,  nursing,  rehabilitative, palliative, convalescent, preventative, promotive, 
medical research program or other health services to public;
Definitions.
15
20
25
30
35
23 of 2010
40
45

(l) “Government funded health care services” means the health care services funded 
and provided by the Government or those provided by the non- government entities but 
for which Government funds part or whole of the costs of care to some or all patients;
(m) “resident” means an ordinary resident of the Union territory of Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands; and
(n) “social audit” means the audit conducted by the community using the social 
dimension.
3. Every person in the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands shall have the 
right:—
(a) to have adequate relevant information about the nature, cause of illness, 
proposed investigations and care, expected results of treatment, possible complications 
and expected costs;
(b) to avail free Out-Patient Department services, In-patient Department services 
consultation, drugs, diagnostics, emergency transport, procedure, and emergency care 
as provided by all public health institutions accordantly to their level of health care as 
may be prescribed;
(c) to have emergency treatment and care under any emergent circumstances, without 
pre-payment of requisite fee or charges including prompt and necessary emergency 
medical treatment and critical care, emergency obstetric treatment and care, by any 
health care provider, establishment or facility, including private provider, establishment 
or facility, qualified to provide such care or treatment without delay and in a case of 
medico-legal nature of case, no health care provider or health care establishment shall 
delay treatment merely on the grounds of receiving police clearance or a police report.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause “medico-legal case” means any 
medical case which has legal implications, either of a civil or criminal nature, and 
includes but is not limited to cases  relating  to  accidents,  assault,  sexual  assault, 
suicide, attempt to murder, poisoning, injuries on account of domestic violence, injuries 
to workers during course of employment, in some of which the service provider may be 
required to prepare documents in compliance with demands by authorized police-officer 
or magistrate;
(d) in case of a resident, to have the right to avail free health care services from any 
clinical establishment in the prescribed manner and subject to the terms and conditions 
specified in the rules;
(e) to have access to patient records, investigation reports and detailed itemized 
bills of treatment;
(f) to know the name, professional status and job chart of the person who is 
providing health care;
(g) to informed consent prior to specific tests or treatment including surgery and  
chemotherapy from all health care establishments;
(h) to confidentiality human dignity and privacy during treatment at all health care 
establishments;
(i) to the presence of female person, during physical examination of a female 
patients by a male practitioner;
(j) to choose alternative treatment available at any health care establishments;
3
Right to health.
5
10
15
20
35
25
30
40

4
(k) to have treatment without any discrimination based upon illness or conditions, 
including HIV status or other health condition, religion, race, caste, sex, age, sexual 
orientation or place of birth of any of them at all health care establishments;
(l) to have information about the rates or charges for each type of service provided 
and facilities available; 
(m) to choose source of obtaining medicines or tests at all health care establishments;
(n) to patient’s education about health condition;
(o) to safe and quality care according to standards prescribed for the health care 
establishments;
(p) to referral transport by all health care establishments, whether public or private, 
in the prescribed manner;
(q) to have treatment summary in case of a patient leaving health care establishment 
against the medical advice;
(r) to be heard and seek redressal in case of any grievance occurred during and after 
availing health care services;
(s) in case of residents, to avail free transportation, free treatment and free insurance 
coverage against road accidents at all health care establishments in the prescribed manner 
and subject to the terms and conditions specified in the rules; and
(t) to obtain treatment records and information from the treating health care 
establishments to seek second opinion from another health care professional or health 
care establishment.
4. The Government shall have the following general obligations at all times, 
by enhancing the quantum of the health care resources in time bound manner for 
realization of health and well-being of every resident in the Union territory of Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands:—
(a) to develop and institutionalize Human Resource Policy for Health to ensure 
availability and equitable distribution of doctors, nurses and other ancillary health 
professionals and workers at all levels of health care as may be prescribed;
(b) to set up the quality audit and grievance redressal mechanisms as may be 
prescribed;
(c) to align all health services and schemes to strengthen a system of health 
services to empower and make residents aware for preventive, promotive and 
protective health care, not merely an absence of disease;
(d) to lay down standards for quality and safety of all levels of health care as 
may be prescribed;
(e) to make availability of Government funded health care services as per 
distance or geographical area or considering population density which includes 
health care institutions, free medicine, test and diagnostics of notified items and 
ambulance services as per standards as may be prescribed;
(f) to ensure that there is no any direct or indirect denial to anyone for any 
Government funded health care services at such health care establishment and 
such guaranteed services as may be prescribed;
Obligation of 
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(g) to mobilize resources and frame plans or policies to carry out obligations 
under this Act;
(h) to set up co-ordination mechanisms among the government departments 
to facilitate availability of nutritionally adequate and safe food, adequate supply of 
safe drinking water and sanitation to patients; and
(i) to take appropriate measures to inform, educate and empower people about 
health issues.
5. (1) The Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an 
independent body to be  known as the Union Territory  of Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands Health Authority consisting of the following members, namely:— 
Lieutenant Governor of  ex-officio 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands  Chairperson;   
 
Member of Parliament from  ex-officio 
House of the People representing  Vice-Chairperson; 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands    
 
Chief Secretary, Union Territory of  ex-Officio 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands  Member;   
Three Members, to be nominated by  Members. 
Administration of Andaman & Nicobar  
Islands having knowledge of  
Public Health and Hospital Management   
(2) The Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands Health Authority shall 
meet at least once in three months.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of services 
of members of the Union territory  of Andaman and Nicobar Islands Health Authority 
shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. The Union Territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands Health Authority shall,–
(a) advise the Government on any matter concerning public health, including 
preventive, promotive, curative, and rehabilitative aspects of health and occupational, 
environmental, and socio-economic determinants of health;
(b) formulate Union Territory health goals and get these included in the mandate of 
Panchayati Raj Institutions and urban local bodies;
(c) formulate Union Territory level strategic plans for implementation of Right to 
Health as provided under this Act, including action on the determinants of healthy food, 
water and sanitation;
(d) develop mechanisms and systems for regular medical, clinical, and social audits 
for good quality of health care at all levels;
Constitution of 
Union territory  
of Andaman 
and Nicobar 
Islands Health 
Authority.
Functions of the 
Union Territory 
of Andaman 
and Nicobar 
Islands Health 
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

6
(e) constitute one or more committees, scientific panels, technical panels for the 
efficient discharge of its functions as and when required;
(f) ensure quality and cost effective health and diagnostic services by private health 
sector; and
(g) carry out other functions as may be prescribed.
7. ( 1) The Government shall establish Grievance Redressal Mechanism within 
three months from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) The Grievance Redressal Mechanism under sub-section (1) shall include the 
following, namely:—
(a) a specified web-portal and helpline centre where complaint may be made 
on denial of services and infringement of rights provided under this Act;
(b) the web-portal and helpline centre shall forward the grievances received to 
the concerned officer and his immediate supervisors within 24 hours;
(c) the concerned officer shall respond to the complainant within next  
24 hours;
(d) if the complaint is not resolved by concerned officer within 24 hours as 
aforesaid the complaint shall be forwarded to Union territory of Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands Health Authority immediately.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty: 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years 
from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament.
10. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this 
Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive session aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Grievance 
Redressal 
Mechanism
Central  
Government  
to provide funds.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties.
Power to make 
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

7
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The islanders of the Union Territory of Andaman & Nicobar, due to its geographical 
location remain susceptible to public health problems. This island located 1200 km from 
mainland India, is beset with several bottlenecks, in terms of infrastructure in health care 
facilities as well as in the number of health care professionals available.
Looking at the overall supply of health care (supply side) and the health outcomes 
(demand side) scenario, the Union Territory of Andaman & Nicobar still has miles to go 
in terms of improving its services in health care. The Post Pandemic scenario has thrown 
up new challenges for the island, which is grappling with the constrained infrastructure of 
healthcare facilities, further aggravated by the locational inhibiting factors.
The GB Pant Hospital is the lone referral hospital for the entire Union Territory with 
specialized services in Surgery, Medicine, Gynecology, Pediatrics, ENT, Pathology & 
Ophthalmology, etc. The Union Territory has a total of 4 functioning CHCs, out of which 
urban areas have zero CHCs. 
It is pertinent to note that the right to life and proper health care is an integral part of 
life and the quality of life of an individual depends upon the quality of health care. Thus, 
the schemes implemented by the Government will be reaching out to more and will be 
implemented more efficiently if it is backed by legal sanction. Over the years Andaman and 
Nicobar islands have proven to be of strategic importance to the nation and have established 
itself as tourist hubs. In the first quarter of the last year, the island saw a footfall of 1,36,190 
tourists. It is only imperative that the health infrastructure of the island is robust enough to 
meet the medical needs of the tourists as well.
Thus, keeping in mind the violability of the life of an individual this bill seeks to provide 
the basic right to health to all the citizens of Andaman and Nicobar. In addition to this, this 
bill also cast a duty upon the Government to protect the right to basic health care and the 
right to access health care for all its citizens. 
The present Bill seeks to enumerate certain rights for the people of Andaman and 
Nicobar including free access to health care for all its citizens. However, these rights are not 
limited to what has been enumerated under this provision but are also in addition to what 
has been provided by the constitution and in other laws for the time being in force. Further, 
under the proposed Bill, certain duty has also been entrusted to the Government. Thus, in a 
nutshell, this Bill provides an inclusive approach to deal with the wide range of problems 
of health care and its accessibility. Further, keeping in mind the financial condition of all its 
citizens of the Andaman and Nicobar island this Bill provides free access to health care in 
cases as enumerated under the provision of the Bill. 
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;               KULDEEP RAI SHARMA  
February 28, 2023.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clauses 4 of the Bill provides for the Administration of Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
to develop and institutionalize Human Resource Policy for Health to ensure availability and 
equitable distribution of doctors, nurses and other ancillary health professionals and workers 
at all levels of health care  and setting up the quality audit and grievance redressal mechanisms, 
etc. Clause 5 provides for appointment of members for Union Territory of Andaman and 
Nicobar Health Authority  and provides for salary and allowances for the members. Clause 
7 provides for the Administration of Andaman and Nicobar Islands to establish Grievance 
Redressal Mechanism within three months from the date of commencement of this Act. 
Clause 8 provides for the Central Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out the 
provisions of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of about rupees two crore is likely to 
be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five crore is also likely to be involved.
8

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 
9

LOK SABHA
__________
A
BILL
to provide for right to health for residents of Andaman and Nicobar Islands and for matters 
connected or incidental thereto.
_________
(Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma,  M.P .)