1
to provide for the declaration of the Lakhipur-Bhanga Stretch of the  Barak river to be
a national waterway and also to provide for  the  regulation and development of the
said Stretch of that river for the purposes of shipping and navigation on the said
waterway and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by  Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga Stretch of
the Barak River) Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.5
AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA
ON  25TH  FEBRUARY, 2009
Bill No. 73-C of 2007
THE NATIONAL WATERWAY (LAKHIPUR-BHANGA STRETCH OF
THE BARAK RIVER) BILL, 2009
A
BILL
Short title and
commencement.

2
2. The Lakhipur-Bhanga Stretch of the Barak river, the limits of which are specified
in the Schedule, is hereby declared to be a national waterway.
3. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that the Union
should take under its control the regulation and development of Lakhipur-Bhanga Stretch
of the Barak river for the purposes of shipping and navigation on the national waterway
to the extent provided in the Inland Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985.
Declaration
of Lakhipur-
Bhanga
Stretch of
Barak river to
be national
waterway.
Declaration as
to expediency
of control by
the Union of
Lakhipur-
Bhanga
Stretch of
Barak river
for certain
purposes.
82 of 1985.
5

THE SCHEDULE
(See section 2)
LIMITS OF THE NATIONAL WATERWAY (LAKHIPUR-BHANGA STRETCH OF THE BARAK RIVER)
The eastern limit of the waterway shall be a line drawn across the Barak river in the
State of Assam at Lakhipur ferry ghat (at latitude 24º 47º 26º  north and longitude 93º 00º 14º
east) and the western limit shall be a line drawn across the Barak  river at a distance of two
hundred meters east of its bifurcation point at Bhanga (at latitude 24º 52º 33º north and
longitude 92º 29º 48º east).
3

4
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the declaration of the Lakhipur-Bhanga Stretch of the Barak river to be a
national waterway and also to provide for the regulation and development of the said
Stretch of that river for the purposes of shipping and navigation on the said waterway
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(As passed by Lok Sabha)
MGIPMRND—1125LS(S5)—25.02.2009.