AS INTRODUCED IN’ LoK SABHA

Vos wt
1 7010 प्ण

oe

J

WARRDIS

कक

Bill No. 73 of 2000

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
‘Suri SusHiL KUMAR SHINDE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000
2. In article 16 of the Constitution, clause (4A) shall be omitted.

3. After article 16 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—

"16A. (1) Nothing in this Constitution shall prevent the State from making any
provision for reservation in matters of appointment, promotion or upgradation to any
class or classes of posts in the services under the State in favour of the socially and
economically backward classes of citizens, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes which, in the opinion of the State, are not adequately represented in the services
under the State.

Short title.

Amendment of

article 16.

Insertion of
new article
164

Reservation
for the socially
and
educationally
backward
classes,
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes in posts
and services
under the
State.


20

25

30

35

2

(2) A person belonging to the socially and economically backward classes
the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the ‘case may be, and who has been
Promoted to any post in connection with the affairs Of the State shalll be entitled to
Count his seniority in that post from the date of such promotion.

(3) Nothing in this Constitution shall prevent the

Promotion to any class or classes
of posts or services in connection with the affairs of the’ State.

© Notwithstanding anything inthis Constitution, the State may by law provide
reservation to the socially and economically backward classes, the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes in private sector, subject to such conditions as may be
Specified in the law made in this regard.

(5) Nothing in this Constitution shall prohibit the State from reserving more
than fifty per cent. of the posts or Vacancies ina recruitment year and from conducting

Special recruitment drive in order to fill up backlog of posts or vacancies for

appointment or promotion or appointment by transfer or upgradation in a service in
an establishment under the State.

(6) Nothing in this Constitution shalt prevent the State fro
Provision for clubbing the posts carrying equal scale of ay, duties or responsibility
and to provide reservation in favour of the socially and economically backward
lasses of citizens, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.

(7) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding anything
Contained in any judgement or decree or order or direction of a Court of Law or
‘Tribunal or Authority having judicial powers to the contrary”,”*

4. After article 29 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely,—

m making any

"29A. (1) There shall be reservation in favour of the socially and economically
backward classes of citizens, the Scheduled Castes i

of reservation or relaxation to ensure filling up of al seats,

(2) The provisions of the article shall have effect notwithstanding anything
contained in any judgement or decree or order or direction of. any Court of Law or
Tribunal or Authority having judicial Powers to the contrary","


| STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Preamble of the Constitution assures every citizen equality of status and of
| 9PPortunity and secures justice—social and economic which has been declared in S.R.
Bommai's case as basic structure of the Constitution.

Article 46 enjoins that the State shall promote with special care the educational and
economic interests of the weaker sections of the people and, in particular, of the Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice,

| The Mandal Commission in its report had indentified other backward classes who have

suffered similar social injustice as had been suffered by the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes.

Article 38 directs that the State to secure social order for promotion of the welfare of the
| by securing and protecting an effective social order in which social, economic and
Political justice shall inform all the institutions of national life and that the state, in particular,
shall strive to minimise the inequalities in income and endeavour to eliminate inequalities
in status, facilities and Opportunities among individuals as well as groups of the people.

Article 51-20) imposes fundamental duty on every citizen to strive towards excellence

in all spheres of individual and collective activity so that the nation constantly rises to
higher levels of endeavour and achievement.

‘The persons belonging to the Socially and educationally backward classes, scheduled

castes and scheduled tribes are the most disadvantaged and deprived weaker sections of the

_ Society. It is the duty of the State to take care of them to minimise the inequalities in status,

facilities and opportunities by effectively implementing the directives in the Constitution to

enable them to reap social and economic justice, secure equality of opportunity and of
Status and to enjoy dignity.

To increase the chances/avenues of appointment/promotion in posts and services under
the State and in Public Sector for the persons belonging to the socially and educationally
backward classes, scheduled castes/scheduled tribes it is necessary to make an express
provision in the Constitution itself.

Even after 50 years since Constitution came into force, the other backward classes,
Scheduled castes/scheduled tribes did not have proper representation for Variegated reasons
‘in various posts or classes of post or appointments in connection with the affairs of the
State.

Due to social, educational and economic backwardness and other disadvantages and
disabilities, the persons belonging to the Socially and educationally backward classes,

+heduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes are not able to compete on equal merit with the
eral category candidates.

The recent judgement of the Supreme Court in Indira Sawheny varsus Union of India

1992 Supplement 3 SCC 217, Dr: Preeti Srivastava versus State of | ‘Madhya Pradesh 1999,
SCC (page 120), and Ajit Singh and others (II) versus State of Punjab IA 1-3 in Civil

peal No. 3782-94 of 1990 etc. dated September 16, 1999 caused hindrance to the

verument for effectively implementing the policy of reservation in imparting of education

all courses of study, in particular, at the stages of higher learning, specialities, super-
ialities, technical, scientific courses, etc,

Therefore, with a view to give effect to the constitutional objectives referred to above, it

become a necessity to suitably amend the Constitution in order to implement the
rvation policy effectively.

New Detar; SUSHIL KUMAR SHINDE


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

16 (4A) “Nothing in this article shall Prevent the State from making any provisions for
reservation in matters of promotion to any class or classes of Posts in services
under the State in f2vour of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes which,
in the opinion of the States are not adequately represented in the services under

the State.”
* * * * * *
* * * * * *