AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Hl @ «=,

+ 1
< : ,
4

| 2aue mos

Bill No. 95 of 2005

THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
By

SHRI GINGEE N. RAMACHANDRAN, M.P.
A
BILL
Further to amend the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
foillows:—

1, (2) This Act may be called the Industrial. Disputes (Amendment) Act, 2005. Short title and
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the Ist May, 2005,

5 2. Section 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 shall be renumbered as Amendment
sub-section (1) thereof and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following of section 2A.
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—

"(2) Where no settlement is arrived at in the course of any conciliation

proceedings taken under this Act in regard to an industrial dispute referred to in

10 sub-section (1), notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the aggrieved

individual workman may apply in the prescribed manner, to the Labour Court for

adjudication of such dispute, and when the dispute has been. referred to it for

adjudication, all the provisions of this Act relating to adjudication of Industrial
Disputes by the Labour Court shall apply to such adjudication."



2

Amendment __ 3. In section 10 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (4), the following words shall be
of section 10. added at the end, namely:— , - -@

“but shall have powers to grant interim orders in relation to the matter in
dispute". | |

Amendment 4. In section 11 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (3), after clause (d), the following
of section 11. clause shall be inserted, namely:— . |

"(e) granting interim orders".

So aa Fn on nin mvc 44.० -२५००० ०८००९ + 7७ NE

:
i
He
iH
uy
i
i



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

At present a workman has to await a reference from Labour Department to the
Labour Court or Tribunal even after a failure report is recorded by the Conciliation Officer.
It is necessary to make provision in the existing statute that an aggrieved workman can
aproach the Labour Court or Tribunal easily for settlement of his dispute without waiting
for any reference from the appropriate authority in order to get justice without any delay.
In case the proposed amendments become part of the statute it will help the industrial
workers to raise their disputes at appropriate forum without much hurdles. Such an
analogous provisions have found place in the State laws in the State of Tamil Nadu, which
have proved beneficial to the workers. Moreover, these Courts and Tribunals are required
to be empowered to grant interim orders while settling the industrial disputes. Such a
provision will enable the workmen to get speedier justice without wasting time in search
of alternative forum for justice.

New DELHI; GINGEE N. RAMACHANDRAN
July 11, 2005.


Dismissal,
ete,, of an
individual
workman
deemed to be
an industrial
dispute.

Reference of
_ dispute to
Boards, Courts
or Tribunals.

Procedure and
power of
conciliation
officers,
Boards,
Courts and
Tribunals.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDUSTRIAL DispuTES ACT, 1947,
(Act No. 14 of 1947)

कर के. कक... के के

2A. Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates
the services of an individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman
and his employer connected with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment
or termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other
workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the dispute.

* कै * * *

10. (1) ‘ am? 1 eo -_
(2) क्र ह * | के | के
.(3) क | के ® | +

(4) Where in an order referring an industrial dispute to a Labour Court, Tribunal or
Nationa! Tribunal under this section or in a subsequent order, the appropriate Government
has specified the points of dispute for adjudication, the Labour Court or the Tribunal or
the National Tribunal, as the case may be, shall confine its adjudication to those points
and matters incidental thereto. |

कर + * + 4
11. (1) | 4 * | कै | «
(2) a rm « 3 *

(3) Every Board, Court, Labour Court, Tribunal and National Tribunal shall have
the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
(5 of 1908), when trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:—

(a) के कै + *
(b) * * के क्र |
(c) * * ie a 7 ल्‍

(0) in respect of ‘such other matters as may be prescribed,

and every inquiry or investigation by a Board, Court, Labour Court, Tribunal or National _
Tribunal, shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of section 193
and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).

* कै कै & *



LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.

(Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran, M.P._)

MG IPMRND—1747LS(S3)—28-07-2005.