THE  SALARY ,  ALLOW ANCES  AND  PENSION  OF  MEMBERS  OF
PARLIAMENT  (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament
Act, 1954.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of
Parliament (Amendment) Act, 2006.
(2) Save as otherwise provided, it shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may
be appointed for different provisions of this Act.
Bill No. 73-C of 2006
Short title.
AS PASSED BY  LOK SABHA ON
23RD AUGUST 2006
5

2
2. In section 3 of the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act,
1954 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), —
(a) for the words “at the rate of four thousand rupees per mensem”, the words
“at the rate of sixteen thousand rupees per mensem” shall be substituted;
(b) for the words “at the rate of four hundred rupees for each day”, the words
“at the rate of one thousand rupees for each day” shall be substituted;
(c) for the second and third provisos, the following proviso shall be substituted,
namely: —
“Provided further that the rates of salary and allowance specified in this
section shall be applicable for a period of five years from the 14th day of
September, 2006 or until it is refixed, whichever is later.”.
3. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), —
(a) in clause (c), in sub-clause (ii), for the words “at the rate of eight rupees per
kilometre”, the words “at the rate of thirteen rupees per kilometre” shall be
substituted;
(b) after the second proviso, and before the Explanation, the following proviso
shall be inserted, namely: —
“Provided also that the rate specified in sub-clause (ii) of clause (c) of this
sub-section shall be applicable for a period of five years from the date of
commencement of the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of  Parliament
(Amendment) Act, 2006.”;
(c) in sub-section (2), after the second proviso, the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided also that the first proviso shall not be applicable to a member
who, in the opinion of the Chairman of the Council of States or, as the case
may be, the Speaker of the House of the People, is so incapacitated physically
and cannot travel by air or train.”.
4. In section 5 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1A), for the words “seven days”, the words “five days” shall
be substituted;
(b) in sub-section ( 2),—
(i) for the first proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted,
namely:—
“Provided that the total number of such journeys under this
sub-section shall be thirty-four journeys per year;”;
(ii) in the second proviso, for the words “less than thirty-two”, the words
“less than thirty-four” shall be substituted;
(iii) in the third proviso, for the words “thirty-two journeys”, the words
“thirty-four journeys” shall be substituted;
(iv) after the third proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:–
“Provided also that in case any member avails a total number of
journeys by air more than thirty-four, such journeys permissible to him,
in the year, he may be allowed to adjust not exceeding eight such journeys
from the entitled number of journeys which may accrue in his credit in
the next following year.”;
Amendment of
section 3.
Amendment of
section 4.
Amendment of
section 5.
30 of 1954.

3
(c) after sub-section ( 2) and before Explanation I, the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
 “(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 2), there shall
be paid to a member who, in the opinion of the Chairman of the Council of
States or, as the case may be, the Speaker of the House of the People, is so
incapacitated physically and therefore cannot perform air or train journey, road
mileage for the entire road journey.”;
(d) in Explanation  III, for the words “thirty-two journeys”, the words “thirty-
four journeys” shall be substituted.
5. In section 6D of the principal Act, after clause ( ii), the following clause shall be
added and shall be deemed to have been added with effect from the 17th day of May, 2004,
namely:—
 “(iii) by road as is referred to in section 4 or section 5, be entitled  to an amount
equal to one road mileage.”.
6. In section 7 of the principal Act, for the words “seven days”, the words “five days”
shall be substituted.
7. In section 8A of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section (1) and the proviso thereto, the following shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(1) With effect from the commencement of the Salary, Allowances and
Pension of Members of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 2006, there shall be paid
a pension of eight thousand rupees per mensem to every person who has served
for any period as a member of the Provisional Parliament or either House of
Parliament:
Provided that where a person has served as a member of the Provisional
Parliament or either House of Parliament for a period exceeding five years,
there shall be paid to him an additional pension of eight hundred rupees per
mensem for every year served in excess of five years;”;
(b) sub-section (1A) and the Explanation thereunder shall be omitted.
8. Section 8AA of the principal Act shall be numbered as sub-section (1) thereof and
after sub-section (1) as so numbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: —
“(2) Every person who is not a sitting member but has served for any period as
a member from the Andaman and Nicobar Islands or the Lakshadweep, shall be
entitled to travel by the highest class of accommodation in any steamer sailing between
the Andaman and Nicobar Islands or, as the case may be, the Lakshadweep and the
main land territory of India in addition to the facilities available to such member
under sub-section (1), without payment of any charges on the basis of an authorisation
issued for this purpose by the Secretariat of either House of Parliament.”.
9. After section 8AB of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘8AC. (1) On the death of a member of either House of Parliament during his
term of office, his spouse, if any, or dependent of such member shall be paid during the
remaining period of life of such spouse or, as the case may be, such dependent so long
as such dependent continues to be a dependent within the meaning of clause (aa) of
section 2, family pension equivalent to one-half of the pension which such member of
Parliament would have received had he retired:
Amendment of
section 6D.
Amendment
of section 7.
Amendment of
section 8A.
Amendment of
section 8AA.
Insertion of new
section 8AC.
Family Pension.

4
Provided that no such family pension shall be payable to a dependent if such
dependent is a sitting member of Parliament or is drawing pension under section 8A.
(2) The family pension payable under sub-section (1) shall also be payable to the
spouse or dependent of a person who was a member of either House of Parliament or
the Provisional Parliament at any time before the commencement of the Salary,
Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 2006 and died
after serving as such member:
Provided that such spouse or dependent is not drawing any pension under this Act or
is not entitled to draw family pension under the proviso to sub-section (1):
Provided further that no person shall be entitled to claim arrears of any family
pension under this sub-section in respect of a period before the commencement of the
Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 2006.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, “Provisional Parliament” shall include
the body which functioned as the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India
immediately before the commencement of the Constitution.’.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act, 1954.
————
(As passed by Lok Sabha)
MGIPMRND—2492LS(S5)—24-08-2006.