1
Bill No. 73 of  2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE PROMOTION OF TWO CHILD NORM BILL, 2009
By
SHRI BAIJAY ANT PANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the promotion of two child norm to control population through incentives
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Promotion of Two Child Norm Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, "appropriate Government" means
in the case of a State, the Government of that State and in other cases, the Central Government.
3. The Central Government shall in consultation with the Governments of the States
promote two child norm and adopt such measures as may be necessary to achieve the
objective.
4. Notwithstanding any custom, tradition or anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force, no person shall, after one year from the commencement of this Act,
procreate more than two children.
Short title and
extent.
Definition.
Promotion of
two child
norm.
Two child
norm for the
general public.
5
10

5. (1) A married couple who has no child, and if either of them voluntarily undergoes
sterilisation, shall be given following incentives by the appropriate Government, namely:—
(a) a dwelling unit free of cost;
(b) one time out of turn promotion to the person if he is a government employee;
and
(c) free medical facilities, pension, food and shelter  in their old age.
(2) A married couple who has only one child and if either of them voluntarily undergoes
sterilisation, shall be given the following incentives by the appropriate Government,
namely:—
(a) a dwelling unit at subsidised or concessional rates;
(b) free education including technical and medical education to the child;
(c) one time out of turn promotion to the person if he is a Government employee;
(d) one time cash reward, as may be prescribed; and
(e) employment to the child after completion of his education.
(3) A married couple having two living children, and if either of them voluntarily
undergoes sterilization, shall be given the following facilities by the appropriate Government,
namely:—
(a) free education including higher and technical education to both the children;
(b) job to the children after completion of their education;
(c) two extra increments to Government employees and one time cash reward of
ten thousand rupees to those who are not Government employees;
(d) preferential allotment of dwelling unit under Government housing schemes;
and
(e) such other facilities as the appropriate Government may deem necessary.
6.  After section 8A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—
"8B. (1) A person shall be disqualified if he procreates more than two living children:
Provided that the person shall not be disqualified if he, within a period of one year from
the date of commencement of the Promotion of  Two Child Norm Act, 2009, procreates
another living child and thereby the number of living children of that person increases to
more than two.
(2) The disqualification referred to in sub-section (1) shall not apply in case of person
having more than two living children on the date of commencement of the Promotion of Two
Child Norm Act, 2009."
7. (1) Any person who is serving in connection with the affairs of the Union Government
or in any undertaking or organization under the control of the Government and who has only
one child or who has not procreated any child or who is unmarried on the date of coming into
force of this Act, shall give an undertaking that he shall not procreate more than two children:
Provided that the provision of this section shall not apply to an employee who has
more than two living children on the date of coming into force of this Act.
(2) Any person violating the provision of sub-section (1) shall not be eligible for
any further increment and promotion during the tenure of his service and shall be subject to
such other action as may be determined by the Central Government.
Incentives for
adoption of
small family
norm.
Insertion of
new section 8B
in Act No. 43
of 1951.
Disqualification
on ground of
not following
small family
norm.
Undertaking by
Government
employees.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
43 of 1951
2

3
8. Any person who procreates more than two children after one year from the
commencement of this Act shall not be entitled to the following facilities, namely:—
(a) essential ration items including fuel like kerosene or any other ration items
from  public distribution system;
(b) allotment of house from a housing scheme sponsored by the appropriate
Government or its agencies;
(c) availing of any welfare or social security scheme;
(d) free maternity facilities in any Government hospital or dispensary or health
care centre;
(e) availing loan facility from any public sector bank or Financial Institution; and
(f) such other disincentives as may be prescribed.
9. The appropriate Government shall introduce population control as a compulsory
subject in all educational institutions in such manner as may be prescribed.
10. (1) No marriage shall be solemnised between a male who is less than twenty-five
years of age and a female who is less than twenty-one years of age.
(2) Any marriage solemnised in contravention of the provisions of this sub-section (1)
shall be void.
11. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act from time to
time.
12. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
13.  The Provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law, for the time being in force.
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification of annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Disincentive
for violation
of the Act.
Introduction
of population
control as a
subject in
educational
institutions.
Restriction on
age of
marriage.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
over-riding
effect.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
After China, ours is the most populous country in the world and we have already
crossed the one billion mark.  If this explosion of  population is not checked effectively
within next ten to fifteen years, China will be left far behind and ours will become the
most populous nation.  Although India occupies only 2.4 per cent.  of global land area,
it is home to 20 per cent of  the world population, which has made our country one of  the
most densely populated nations in the world. This has given rise to unparalleled transformation
of human values, social institutions and economic structures. Due to overcrowding caused
by population explosion, law and order situation in most parts of the country is deteriorating
day by day. Incidents of Robbery, snatching, stealing, rape, murder and other crimes are
rising. Unemployment among the youth, more so amongst the educated ones, is rising
menacingly and the gap between the haves and have-nots is creating explosive situations.
In most parts of the country, agricultural land holdings are fast becoming smaller and smaller
and uneconomical because of its division generation after generation. The housing needs in
urban as well as in rural areas are far beyond the available finances and educational facilities
are hopelessly inadequate to meet even with the existing demands let alone the future ones.
The population explosion is adversely affecting the ecological balance of our nation. The
drinking water has become scarce. The ground water level has alarmingly gone down and
has become contaminated and poisonous. The jungles are fast depleting resulting in less
rains causing frequent droughts. Air, water and noise pollution has risen to dangerous
levels. The civic  amenities have almost broken down throughout the country. Thus the
entire scenario has become alarming due to ever increasing population. Since there is no
balance between population growth and the available resources, a developing nation like
ours can hardly expect to achieve a quality life by adding further to her numbers day by day.
Therefore, the time has come to check the population growth effectively and this
menace has to be tackled at all levels. The situation has become alarming due to apathy  of
populace to foresee this population explosion time bomb which will create   havoc if  strong
measures are not taken at the earliest to defuse this time bomb. For this, two child  norm has
to be enforced stringently and incentives and disincentives have to be  introduced otherwise
the growing population will certainly hamper the  progress and  prosperity of our nation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BAIJAYANT PANDA
June  5, 2009.
————
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER  ARTICLE 117 (3)
OF THE CONSTITUTION
[Copy of letter No. H. 11018/1/2009-Ply., dated 17 August, 2009 from Shri Ghulam Nabi
Azad, Minister of Health and Family Welfare to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Promotion of Two
Child Norm Bill, 2009 by Shri Baijayant Panda, Member  of Parliament, has recommended
consideration of the Bill by Lok Sabha under article 117(3) of the Constitution.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for certain incentives for adoption of small family norm.
Clause 11 provides that the Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law provide adequate fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act from time
to time. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crore will be involved as a
recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
5

A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five hundred crore  is also likely to
be involved.
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only, and as such the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the promotion of two child norm to control population through incentives
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Baijayant Panda, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4200LS-(S5)—10-11-2009.
S-5\F\BILL 2009\LAW\2336LAW