1
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI BAIJAY ANT PANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. For section 124A of Indian Penal Code 1860, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"124A. Whoever, knowingly or wilfully, by words, either spoken or written, or by
signs, or by visible representation or otherwise, advocates the overthrow of the
Government or an institution established by law, by use of force or violence or by
assassinating or kidnapping any employee of such Government or institution or any
public representative or provokes another person to do such acts shall be punished
with imprisonment which may extend to seven years, or with fine or with both.
Explanation.—Mere criticism or comments expressing disapproval of any act of
the Government shall not constitute an offence under this section.".
Short title
and
commencement.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 124A.
Bill No. 73 of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Advocating
overthrow of
Government
by force or
violence.
545 of 1860.
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The debate around section 124A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) is not new. This
section penalizes sedition and was first introduced by the then British colonial regime in the
year 1870 to deal with people spreading disaffection against the Government. Mahatma
Gandhi described it as the "prince among the political sections of the IPC designed to
suppress the liberty of the citizen”. Gandhiji himself was charged with sedition many a times
under this section. Other victims of this law include renowned nationalists like Bal Gangadhar
Tilak and Annie Besant.
Several members of the Constituent Assembly—K.M. Munshi and T.T.
Krishnamachari—in particular had questioned the relevance of such a law in a modern
democracy. Even Pandit Nehru had termed it as "highly objectionable and obnoxious".
However, section 124A not only remains in the statute book, but continues to be used
regularly. There are several instances when this section has been misused by authorities and
applied frequently against innocent civilians, activists, journalists and political opponents.
Recently, the arrest of anti-corruption activist and cartoonist Assem Trivedi on charges
of sedition for making caricatures of Parliament, Constitution and the national emblem created
huge public outcry. It is important to note that this was not a one-off incident. Previously, the
sedition law had been applied to civil rights activist Binayak Sen and writer Arundhati Roy.
This raises serious questions about the relevance of this law in a modern constitutional
democracy. Mahatma Gandhi, during his trial in 1922 had said, "Affection cannot be
manufactured or regulated by the law. If one has no affection for a person, one should be free
to give the fullest expression to his disaffection, so long as he does not contemplate, promote
or incite violence”.  The Supreme Court has also taken a similar stand while evaluating the
constitutional validity of this section in the Kedar Nath vs State of Bihar case, wherein the
Court clearly laid down that the section should be applicable only for acts that incite violence
or public disorder. The problem thus lies at the lower courts and the investigating authorities
that continuously disregard Supreme Court's interpretation of the law.
If we compare the said provision in our statute book with other countries, we find that
in most developed countries, the crime of sedition has been abolished from their statute
books. United Kingdom and New Zealand have abolished it. Australia has also toned it
down considerably. It has been used rarely in the United States and the courts have given
wide protection to persons giving political speech, except in cases where it leads to
lawlessness. The offence of sedition is considered unnecessary and inappropriate in modern
liberal democracies, where the right of the citizen to criticise and challenge Government
structures and processes is well accepted.
Thus, this Bill seeks to replace section 124A of Indian Penal Code with a new section
that allows for exchange of ideas, however unpopular or radical they may be. It specifically
excludes criticism of the Government from the ambit of the section. However, it imposes some
reasonable restrictions on the exercise of this freedom by penalizing people who advocate
the overthrow of Government by force or violence or by assassination or kidnapping of
Government employees or public representatives. The maximum punishment is also reduced
from life imprisonment to seven years.
These changes are aimed at safeguarding the right of the citizens to freedom of
expression, while at the same time ensuring that unfettered freedom of some does not lead to
violence or disorder for others.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BAIJAYANT PANDA
July 7, 2014.
2

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 of 1860)
* * * * * * *
124. Whoever by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible
representation or otherwise, brings or attempts to bring into hatred or contempt, or excites or
attempts to excite disaffection towards the Government established by law in [India,] shall be
punished with [imprisonment for life], to which fine may be added, or with imprisonment
which may extend to three years, to which fine may be added, or with fine.
Explanation 1.—The expression "disaffection" includes disloyalty and all feelings of
enmity.
Explanation 2.—Comments expressing disapprobation of the administrative or other
action of the Government without exciting or attempting to excite hatred, contempt or
disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this section.
Explanation 3.—Comments expressing disapprobation of the administrative or other
action of the Government without exciting or attempting to excite hatred, contemt or
disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this section.
* * * * * * *
Sedition.

GMGIPMRND—1433LS(S3)—24-07-2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860
————
(Shri Baijayant Panda, M.P .)