BUI No. 14 or 125' 
THE FOREIGNERS LA WS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 

31 of 1946. 
8ID No. 71 of 1'5' 
THE FOREIGNERS LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
furt'her to amend the Foreigners Act, 1946, and the Regist'ro-
!\ion of Foreigners Act, 1939. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may' be called the Foreigners Laws (Amendment) Short title. 
Act, 1956. 
, Z. In the Foreigners Act, 1946 (hereinafter referred to as the AmeDdJDeAt 
Foreigners Act), in section 2, for clause (a), the following clause of scc:tion 2. 
shall be substituted, namely:-
'(a) "foreigner" means a person who is not a citizen of 
India;' 
o 3. In section 3 of the Foreigners Act, in sub-section (2), the Amendment 
I brackets, letter and words" (g) shall be arrested and detained or con- of section 3· 
fined;" shall be omitted. 
20 
4. (1) After section 3 of the Foreigners Act, the following sec- IDSertiOll of 
tion shall be inserted, namely:- DeAW section 
3 • 
"3A. (1) The Central Government may, by order, declare P t 
that all or any of the provisions of this Act or of any order made c=~t 0 
thereunder shall not apply, or shall apply only in such circum- ~~_of 
stances or with such exceptions or modifications or subject to w~lth COUQ-
such conditions as may be specified in the order, to or in relation :::::r;:!eons 
to-· from applica-
tion of Act In 
(a) the citizens of any such Commonwealth country as certain cuet. 
may be so specified; or 

AmeDdment 
of section 4. 
2 -, 
(b) any other individual foreigner or class or descrip-
tion of foreigner. 
(2) A copy of every order made under this section shall be 
placed on the table of both Houses of Parliament as soon as may 
be after it is made." S 
5. In section 4 of the Foreigners Act,-
(a) sub-section (1) shall be omitted; 
'<M for sub-sections (3)- and (4), the following sub-sections 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"(3) No person shall-
(a) knowingly assist a person on parole to escape 
from the place set .,.p~ for his residence or knowingly 
harbour any such ·p1!tSon, or 
10 
(b) give a persan.Qn ~role any assistance with 
intent thereby to prevent, 'hinder or interfere with the IS 
apprehension of·· such' person. 
(4) ne Cen.tral Gpven1ment ~. by order,provide for 
regula ting access to, and the conduct of persons in, 
places where persons on parole are restricted, and for pro-
hibiting orregulattag tile despatch,. conv&yaace -from ou~ 20 
siliesuchplates toOl'- for.uidl-.perMns themn ,oieuch arti-
cles as may be prescribed." 
6. In section 5 of the ForeignersA:et,;in S\lb.seetion '(8), the word Amendment 
"Royal" shall be omitted. of section ,. 
7. Seetion to of the Forejgnea ~t shall ..be omitted. 2S Omission of 
aec:don 10. 
16 of 1939. 8. In the Registration of Foreigners A'et, 1tS9, 'hi '~ioR 2, for Amendment 
clause (a), the following-dal. sh4lU,ltqn~tijuted,Jl6~ely:- ofsections. 
'(a) "foreigner" means a person who is 'not a citizen of 
India;' 

STATEMENT OF ~B'JEC'DS( lIND REASONS. 
With the enagtment· of the Citizenship Act, 1955, which came into 
force on the 30th December, I., the definition of the term 
'foreigner', both in the Re~istration of Foreigners Act, 1939 (16 of 
1939) and the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1'946) has become out 
of date. It is, therefore, necessary to amend it so as to include within 
its scope all persons who are not citizens of India. The Bill is intend-
ed to attain this object, but powers' are being taken at the same time 
to exempt· by the islue of a special order the citizens of any Com-
monwealth country. :Even in· the case of citizens of any such coun-
try, power will be available to- apply all· or any of the provisions of 
the Act in individual cases.' I 
G. B. PANT. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 19th November, 1956. 
. ' 

Pow~ to 
mIIte orders. 
• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE F~REIGNERS ACT, 1946 
(31 OF 1946) 
• • 
Z. In this Act -
(a) "foreigner" means a person who"-
• 
(i) is not a natural-born British subject as defined in 
sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 1 of the British Nationa-
lity and Status of Aliens Act, 1914, or 
(ii) has not been granted a certificate of naturalisation 
as a British subject under any law for the time being in 
force in India, or 
(iii) is not a citizen of India; 
• • • • • 
3. (1) * • • • • 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, orders made under this section may provide that 
the foreigner -
(a) shall not enter India, or shall enter India only at such 
times and by such route and at such port or place and subject 
to the Gbservance of such conditions on arrival as may be 
prescribed; 
(b) shall not depart from India, or shall depart only at such 
times and by such route and from such port or place and subject 
to the observance of such conditions on departure as may be 
prescribed; 
(c) shall not remain in India or in any prescribed area 
therein; 
(cc) shall, if he has been required by order under this sec-
tion not to remain in India, meet from any resources at his dis-
posal the cost of his removal from India and of his maintenance 
therein pending such removal; 
(d) shall remove himself to, and remain in, such area in 
India as maybe prescribed; 
4 

S 
(e) shall comply with such conditions as may be prescribed 
or specified -
(i) requiring him to reside in a particular place; 
(ii) imposing any restrictions on his movements; 
(iii) requiring him to furnish such proof of his identity 
and to report such particulars to such authQrity in such 
manner and at such time and place as may be prescribed 
or specified; 
(iv) requiring him to allow his photograph and finger 
impressions to be taken and to furnish specimens of his 
handwriting and signature to such authority and at such 
time and place as may be prescribed or specified; 
(v) requiring him to submit himself to such medical 
examination by such authority and at such time and place 
as may be prescribed or specified; 
(vi) prohibiting him from association with persons of 
a prescribed or specified description; 
(vii) prohibiting him from engaging in activities of a 
prescribed or specified description; 
(viii) prohibiting him from using or possessing pres-
cribed or specified articles; 
(ix) otherwise regulating his conduct in any such parti· 
cular as may be prescribed or specified; 
(f) shall enter into a bond with or without suret:es for the 
due observance of, or as an alternative to the enforcement of, 
any or all prescribed or specified restrictions or conditions; 
(g) shall be arrested and detained or confined; and may make 
provision for any matter which is to be or may be prescribed 
and for such incidental and supplementary matters as may, in 
the opinion of t£.e Central Government, be expedient or neces-
sary for giving effect to this Act . 
• • • • 
Internees. 4. (1) Any foreigner (hereinafter referred to as an internee) in 
respect of whom there is in force any order made under clause (g) 
of sub-section (2) of section 3, directing that he be detained or con-
fined, shall be detained or confined in such place and manner and 
subject to such conditions as to maintenance, discipline and the 
punishment of offences and breaches of discipline as the Central 
Government may from time to time determine. 

Change of 
name. 
6 
~ Nb, Pe'PSOII' shaft -
(a) knowingly assist an internee or a person on parole to 
escape:-freal custody 01' the place set apart ftJr his' residence, or 
knowingly harbour: an escaped internee or person on parole, or 
(b) give an escaped internee or a person on parole any assist-
ance with intent thereby to prevent, hinder or int'erfere with 
the apprehension of the internee or the person on parolt!; 
(4) The Central Government may by order provide for regulat-
ing access to, and the conduct of persons in, places in India where 
internees> OP persons on, parole are detained or l"eBtricted; as the case 
may }Je, ad, far prohibiting or regul8t~ng the despattm· or convey-
aR()el fI.om. outside'such plees to or for in41errteee Of' peNOns on 
parole thereiit- of su.m articles· as may be pl'eBcribed\· 
• • • • • 
51 (1)1 
• • • 
(5), NotdaiRgdnthis seetion shaU apply to,thlHlS81Intption or use-
(a) of any name in pursuance of' a Rbyar M.~ or per-
mission, gl:anted by the Centtal Government;, or 
(b) by any married woman; of het> husband!9 l1amttl 
• • • • 
Power to 10. The Central Government may by order dsclar~ that any or 
::~~r~~m all of the provisions of this Act. or the orders made thereunder 
of Act. shan' not' IIppl)" or shan apply only with such modtfications or sub-
Defl.DitiODS. 
ject to such conditions as may be specified; to or in relation to any 
iDdtfIidttai< funrigner or- BI1}1 ctl8t!IB or- descriptiOl't oi flmetgJier. 
Ex'llWl'lS. F.ROM THB REGIS'l'R'ADON OF FORElCINI:U ACT, 1939, 
(16. OF 1939) . 
• • • • • 
Z.· 10; this A.ct-
(U); tt\-e-Wrord "foreigner"· shail denote a person· who' is not -
(i) a British subject domiciled in the United' 
IIIngdom; or 
(iijf 8' citizen' of' India; or 
• • • * • 
(IW). II' person duly appoihted' by a foreign Govemmenf 
tb, eKert!fse diplomatic functions; or 
(v) B consul or a vice-consul; 
• •• .. • 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Foreigners Act, 1946, and the Registration 
of Foreigners Act, 1939-
(Shri Gooind Ballabh Pant, 
Minister of Home Affairs) 