220! 
IHt. 
, 
" .' 
',\, , 
" 
_.e."'.:S .. 
THE MICA MINES 'LABOUR WELFARE FUND (AMBMDDNTJ 
BILL, 1980 
BILL 
/u.'l'the1' to amend the Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, IM6. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund Sbori 
(Amendment) Act, 1180. title. 
5 Z. In secUon 6 of the Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1948, 
after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
.. (3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act 
shall be laid" as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
10 of Parliament, while it is in sessfon, for a total period oi thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or mQJ'e successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately follow-
ing the session or the succelBive sessions aforesaid, both Houles agree 
in making any modification in the rule or both HoWleS agree that the 
IS rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have eJtect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, al the cue may be; so, how-
ever, that any lOch modification or annulment shall be 'without pre-
judiCe to the valiciity of anything previously dorte under that rule.". 
.Amend-
memo! 
Bedion 
I . 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1946 constitutes a fund for 
the financing of activities to promote the welfare of labour employed in 
the mica mining industry. Section 6 of the Act empowers the Central 
Government to make rules to carry into effect the purposes of the Act. 
The Act does not reqUire the rules made by the Central Government to 
be laid before Parliament. 
2. The Committee on Subordinate Legislation (Fifth Lok Sabha) in 
their Fourteenth Report desired that the Government should undertake 
a review of all Acts to find out which of them do not contain a provision 
for laying of rules kamed thereunder before Parliament and should in-
corporate such provision in those Acts. The Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation (Sixth Lok Sabha) in their Nineteenth Report further desired 
that the necessary amending legislation be brought up at an early date. 
It is pra,osed to accept these :recommendations of the Committees on 
Subordinate Legislation and make a suitable amendment in the Mica 
Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1946. 
The Bill seels to achieve this object. 
;02~ ... :~ ~:. . ~' ..• J. B. PATNAIK. 
"~.n~'·'''''''·~''1 '_ 
..... ,~,~, ... , 
The 15th Murch, 1980. 
,'/ 't 
..... 
· .... 

:., ,. ~ 'I .. 
1-" .. :' 
-
·LOX SAB;RA 
A 
BILL 
fut1'IfIrT to-1I'IIIe'kcI the Mica- Mme. Labour Wel1are Fund Act, 1941, 