As INTRODUCED IN Lolt SAmIA O!f' 
'1 b ,'j" i 1" ~ 
BiU No. 14 0I'117t 
THE PRASAR BHARATI (BROADCASTING CORPORATION OF 
INDIA) BllL, 1979 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSJ:S 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPI'ER II 
BROADCASTING CORPORATION OF INDIA 
3. Establishment and constitution of Corporation. 
4. Chairman. 
5. Director General. 
6. Term of oftice, conditions of service, etc., ot members. , 
, . 7. Removal and suspension of Chairman or other non-ofticial 
-
members from office in certain circumstances. 
8. Meetings of Corporation. 
9. Ofticers and other employees ot Corporation. 
1{). Establishment of Recruitment Board. 
11. Transfer of service of existing employees to Corporation. 
12. Functions of Corporation. 
13. Establishment of Complaints Board. 
14. Jurisdiction of, and procedure to be followed by, the Com-
plaints Board. 
15. Powers of Complaints Board. 
CHAPTER m 
ASSETS, FINANCES AND ACCOUNTS 
16. Transter of certain assets, liabilities, etc., of Central Govern-
ment to Corporation. 
17. Grants by Central Government. 
18. Fund of Corporation. 
19. Investment of moneys. 
20. Budget of Corporation. 
21. Accounts and audit of Corporation. 
22. Corporation not liable to be taxed. 

ii 
.. 
CLAl1SJ:S 
23. Power of Central Government to give directions. 
24. Chairman, members, etc., to be public servants. 
25. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
26. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Corporation. 
27. Delegation of powers. 
28. Annual report. 
29. Power to make rules. 
SO, Power to make regulations. 
31. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. 
12. Power to remove difBculties. 

Bill No. 74 of 1979 
THE PRASAR BHARATI (BROADCASTING CORPORATION OF 
INDIA) BILL, 1979 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a Broadcasting Corporatioft far 
India, to be known as Pra.sar Bharati, to defim.e its compo~ 
functions and pc:n.vers and to provide for matters connected there-
with (R' incidentGl thereto. 
BE It enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
S 1. (1) This Act may be called the Prasar Bhuati (Broadcasting Short 
tiu., 
10 
Corporation of India) Act, 1979. extent 
and com-(2) It extends to the whole of India. mence-
rnenl (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Akashvani" means the offices, stations and other establish-
ments, by whatever name called, which immediately before the 
appointed day form. part of or are under the Directorate General, 
All India Radio, of the Union Ministry of Information and Broad-
DefIDl-
tiOZll. 
IS casting; 
(b) "appointed day" means the date appointed under section 3; 
(c) "broadcasting" means the dissemination of any form of 
communication by the wireless transmission of writing. atgna. 
.. , .•• ...s..:I 

Establilll-
ment ud. 
Composi-
tion of 
CoII'ICID-
Uon. 
signals, pictures, images and sounds of all kinds by means ot 
Hertzian waves intended to be received by the public either directly 
or through the medium of relay stations and all its grammat1cal 
variations and ct:>gnate expressions shall be construed accordingly; 
(d) "Chairman" meana the Chairman of the Corporation appoint- 5 
ed under section 4; 
(e) "Complaints Board" means the Board established under 
section 13; 
(j') "Corporation" means the Prasar Bharati (Broadcastine 
Corporation of India) established under section 3; 10 
(g) "Director General" means the Director General of the Cor-
poration aappointed und~r section. 5; 
(h) "Doordarshan" means the offices, kendras and other estab-
lishments, by whatever name called, which immediately before the 
appointed day form part of or are under the Directorate General, IS 
(i) "kendra" means any telecasting centre with atudio. or trans-
mitters or both and includes a relay station; 
(j) "member" means a member of the Corporation; 
(k) ''Non-Iapsable Fund" means the fund created from the com-
~al revtmuesof Akaahvani and Doordarahan . to moet upendi- 20 
ture on certain schemes; 
(1) "non-ofticial member" means a member appointed under 
clause (b) of sub-section (4) of section 3; 
(m) "notification" means a notification published in the Official 
\ 
Gazette; 25 
, (n) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under thia 
Act; 
(0) "Recruitment Board" means a hoard established under 1Ilb-
section (1) of section 10; 
(P) "regulations" means regulations made under thia Act; 30 
(q) "Renewal and Replacement Fund" means the fund created 
out of the Consolidated Fund of India to replace the capital equip-
ment of Akashvani and Doordarahan in a phased manner; 
(r) "station" means any broadcasting station with .tucli~ 01' 
transmitters or both and includes a relay station; 
(8) "year" means the financial year. 
CHAPTER n 
PRASAR BHARATI BROADCASl'ING CORPORATION OF bmIA) 
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government IQY. 
3S 
by notification, appoint in this behalf, there' shall be establls~ecl for the 40 
purpoMll eI. ~ A" ~ Corporation to be known as the PI'JiIIIU' Bbaratl 
,(IIIJ1oIa~ CGrporati- of India). I 
(2) The 'Corporation shall be a body corporate by the name afo~id, 
having perpetull succession and a common seal with power to acquire, 
hold and dispose cd property, both movable and immovable, and to con- 45 
tract. and shall by the said name sue and be sued. 
(3) The headquarters of the Corporation shall be at New Delhi and 
the Corporation may establish offtces, kendru or .tationa at other plaC8I 

a 
Ul India and. wjth the previous approval of the 
outside India. 
(If) TIle Corperadoa shall COIlsist ef the foUowiac JDeIIIhrs, name-
ly:- .. \ 
S (a) the Chairman; 
(b) DOt mOl'e than el8¥ea u.uI DOt _5 tban seven ... '-oIkial 
members, to be appointed by the President irom amonpt pe1'Soaa of 
eminence in public life or persoDS having .pedal knowledce or pradi .. 
cal experieDC'e in respect of such matters as education, Uterature, cui .. 
10 tore, arts, music, dramatics, journalism, administration, maaacement 
and teehaieal and 1epI aspects of broIatIeastiDc; 
(c) the Secretary, Union Ministry in charge 01 FinaDee,-or if 
there are DJOI'e IIIIeh Secretarielltlaau lOIle, tudl 9IIe of them u may 
be appoiJateli ill tltia behaII by Itbe Central Government, ex otIlcto; 
IS (d) the 8ed'etary, Union Ministry in charp of Information and 
Broadcasting or, if there are more such Secretaries than oDe, such 
one of them as may be appointed in thia behalf by tbe CeDtral 
Government, ex officio; 
(e) the Director General. 
20 (5) The Corporation may appoint such committees u may be ~ 
sary for the efficient performance, exercise and discharge of its functiona, 
p()wers and duties: 
Provided that all or a majority of the members of each such com-
mittee shall be members of the Corporation and a member of any such 
25 committee who is not a member of the Corporation shall have ODly the 
right to attend the meetings of the committee and take part in the 
proceedings thereof, but shall not have the right to yote. 
(6) The Corporation may associate with itaelf in such manner and tOl' 
such purposes as may be prescribed any persons whose aaswtance or 
advJce it may need in complying with any o£ the provisions of this 
30 Act and a person so associated shall have the right to take part in the 
d1scu3sions of the Corporation relevant to the purposes for which he hu 
been aSSOCiated, but shall not have the right to vote. 
(7) No act or proceeding of the Corporation Or of any committee 
35 appointed by it under sub-section (5) shall be invalidated merely by 
40 
reason of- -
<a) any vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of the 
Corporation or such committee; or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as • mem-
ber of the Corporation or such committee; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Corporation or such 
committee not affectifli the meriq of the cale. 
I 

DIrector 
General. 
Term of 
oJBce. 
c:onditiona 
of .er-
vice .... 
ofmem-
ben. 
Removal 
and 
su.pen. 
sian of 
Chairman 
oroth .. 
non-
o1Ilcial 
member. 
from 
odBceln 
certain 
circUm-
.tanc-. 
4 
j. (1) The Chairman of the Corporation shall be appointed b,. tWt 
President after consultation with the Speaker of the House of the Peo-
ple and the Chairman of the Council of States and the selection of a 
person for the purpose shall be based primarily on consideration of his 
eminence in public life and distinctioD in matters luch u education, lite. 5 
nture, culture, arts, music, dramatics, journaHsm, administration, 
management, and technical and legal aspeets of broadcastiol. 
(2) The Chairman shall perform, exercise and discharge such func-
tions, powers and duties of the Corporation as the Corporation may 
deleeate to him. 10 
5. (1) The Director General of the Corporation shall be appointed by 
the PresideDt after consultation with the Chairman. 
(2) The Director General ihall exercise and discharge such powers 
and dutles of the Corporation as the Cbrporation may delegate to him. 
6. (1) Every member [other than an ex officio member referred to in 
clause (c) or clause (d) of sub-section (4) of section 3] shall, subject to 15 
the other provisions of thii Act, hold office for a term of five years from 
the date on which he enterit upon hia office. 
(2) The Chairman and the Director General shall be whole-time mem-
bE-ra and the other memberit &hall be part-time membera. 20 
(3) The Chairman and the Director General .hall be ..,.titled;'to luch 
juJBties and allowances and such conditions Qf aervice in respect of 
leave, pension (if any), provident fund and other matters u may be 
pretloCribed. 
(4.) The allowances payable to and other conditioDa of aervice of the 25 
non-ofticial member. .hall be such /BS may be prescribed. 
(5) Where before the expiry of the term of office of a person holding 
the o1Bce of Chairman, Director General or a non-official member, a 
vacancy arises, for any reason whatsoever, such vacancy shall be deemed 
to be a casual vacancy and the person appointed to fill such vacancy shall 30 
hold office for the unexpired period, of the term. for which his predecessor 
in oftlce would have held office if such vacancy had not arisen. 
7. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the Chairman 
shall only be removed from his office by order of the President. 
on the ground of misbehaviour after the Supreme Court, on a 35 
reference being made to it by the PreSident, has, on inquiry held 
in accordance with such procedure as the Supreme Court may by rulel 
provide, reported that the Chairman ought, on any such ground, be 
removed. 
(2) The President may, after obtaining the approval . of the 40 
Supreme Court, suspend from office the Chairman in respect of whom 
a reference has been made to the Supreme COlJrt ror inquiry under sub-
section (1), pen dine luch inquiry. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
PresIdent may, by order, remove the Chairman from office if the Chair- 45 
man,-
(4) is adjudeed an insolvent; or 
(b) enlales durinl hil term. of office in any paid employment 
outaide the dutiell of hia oftlce; or 

a 
(c) is. in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue in 
ofBce by reason of infirmity of mind or body. 
(4) If the Chairman is or becomes in any way concerned or inter-. 
ested in any contract or agreement made by or on behalf of the Corpora-
5 ti("n or the Government of India or the Government of a State or parti-
cipates in any way in the profit thereof or in any benefit or emolument 
arising therefrom otherwise than as a member, and in common with the 
other members, of an incorporated Company, he shall, for the purpose 
of sub-section (1), be deemed to be guilty of misbehaviour. 
10 (5) The President may, with the concurrence of the Chainnan, 
15 
remove from office any non-offlcial member, who-
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or 
'(b) is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue In 
office by reason of infirmity of mind or body; or 
(e) is guilty of misbehaviour, 
ExplanatiOTt.-For the purposes of clause (c), the provisions of sub-
section (4) shall apply in reolatfon to a non-offtcial member as they 
apply in relation to the Chairman, 
(6) The Chairman or anv non-offtcial member mav resign his oftlce 
20 by giving notice thereof in writing to the President and Qn such resig-
nation being accepted, the Chairman or such member shall be deemed 
to have vacated the oftice. 
8. (1') The Corporation !O!hall meet at such times and places and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business 
25 at its meetings (includfng the quorum at meetings) as may be pro~de~ 
hy regulations: 
Provided that there shal1 not be less than six meetings every year 
but three months shall not intervene between one meeting And the next 
meeting, 
30 on The Chairman shall presfde at the mpetings of the Corporat;on 
and if for anv reason he is unable to attend any meeting, any other 
member elected by the members present at such meeting, shall preside 
at., . . . 
35 ration· 
and voting 
his absence, the person 
casting vote. 
t. (1) Subject to such control, restrictions and conditions as mav be 
40 prescribed, the Corporation may appoint, after consultation with the 
Recruitment Board such officers and other employees as may be neces-
sary for the eftlclent performance of Its functfons. 
m The methoch of reemltment of such ofIIeen lind emDIoyees .Dd 
all other matters conneeted therewith and the conditions of semce of 
45 sum otBceft and other employees !IIhall be sudt as may ~. ~~~" 
regalatfona . ,.' ,.. : . :' 
omcen 
and 
other 
employeel 
of 
Corpora. 
tion. 

r.tabllah-
ment of 
Recruit-
ment 
Board. 
TraQafer 
ofaer-
nee of 
existin& 
emplo-
7eea to 
Corpora-
tion. 
te. (1) The Corporation shall, as soon a5 may be, after the appointed 
day and in such manner and au bject to such conditions and restrictiOlll 
as may be presop.bed, establish for the purposes of section 9, one or 
more boards to be known as the Recruitment Board or, as the case may 
be, Recruitment Boards, consisting wholly of persons other than mem- 5 
bers, oftlcen and other employees of the Corporation. 
(l) The quallfteations and other lCondltiom of service of the members 
eOftStituting the Reeruitment Board, the period for which such members 
shaH hold oIIlee slad he S1I£h as ~ lie preserfbed. 
11. (1) Where the Central Government ha. eeaeed or eeues to per- 10 
form any functions whieh under section 12 are the fanctions 01 the 
Corporalton, it shall be lawful for the Central Government to transfer, 
bv order and with effect from meh date lor dates as may 'be specified In 
the eNer, to the Cerporattoa any of the otIieen Or other employees' 
serving in the AkashVdi or DeerHrm- .... ~gecI iR the JMfI'form- 15 
anee of those functions: 
Provided that no order under this sub-M!etion shan be made in rela-
tion to all.y ofIlcer or other emplOYee tn the -Aka~ltvanj 01' Doordanhan 
who has, in 1'eSpeet of the proposal of the Central Government in tran. 
fer lliuch otRcer Or other employee to tbe Corporation, intimated within 20 
met. time lIS IIIIlY be spec!1fted in tM~ behalf by the Central GoYernment, 
his lIttentien of not ~OIIlIftg .. e1flployee of tbtl Corporation. 
(Z) In makin~ an order under sub-section (1). the C(>nt1'al Govern-
ment shall, as far as may be. take into consideration the functions 
whfch the Akashvani or, as the case mav be. Doordarsban bas ce3Bed 25 
m" cease; to petfonn and the area in which such functions have been or 
lIl"e ~rmed. 
(3) An omcer or other employee transferred by an order under sub-
lIIection (1) shan. on and from the date of t1'ansfer cease to be an em-
ployee of the Central Government and become an emp10vee of the 30 
Corporation with such de!':i£mation 'is the Corporation may determine and 
shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section ·(5), (6) and (7) be 
governed by such regulations as may be made as respects remuneration. 
and other conditions of service inclmiing pension. leave and provident 
fund and shall continue to be an officer or other employee of the 3S 
Corporation unless and until his employment is terminated by the 
Corporation. 
(4) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) sball awly to the members 
of the Cent1'al Secretariat Service, Central Information Service or any 
(lther service or to persons borne on cadres outside AkMhvanf and 40 
Doordarshan or to person!': wor~ing· on deputation in Akashvani or 
Doordarshan from any other Ministry or Department of the Central 
Government or' from any State Government or from any organisation. 
(5) Every officer or other employee tran9ferred by an order made , ... 
under S'Ub-section (1)sha1I, within six months from the ute of transfer, 4S 
pxercise his option in writing to be governed,- , 
(a.) .by the scale of pay applicable to the post held by him in 
. the Akashvani or Doordarshan immediately before th.e date of trans-
fer or by the scale applicable to the post under the Corporation to 
which he is transferred; ~o 

5 
., 
(b) by the leave, provident fund, retirement or other termiDal 
~Ql1ta adlniJaible to employees of the Central Government in 
aCco~(UlCe with the rules or orders of the Central Government, .. 
amended from time to time, or the leave, provident fund, or other 
terminal benefits admissible to the employees of the Corporation 
under th regulations, 
and sueh option once exercised under this Act shall be final: 
Provided that the option exercised under clause (a) by an o1llcer or 
other employee shall be applicable only in respect of the post under the 
10 Corporation to which such officer or other employee is transferred. and 
on appointment to a higher post under the Corporation he shall be 
eligible only for the scale of pay apapliCable to such highr post: 
Provided further that if immediately before the date of his transfer 
any such officer or other employee is offiCiating in higher post under 
IS the Government either in a leave vacancy or any other vacancy of a 
specified duration, his pay on transfer, shall be protected for the un-
expired period of such vacancy and thereafter he shall be entitled to 
the scale of pay applicable to the post under the Government to which 
he _ would have reverted or to the scale of pay applicable to the post 
20 under the Corporation to which he is transferred, whichever he may opt: 
Provided also that when an officer or other employee serving in the 
Union Ministry of Information and Broadcasting or in any of its attach-
ed or ~lJbordinate offices is promoted to officiate in a higher post in the 
Ministry or office subsequent to the transfer to the Corpo.r;ation of any 
25 other officer or employee senior to him in that ,Minjstry or office before 
such transfer, the officer or other employee who is promoted to oftlciate 
in such higher post shall, on transfer to the Corporation, be entitled only 
to the scale of pay applicable to the post he would have held but for 
such promotion or the scale of pay applicable to the post under the 
30 Corporation to which he is transferred, whichever he may opt. 
(6) No ofticer or other employee transferred by an order made under 
3ub-section (1),- , _.; .. :J. 
(a) shall be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate 
to that competent to make a similar @r equivalent appointment 
3S under the Corporation as may be specified in the regulations; 
(b) shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except 
after an inquiry in which he has been informed Ci)f the charges 
against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in 
respect 01 those charges: 
40 Provided that where it is proposed after such inquiry to impose 
45 
ullOn him any such penalty, such penalty may be imposed on the basis 
of evidence addUCed during such inquiry and it shall not be necessary 
to give such person an opportunity of making representation on the 
penalty pr~posed: 
Provided further that clause (b) shall not apply,-
. (i) where an officer or other employee is diSmissed or removed 
or red\lced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led. to h1s 
conviction on a criminal charge; or 

Functions 
of Corpora 
tion. 
8 
(iw) where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove an 
o1Bcer or other employee or to reduce him in rank, 1& satisfted that 
for some reason, to be recorded by that authority in writing, it is 
not reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry; 
(iii) an officer or other employee who, after transfer to the 5 
Corporation, is appointed to a higher post under the Corporation in 
response to an open advertisement and in competition with out-
siders._. l . I" .. , __ ~ i... •• .:..J. ~ 
(7) If, in respect ot any officer or other employee referred to in sub-
section (6), the question arises whether it is reasonably practicable to 10 
hold such inquiry as is referred to in that sub-section, the decision 
thereon of the authority empowered to dismiss or remove him or reduce 
him in rank, shall be final 
\ 
12. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall be the primar'y 
duty of the Corporation to organise and conduct public broadcasting 15 
services to inform, educate and entertain the public and to ensure a 
balanced development of radio and television. 
(2) The Corporation shall, in the discharge of ots functions, be guided 
by the following objectives, namely:-
'&, .• 
I. 
(a) upholding the unity and integrity of the country and the 20 
democratic and social values enshrined in the Constitution; 
(b) safeguarding the citizen's right to be informed freely, truth-
fully and objectively of all matters o~ public interest, national or 
international and presenting a fair and balanced flow of informa-
tion including contrasting views, without advocating any opinion or 25 
ideology of its oWD; 
(c) paying special attention to the nelds ot education, agricul-
ture, health and family welfare and science and technology; 
(d) giving adequate coverage to the composite culture of the 
country as well as sports and games; 30 
(e) serving the rural, illiterate and w .. aker sections of the 
people, keeping in view the special needs of the youth, social and 
cultural minorities, the tribal communities, and of those residing in 
border regions, backward or remote areas; 
(1) inf~ and stimulating the national conscioUBDe81 in 35 
regard to the status and problems of women; 
({1) protnoting social justice and combating exploitation, in-
equality, and such evils as untouchability and n8lTQW parochial 
loyalties; 
(h) upholding the secular ideal and promoting a spirit of truth 40 
and inquiry in the country among all sections of the people; 
I 
(i) taking special steps to protect the interests of children, the 
blindt the aged, the handicapped and other vulnerable sections of. 
the people; 
(;) promoting comprehension and national integration by 45 
broadcasting in a manner that facilitates communication in and 
UDODI an the languages of India; and 

9 
(k) providing comprehensive broadcast coverage through the 
choice of appropriate technology and the best utilisation of the 
broadcast frequencies available and ensuring high quality reception. 
(3) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
S going provisions, the Corporation may take such steps as it thinks fit-
10 
20 
(a) to ensure that broadcasting is conducted as a public service 
to provide and produce progranunes; 
'(b) to establish a system for the gathering of news for radio 
and television; 
(c) to negotiate for purchase of, or otherwise acquire, pro-
grammes and rights or privileges in respect of sports, fixtures and 
other events, occasions, meetings, functions or incidents of public 
interests for broadcasting and to establish procedures for the alloca-
tion of such programmes, rights or privileges to the services; 
(d) to establish and maintain a library or libraries of radio, 
television and other materials; 
(e) to conduct or commiSSion; from time to time, programmes, 
audience research, market or technical service, which may be re-
leased to such persons and in such manner and subject to such terms 
and conditions as the Corporation may think fit; 
(1)' to provide such other services as may be specified by the 
r regulations. 
'(4)' Tlie Corporation shall be subject to no civil liability on the 
ground merely that it failed to comply with any of the provisioDi of 
25 this section. ' ' ' , .. '; ;'j 
13. (1) The Corporation shall, by notification, establish a Complaints 
Board consisting of one person or such number of persons not exceeding 
five as it thinks fit to receive and consider the complaints referred to 
in section 14: 
30 Provided that where the Complaints Board consists of one person, that 
~ person, and where it consists of more persons than onp., one at least of 
such persons shall be a person who Is -or has been or is qualifted to be a 
Judge of a Hign Court. 
(2) Where the Complaints Board consists of more persons than one, 
3S the Corporation shall appoint one of the persons qualified as specifted in 
the proviso to sub-section (1) to be the Chairman of the Board. 
(3) Where the Complaints Board consists of more persons than one, 
the powers and functions of the Complaints Board may be exercised and 
discharged by benches consisting of two members and con'Stftuted· by thE' 
40 Chairman of the Board: 
Provided that if the members of the bench differ on any point or 
points, they shall state the point or points on which they differ and refer 
the same to a third member (to be specifted by the Chairman) for hear-
Ing of such point or points, and such point or points shall be decided 
45 according to the opinion of that member. , 
"(4) Notwithstandln~ anythln~ contained in 5ub-osectlcn "(3). where 
the Complaints Board conststs of more persons than one, the Chairman 
m:ty, if satisfied that consistent with the ends of justice, It fs necessary 
80 to do for the expeditious dfRposal of cases, by order In writing, 
Elta. 
bliahment 
of Com-
plaints 
Board. 

Jurisdic-
tion of, 
and pro-
cedure 
to be 
followed 
by, the 
Com-
plaint, 
Board. 
Powers 
of 
Comp-
laint. 
Board. 
Trans-
fer of 
certain 
a.uets, 
liabili. 
ties, etc., 
ofCen-
tral Gov-
ernment 
to 
Corpora-
tion. 
10 
authorise allY of the members thereof to exercile the powers and dls-
charge the functions of the Complaints Board in respect of such classes 
of cases as he may specify in the order. 
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-sedloD (1), tile quaWleatlGIU ad S 
other eondi&ns of service of the person or persons constit1Jting the 
Complaints Board and the period for which such. person or persons shall 
hoI. ofllce shaD be such as may be detemtined, with the previoUl ap-
proval of the Central Government, by the Corporation. 
14:. (1) TIle Complaints Board shall receive and consider complaints 
from persons claiming themselves to have been treated unjustly or 10 
unfairly in any manner (including unwarranted invasion of priv.acy or 
mfsrepresentationl) in connection with any programme broadcast by the 
Corporation. 
(2) Every such complaint shall be made in writing within thirty 
dp.ys of the broadcast concerned. IS 
(3) Subject to any regulations that may be made in this behalf, the 
Complaints Board shall follow such procedure as it may think fit. 
·(4) If the complaint is found to be justified wholly or in part, the 
Complaints Board shall advise the Corporation to take appropriate action 
and shall inform the complainant in· writing of the same. 20 
(5) If the complaint is found not to be justified either in whole or 
in part; the complainant shall be so informed in writing. . , 
U. (1) The . Complaints B~ard shall, for the purposes of this Act, have 
the same powers as are vested in a court under the Code of Civil pro;;. 
eedure, 1908, while dealing with a complaint in respect of the fellO'Wlnl 2S 5 of 1908. 
matters, namely:-
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him 
on oath or affirmation; 
(b) ~mpel1ing the production of documents; and '- ..... 
" (c);Jssuing com#ssions for the examination of witneee8s. 
(2) Subject to any ~gulations made in this behaU, the Complaints 
&arcl m~y impound and retain in its custody for such period as it thinks 
fit ariy documents prOOu~ before it while deaUng with a eotnplaint 
under this Act. 
.. CHAPTER m 3S 
AsSETS, FINANCES AND ACOOtTNTS 
18. As f.rom the at>JX>inted day-
., 
(a) all property and assets (Including the NC)n-Lapllab1e I'uDd 
and the Renewal and ReplaeemeDt Fwad) which Im.medlately Won 
that day vested In tbe Central Government for the p1ll'pDle of 40 
Akashvani or Doordarshan or botb shall stand trllDderred to the COl'-. pontion; 
(b) f aD debts, obligations and liabilities iDeurred all 4:oDtradi 
entered . Into and all matters and tliinp eD~ged to ~ dODe by with 
or for the Cetdral GoYermnent Immediately 'before flUch day ;... or ',.-
In connection with th~ purposes of Akashvanl or DoordB1'BhaD or 

23 of 1955. 
11 
both shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered hato aIld en-
gaged to be clone by, MtIt 01' for the Corporation; 
(c) all sums of money due to the Central GovemmeDt In reb-
tiGn to the Akashvani or Doordarshan or oth tmmedia&ely hfore 
5 such day shall be deemed to be tiDe to the Oorpontion; 
(d) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which 
could have ~een instituted by or against the Central Government 
immediately before such day for any matter in relation to the Akash-
vani or Doordarshan or both may be continued or instituted by or 
10 against the Corporation. 
17. For the purposes of enabling the Corporation to discharge its fuDc-
tions efficiently under this Act, the Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this hebaH, pay to the 
Corporation in each financial year ,-
15 (I) the proceeds of the broadcast receiver licence fees, as 
reduced by the collection chat:ges; and 
(ii) such other S1lD1B of money as that Govemment considers 
necessary, 
by way of graM, loan or otherwise. 
I , 
20 18. (1) The Corporation shall have its own Fund and all the receipts 
of the Corporation (lncludin.~ the amounts which stand transfened to 
the Corporation under section 16 shall be credited to the Fund and all 
payments by the Corporation shall be made therefrom. 
(2) All moneys belonging to the Fund shall be deposited in the State 
25 Bank of India constituted under the State Bank of India Act, 1955, tn 
such manner as the Corporation may decide. 
(3) The Corporation may spend such sums as it thinks fit for perform-
ing its functions under this Act and such sums shall be treated as ex-
penditure payable out of the Fund of the Corporation. 
30 19. The Corporation may invest its moneys in the ieeurities of the 
Central Government 01' any State Government or in such other manner 
as may be prescribed. 
20. (1) The Corporation shall, before the commencement of each year 
prepare a statement of. programme of its activities during the forth-
35 coming year as well as financial estimates in respect thereof. 
(2) The statement prepared under sub-section (1) shall not less th.n 
three months before the commencement o~ each year, be submitted to 
the Central "Government for its approval. 
(3) The statement and the financial estimates of the Corporation. 
40 referred to in sub-section (1), may. witli the approval of the Central 
Gnvernment, be revised by the Corporation. 
21. (1) The Corporation shall maintain proper accounts and other rele-
vllnt records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such farm 
and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
4S (2) The accounts of the Corporation shall be audited by the Camp-
trnUer and Auditor-Generat of India at such intervals as may be specifted 
Grants 
by Cen-
tral Gov-
ernment. 
Fund of 
Corpora-
tion. 
Bucl8et 
of 
Corpora-
tion. 
AccoUnts 
and audit 
of 
Co11Jora-
tion. 

Corpora-
tion. 
not 
J.latble 
to be 
taxed. 
Power of 
Central 
Govern-
ment 
to give 
direc-
tions. 
C~-' 
man, 
melD-
berB, etc., 
to be 
public. 
88!l'98Dta. 
Protec-
tion of 
action 
taken in 
good 
faith. 
Authen-
tication 
of ordel'B 
and 
other 
instru-
ment. 
of 
Corpora-
tion. 
12 
by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Corporation to the Comptroller and Auditor-
General. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person 
appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the 4 
Corporation shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in 
conn,ection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General has 
in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, 
shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, con-
nected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of 10 
the offices of the Corporation. 
(4) The accounts of the Corporation as certified by the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in 
this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause IS 
the same to be laid before each House o~ Parliament. 
22. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Ad, 1961, 43 of 1961. 
or any other eD8riment for the time being in force relating to income 
tax, sur-tax or any other tax on income, profits or gains, the Corporation 
shall not be liable to pay any incom&-tax, sur-tax or any other tax In zo 
respect of- • • I 
(Il) any income, profits or gains, aeeruing or .risiDg lout of the 
Fun.d of the Corporation or any amount received in that Fund; and 
(b) any income, profits or gains, derived or any amount recalv •. 
by the Corporation., 25 
CHAPI'ER IV 
MrsCELLAm:ot1S 
23. The Central Government may, from time to time, issue to the 
Corporation such directions as it may think necessary for the efficient 
administration of this Act, and a copy thereof shall be laid before each 30 
Hou~e of Parliament. 
24. The Chairman, members and every officer or other employee of 
thE!' Corporation and every member of a Committee constituted under 
sub-section (5) of section 3 and every member of the Complaints 
Board and the Recruitment Board shall be deemed to be a public servant 35 45 of 1860. 
wfthin the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
25. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Corporation, 
the Chairman, member or any officer or any other employee of the 
Corporation or a member of the Complaints Board or a Recruitment Board 
for anything. which is in go'od faith done or intended to be done in pur- 40 
suanee of thIS Act or of any rules or regulations made thereunder. 
II. All orders and decisions of the Corporation shall be authenticated 
by the signature of the Chairman or any other member authorised by 
the Corporation in this behalf and all other instruments executed by the 
Corporation shall be authenticated by the signature of the Director 
General or by any officer of the Corporation authorised by the Corpo- 45 
ration in this behalf. 

5 
10 
13 
1:1. The Corporation may, by general or special order, delegate to the 
Chairman or any other member or to any oiRcer of the Corporation, sub-
ject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified there-
in, such of its powers and duties under this Act as it may deem fit. 
28. The Corporation shall prepare once in every catendar year, in such 
form and within such time as may be prescribed, an annual report giving 
a full account of its activities during the previOUS year and copies thereof 
shall be forwarded to the Central Government and that Government 
shall cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament. 
29. (1) The Central Government may, by notification make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
IS (a) the manner in which and the purposes for which the Corpo.-
ration may associate with itself any person under sub-section (6) of 
section 3; 
i' ' (b) the salaries and allowances and conditions of service in res-
pect 0:11 leave, pension (if any), provident fund md other matters in 
20 relation to the Chairman and the' Director General under sub-
section (3) of section 6; 
(e) the allowances payable to, and other conditions of service 
of, the non-official members under sub-section (4) of section 6; 
(d) the control, restrictions and conditions subject to which the 
2S Corporation may appoint officers and other employees under sub-
section (1) of section 9; 
(e) the manner in which and the conditions and restrictions 
&ubject to which a Recruitment Board may be established under sub-
section (1) of section 10; 
30 (1) the qualificatiOns and other conditions of service o! the 
members of a Recruitment Board and their period of oiRce under 
sub-section (2) of section 10; .••• 
(g) the manner in which the Corporation may invest its moneys 
under section 19; 
35 (h) the form and the manner in which the annual statement of 
accounts shall be prepared under sub-section (1) of section 21; 
(i) the form in, and the time within, which the Corporation may 
prepare an annual report under section 28; 
(;) any other matter which is required to be or may be pres-
40 cribed. 
Dele,A-
tion ot 
powen. 
Annual 
Report. 
Power 
to make 
rule. 
30. (1) The Corporation may, by notification, make regulations not Power 
inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder :IIor enabling to make 
it to perform its functions under this Act. relU-latlaa& 

Rules 
and 
regula-
tions to 
be laid 
before 
Parlia-
ment. 
Power to 
remove 
cWBeul-
tl_ 
14 
(2) Withou~ prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters. namely:-
(II) the times and places at which meetings of the Corporation 
shall be held and, the procedure to be followed thereat; and the 
quorum necessary for the transaction of the business at a meeting S 
of the Corporation under sub-section (1) at section 8; 
(b) the methods of recruitment and conditions of service of 
oftlcers and other employees of the Corporation under sub-section 
(2) of section 9; 
(c) the remuneration and other conditions of service, including 10 
pension, leave and provident fund in relation to an ofJlcer or other 
employee of the Corporation under sub-section (3) o:fl section 11; 
(d) the authority competent to make certain appointments 
referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (6) of section 11; 
(e) the services which may be provided by the Corporation IS 
under clause (f) of sub-section (3) of section 12; 
(1) the procedure which the Complaints Board may follow 
under sub-section (3) of section 14; 
(g) the period for which the Complaints Board may impound 
and retain in its custody any docwnents under sub-section (2) of 20 
aection 11); 
(h) any other matter in respect of which provision is, in the 
opinion of the Corporation, necessary for the performance of its 
functions under this Act. 
S1. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, 25 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be com-
prised in one sess .. on or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before 
the expiry of the session immediately fullowing the session or the suc-
cessive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 30 
in the rule or regulation, or both Houses agree that the rule or regula-
tioa, should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have 
e1fect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so. however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without .J 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 35 
regulation. 
32. Ii any diftlculty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
the Central Government may, by order, published in the Oftlcial Gazette, 
make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, 
~ it may deem necessary, f<or the removal of the difficulty: 40 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a perlo. 
of three years from the appointed day. 

U>K GAEHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
I • 
THE PR.A:.:J.An:':'L1J.'l..AII ( ... :JiU.tU:CiWi'I;·,G COR.?OLA',;CJlI eH' JfmlA) 
BILL, 1979 
( i'oDe I ~ . .J..n_~K9.g.u: c.~.4._.;i;.!}_.J;.& Sab n a) 
for' IIaappointed" re ad "lppointed" 
aftc:~' linG '1 ~, inser t -
"too rdar sh an 0 f th e n.:J. (.\ n Hi ni"st ry 0 f 
Informati.on and Broa.casting;" 
"consj deration" red "c(.lnsid(:Jra:t.o.ioDs" 
-5.;. P 6 age, line 12,-
6. 
.f2.L. "Co!'J)o r ai to n " 
for -
J .; 1',0 1 ') .... , .. -,,-
" fo r " re ad --
7 • Page 6, li ne 32,-
read ''Corporation'" • 
"or" 
~ "su b-::;ec ti 0 n " !~ "su b- sec tic ns II 
8. Page 7, l:Lne 6,-
" 
for "th reg:llation s l1 read "the regulations" 
). Page 7,· lin8 1;2,--
{.; ) , ~..... 1£! "apaplicable' ~ 
(11)&lI' ·1!!.::i ~L:r." 
10. Page 8, line 1;:),-
fu.!' !lots" :"cc,o. "its" -
. I 

" 2 • 
11. Page 11, line 4,-
for IloJ .. l~ " A.I..I£! "both II 
12. Page 13, 1ft thllJ tDUl1nal neadinl to OJ.~.e 2<1 ~. 
1"9 ad tlrule S It 
-
13~ 'age 19 t line " fX'Qm bQttom,-
NEW DELHI; 
~~_~~a~~-~ __ ~ VaJ.sakha 2'+, 19u1 \~ .. ) "~ 
.,...' , .. -...... '~ . ~ ....... -. '').. 
- ~,el: .......... c:' 

LOK SABRA 
CORRI~DUM NO.2 
THE PRASAR BHARATI (EROADCASTIN G C8RPORATION OF INDIA) 
BILL, 19'n 
I-To belAs introduced in lDk Sabha 7 
Page i, line 12, heading under O1apter 11,-
M "BROADCASTING CORPORATION OF INDIA" 
mad ItIPRASAR BHARATI( BROADCASTING COHPORATION 
OF INDIA,) II 
Vaisakha 2 ~ 1901 ( Saka) 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
. It is the Government's declared policy to confer autonomy on Akashvani 
and Doordarshan in order to ensure their functioning in a fair and objec-
tive manner. In pursuance of this polley. Government appointed a 
Working Group headed by Shrl B. G. Ver~hese to examine the function-
ing of these media and to make recommendations regardinJi( their future 
set up. The Working Group submitted its report in March, 19178. 
2. The recommendations of the .Workin~ Graup have been carefully 
examined. It is proposed to provide for the establishment of an autono-
mous corporation to be known as 'Prasar Bharati' and to enfriist to ft the 
functions which are at 1?resent discharged throu.~h Akashvanl find Door-
darshan. 'TItP. intention ie; that the nrooosed CorporatiO'l'l should function 
as 'a ~nuinelv autonomous body which fs innovative. dvnamic. flexible, 
democratic. and responsive to its opportunf'tiee; rmd to the people of India 
whom it is designed to entertain. inform and educate'. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the ahove obiects. In addition t" mating 
provisions as to the establh;hmpnt and composition of the Corporation, 
appointment and removal of the members of tYie CorPoration, 
transfer of properties and funds at present vested in the Central Govern-
ment for the purpose of Akashvani and Doordarshan to the CorporatiO'll, 
transfer of employees of Akashvlln1 and Doordarshan to the Corporation 
and othp.r ancillary matters. the Bill all10 provides for the establishment of 
Ii Complaints Board to deal with complaints about programmes broadcast 
by the Corporation. 
4. The notes on clauses explain the provisions of the Bill. 
Nr.w DEt.m; L. K. ADVANI. 
The 1st May. 1979. 
. . I 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTTCLES 117 AND 274 
OF THE· CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
rcopy of letter No. 4(1) 179-WGAD. dated the 10th Mav. 1979 from 
Shri L. K. Advftni. Minister of Inf<ormation and Broadcasting to the 
Secretary. Lok Sabha.] 
The President havinj! been informed 011 the !;ubject mattPr of the 
Pra~Rr Bharati (Broadcastin~ Corporation of Tndil'l) Bill, 1m. recom-
mends under clauses (1) and en of article 117 and article 274(1)' t'Jf the 
Conc;tttutfon of India. for introduction and consideration of the Bill in 
Lok Sabha. 

Notes on. clause, 
Clause 2 seeks to define ceriain expressions used in the Bill. 
\ 
Clause 3 provides for the establishment of the Broadcasting Corpora-
tiO'll to be known as 'Prasar Bharati' and for its composition. 
Clauses 4 to 6 provide for the appointment, term of office and other 
conditions of service of the Chairman, Director General and non-oftlcial 
members ,of the Corporation. 
Clause 7 deals with the removal and suspensiO'l1 of Chairman and non-
official members. The grounds of removal as provided in the clause are 
the same as those provided in article 317 of the Constitution with respect 
to removal of the Chairman or other members of a Public Service Com-
mission. The Chairman may be removed from office by an order of the 
President on the ground, of misbehaviour after the Supreme Court on a 
reference made to it by the President ha!; on inquiry held in accordance 
with such procedure as the Supreme Court 'may by rules provide, 
reported that the Chairman ought on any such ~und to be remove(i 
The President may sust'end from office the Chairman where a reference 
has been made to the Supreme Court ferr inquiry as to whether he should 
be removed on the J!l'ound of misbehaviour. The President cannot 
exerci~e the power to suspend the Chairman without obtainin$! the prior 
anproval of the SUT'reme Court. The President mav remove the Chair-
man forom office if the Chairman is adiudlled as an insolvent or engages 
nurina hi!'; term of om"'e in I111V nllid pmnlovment outside the duties of 
his office or if he is, in the opinion of the President. unfit to coptinue in 
office by reason of infir'mitv of m;nd or ,body. The President may 
remove a non-official member from office with the concurrence of the 
Chairman I on anv ground ,on which the Chairman may be removed from 
.offit".e., Ac; in the case of a member of Puhlic Se'T'ViC'p. Commission, the 
~und of mIsbehaviour includes a ('ase in which the Chairman or a mem-
ber. a~ the c:\se may be. is or becomes in anv wav concerned or interest-
. ed in nnv c.ontract or agreement made by or on behalf of the Corporation 
or the Government of Tnoin or the ("..overrtment of 11 State or participates 
in anv W"lV in th". T>Tofitc: thereof or in anv benefit .or emolument arising 
therefrom otherwiRe than flS a membel' and in common with the other 
members of an incorporated company. 
Cltruse 8 deals with the meetings of the Corporation. 
Cla'lLBl! 9 empowct'S the COl'OOt"ation to appoint, in eonsultation with 
the Recruitment Board, r::uch ,ofticers and other employees as may be 
necessary. 
.. '/'" , 
Clause 70 pr~videsfOr the ~ti'\blishment .of nne or more Recruitment 
Boat"ds (cmlsistin~ wholly ~f persons. other than membern, officers and 
other employees of the' Corporation) f~'T the f'urpose of selection of candi-
dates to tro paste: of officers and other employees undC"l' the Corporation . 
• 
-........ -
I 

17 
Cl4u.ae 11 deW. with the transfer of service of the existing employeeS 
of ,the Akashvani and Doordarshan to the Corporation by order of the 
Central Government. It also provides that no such order shall be made 
in relation to any officer or other employee if he has intimated the Cen-: 
trA1l Government, within the time specified, his intention of not becoming 
an employee of the Corporation. 
Clause 12 enumerates the functions of the Corporation. Sub-clause 
(1) provides that it shall be the primary duty of the Corporation to 
organise and conduct public broadcasting services, to inform, educate and 
entertain the public and to ensure a balanced' development of radio and 
television. SUb-clause (2) of this clause enumerates the various objec-
tives by which the Corporation shall be guided in the discharge of its 
functions. 
Clauses 13 to 15: Clause 13 provides for the establishment by the Cor-
poration of a Complaints Board consisting of one person or such numbeJ.: 
of persons not exceeding five. Clause 14 empowers the Complaints Board 
to receiVe and consider complaints from persons claiming themselves to 
rulve been treated unjustly or unfairly in connection with any programme 
broadcast by the Corporation. The clause also provides for the proce-
dur~ to be followed by the Complaints Board. Clause 15 conf~rs on the 
Complaints Board certain powers of a civil court to enable it to perform 
its functions. 
Clause 16 deals with the transfer of certain assets and liabilities etc. 
held for the purposes of Akashvani and Doordarshan to the Corporation. 
Clause 17 provides for the payment by the Central Government, after 
due appropriation made by Parliament by law, to the Corporation, in each 
financial year, the proceeds of the broadcast receiver licence fees, after 
deducting the collection charges, and such other sums of money as the 
Government consider necessary by way of grant, loan or otherwise. 
Clause 18 provides for the Fund of the Corporation. 
Clause 19 relates to the investment of the mon~s of the Corporation. 
ClaU8e 20 lays down that the Corporation may prepare a statement of 
programme of activities during the forthcoming year as well as financial 
estimates in respect thereof before the commencement of each year. 
ClaU8e 21 lays down that the Corporation shall maintain proper ac-
counts and other relevant records and prepare an Annual Statement of 
Accounts which shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India. 
Clause 22 seeks to exempt the Corporation from the payment of income-
tax, sur-tax or any other tax in respect of any income, profits or gains, 
derived by the Corporation. 
Clause 23 empowers the Central Government to issue such directions 
as it may think necessary for the efficient administration of the Act and 
also provides that a copy of such directions shalJ. be laid before each 
House of Parliament. 

ii 
Clause 24 provides for Chairman, members, officers or other employees 
of the Co1'pQl'ation, etC. to be public servants within the meaning of sec-
tion 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
Clause 25 seeks to give protection for anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done in pursuance of the Act or any rules and 
regulations made thereunder. 
Clause 26 provides for the authentication of orders and decisions of 
the CoI'pOration by the signature of the Chairman or any other member 
and other instruments by the signature of the Director General or by any 
other officer of the Corporation. 
CLause 27 provides for the delegation, by general or special order, of 
the powers of the Corporation to the Chairman or any other member or 
to any officer of the Corporation subject to such conditions and limitations, 
if any, as may be specified in the order. 
Clause 28 provides for the preparation by the Corporation of an Annual 
Report giving a full accO'llnt of its activities during the previous year. 
The Central Government has to cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament. 
Clause 29 empowers the Central Government to make rules f()r carry-
ing out the provisions of the Act. 
Clause 30 empowers the Corporation to make regulations not inconsist-
ent with the Act and the rules made thereunder for enabling it to dis-
charge its functions under the Act. 
Clame 31 provides for laying of the rules and regulations made under 
the Act before Parliament. 
Clause 32 provides for removal of difficulties in giving effect to the 
provisions of the Act. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3(1) of the Bill provides for the establishment of Prasar 
Bharatl. Clauses 4(1), a(l) and 3(4) (b) (c) and (d) of the Bill provide 
respectively tor tne appointment of the C.Ilairman, the jJirecto~ venera!, 
the non-otticlal members and ~, ollicW member~. Clause 0(3) 01 the 
bill envisages that the salary and allowances and other conditions of 
service of the Chairman and the .L>lrector General ot the Corporation be 
such as may be prescribed. Clause 6(14) provides that the allowances 
payable to and other conditions of servIce of, the non-official members 
shall be such as may be prescribed. 
2. Clause 9 of the Bill provides for appointment of officers and other 
employees of the Corporation and for their conditions of service. Clause 
W~l) provides for establishment of ltecrwtment Board or Boards. 
l:lause 10(:t) envisages that the qualihcations and other conditions 01 
service of the members of the Recruitment Board Of Boards be such a~ 
may be prescribed.. 
3. Clause 13 (1) of the Bill provides for the establishment of a 
ComplaInts Hoard. Clause l:i (a) enVisages that the qual.J.ficatlons and con-
ditions of service of the person or persons constituting the Complaints 
Board shall be such as may be determined by the Corporation with the 
previous approval of the Central Government. 
4. Clause 16 (a) of the Bill provides for the transfer of all the existing 
grOSs assets of Akashvani and Doordarshan to the Corporatioq. These are 
estimated to be about Rs. 95 crores as on 31-3-1979. It also provides for 
the transfer of the unspent balance in the Non-Lapsable Fund of about 
B.s. 30 crores and also the un-spent balance of the Renewal and Replace-
ment Fund amounting to about Rs. 3 crores as on 31-3-1979. Clause 
16 (b) provides for the transfer of existing debts, obl1gations, liabilities 
and all contracts entered into by the Centr~l Government on behalf of 
Akashvani and Doordarshan to the Corporation. Clause 16 (c) provides 
for the transfer ot all sums of money due to the Central Government in 
relation to Akashvani and Doordarshan tolthe Corporation. Clause 17 
provides for the grant of the proceeds of the broadcast receiver licence 
fees which are placed as on 31-3-1979, at about Rs. 32 crores ,(gross), re-
duced by the collection charges and such other sums of money as may 
be determined by the Central Government to the Corporation by way 
0:£ grant, loan or otherwise. These sums will be ~d to the Corporation 
after a due appropriation by Parliament by law. 
5. The salaries and other conditions 0:£ service of the members of the 
Corporation, Complaints Board and the Recruitment Board or Boards 
are to be prescribed by rules after the Corporation is set up. It is, 
therefore, not possible to give precise details of the expenditure 
involved. The Corporation's deficit is estimated to be about Rs. 6.50 
crores on revenue account in 1979--80. This may go up progressively. The 
Plan Outlay for 1979-80 on capital account' is Rs. ~3.01 crores. It is ex-
pected to be Rs. 23. 15 ~rores in 1980-81. Funds have to be provided by 
Central Government accordingly, after due appropriation by Parliament. 
The Corporation will retain income from Commercial Broa,dcasting 
amounting to about Rs. 12 crores per annum. 
19 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to 
m3ke rules for carrying out the provisions of the Act. The matters in 
respect of which such rules may be made relate inter alia to the manner 
in which and the purposes for which the Corporation may associate 
wjth itself any person in complying with any of the provisions of the 
Act, the salary and allowances and conditions of service and other 
matters in relation to the Chairman and Director General, the allow-
ances payable to and other conditions of service of the non-official mem-
bers, the control, restrictions and conditions subject to which the Cor-
poration may appoint officers and other employees, the manner in which 
and the conditions and restrictions subject to which a Recruitment Board 
m:ly be appointed, the qualifications and other conditions of service of 
the members of such a Board, etc. 
2. Clause 30 of the Bill seeks to empower the Corporation to make 
regulations not inconsistent with the Act and the rules thereunder for 
enabling it to perform its functions under the Act. The maltters in 
respect of which such regulations may be made relate inter alia to the 
time and place at which meetings of the Corporation shall beheld and 
the procedure to be followed thereat, and the quorum necessary at such 
meatings, the recruitment and conditions of service oIf officers and other 
employees of the Corporation, the period for which the Complaints 
Board may impound and retain in its custody any document, the proce-
dure which the Complaints Board may follow in considering any com-
plaints, etc.. '. 
3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made under clause 
29 of the Bill and the matters in respect of which regulations may be 
made under clause 30 of the Bill are all matters of detail or procedure 
or matters for which it is not .practicable to make provision in the Act. 
Further, as provided in clause 31 of the Bill, the rules and regulations 
have to be laid before Parliament. Hence the delegation of legislative 
power is of a normal character. 
20 

LOR: SABHA 
A. 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a Broadcasting Corporation for India, 
to be known as Prasar Bharati, Ito define its composition, functions 
and powers and to provide for matters connected therewith or inci-
dental thereto. 
, I 
(Shri L. K. AdvaBi, 
Minister of Inf0nn4tion cmd Broadcasting 