THE TEA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1967 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

29 of 1953. 
S 
BID No. 'N .... 1167 
THE TEA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1967 
(As INTROJ)UCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Tea Act, 1953. 
: 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Tea (Amendment) Act, 1967. ~~~~ 
2. In the Tea Act, 1953 (hereinafter referred to as the principal =i~f 
Act), in the long title, for the words "levy a customs duty on tea long title. 
exported from India", the words "levy a Q,uty of excise on tea 
produced in India" shall be substituted. 
Amend-3. In section 3 of the principal Act, in clause (c), for the words ment of 
"the customs-duty", the words "the duty of excise" shall be section 3. 
10 substituted. 
IS 
20 
1 of 1944. 
4. For section 25 of the principal Act, the following section shall ~W~~-Of 
be substituted, namely: - new 
section for 
section 25. 
"25. (1) There shall be levied and collected as a cess for the Imf position 
. . 0 cess purposes of thIS Act a duty of eXCIse on all tea produced in on tea 
India at the rate of four paise per kilogram: f~'tndl~ 
Provided that the Central Government may from time to 
time fix, by notification in the Official Gazette, a higher rate, 
not exceeding 8'8 paise per kilogram, at which the duty of excise 
shall be levied and collected. 
(2) The duty of excise levied under sub-section (1) shall be 
in addition to the duty of excise leviable on tea under the Central 
Excises and Salt Act, 1944, or any other law for the time being 
in force. 

2 
(3) The provisions of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, 1 of 1944. 
and the rules made thereunder, including those relating to refund 
and exemption from duty, shall, so far as may be, apply in 
relation to the levy and collection of the duty of excise under 
this section as they apply in relation to the levy and collection 5 
of the duty of excise on tea under the said Act.". 
Declaration under the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931 
It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest 
that the provisions of clauses 2, 3 and 4 of this Bill shall have 
immediate effect under the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 10 
1931. 16 of 1931. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Tea Board, a body set up under the Tea Act, 1053 (~ of 
1953), to look after the development of the tea industry in India, is 
financed out of the proceedll of a cess levied on tea exported out of 
India, under section 25 of the Act. The current rate of the tea 
export cess is 4'4 paise per kilogram. The proceeds of the celli are 
initially credited to the Consolidated Fund of India and relealled 
therefrom to the Tea Board to meet its expenses. 
The various activities undertaken by the Tea Board for the deve-
lopment of the tea industry and promotion of tea exports have 
expanded considerably and it has been found that the proceeds from 
the present cess on tea exports are not adequate to finance its acti-
vities. Moreover, if the tea industry is to develop on sound and 
proper lines and production and exports of tea are to be !Jubstan-
tially increased, the expenditure of the Tea Board both in India and 
abroad has necessarily to be on a larger scale than at present in 
order to be commensurate with the desired results. It has, therefore, 
become necessary to take steps to augment the revenues from the 
cess so that the Tea Board can be financ~d adequately. This Bill 
accordingly seeks to provide for the levy bf the cess not merely on 
tea exported out of. India but on all tea produced in India and for its 
collection along with and in the same manner as the excise duty 
on tea. The Bill further provides that the new ceS$ shall be levied 
at 4 paise per kilogram with immediate effect and that the Govern-
ment may, if necessary, levy the cess at such higher rate, not exceed-
ing 8'8 paise per kilogram, as may, from time to time, be fixed by 
notification in the Official Gazette. 
NEW DELHI; DINESH SINGH. 
The 27th May, 1967. 
s 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to substitute a new section for section 
25 . &f the Tea Act, 1953 and the proviso to sub-section (1) of new 
section 25 empowers the Central Government to fix, from time to 
time, by notification in the Official Gazette, a rate higher than 4 paise 
per kilogram but not exceeding 8'8 paise per kilogram, as the rate 
at which the cess by way of duty of excise on all tea produced in 
India shall be levied and collected for the purposes of the Act. This 
is intended to enable the Government to regulate the actual rate of 
the cess in future within the ceiling specified, in order to meet the 
actual financial requirements of the Tea Board, as estimated from 
time to time. 
2. The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 

32ofl934. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE TEA ACT, 1953 
(29 OF 1953) 
An Act to provide for the control by the Union of the tea 
industry, including the control, in pursuance of the 
International Agreement now in force, of the cultivation 
of tea in, and of the export of tea from, India and for that 
purpose to establish a Tea Board and levy a customs 
duty on tea exported from India. 
• • • • * 
CHAPI'ER I 
PRELIMINARY 
• • • • * 
S. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • * 
(c) "cess" means the customs-duty imposed by section 25; 
• • • • * 
CHAPTER V 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
DeftnlUonl. 
25. (1) A duty of customs shall be levied and collected on all tea ImpoUUon 
exported or taken outside India at the rate of eight rupees and eighty ~~ ~~t!~' 
naye paise per quintal. on export 
of tea. 
(2) The cess levied under sub-section (1) shall be in addition to 
any other duty leviable under the Indian Tariff Act, 1934, or any 
other law for the time being in force and shall be collected by such 
agencies and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
• • • • .. 
5 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Tea Act, 1953. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article .. II7 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the 
introduction of the Bill. 
S. L. SHAKDHER, 
Secretary. 
(Dinesh Singh, Minister of Commerce) 