B~~~. 74 o. 1958 @ 
THE ARMED FORCES (ASSAM AND 
MANIPUR) SPECIAL POWERS 
BILL, 1958 
(Aq, INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 

,. \"..., 
" ..... 
BIll N,. 7. 0.£ 1;$1 
THE ARMED FORCES (ASSAM AND MANIPUR) 
.' . SPECIAL POWERS' :BILL, 1958 
(As n{TRQDUCED IN' Lo~ SABH,t,J _ 
• 
BILL 
to enable certain special powers to be conferred "pon members 
of the, ~(If'me" forces in dist"rbe~ are~ in the State ,of Auam 
and the Union t~itory of Man.ipur. ::" ... 
Bidt enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Reptia1ic 
of India as follows:- Short title 
(Assam and and extent. 1. (1) This ACt may'be ealled. the Armed Forces 
Manipur)' Special Powers Act, 1958. 
5 (2) It exte~dsto the whole of the State of Assam indthe TJ'tifon 
territOry of Manipur. ' . " 
10 
t: Iii this Act,unless the context otherwise requires,-
, (a):llarmed forces" means the military forces and: the 'ttir 
. f~rces oPerating' as land forces, and includes any other anned 
forces of the Union so operating;' ~/ 
,(b) . ,"disturbed. area" means an .area which isior the time 
being declared by notification under section 3 to be a disturbed 
area; 
~finitio.s. 
45 of 1950. IS 
46 gf 1950. 
(c)a11 'other words and expressions used herein, but' not 
deftned.anddeftned in the Air Force Act, 1950, or the Army Act, 
. 1950, Shall have the ,meanings respectively assigned. to them in 
J;. , 
• < 
those Acts. '" , ., 
3.1£ the Government of Assam or the Chief Commissioner of Power to 
Manipur is ~f thE! ~inion that the whole or any part of the State ~:c:e~re~~ , .. 
20 of Assam. or the Union territory of ~antwr, as the c. may be, disturbed 
ill in such a disturbed: or dangerous condition that the, use of armed neas. 

2 
forces in aid of the civil power is necessary, he may, by notification 
in the OfBcial Gazette, declare the whole or any part of the State or 
IJnion territory to be a disturbed area. 
ol. Any commissioned officer, warrant officer, non-commissicmed 
oBic:er or any other person of equivalent rank in the armed forces 5 
may, in a disturbed area,-
(a) if he is of opinion that it is necessary so to do for the 
maintenance of public order, after giving IlICh due warning as 
.he may consider necessary, fire upon or otherwise use force, even 
to the eausing of death, against any person who is acting in 10 
cotltraYelltion. of any law or order for the time beiDC in force in 
the di&t.urbed area prohibiting the 881e1Dbly of Ave or more 
"»e11lODl or the carrying of weapons or of things capable of being 
UIed as weapons or of ftre-arms, ammunition or explosive 
substances; 15 
(b) if he is of opinion that it is neceu&ry 80 to do, destroy 
any arms dump, prepared or fortified positioD or abelter from 
which armed attacks are made or are likely to be made or are 
aUempted to be made, or any structure used as a trainillg camp 
for armed volunteers or utilllecl as a hide-out by armed gaAp;o 
or abaC4)Dders wanted for any offence; 
(c:) arrest, without warrant, any penon who baa eommitteci 8 
c:opiuble oifeDce or against whom a reaIIOftabJe IUSpidon em.&a 
tha& he baa committed or is about to commit a cognizable cdfenee 
aDd may use such force .. may be neceaary to effect the arrest; 25 
(d) enter and search without warrant any pl'emiIeI to mUe 
any such arrest as aforesaid or to recover any penon believed 
to be wrongfully restrained or confined or any property reason-
ably IUSpeCted to be stolen property or any arms, ammunition 
or explosive substances beliewd to be unlawfully kept In sueh 30 
premi .. , and may for \hat purpoIIe use BUeb force as maybe 
neceaary. 
ArfCllCd he i. Any per80D arrested and taken into custody under this Act 
=:-.:. to ahall be made over to the oflcer in charge of the DeaI'eIt police 
die police. station with theleut pouible delay, topther with • report til the 35 
circumstances OCC:Uioning the arrest. 
ProUClion to 6. No prGNeution, wit or other legal proceedln, shall be Insttt~ 
=,..., eel, except with the previoWl sanction of the Ce!atn1 Government, 
Act. apiD8t any perIOn in respect of anythil'lg done or purported to be 
c:IoDe in exercile of. the pbwen c:onferred by this Aet. ,.0 

of ItS" 
3 
'1. (1) The Armed Forces (Assam and Manipur) Special Powel'8 atPIII_ ..... Ordinance, 1958, is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any aet.ion 
taken w.wier· the said Oniinanee shall be deemed to have been done 
5 or taken under this Act, 8S if this Ad had commeDCed OIl the 22Dd 
·day of May. 1958) 

STATi;M~NT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Ati Ordtnan~~ entitled the Armed Forces (Assam and Mani}?ur) 
Special-Powers Ordinance, 1958, was promulgated by the President 
on the 22~ May, 1958. Section 3 of the Ordinance empowers the 
Governor of Assam and the Chief Commisaioner of Manipur to 
declare the whole or any part of Assam or the Union territory of 
Manipur, as the case may be. to be a disturbed area. On such a 
declaration being made in the Ofticial Gazette, any commissioned 
officer. warrant ofticer. non-commissioned officer or any other person 
of equivalent rank in the armed forces may exercise, in the dis-
turbed area, the powers conferred by sections 4 and 5 of the Ordi-
nance. The Bill seeks to replace the Ordinance. 
NEW DELHIj 
The 5th Jut'll. 1958. 
4 
G. B. PANT. 

LOt{ SABHA 
A 
BILL 
Co enable certain special powers to be conferred uron member~ 
of· the armed forces in disturbed area'! in the State of 
Assam and tl,e"'Union territory of Manipur. 
(Shri GOfIind BaUabh Pant, Minister of Home Affairs.) 