.. 
20 of 1953. 
5 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
. "~I {: 
I 'r I ... 
I 
DiU No. 74 of 1970 
THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES OF OFFICERS OF 
PARLIAMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1970 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Salaries and Allowances of O(Jicers of Parliament Act, 1953. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Salaries and Allowances of OfHcers Short title 
of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1970. commence-
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of 
November, 1969 . 
and 
ment. 
Z. Section 4: of the Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parliament Amend. 
Act, 1953 shall be re-numbered as sub-section' (1) thereof and- ment of 
section 4. 
(i) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, for the words "fifteen 
10 days", the words "one month" shall be substituted; and 
15 
(ii) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered and before the 
Explanation, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) In the event of the death of an officer of Parliament, 
his family shall be entitled to the use of the furnished residence 
occupied by the officer of Parliament-
(a) for a period of one month immediately after his 
death, without payment of rent and no charge shall fall on 
the family of the officer of Parliament in respect of the 
maintenance of such residenel, and 

2-
(b) for a further period of one month, on payment 01 
rent at such rates as may be prescribed by rules made in this 
behalf under section 11 and also charges in respect of electri-
city and water consumed in that residence during such 
further period.". 5 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under section 4 of the Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parlia-
ment Act, 1953, an officer of Parliam~nt (namely, the Chairman or the 
Deputy Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker or the Deputy 
Speaker of the House of the People) is entitled, without payment of rent, 
to the use of furnished residence throughout his term of oftlce and 
for a period of fifteen days immediately thereafter. This period of 
fifteen days is considered short when an officer of Patliament vacates 
office and is even more so when his family has to' vacate the residence 
in the event of his death, considering that this is the period which 
would, in most cases, be taken up in completing the funeral rites. 
2. It is, therefore, proposed to increase the aforesaid period of fifteen 
days to one month when an officer of Parliament vacates office. In the 
event of the death of an officer cf Parliament it is proposed to provide 
that his family shall be entitled to the use of the furnished residence 
occupied by the officer of Parliament for a period of two months 
immediately after his death. For the first month his family will not be 
liable for payment of rent or maintenance cbargesbut during the second 
month, his family will have to pay rent at the pl'esc:ribed rates and 
charges for electricity and water consumed during that month. 
3. It is also proposed to give retrospective effect to the above pro-
posals from 1st November, 1969. 
NEW DELHI; K. RAGHU RAMAIAH. 
The 6th July, 1970. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 160(L)/67-70/PA., dated the 18th July, 1970 from 
Shri K. Raghu Ramaiah, Minister of Parliamentary Mairs, and Shipping 
and Transport to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President. having been informed of the subject matter of the pro· 
posed Bill further to amend the Salaries and Allowances of Oftlcers of 
Parliament Act, 1953, recommends the introduction of the Bill under 
article 117 (1) and its consideration by Lok Sabha under article 117 (3) 
of the Constitution. 
3 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Under section 4 of the Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parlia-
ment Act, 1953, an officer of Parliament (which term means the Chair-
man or the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker 
or the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People) is entitled, without 
payment of rent, to the use of a furnished residence throughout his 
term of office and a periw of fifteen days immediately thereafter The 
proposed provision in clause 2 of the Bill is to increase this period to 
one month when the officer of Parliament vacates office and to two 
months in the event of his death (the intention being that his family 
may retain the residence for a period of one month after his death 
without payment of rent and fQl' a further period of ohe month on 
payment of rent at prescribed rates). "If the period of retention is 
increased to one month or two months, as the case may be, instead of 
fifteen days as at present, the additional financial expenditure likely to 
be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India will be about Rs. 1,200 
or, as the case may be, Rs. 2,100 per annum. However, as the expendi-
ture is of an uncertain and unpredictable nature, it would not be 
possible to make an exact assessment of the amount likely to be involved 
but it is not expected to be large. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES OF OFFICERS OF PARLIAMENT 
ACT, 1953 
(20 of 1953) 
• • • • • 
4. Each officer of Parliament shall be entitled without payment of Residence 
rent to' the use of a furnished residence throughout his term of office for officers of Parlia-and for a period of fifteen days immediately thereafter, and no charge manto 
shall fallon the officer personally in respect of the maintenance of such 
residence. 
Expl4natiOn.-For the purposes of this section, "residence" includes 
the staft quarters and other buildings appurtenant thereto and the garden 
thereof, and "maintenance" in relation to a residence includes the pay· 
ment of local rates and taxes and the provision of electricity and water . 
• 
. '/' 
•• l • 
. ... . 
..... - I, ~. ',' ... .:..,~: ,,~.: 
• 
,:.,~ r( ' • . ,J .. ,. (. 
• • 
s I r' 
• 
.• 1 
,'j • 
'.' ~ , 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
co amend the Salaries and AUowanc.es of Ofbcers of Parliament Act. 1953. 
(Shri K. Rtlfhu RtJlfUriall, 
MinUter uf P",'iamsruary Alairs, 
tJrrd Sm""" artd TrQltsport.) 
. ; 