As INTRODUCIID IN Lolt SABBA ON 
. , 
Bill No. 1~ of 117. 
THE METAL CORPORATION (NATIONALISATION AND MISCELLA-
NEOUS PROVISIONS) BILL, 1976 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAus~ 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
3. "Undertaking"-meaning of. 
CHAPTER II 
TAKING OVER OF MANAGEMENT OF THE UNDERTAKING OF THE MI!'l'AL CoRPORATION 
4. Taking over of management of the undertaking of the Metal Corpora-
tion. 
5. Appointment of Administrator to take over the management of the 
undertaking. 
6. Application qf Act 1 of 1956. 
CHAPI'ER III 
ACQUISITION OF THE UNDERTAKING OF THE METAL CORPORATION 
7. Vesting of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation in the Central 
Government. 
8. Central Government to be the lessee of the State Government. 
9. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertaking 
of the Metal Corporation in a Government company. 
CHAPTER IV 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
10. Payment of amount for deprivation of management. 
11. Payment of amount for acquisition of the undertaking. 
12. Time of payment. 
CHAPTER V 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKING OF THE METAL CoRPoRATION 
13. Management, etc., of the undertaking. 

til) 
CHAPTER VI 
PRoVISIONS JllI:[ATING TO DIPLOYDS OF THI METALS Col\pouTION 
CLAUSES 
It. ProvisiODlltiating to employees. 
16. PtuYident and otheriuDds. 
CHAPrER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
16. Act to have overriding effect. 
17. Contracts in bad faith may be canceiied or varied. 
18. Protection of action taken m ,ova faith. 
19. Delegation of powers. 
20. Penalties. 
21. Offences by companies. 
22. Power to make rules. 
23. Power to remove diftlcultiei. 
24. Abolition of Tribunal, etc. 
25. Repeal of OI'dinance 12 c4 19'78 and ta\tihg. 

Bill No. '" of 1"8 
THE METAL CORPORATION (:tf*T.IO,NALIS~':nO~ AN,P 
MISC~LLi}..NEOUS PROVISIO~) BIL,L, 1976 
A 
BILL 
to pTovide few the taking over of the manAgement of ·the tmdertekiw.g of 
the Met. Corporation, after .uch undertaking is deemed to 'MW ~eti 
trA"Bferred to, aM re-vested in, the acrid Corpot'Aticm, and for the 
BubNquent acquiaition of the undertaking of the Metal COrpotdRon 
for the purpose of enabling the Central Gover"t1lm67&t, in the pubUc 
interest, to exploit to the fullest extent possible, the zinc and lead 
deposits in and around Za""",. 4I1'.eIIin tJle State of Rajasthan and to 
utilise those minerals in such manner as to subserve the common 
good, and for matte1" connected therewith M inciclefttal thereto. 
BE .it enacte4 ,by Pa.rli~nt w the Twenty-seventh Y~r .Qf .the 
RepuqIic of IncUa as (ollows:-
CHAPTP;:R I 
PRELIMUlUY 
S 1. (1) This Act may be called the Metal Corporation (Natfonatisation Bhort 
"" and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1976. tit~ . . . .. 
10 
and com-
(2) SecWml 20 80021 sball CQlne in,to force at once and tbeotbe.r mence-
provitlions of this Act shall be deemed tobave come into iwee on \he· ment. 
22ndGiay of OtIiliGber, .,965. 
2. Intbts Aot, -\HJleSs ihe oontut otherwiJe ~u41e,~ 
(a) C4appo~ted day" means the 2nd day of 'Au~ 1976; 
. i 

"Und..-
taking" 
-mean-
lntot. 
TakiDI 
over of 
manage· 
ment of 
the under-
takinJol 
the 
Metal 
Corpora-
tion. 
2 
(b) "commencement of this Act"' means the 22nd day of October, 
1965; 
(e) "Metal Corporation" means the Metal Corporation of India 
Limited, a company within the meaning of the Companies Act, 1956, 1 of 1956. 
and havin~ its registered office at Calcutta; S 
(d) "Mineral Concession Rules" means the Mineral Concession 
Rules, for the time being in force, made by the Central Government 
under the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 
1957; 
(e) "notification" means a notification published in the Official 10 
Gazette; 
(1) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 
'(g) words and expressions used in this Act and not defined but 
67 of 1957. 
defined in the Companies Act, 1956, have the meanings respectively 1 of 1956. 
assigned to them in that Act. IS 
3. For the purposes of this Act, the undertaking of the Metal Corpora-
tion shall be deemed to include all assets, rights, leaSE' holds (including 
mining leases, if any), powers, allthorities and privileges and all property, 
movable· and immovable, Including lands, buildings, works, mines 
workshops, projects, smelters, I'efineries, stores instruments, machinery, 2.0 
locomotives, automobiles and other vehicles, mdned or extracted zinc or 
lead ores, concentrates and metals, in process, or in stock or in transit. 
cash balances, cash in hand, re~rve fund, investments and book debts 
and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property as 
were immediatE'ly before the date of commenrement of this Act in the 25 
ownership. possession, powl'r or control of the Metal Corporation, whether 
within or without India, and all books of account, registel'! maps sections, 
drawings. records of survey and all other documents of whatever nature 
relating thereto; and shall also be deemed to include all boITOWings, 
liabilities and obligaUons of whatever kind of the Metal CorDOT'8tion in 30 
relation to its undertaking. 
CHAPTER II 
TAKING OVER OF MANAGEMENT OF THE UNDERTAKING OF THE METAL 
CORPORATION 
4.(1) On the commencement of this Act, the Metal Corporation of 35 
India (Acquisition of Undertaking) Act, 1986, shall stand repealed, and 36 of 1966. 
on such repeal, the underlakiBK of the, Metal Corporatioo, which had 
been trandened to, and vested in, the CeDtral Govemment by virtue 
of the provisions of section 3 of the Act so repealed. and the undertakng 
of tile Metal Corporation together with aU its properties, 'assets, liabilities 40 
and obU~ation!l specified in sub-section (1) of section 4 of that Ad and 
meh other properties, assets, liabilities and obligatons, acquired or 
iMUrre«!, fM the purposes of Its :underlaking, after the Z2ndday of 
Odober, 1965, which stood, by virtUe of the provisions of section 12 of 
the said Act, tranalerred to, and vested in, the (".ovemment company 45 
formed in pUl'SuaDce of the provisions of section 12 of he Act aforesaid 
shall, by virtue of the proNiollA of this Ad. 1Je deemed to have been 
re.trlllllferred to, .- re-y",W ill, the Metal CorporatioD, and, 

LOK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE METAL CORPORATION (NATIuNALISATION AND MISCELLANEOUS 
PROVISIONS) BILL, 1976 
(To be/As~roduced in" 10k Sabha) 
1. Page (11), line 2,-
f2r. "METALS" read "METAL" 
2. Page 2, line 39,-
for ''undertakng'' ~ 'tundertak1ng" 
3. Page 2, line 42,-
for "obligatons" read "Qbligat1ons" 
4. Page 2, line 46 ,-
f2!. "he Ac t " re ad "the Ac t " 
Page 3, line 2,-
f2r. "ransferred" 
6. Page 9, line 36 ,-
for "on" read 
Page 11, line 14,-
fslr. "abatment" 
NEW DElliI; 
~ugust 2~ 19~6 Sravana ,1 98 (Saka) 
read "tr ans ferred" 
"or" 
read "abatement" 

1 of 1956, 
3 
immediately thereafter, the management of the undertaking of the Metal 
Corporation shall be deemed! to have been ransferred to, and \'ested iD, 
the Central Government. 
(2) Any contract, whether express or implied, or other arrangement, 
5 in ~o far as it relates to the management of the business and affairs of 
the undertaking of the M.etal Corporation, and in force immediately 
before the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have terminated 
on such commencement. 
(.1) All persons in charge of the management, including persons holding 
10 offices as directors, managers or in any other managerial capacity 
specified in section 197A of t.he Companies Act, 19,j6, of the Metal 
Corporation immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall be 
deemed to have vacated their offices as such On such commencement. 
(4) Notwithstanding anyth~ng contained in any other law for the time 
15 being in force, no person in respect of whom any contract of manageJ.1ent 
Or other arrangement is tenninated by reason of the provisions of 
sub-section (2) or who cea~es to hold office by reason of the prOvisions 
contained in sub·section (3), shall be entitled to clatim any compensation 
for the premature termination of the contract of management or other 
20 arrangement or for the loss of office, as the case may be. 
5. (1,) The Central Government may, as soon as it is convenient 
administratively so to do, 3ppoint, with effect from such earlier or later 
date (not beinr a date earHer than the commencement of this Act), any 
person or body of persons (includi.ng a Government company, whether in 
25 existence at the commencement of this Act or incorporated thereafter) 
as the Administrator of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation and 
the Administrator SO appointed shall carry on the management of such 
undertaking for and rm behalf of the Central Government. 
(2) On the appointment of the Administrator under sub-section (1), 
30 the management of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation shall vest 
in such Administrator and all pE>t'Sons in charge of the management of 
such undertaking immediately before such am>ointment shall cease to 
be in charge of such management and shall be bound to deliver to the 
Administrator all assets, books of account, registers and other documents 
3S in their custody relating to the undertaking of the Metal Corporation. 
(3) The Central Government may issue such directions (including 
instructions as to initiating, defending or continuing any legal proceedings 
before any court, tribunal or other aut.hority) to the Administrator as to 
his powers and duties as the Central Government may deem desirable 
40 and the Administrator may also apply to the Central Government at any 
time for instructions as to the manner in which the management of the 
undertakjn~ of the Metal Corporation, or in relation to any other matter 
arising in the course of such management, shall be conducted. 
_ (4) Where any property, the management of which h~s vested in the 
"'" Central Government under trection 4, is in the posseSlilOn, custody or 
Appoint-
ment of 
Adminis-
trator to 
take 
over the 
manage· 
ment 
of the 
under-
taking. 

Applica-
tion of 
Act 
1 of 1956. 
4 ...... 
oontrol of any person, such person shall deliver the property to the 
Central Government forthwith. 
(5) Any person who, at the commencement of this Act, has in his 
possession or under his control any books, papers or other documents 
relating to the undertaking of the Metal Corporation shall be liable to 5 
account for such books, papers and other documents to the Administrator 
and shall deliver them up to the Adminis.trator or to such person as may 
be authorised by the Central Government or the Administrator in this 
behalf. 
(6) The Metal Corporation shall. within such period as the Central 10 
Government may allow in this behalf, furnish to that Government a 
complete inventory of al1 the properties and assets (including particulars 
of book debts and investments and belongings) of the Metal Corporation 
at the commencement of this A~t, all' liabilities and obligations of the 
Metal Corporation subs·isting at such commencement and also of all IS 
agreements entered into by the Metal Corporation and in force on such 
commencement, including agreements, whether express or implied, 
relating to leave, pension, gratuity and other tenns of service of any 
officer or other employee of the Metal Corporation under which, by virtue 
of the proviS'ions of this Act, the Central Government has, or will have, 20 
or may have, liabilities, and for this purpose, the Central Govemment 
shall afford the Metal Corporation all reasonable facilities. 
(7) The Administrator shall hold office during the pleasure of the 
Central Government and shall receive, from the funds of the undertaking 
of the Metal Corporation such remuneration as may be fixed by the 25 
Cerltral Government. 
G. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act. 
1956, or in the memorandum or articles of association of the Metal 
Corporation. so long af; the management of the undertaking of the Metal 
Corporation remains vested in the Central Government,- 30 
(a) <it shall not be lawful for the sbarehoiders of the MeW 
Corporation or any other person to nominate or appoint uy person 
to be a director of the Metal Corporation; 
(b) no resolution passed at any meeting of the shareholders of 
the Metal Corporation on or after the commencement of this Act 3S 
shall be given eftect to unless approved by the Central Government; 
(c) no proceeding for the winding up of the Me·tal Corporation 
or for the appointment of liquidator or receiver in respect of the 
undertaking thereof shall lie in any court except with the consent 
of the Central Government. . 40 
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub.section (1), and to the 
other provisions contained in this Act and subject to such other exceptions, 
restJ'ictions and limitations, if any, as the Central Government may, by 
notification. specify in this behalf, the Companies Act, 1956, shall continue 1 of 1918. 
to apply to the Metal Corporation in the same IJumner as it applied 
thereto before the date of commencement of this Act. AI 
• 

36 of 19661 
, 
CHAPTER TIl 
ACQUlSmON OF THE UNDERTAKING OF THE METAL CORPORATION 
7. (1) On the appoiated day. the undertakinr of the Metal Corporation 
~d the rig~t, title anel interest of the Metal Corporation in relation t~ 
5 lis undertaking, shall stand transferred to, and sbaJJ vest absolutely in 
the Central Government. .. 
. (2) SU~ject to the other provisions contained in this Act, all property 
mcluded m the undertaking of the Metal Corporation which has vested 
in t~e Central Government under sub-section (1) shall, by force of such 
10 vestmg, be freed and discharged from any trusts, obligations, mortgages, 
charges, lienS! and other incumbrances affecting it, and any attachment, 
injunction or any decree or order of a court, tribunal or other authority 
restricting the use of such property in any manner shall be deemed t~ 
have been withdrawn. 
IS ExpZanation.-For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that 
the mortgagee of any property included in the undertaking of the Metal 
Corporation, or any other person holding any charge, lien or other 
interest in, or in relation to, any such property, shall be entitled to claim, 
in accordance with his rights and Ijnterests, payment of the mortgage 
20 money or other dues, in whole or in part, from the Central Government 
but no such mortgage, charge, lien or othel;' interest shall be enforceable 
against any property which has vested in the Ce~tral Government. 
(3) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, all contracts 
and working arrangements which are subsisting immediately before the 
25 appointed day and affecting the Metal Corporation shall, in so far as 
they relate to the undertaking of the Metal Corporation, cease to have 
elIect or be enforceable against the Metal Corporation Or any person who 
was surety or had guaranteed the performance thereof and shall be of 
as full force and effect against or in favour of the Central Government 
30 and enforceable as fully and effectually as if, instead of the Metal 
Corporation, the Central Government had been named therein or had 
been a party thereto. 
(4) Subjee;t to the other provisions conta1ned in this Act, any proceed-
~~ ing or cause of action pending or existing immediately before the 
3S appointed day by or against the Metal Corporation or the Central 
Government or the Government company referred to in section 12 of the 
Metal Corporation of India (Acquisition of Undertaking) Act, 1966. in 
relation to the undertaking of the Metal Corporation may, as from that 
uay, be continued and E'nforced by or against the Central Government or 
40 the Government company referred to in section 9, as it might have been 
enforced by or against the Mfrlal Cwporation, the Central Government 
or the Government company, as the case may be, if this Act had not 
been promulgated, and shall cease to be enforceable by or against the 
Metal Corporation, its surety or guarantor. 
4S 8. (1) Where the right of the Metal Corporation under any mining 
lease granted, or deemed to have been granted to it by any State 
Government or any other person, vest in the Central Government under 
section 7, the Central Government shall, on and from the date of such 
vesting be deemed to have become the lessee of such State Government 
So or such other person, as the case may be, in relation to such mine, as 
if a mining lease in respect of su{'h mine had been granted ~o the ~entral 
Government. and the period of such lease shall be the entIre penod for 
Vestinl 
of the 
under-
taking 
of the 
Metal 
Corpora-
tion in 
the 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Central 
Govern-
mentto 
be the 
lessee 
of the 
State 
Govern-
ment. 

Power of 
Central 
Govern-
mentto 
direct 
vesUng 
of the 
under-
taklngof 
the Metal 
Corpora-
tion in a 
Govern-
ment 
company. 
Payment 
of amount 
for depri-
vation 01 
manage-
ment. 
6 
'\.,'j .:.'1: ... r -.~ 
which such lease could have been granted by the State Government or 
such other person under the Mineral Concession Rules, and, thereupon 
all the 'rights under such mining lease, including surface, underground 
and other rights granted to the lessee shall be deemed to have been 
transferred to, and vested in, the Central Government. S 
(2) On the expiry of the term of any lease referred to in su1>sec.tion (1), 
such lease shall, if so desired by the Central Government, be renewed 
by the State GovernlTlent or other person on the same terms and 
conditions on which such lease was held immediately before the appointed 
day by the Metal Corporation, for the maximum period for which such 10 
lease could be renewed under the Mineral Concession Rules, 
9. (1) NotWithstanding anything contained in section 7, the Central 
Government may, if it is satisfied that a Government company is willing 
to comply, or has complied, with such terms and cond~tions as that 
Government may think fit to impose, direct, by an order in writing, that IS 
the undertaking of the Metal Corporation and the rightt, title and interest 
of the Metal Corporation in relation to such undertaking shall, instead 
of continuing to vest in the Central Government, vest in ,the Government 
company either on the date of publication of the direction or on such 
earlier or later date (not being a date earlier than the appointed day) 20 
as may be specified in ~he direction. 
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the Metal Corporation in 
relation to its undertaking vest in a Government company under sub-
section (1), the Government company shall, on and from the date of such 
vesting, be deemed to have become the lessee <in relation to the mines of 2S 
which the Metal Corporation was the lessee as if a mining lease in respect 
of such mines had been granted to th~ Government company, and the 
period of such lease shall be the entire period for which such lease could 
have been granted under the l\lineral Concession Rules; and all the rights 
and liabilities of the Central Government in rel8tt1ion to such mines shall, 30 
on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the 
rights and liabilities, respectively, of the Government company, 
(3) The proviSions of sub-section (2) of section 8 shall apply to a lease 
which vests in a Government company as they apply to a lease which 
has 'vested in the Central Government and any reference therein to the 3S 
Central Government shall be construed as a reference to the Government 
company. 
(4) Any reference hereafter in this Act to the Government company 
9hal1 be conStrued as a reference to the Government company which is 
appointed as the Administrator under sub-section (1) of section 5, or. as 40 
the case may be, the GoVernment company referred to in the direction 
made under sub-section (1). 
CHAPTER IV 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
10. For the deprivation of the Metal CorpOl'ation of the mana,ement 4S 
of its uudertaking, there shall be given, in cash, to the Metal Corporation 
by the Central Government, an amount, calculated at the rate of rupees 
eleven lakhs and thirty-nine thousand per annum, lor the period com-
meneiDg on the 2Znd day of October, 1965, aDd endina on the appointed 
day. So 

, 
it. For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government, under 
section 7 of the right, title and interest of the Metal Corporation' in 
relatioa to its undertaking, there shall be given, in cash, by the Central 
Government to the Metal Corporation, an amount of rupees one crore 
5 and ninety-e!ght lakhs. 
12. (1) The amount determined under section 10, ancl the amount 
payable under section 11, shall be given by the Central Government to 
the Metal Corporation before the expiry of a period of three months maID 
'he appointed day Uhereafter referred to as the specified period). 
10 (2) The amount referred to in sub-section (1) shall, if not paid before 
the expiry of the specified period, carry simple interest at the rate of four 
per cent, per annum, for the period commencing on the date of expiry of 
the specified period and ending on the date on which payment of such 
, " amount is made by the Central Governmen:t to the Metal Corporatio~: 
I 5 Provi~ed that no interest shall run from the elate pn which the amrunt 
is tendered to the Metall Corporatioa if the amounU so tendered is not 
u~ed~~ , 
CHAPTER V 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF 'mE UNDERTAKING OF THE METAL CORPORATION 
20 13. The general superintendence, direction, control and management 
of the affairs and business of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation, 
the right, title and interest in relation to which have vested in the 
Central Government under section 7, shall vest in the Government 
company specified in the dir(:Ction made under sub-section (1) of section 9, 
25 and, thereupon the Government company shall be entitled' to exercise all 
such powers and do all such things as the Metal Corporation is authorised 
to exercise and do in relation to its undertaking. 
CHAPTER VI 
PROVISIONS REL ... TING TO EMPLOYEES OF THE METAL CORPORATION 
30 U. (1) Every officer or other employee of the Metal Corporation 
(except a director or any managerial personnel specified in section 197.f\ 
10f 1956. of the Companies Act, 1956, or any other person en.titled to manage the 
whole or a substantial part of the business of the Metal Corporation 
under a special agreement) in the employment of the ~tal Corporation 
35 immediately before the comm~ncement o~ thi,s ~ct shall, ~Il so far 
as such employee is employed In connection With the affairs of the 
undertaking of the Metal Corporation, become, as from such commence-
ment, an officer or other employee, as the case may be, of the Central 
Government or the Government company and shall hold office by the 
40 same tenure and at the same remuneration. a?d upon the sa~ terms a~ 
conditions :md with the sume rights and pnV1leges as to pensIOn, gratuity 
and other matters as he would have held under the Metal Corporation 
if this Act had not been enacted and shall continue to do so 
until his employment under the Central Government or the Goverrunent 
company is duly terminated or until his remunera.tion , terms and condi-
45 tions are duly altered by the Central Government or the Goverrunent 
company: 
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to any such 
officer or o,ther employee, his employment shall be terminated by the 
PaYmeDt 
of amount 
forae-
quiaition 
of the 
under-
taking. 
Tlmeof 
payment. 
Manage-
Hidtii,V' , 
etc.,otlhe 
under- ' 
taldrie. 
Prov!-
s1ons~ 
latinl 
to em-
pIoyeer. 

Provident 
and 
other 
lunda. 
Act to 
bave 
over-
ridin, 
eftect, 
Contracts 
in bad 
faith 
maybe 
cancelled 
ar 
varied. 
'8 
, . 
'Central Govetnment or the Government company on. payment of an 
amount equivalent to-
(a) three month's remuneration, in the case of permanent 
employees, and 
(b) one months' remuneration, in the case of other employees: S 
Provided further that nothing in this section shall apply to any: officer 
'or other emp10yee who has, within thirty days next following the com-
mencement: of this Act, by notice in writing to the Central Government 
or the Government company, as the case may be, intimated his intention 
of not becoming an officer or other employee of. the Central Government 10 
or the Government company. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947. or in any other law for ,the time being in force, the transfer 
of the services of any officer or other employee of the Metal Corporation 
to the Central Government 01' the Government company shall not entitle IS 
such oiIicer or other employee to any compensation under that Act or 
other law, and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal 
or other authorities. 
15. (1) Where the Metal Corporation has established a provident, 
superannuation, welfare or other fund for the benefl,t of the persons em- 20 
ployed in its undertaking, the monies relatable to the officers or other 
employees whose services have become transferred by Or under this 
Act to the Central Government or the Government company, shall, out 
of the monies standing, on the appointed day, to the credit of such provi-· 
dent, superannuation, welfare or other fund, stand transferred to, and 25 
vested in, the Central Government or the Government company, as the 
case may be. 
(2,) The monies which stand transferred, under sub-section (1), to the 
Centr'al Government or ,the Government company. as the caSe may be, 
shall be dealt with by that Government or Government company in such 30 
manner as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
16. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any-
thing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 3S 
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law, 
other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority. 
17. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied after such inquiry as 
14 ot UK7. 
it may think fit that any' contract or agreement entered into at any time 40 
within three years immediately preceding the commencement of this Act 
between the Metal Corporation or the managing agents of Metal Cor-
poration and any other person, in so far as such contract or agreement 
relates to the undertaking of the Metal Corporation, has been entered into 
,in bad faith or is detrimental to the interests of the undertaking of the 45 
Metal Corporation, it may make an order canc:elling (either uncondi-
tionally or subject to EUch conditions as it may think fit to impose) or 

• 
varying the contract or agreement, and thereafter the contract or agree-
~e,.'t shall have effect accordingly: 
Provided that no such contract Or agreement shall be cancelled or 
varied except after giving to the parMes to the contract or agreement a 
S reasonable opportl1nit~· of being heRrd. 
10 
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order made under sub-section (1) may 
make an applicamon to the High Court at Delhi for the variation or 
reversal of such order and thereupon such court may confirm, modify or 
reverSe such order. 
18. (1) No suit, pm<:ecution or other Ie~al proceeding shall lie a~inst 
the Central Government or any officer of that Government Or the Ad-
ministrator or the Government comnflny or any officer or other person 
authorised hy that Government or Government comnany for anything 
which is in good faith don':'! or lntendf:'d to be done under' this Act. 
IS (2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against tbe Central Gov-
'ernment or any of its officers or other employees or the Government com-
pany or anv officer or other !JI!rson authorised by that company for anv 
dama~e causf"d or likely to be CAUI';ed by anything which is in good 1aith 
done or ~ntended to be done under this Act. 
20 19. (1-) The Central Gm·ernment may, by notification. direct that all 
Or any of th(' powers exercisable by it under this Act. other than thf' 
power conferred by section 22, may also be exercised by such person or 
persons, as may he sp('cified in the nntification. 
(2) Whenever an .... dele~ation of power is made under sub-sec,tion (1). 
2S the persons to whom such power has been delelZatedshall act under the 
direction, control and supervision of the Central Government. 
20. Any person who.-
fa) havin~ in hil:; possession. custody Or ('ontrol any property 
forming' part of anv undertakinlZ of thp. Metal Corporation. ~~-
30 full ... withholdR RuC'h l>roperty from the Cf:'ntral Government or Gov-
ernment company: or 
'(b) wrongftlllv obtains pOssession of. or retains. any property 
formin~ part of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation or wilfully 
withholds or failR to furnish to the Central Governm~nt or thf" 
3S Government company or any person or body of persons sQecifiC'd by 
that Government on Government company. any d~ment rf:'latinl! 
to such undertakinv. which mav be in his possession, custody or 
control or fails to deliver to the Central Governmen~ or the Govern-
ment company or anv person or bodv of persons snecified by that 
40 Government Or Government C'ompanv, any assets. books of aC'counts. 
rem-stefl; or other documents in his oosResRion. custody or ('O~trol. 
relating to the undertaking of the Metal Corporation; or 
(0) wrongfully removes or destroys ariy property forminll l>Art 
of any undertaking of the M~ttl Corporatiori or prefers any clsUn 
Protec-
tion ot 
action 
taken 
in good 
faith. 
Dele,a-
Hon ot 
pO\l\'Ort. 
Penal-
ties. 

Offence. 
by com-
panles. 
Power 
to man 
rules. 
10 
urider this Act which he knows or has ,reasonable cause to believe 
to be false or ~rossly, inaccurate, 
shall be punishable with impris( nment for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with 
both. S 
21, (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, 
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct 
of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offencE'! and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 10 
punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-seC'lttion shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment. if he proves that the offence was 
cOmmUted without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due dili-
gence to prevent the commission of such offence. 15 
(2) Notwithstanding anything ('ontained in sub-section (1), where 
any Offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent Or r.onni-
vance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any d!rector, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, mana~et", 20 
secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordinF,ly. 
Exp!ana.tion.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) c'company" means any body corporate and includes a finn or 
other association of individuals: 25 
(b) 'director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
21. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the ~nerality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide forall or any of the following 30 
matters, namely:-
CUi) the manner in which the monies in any provident or other 
fund referred to in sub-section (2) of section 1'5 shall be dealt wUh; 
(b) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, pres-
cribed. 35 
(3) Every rule madE' by the Centnl Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of .. 
Parliament while it is in session for a total period or thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately follOwing the session 40 
Or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modificRttion in the rule Or both Houseg agree that the rule should not 
be made. the rule shall thereafter have effect only in sueh' modified form 
or be of no effect, as the· case may be; so, however, that any modification 

11 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pre· 
viously done under that rule. 
23. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisiong of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the 
5 provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period 
of two years from the date on which this Act receives the assent of the 
President. 
24. (1) On the commencement of this Act, the Tribunal constituted 
10 un tier sub-sectiort( 1) of section 11 of the Metal Corporation of India 
36 of 1966. (Acquisition of Undertaking) Act, 1960, shall stand abolished and every 
proceeding pending before it, every order made by it and every appeal 
or application against any such order, shall stand abated, and, on such 
abatment, the Central Government shall take charge of all records of 
15 proceedings, applications, memoranda, regrsters and other documents 
maintained by, or in connection with any proceedng before, the Tribl'nal. 
20 
30 
(2)' On the commencement of this Act.-
(a) ev~ry suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature 
in relation to the affairs or business of the undertaking of the Metal 
Corporation instituted before such commencement, and pending on 
such commencement shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any 
way. prejudicially affected by reason of anything contained in this 
Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, 
prosecuted and enforced by or against the Metal Corporation and 
not against the Central Government or the Government company; 
(b) every suit, appeal Or other proceeding of whatever nature 
instituted after such commencement but before the appointed day, 
in relation to the affairs or business of the undertaking of the Metal 
Corporation, and pending on the appO'inted day, shall not abate, be 
discontinued or, in any way, be prejudicially affected by reason of 
anything contained in this Act, but such suit, appeal or other pro-
ceeding may be continued, prosecuted and enforced by Or against the 
Central Government or the Government company. 
(3) Anything done, any action taken or any contract entered into by 
35 the Central Government, Administrator or the Government company at 
any time during the period commencing on the 22nd day of October, 
1965, and ending on the appointed day shall be deemed t6 have been done, 
taken or enrered into by the Central Governmelltt or, as the case may be, 
the Government company in the due course of management of the under-
40 taking of the Metal Corporation. 
25. (1) The Metal Corporation (Nationalisation and Miscellaneous Pro-
visions) Ordinance, 1976 is hereby repealed. 
Power to 
remove 
dIfficul-
ties. 
Abolition 
of Tribu-
nal, etc. 
Repeal of 
Ordinance 
12 of 1976 
(2) Notw~thstanding such repeal, anything done Or any action taken and saving. 
under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have becn done or taken 
45 under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Metal Corporation of India Limited, a company, had a mmmg 
lease in respect of zinc-lead deposits in Zawar area in Rajasthan and 
owned a lead smelter 8,t Tundoo in Bihar. It had undertaken to expand 
production from the Zawar mines and to construct a Zinc Smelter near 
Udaipur for producing electrolytic grade zinc and bye-products. How-
ever, for various reasons, the Corporation was not able to complete the 
projects it had undertaken. The construc,uon work came to a standstill 
and the Corporation failed to meet its repayment obligations to the 
suppliers of machinery and others. 
2. As zinc and lead are essential raw materials fot' the economy of 
the country and are of considerable strategic importance to the country, 
it was necessary in the public interest that the projects undertaken by 
the Corporation should be completed as soon as possible. In the 
circumstances, for the speedy development and expansion of the zinc-
lead depos~ts, the undertaking of the Metal Corporation of India was 
acquired by the Central Government with effect from 22nd October, 1965 
by a Parliamentary legislation, enacted in 1965. The said Act, having 
been struck down, was replaced by the Metal Corporation of India 
(Acquisition of Undertaking) Act, 1966 (36 of 19(6). The undertaking 
of the Corporation was la,ter vested in the Hindustan Zinc Limited, 
Udaipur, a Government company, with effect from 10th January, 1966. 
3. Section 10 of the 1966-Act provided for payment of compen!llation 
for the acquisition of the undertaking by the Central Government to the 
Metal CorporatIon. The principles for the determination of the amount 
of t.he compensation were specified in the Schedule to the Act and it 
was provided that where the amount of the compensation could be fixed 
by ag.reement, it shall be deternlined in accordance with such agreement; 
but where no such agreement could be reached, ;the Central GovernmE'nt 
shall refer the matter to a one-man Tribunal. The amount of compensa-
tion could not be determined by agreement because the Corporation wa~ 
engaged for about four years from 196.') in questioning the vires of 
1965-Act in the Punjab High Court and the vires of the 1966-Act first 
in the Supreme Court and then in the Calcutta High Court. The Calcutta 
High Court ultimately dismissed its writ petition on 1st April, 1969. 
4. Pursuant to section 10 of the 1966-Act, efforts were made to 
determine the amount of compensation by mutual agreement. An offer 
of compensa.tion of Rs. 1.98 crores was made to the Corporation in April. 
1971. As there was no response to the offer from the Corporation withil'l 
the time-limit specified jn the offer, a one-man Tribunal was constituted 
on 29th November, 1971, as provided under section 11 of the 1966-Act. 
5. Thp. Tribunal cOLlld not commence its proceedings as, in the mean-
while, some of thf' shareholders of the Corporation filed a writ petition 
in the Calcutta Hi~h Court, seeking tm injunction against the proceedings 
of the 'rribunal. That petition was finally dismissed in July, 1972. 

6. Thereafter, the tribunal directed the Corporation in August, 1972, 
to file its claim. The Corporation, however, wan,1led inspection of the 
records before filing its claim, and, after protracted proceedings arising 
out of its pleas, the Corporation ultimately 1iled <its claim on 27th April, 
1974, claiming B.s. 101.80 crores. The Central Government filed a written 
reply in September, 1974, and the Corporation filed its rejoinder in 
November, 1974. 
7. Thereafter, the issues were to be framed, but the Corporation 
wanted inspection of records once again and also sought financial 
assistance from the Government to present its case effectively. This plea 
of the Corporation further delayed the determination of the amount of 
compensation. Finally, on 21st. June, 1976, the Corporation went to the 
extent of withdrawing from further participation in proceedings before. 
the Tribunal. 
8. The undertaking of the Corporation was acquired for the speedy 
development of the zinc-lead deposits. The prolongation of the pro('eed-
ings before the Tribunal by the Corporation continued to leave indc'er-
minate the amount of compensat~on payable, which ultimately has to 
be capitalised. This was standing in the way of formulation and 
execution of plans for further increase in production of these critical 
metals by the Government company in which the undertaking was ves,ted 
under section 12 of the 1966-Act. 
9. In pursuance of the continued objective of increased production of 
zinc and lead metals and to subserve the common good, which, for the 
reasons stated now, necessitated end'ing of the uncertainty in regard to 
the amount of compensation payable to the Corporation, the ME"tal 
Corporation (Nationalisation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Ordinance, 
1976, was promulgated by the President on 2nd August, 1976. 
10. The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance. 
NEW DELHI; CHANDRAJIT YADAV. 
The 6th AUgU8t, 1976. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 54018(1)176-Met. II, dated the 9th August, 1976 
from Shri Chandrajit Yadav, Minister of Steel and Mines to the Secre-
tary-General, Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Bill recomm~nds to the House the introduction of the Bill 
under article 117 (1) of the Constitution of India and also recommends 
the consideration of the Bill under article 117 (3) . 

j.'lNANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Sllb-clause (1) of clause 4 of the Bill seeks to provide that the right, 
title and interest in relation to the undertaking of the Metal Corporation, 
which had been transferred to, and vested in, the Central Government 
on 2~nd October, 19€5 under section 3 of the Metal Corporation of India 
(Acquisition of Undertaking) Act, 1966 (36 of 1966), and was th~reafter 
transferred to, and vested in, the Hindustan Zinc Lim~ted, a Government 
company, sh~ll stand re-transferred to, and re-vested in, the Metal 
Corporation and immediately thereafter the management of the under-
takillg of the Metal CorpOration would vest in the Central Government. 
According to the Bill, the management of the undertaking of the Metal 
Corporation remained vested in the Central Government for the period 
commencing on 22nd October, 1965 and ending on 2nd August, 1976, i.e. 
the day on which the Metal Corporation (Nationalisation and l\.1iscel-
laneous Provisions) Ordinance, 1976 (12 of 1976) was promulgated by the 
Pres,ident. Clause 10 of the Bill, therefore, provides for the payment of 
an amount, at the rate of Rs. 11.39 lakhs per annum, for the deprivation 
of the Metal Corporation of the management of its undertaking during 
the period aforesaid. The total amount to be paid for the period afore-
said will thus come to rupees 122.79 lakhs. 
Clause,7 of the Bill seeks to provide that on and £rom the appointed 
day, i.e. the 2nd day of August, 1976, the Wldet;taking of the Metal 
Corporation shall stand transferred to, and vested in, the Central Govern-
ment. Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to provide for the payment of an amount 
of rupees 198 lakhs to the Metal Corporation for the aoqui9ition of its 
undertaking. 
Clause 12 of the Bill provides that the amount aforesaid is to be paid 
within a period of three months from 2nd August, 1976, and in case of 
non-payment of the amount within the period aforesaid, the amount 
will carry simple interest at the rate. of 4 per cent. per ~um until it 
is paid. Since it is not proposed to delay the payment of the amount, 
no expenditure is likely" to be involved for payment of any interest. 
The Bill, if enacted would, therefore, involve a non'recUtTing expendi-
ture of a total amount of rupees 320.79 lakhs (rupees 122.79 lakhs + rupees 
198 lakhs). 
Since management of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation is 
proposed to be vested in th:, Hindustan Zinc Limited immediate]y after 
it has vested in the Central Government, no other recurring and non-
recurring expenditure would be im·o]ved. 
14 

MEMORAKDUM HEGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 22 of the Bill empowers the Central Govern-
ment to make rules to carry out the provh,ions of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) 
of that clause enumerates the matters in regard to which the rules may 
he made. ThesE' are matters of detail and could hardly be provided in 
the Bill itself. The de!egation of legislative power is, thErefore, of a 
normal (·haracter. 
15 

Memorandum regarding changes in the Legislation to replace the iMetal 
COTp'lration IN(Ltiona1i~atior. and Miscellaneous Provisions) 
Ordinance, 1976. 
Besides necessary drafting and consequential changes the following 
changes have been made in the Bill, namely:-
1. An Explanation has been inserted in sub-clause (2) of clause 7. 
The Explanation is only of a clarificatory nature. 
2, In sub-clause (2) of clause 17, the word "Delhi" has been substituted 
for the word "Calcutta". In the Ordinance the High Court of Calcutta 
was given. jurisdiction tlJ entertain appncations for the variation or 
reversal of orders passed under sub-clause (1) of that clause because the 
registered office of the Metal Corporation of India Limited is at 
Calcu.tta. But since the ord,ers against which such applications may be 
made, could be made by the Central Government, the jurisdiction to hear 
such applications is being given to the High Court at Delhi. 
3, In sub-clause (1) of clause 24, a provision has been included re-
quiring the Central Government to take charge of all records and other 
documents of the Tribunal which has been abolished. 
HI 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the taking over of the management of the undertaking of 
the Metal Corporation, after such undertaking is deemed to have 
been transferred to, and re-vested in, the said Corporation, and for 
the subsequent acquisition of the undertaking of the Metal Cor-
poration for the purpose of enabling the Central Government, in 
the public interest, to exploit to the fullest extent possible, the zinc 
and lead deposits in and around Zawar area in the State of Rajas-
than and to utilise those minerals in such manner as to subserve the 
common good, and for matte;s connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 
(Shri Chandrojit Yadav. Minister of Steel and Mines.) 