. AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

"44 06: 1093

24 ० 1999

USE OF THE PEOPLE (ADMINISTRATION) BILL, 1999
By
Suri G.M. Banatwata, M.P.

A

BILL
the appointment of 6 Commission to oversee the administration of the
ial staff of the House of the People and for matters connected therewith

by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

Act may be called the House of the People (Administration) Act, 1999,

Act, unless the context otherwise requires —

ommission” means the House of the People Commission constituted
ion 3 of this Act:

“House” means the House of the People;

“Leader of the House” means the Prime Minister or a member of the Council
inisters, who, being a member of the House, may be nominated by the
Minister for the purposes of this Act:

d) “Leader of the Opposition” means a member of the House who is recognised
‘Speaker as such or his nominee, who shall be a member of the House, and if
ris no such leader, then the leader of the party in the Opposition having the
number of members in the House;

(०) “Secretarial Staff” means the staff of the House of the People;

“Secretariat” means the Secretariat of the House of the People, and

Shon title

Definitions.


4

(g) “Speaker” means Speaker of the House of the People.

Constitution and 3. (7) There shall be constituted a Commission to be known as the House of the

Composition of People Commission to perform the functions conferred on it by this Act.

(2) The Commissio# shalf be appointed by the House on a motion to be moved by
the Léader of the House and adopted by the House,

(3) The Commission shall consist of the following: —
(व) the Speaker;
(b) the Deputy Speaker of the House;
(c) the Leader of the House;
(d) the Leader of the Opposition; and

(०) three members of the House to be elected by the system of proportional
representation by means of a single transferable vote.

Time upto which 4. The Speaker and the Leader of the House shall continue to be the members of the

Fee % be Commission until immediately before the assumption of the office by their respective
eader ०]

House continue SUCCESSOFS.

as Members of

Commission.

Cessation of 5. A member of the Commission other than the Speaker and the Leader of the House

membership of shall cease to be a member of the Commission if he ceases to be a member of the House.

the Commission.

‘Chairman of the 6. (1) The Speaker shali be the ex-officio Chairman of the Commission

Commission.

(2) While the office of the Speaker is vacant, the Deputy Speaker of the House
shall function as the Chairman of the Commission and, if for any reason, the Speaker is
unable to act as the Chairman of the Commission, the Deputy Speaker shall act as the

~ Chairman of the Commission.

Appointment of 7. (J) There shall be a Secretary-General of the House who shall be appointed by the
Seoretary-Gen- President of India on the recommendation of the Commission
°

(2) The Sccretary-General shall be appointed from amongst those who have

distinguished themselves and made their mark in the service of the House in various
capacities in the Secretariat for not less than twenty years.

(3) The Secretary-General shall be the head of the Secretariat.

‘Vacation and res- 8. The office of the Secretary-General shall become vacant—
ignation of, and
removal from, (a) on his attaining the age of superannuation, as may be fixed by the 30
the office of Seo- Commission;
tetary-General.
(b) on his resignation in writing addressed to the President of India; and
(८) on his removal from office by the President of India in the same manner as
is provided for the removal of a Judge of the Supreme Court under clause (4) of
article 124 of the Constitution. 35.
Functions of the 9. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the functions of the Commission shall
Commission. include the following: — वि
(a) to frame rules regulating the recruitment, appointment, promotion बाते ;
other service conditions of the Secretary-General and officers and staff of the
Secretariat;
40

(6) to adopt such service rules of the Government of India as it may deem fit;
(c) to appoint officers and staff of the Secretariat;

(d) to appoint officers and staff on deputation to posts in the Secretariat from


3

other services such as Judicial services or from office of the Comptroller and Auditor
General or from State Legislatures;

(९) to determine the strength of the secretarial staff at various levels and their
pay scales and other allowances;

(0 to ensure that the classification, grading, salaries, allowances and other
conditions of service. including pension and other benefits, of the personnel in the
Secretariat are kept generally in conformity with those of the personnel in other
comparable services in the Government of India and also consistent with the service
requirements of the House;

(g) to consider and decide appeals against the orders of the Speaker or Secretary-
General, as the case may be, submitted by the officers and staff of the Secretariat;

(h)to prepare an estimate for each financial year of the expenses of the services
of the Hoyse and of any other expenses incurred for the service of the House and lay
them before the House;

(0 to appoint a member of the secretarial staff as “Finance Officer” who will
be responsible for accounting for the sums paid out of money provided by Parliament
for the service of the House; and

() to exercise all powers necessary to implement the provisions of clause (1)
of article 98 of the Constitution of India towards the constitution of a separate.
“independent and autonomous Secretariat of the House.

10. (7) The Commission may delegate to the Speaker or Secretary-General any of its
unctions under this Act.

(2) Anything done by or in relation to a person, to whom functions are delegated
der this section, in the discharge of functions of the Commission, shall have the same

(3) Any delegation of functions made by the Commission under this section or
amendment or revocation of such delegation shall be mentioned in the annual report
‘the Commission made under section 12,

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Commission shall
the ultimate responsibility for considering any representation made, in relation to
tters affecting the interests, in connection with the employment of the secretarial staff.
staff associations who are recognised by the Commission in respect of such staff, and
the conduct of consultations and negotiations, about such matters with those staff
ociations.

वा, The validity of any proceedings of the Commission shall not be affected by any
ancy among the members of the Commission, or by any defect in the appointment or
ation of any members of the Commission.

12. The Commission shall as soon as possible, after the end of every financial year,
8, print and present to the House a report on the exercise of its functions in that year

13. (/) The Commission may make rules to regulate its procedure and conduct of its
siness.
(2) The Commission may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules to
late recruitment and conditions of service of the secretarial staff.

(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
५ before the House, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
prised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, the
use agrees in making any modification in the rule, or the House agrees that the rule

Delegation of
functions of the
Commission.

Validity of the
proceedings of
the Commis-
sion

Annual Report
of the Commis-
Power to make
rales


‘Transitional
provisions.

Saving.

4

should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be.

(4) Any notice of amendment to such rules given by a member shall stand referred
to the Commission which shall consider it and make such changes in the rules as the
Commission may consider fit:

(5) The final rule made by the Commission after taking into consideration the
amendments suggested by the members shall be laid before the House and, thereafier, on
the House agreeing to the final rule on a motion made by a member of the Commission, the
rule or amendment to a rule, as the case may be, shall be promulgated by the Commission
by notification in the official Gazette.

14. Ail persons employed in the secretarial staff immediately before the coming into
force of this Act, shall be treated, for all purposes, as if their appointment had been made
by the Commission,

15. All rules, regulations and orders made and in force immediately before the coming
into force of this Act, shall be deemed to have been made by the Commission and shall
continue to be valid and operative unless modified or revoked by the Commission; so,
however, anything contained therein being inconsistent with any provisions of this Act,
shall be of no effect and be void to the extent of such inconsistency.

+

10

15


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The concept of an independent Secretariat of Parliament is an essential adjunct of
| democracy. The significance of this conceptualisation of a Secretariat
independent of the Executive was fully realised in the 1920s when the then Central
Legislative Assembly passed unanimously a resolution moved by Pandit Motilal Nehru
and seconded by Lala Lajpat Rai, Later, Vithalbhai Patel ceaselessly endeavoured in this
- direction.

The independent position of the Secretariats of the Houses of Parliament was
recognised by the makers of our Constitution when they considered it necessary to
incorporate a separate and exclusive article (article 98) in the Constitution. This article
envisages enactment by Parliament of a law to regulate the recruitment and conditions of

service of persons appointed to the secretarial staff of the House. The enactment of such a
Iegislation is long overdue.

____ The unique position of the Lok Sabha Secretariat demands, as it does, a special sense
of dedication and impartiality from the secretarial staff in the discharge of their duties and
Tequires a broad-based institutional arrangement representing the House to be statutorily
made available to assist the Speaker in watching and safeguarding the interests of the
secretarial staff in the service of the House and its members. This institutional arrangement
‘is sought to be made by providing a House of the People Commission.

Hence this Bill.

New Devut, G. M. BANATWALLA.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for the constitution of a House of the
Commission. Its members are the members of the House of the People who would
discharging their duties in relation to the Commission as its members. The expendi
towards the payment of their TA/DA, if any, would be a part of the normal expendit
the House. The increase in the expenditure, if any, as aresult of constituting the Commi:
would be a marginal one that would not be possible to be quantified in specific ter
this stage.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to confer on the Commission the power to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act, The matters in respect of which such rules may be
made are matters of procedure and administrative details. The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character. .



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the appointment of a Commission to oversee the administration of the
secretarial staff of the House of the People and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri 6. M. Banatwalla, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1655LS—11.11.1999.