As inTRobUCED IN Lok SABHA

10 JUL 1३५४

Bill No. 74 of 1998

| (REGULATION OF PRODUCTION, SUPPLY AND
DISTRIBUTION) AMENDMENT BILL, 1998

By
Suet P. 5. Gapnavi, M.P.

BILL

the Cigarettes (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 1975.
Br: itenacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —

1, (1) This Act may be called the Cigarettes (Regulation of Production, Supply and
tion) Amendment Act, 1998.

(2) Itextends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notifica-
the Official Gazette, appoint

2.In the long title of the Cigarettes (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribu-
1, 1975 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after the word "cigarettes", the
“and other tobacco products” shall be inserted.

Short title,
extent and
commencement,

Amendment of
Long Title


2

Amendinent of 3. In section 2 of the principal Act.—
section 2.
(i) in clause (6), in sub-clause (is), for the words “but does not
words “and also includes” shall be substituted.

(1 for clause (m), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(m) “specified warning” in relation to cigarettes means the following
namely:—-

"Cigarette smoking is injurious to health";
and in relation to any other tobacco product means the following warning, namely:-
"Chewing/Consumption of (name of product) is injurious to h
(iii) after clause (m), the following clause shall be added, namely:—

"(n) "tobacco product” means tobacco in any form and its mix
blends with other substances or ingredients, which are used for smoking,
ing, sniffing or consumption and shall include Gutka, Khaini, and
similar products, by whatever name called.".

Insertion of new 4. After section 2 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,

section 2A

Application of "2A. The provisions of this Act shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to

Provisions of the bacco products,”,

Act to other

tobacco

products

Substitution of 5. For section 7 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, ni

new section for

section 7,

Size of letters, “7. No warning shall be deemed to be in accordance with the provisions
Act, if the height and breadth of cach letter used in such warning is less
millimetres.”.

Insertion of new 6. After section 7 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,

sertions 7A and

7B

Prohibitior on “7A.(1) No person shall blend or treat cigarettes or any tobacco

blending or i ox or payed

ealing of any addictives, narcotics or psychotropic drugs.

cigarettes and (2) Any person who violates the provisions of sub-section(1) shall be

tobacco products

with ‘addictives, able with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, or wi

which may extend to ten lakh rupees, or with both.

ete

Prohibition on 7B (1) Sponsoring of any national or international sports events in India

spamoriis et advertisements of cigarettes and other tobacco products by any manufact

Serene ae, cigarettes or tobacco products is hereby prohibited.

evgarette ig y

(कार । (2) Telecasting and broadcasting of advertisements of cigarettes and
bacco products is hereby banned.".

Amendment of 7. In section 17 of the principal Act, for the words "which may extend to three

section 17. or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees", the words "Which may ex
seven years, or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees" shall be substi



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Smoking of cigarettes and beedis and consumption of tobacco products like Gutka
and Khaini have been claiming a large number of human lives year after year. Throat and
lung cancer, lung infections including T.B., heart ailments and other tobacco related dis-
eases have assumed menacing proportions accounting for high percentage of deaths every
year.

Ithas, therefore, become necessary to regulate, control and even ban production, sale
and distribution, not only of cigarettes, beedis and rolls of tobacco used for smoking but
also of other tobacco products, including Gutka and Khaini. It has also been noticed that
tobacco products are treated and blended with addictives and psychotropic drugs resulting
in addition, which eften proves fatal.

Itis, therefore, proposed to enlarge the scope of the Cigarettes(Regulation of Produc-
tion, Supply and Distribution) Act, 1975 by making necessary provisions to regulate the
production, supply and distribution of other tobacco products, warn the users of tobacco
products of dangers they are exposed to and to make the punishment for offences relating to
production and supply of such harmful products deterrent enough to make them effective.

Hence this Bill.

New Deut; P.S.GADHAVI
May 29, 1998.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CIGARETTES (REGULATION OF PRODUCTION, SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION)

Acr, 1975.
(Act No. 490F 1975)
* * * * * .
A
BILL

to provide for certain restrictions in relation to trade and commerce in, and production,
supply and distribution of, cigarettes and for matters connected thereto.

* * * * * *
2.In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
* * * . * *
(b) “cigarette” includes, —

(i) any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or in any other substance not
containing tobacco,

(ii) any roll of tobacco wrapped in any substance containing tobacco,
which, by reason of its appearance, the type of tobacco used in the filler, or its
packaging and labelling is likely to be offered to, or purchased by, consumers as
cigarette,

but does not include beedi, cheroot and cigar;

* * * * * *

(m) "specified warning” means the following warning, namely, "Cigarette smok-
ing is injurious to health”

7. No warning shall be deemed to be in accordance with the provisions of this Act if
the height of each letter used in such warning is less than three millimetres.

17. Any person who,—

(a) sells, or distributes or supplies in the course of any trade or commerce, any
package of cigarettes which does not contain, either on the package or on its label, the
specified warning,

(b) produces, or supplies or distributes in the course of any trade or commerce,
any package of cigarettes which does not contain, either on the package or on its
label, the specified warning,

(c) advertises, or takes part in the advertisement of cigarettes if such advertise-
ment does not include the specified warning,

shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.

* * * * * *


LOK SABHA

a
BILL
to amend the Cigarettes (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 1975,

(Shri 2 5. Gadhavi, M. 22)
MGIP(PLU)MRND—968LS—30.06, 1998.