As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
11? ~'.~" ~~'4 
Bill No. 74 of ~4 
TIlE FOOD CORPORATIONS BILL, 1964 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
"I 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
THE FOOD CORPORATION OF lNDIA 
3. Establishment of Food Corporation of Indie. 
4. Offices and agencies. 
5. Capital of Corporation. 
6. Management. 
7. Board of directors. 
8. Disqualification for office of director. 
9. Remowl and resignation of directors. 
10. Meetings. 
11. Advisory Committees. 
12. Officers and other employees of Corporation. 
13. Functions of CorporatiOn. 
" !) 
14. Executive Committee and other committees. 
15. Member of board or committee thereof not to vote in certain 
cases. 
CHAPTER III 
BOARDS OF MANAGEMENT 
16. Boards of Management, their constitutiQt\ and f\mettoM. 
, (i) 
1394 (B)LS-I 

(ii) 
CHAPTER IV 
STATE FOOD CORPORATIONS 
CLAUSES 
17. Establishment of State Food Corporation. 
IS. Capital of the State Food Corporation. 
19. Management of State Food Corporation. 
20. DisqulJlification for office of member of board of directors. 
21. Removal and resignation of members ·of board of directors. 
22. Meetings. 
23. Appointment of officers, etc., and their conditions. of service. 
24. Executive Committee and other committees. 
25. Member of board or committee thereof not to vote in certain 
cases. 
CHAPTER V 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
26. Sub, nission of programme of activities and financial estimates. 
27. Bon owing powers of Food Corporation. 
28. Len. ling by Food Corporation on security of foodgrains. 
29. Pow Ir to enter into agreement for purchase of foodgrains after 
barvest. 
30. Gus rantee by Food Corporation. 
31. Fun Is of Food Corporation. 
32. InVE Itment of funds. 
33. Allo ~tiOl1 of surplus profits. 
34. Accl un'ts and audit. 
35. Annual report on the working of Food Corporations. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
36. Vael ncies, etc., not to invalidate acts or proceedings of FQaq 
Corporation, etc. 
37. DelE gation. 
38. Dec: aration of fidelity and ~recy. 
39. Ind( mnity of directoz:s. 
40. Pro1 ection of action taken under this Act, 

· (iii) 
CLAUSES 
41. Offences. 
42. Prm'ision relating to income-tax, super-tax, etc. 
43. Win :ling up of Food Corporation. 
44. Power to make rules. 
45. Power of Food Corporation to make regulations. 
THE SCHEDULE 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
LOK SABHA 
CORRIG1=: ~\fDA 
to 
THE FOOD CORPORATIONS BILL, 1964 
(To Bel As Introduced in Lok Sabha) 
Page (11) , Clause 18. -
omit "the" - ' 
Page 4, line 21,-
t'm1t It other" -
Page 5, line 36, -
Ja..fter "aforesaid," insert "the" 
Page l2, line 13, -
ill "members" ~ "member" 
Page 12, line 21, -
omi t, "the re of!' 
6. Page 18, line 15, -
m "regulat on" read "regulation" 
7. Correct line numbers on pages -
2, 12, 14, 16, 17 and 19. 
NEW DEHII: 
NOVEMBER 14. 196t KARTlKA 23, 1886 Saka) 

s 
10 
IS 
8i1l No. 74 or I". 
THE FOOD CORPORATIONS BILL, 1964 
A 
BILL 
t~ provide for th~ establif,hme:nt of Food Corporati~ for t~ pur-
. pose oj tr~ine. in foodgrains and other foodstufJ~ and for 'n,14t-
teTS' cOnnected' therewith and incidental thereto. ' 
BE it en~cted qy Parliament in the Fifteenth y~ of the Republic 
oct. Ip¢a. as fo~ows: - . 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINAKY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Food Corporations Act,19M. Short· 
title, (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of, Jammu extent 
and.~ir. and com. 
mence-(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern· Mento 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In t~ Act, unless the context otherwise requires.- Defini-
tions. (a) "Corporation" means the Food Corporation of India 
established under section 3; 
(b) "Food Corporation" means the Food COl1POrat~on of 
I~~ia est~blished und~ section 3 or a State FOOd Corporation 
eStablished under section 17; 
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under 
this Act; •. 

Establish. 
mentof 
Food Cor. 
poration 
of India. 
Offices 
and 
agencies. 
(d) "scheduled bank" means a bank for the time being in-
cluded in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934; 
(e) "State Food Corporation" means a State Food Corpo-
ration established under section 17; S 
(f) "year" means the financial year. 
CHAPTER II 
THE FOOD CORPORATION OF INDIA 
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government 
may, 'by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, IQ 
the Central Government shall establish for the purposes of this Act 
a Corporation known as the Food Corporation of India. 
(2) The Corporation shall be a body corporate with the name 
aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common se'al with 
power, subject to the provisions 'Of this Act, to acquire, hold and IS 
dispose of property and to contract, and may, by that name, sue 
and be sued. 
4. (1) The head office of the Corporation shall be at Madras or at 
such other place as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, specify. 20 
(2) The Corporation may, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government, establish offices or agencies at other places in 
or outside India. 
2 of 1934. 
Capital of 5. (1) The original capital of the Corporation shall be such sum 
Cor- not exceeding one hundred crores of rupees as the Central Govern- 2S 
poration. ment may fix. 
Manage-
ment. 
(2) The Central Government may from time to time increase the 
capital of the Corporation to such extent and in such manner as that 
Government may determine. 
(3) Such capital may be provided by the Central Government 30 
from time to time after due apPl'IOPriation made by Parliament by 
law for the purpose and subject to such terms and conditions as may 
be determined by that Government. 
6. (1) The general superintendence, direction and management 
of the affairs and business of the Corporation shall vest in a board 35 
of directors which may exercise all such powers and do all such 
acts and things as may be exercised or done by the Corporation 
under this Act. 
(2) The board of directors, in discharging its functions, shall act 
on business principles having regard to public interest and shall be 40 

68 of 1982. 
3 
guided by such instructions on questions of policy as may be given 
to it by the Cent:ral Government. 
(3) If any doubt arises as to wh~ther a qu~stion is or is not a 
question of policy, the decision of the Central Government thereon 
5 shall 'be final. 
10 
IS 
7. (1) The board of directors of the Corporation shall consist of 
the follOwing, namely:-
(a) a Chairman; 
(b) three direlctors to represent respectively the Mini,strie6 
of the Central Government dealing with-
(i) food, 
(ii) finance, and 
(iii) co-operation; 
(e) the managing director of the Centl'11 Warehousing 
Corporation established under section 3 of the Warehousing 
Corporations Act, 1962, ex-officio; 
(d) a managing director; 
(e) six other directors. 
(2) All the diredors of the Corporation other than the director 
zo referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (1) shall be appointed by 
. the Central Government. 
25 
(3) The managing director s11a11-
(a) exercise such powers and perfonn such duties 88 the 
board of qlrectors may entrust or delpgatel to him; and 
(b) receive such salary and allowances ae; the board of 
directors may, with the approval of the Central Government, 
fix: 
Provided that the first managing director shaJ1 receive such 
salary and allowances as the Central Government may fix. 
30 (4) The tenn of office of, find the manner olf filling casual vacan-
cies among, the directors of the Corporation, other than the director 
referred to in clause (e) of sub-section (1), and the other terms 
and conditions of appoLntment of the directors of the Corporation 
shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), ~ such as may 
35 be prescrIbed. 

Disqua-
lification 
for office 
of direc. 
tor. 
Removal 
and resil-
nation of 
direct8l's. 
4 
8. A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as, and !for 
being, a director of the Corporation-
(a) if he is, or at any time has been, adjudicated insolvent 
or has suspended payment of his debts or has compounded with 
his creditors; or 5 
(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a 
c()mpetent court; or 
(e) if he is or has been convicted of any offence which in 
the opinion of the Central Government involves moral turpi-
tude; or 10 
(d) if he has been removed or dismissed from the service 
of the Government or a corporation owned or controlled by 
the' Government; or ' 
. I ,: " 
(e) except 'in the case of the chairman or the managing 
director. if he is a salaried official of the Food Corporation of IS 
India or ,a State Food Corporation. 
t. (I) The Central Government ml!lY, at a~;y. tim~, aft'er consulta-
tion with the Corporation, remove the managing director from office 
after g}ving him a reasonable opportunity of showing oouse against 
the proposed removal. 20 
(2) The board of directors may remove any othe.r director from 
nffice who-
(a) is or has become subject to any of the disqualifications 
mentioned in section 8; or 
(b) is absent without leave of the board of directors from 2S ' 
more than th:-ee consecutive meetings thereof without cause 
sufficient, in the opinion of the board, to exonerate his absence . .... 
(3) A director of the Corporation mav resifm his office by giving; 
notice thereof in writing to the Central Government and' on such 
-resignation being accepted: he shall be deemed' to have vacatea; his 30 
office. " .. 
Meetings. 10. (1) The board of directors of the CorPoration' shall meet' at 
such times and places and shall obse~e sUch rules' of' proCedure in 
l'e~aro to the transaction of business at its meetin~~ (including the 
quorum at meetings) as may be provided'by re;~lation:s made by 3S 
the 'Corp'oration under this Act. 
(2) The Chaitnl'an of the board or, if for any reason he is unable 
to attend any meeting, any other director elected by the directors 
present at the meeting, shall preside at the meeting. 

I 
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the board 
shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the directors present 
and voting, and, in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairman, 
or in his absence, the person presiding, shall have and. exercise a 
S second or casting vote. 
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Advisory 
Official Gezette, constitute one or more Advisory Committees con- ~mmit­
sisting of such persons and on such terms and conditions as may be eel. 
prescribed~ 
10 (2) It shall be the duty of any such Advisory Committee to 
advise the Central Government or the Corporation in regard to any 
matter connected with the purposes of this Act in respect of which 
its advice is sought by the Central Government, or, as the case may 
be, by the Corporation) I 
IS (3) The expenses in relation to the Advisory Committees shall 
. be met by the Corporation) ! 
12. (1) The Central Government shall, after consultation with Oft\cerl 
the Corporation, appoint a person to be the Secretary of the Corpo- ::81' em-
ration; I plo1'ee8 or 
20 (2) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Gov- ~r ... 
ernment in this behalf, th~ Corporation may appoint such other 
officers and employees as it considers necessary for the emdent 
performance of its functions. ' ! 
l 
(3) The methods of appointment, the conditions of service and the 
2S scales of pay of the omcers and other employees of the Corponltion shall __ 
(a) as respects the Secretary, be such·'" may be pres-
cribed'! ~ 
(b) as respects the other omcers and employees, be such .1 
30 may be determined by regulations made by the Corporation 
under this Act. 
13. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall be the pri- l"wlctiona 
mary duty of the Corporation to undertake the purchase, storage, ~ 
movement, transport, distribution and sale of foodgrains and other u:::ra-
3S foodstuffs. 
(2) Subject as aforesaid, Corporation may also, with the pre-
vious approval of the Central Government,-
(a) promote by such means as it thinka tit the production 
of foodgrains and other foodstuff.; 
181M (B) LS-..2. 

Executive 
Commit.. 
wand 
other 
commit- ' 
tea. 
... '. 
(ll) set up, or assist In the setting up of, rice 'Mml, iiour 
mills and other undertakings for the processing of foodgratn. 
and other foodstuffs; and. I 
(c) discharge such other functions os may be prescribed or 
as are supplemental, incidental or consequential to any of 'the J 
functions conferred on it under this Act. 
14. (1) The board of directors of the Corporation may constitute 
an Executive Committee which shall consist 01-
(a) the Chairman of the board; 
(b) the managing director; and 10 
·(c) three other directors, of whom one shall be a non-
officia1.' , 
'(2) The Chairman of the board of directors shall be the Chair-
man of the Executive CommitteeJ !. 
(3) Subject to the J!eneral' control. direction and superlntend- 1$ 
enee of the board of directors, the Executive Committee shall be 
competent to deal witll any matter within the competence of. the 
Corporation. - ~ 
(4) The board of directors may con~titute sucn other C'Ofnmit-
tees, whethp-r consfc:tinJ! whonv of dIrectors or wholly of other ner- 20 
sons or partly of directors and 'Dartly of other persons as it thinkl 
fit, for such purposes as it may decide. 
(5) A committee constituted under this sec1:ion shall meet at 
such times and plRcPs and shall observe such rules of nrocedure in 
resrard to the transaction of business at itsmeetinsrs(fncludlnll the 2, 
auonlm at meetinsrs) 8!; may be provided by regulations made by 
the CorporatiowtUnder this ActJ I 
on The'mpmbers of a committee (other than the dh·pctors of 
. the bOj!Il'd) !'InAll he nq;d bv th~ Corporation such fPfO'S and qllowRnces 
as mAV be fl-,red bv it bv rel!Ulr.tt,wns made undp.t' thic: Act for attfmd- 3-
insr the mpeH"~s of the committee and for attending to any other 
work of the Corporation. 
Member of ,.15. A mpmber of the board of dirp.ctors of the Corporation or a 
board or committee thereof who has any direct or indirect pecunfRrv interest commit.. tee in ,,"v matter comim! ltn for considpt'~tion at a meetinsr of th~ hMr~3S 
thereof of directors or committf"-e thp.reof. ~h!lll. a~ !l:oon a!l: nM~blp ~fter r,,1f'-
Dot te Vl'l"t cirMJm!l:b\n~ h~ve come tohic: lrnowlfl'di:!e. df~clMp. the TI"htrf'! 
vote in of his intPTP!'It at ~l1~h m~ptfnJ! :'Inn thp dfCl('1MUre t'fhftll be recl'lr~ed 
eertaiD In fh", minut"'l111 of th", bOl'lrd or the eommitt~e. as the Clllllle Im'ly hf', 
.... ""d th'" memhf't' ,.;hall not hke anv nart fn l'Inv dp.liher"tirl1'l or df'cf- ~ 
eton of the board or committee with respect to that ~tttn'. 

7 
CHAPTER III 
BoARDS OF MANAG:uo:HT 
11. (1) The Central Government may, on 8 request received in Boardl ot 
this behalf from the State Government or Governments concerned mana, .. 
, or otherwise, by notification in the Official Gazette, establi5h a :e~t, 
Beard of Management for a State or two or more contiguous States, co~t1tu­
if no Stete Food Corporation is functioning in such State or States. tion anel 
funct10DL (2) The head office of the Board of Management sooll be at 
such place as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
10 Official Gazette, specify. I I 
(3) TL Board of Management shall consist of-
(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the board of directors 
at the Food Corporation of India; 
(b) the senior-most executive officer of the said Corp.oration 
15 employed at the head office of the Board of Management; and 
(c) not more than ten other members to be appointed by 
the board of directors of the said Corporation. 
(4) The members of a Boord of Management referred to in clausea 
(a) and (c) of sub-section' (3) shall hold office for a term of two 
20 years and shall be eligible for re-appointment and the other terma 
and conditions of their appointment shall be such as may be pres-
cribed~ I 
(5) The Board of Management shall advise the Corporation on 
such matters as may be generally or specifically referred to it and 
25 shall perform such other functions as the Corporation may dele-
gate to it. 
(6) The provisions of sections 20, 21 and 25 shall, so far as may 
be, apply in relation to the members of a Board of Management aa 
they apply in relation to the members of the board of directora of 
30 a State Food Corporation: . 
Provideci that the reference to the General Manager in cla\lSe (e) 
of section 20 shall be construed' as a reference to the officer of the 
Corpomtion referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (3). 
(7) The Food Corporation of India may, after consultation with 
a Board of Management, appoint such staff as it considers n~essary 
3S to enable that Board to perform its functions under this Act. 
(8) The Board of Management may, by order in writing, autho-
rise anyone or more of its members to exercise and perform, sub-
ject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in 
-to the order, auch of its powers and functions 8i it may think 11t. 

1".Irta1t1ish-
mentof. 
State 
Food. 
Corpora. 
tion. 
Capital of 
State 
'Food Cor-
poration. 
8 
(9) The Board of Management shall follow such procedure as may 
be provided by regulations made by the Food Corporation of India 
under this Act. 
(10) Where a Board of Management has been established-
(i) for a State, or 5 
(U) for two or ~ore States, 
then such Board shall stand dissolved-
(a) in the case referred to in clause (i), on the establish-
ment of a Food Corporation for that State, and 
(b) in the case referred to in clause (ii), on the establish- 10 
ment of such Corporation for anyone or more of such States. 
(11) Wher~ a Board of Management stands dissolVed under 
clause (b) of sub-section (10), the Central Govermnent may estab-
lish a new Board of Management for the State or States for which no 
Food. Corporation has been established., IS 
(12) The expenses of the Board of Management in the discharge 
of its functions under this Act shall be met by the Food COrpora-
tion of IndiaJ I , 
'CHAPTER IV 
STATE FOOD CORPORATIONS 
17. (1) The Central Government mey, by notification in the 
Official Gazette and .after consultation with the Government of a 
State, establish a Food Corporation for that State under such name 
as may be specified in the notification., 
20 
(2) A State Food Corporation established under sub-section (1) 25 
shall be a body corporate by the name notified under that sub-sec-
tion, having perpetual succession and a cormnon seal with power, sub-
ject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of 
property and to contract, and may, by the said nwne, sue and be 
sue~' - 30 
(3) The head office of a State Food Corporation shall be at such 
place within the State as may be notified by the Central Govern-
ment in the Official Gazette. i I 
(4) Subject to the provisicms of this Act, a State Food Corpo-
ration may perform such of the functions of ~he Food Corporation 35 
of India as that Corporation mey delegate to it. 
lS. (1) The capital of a State FOOd Corporation shall be luch 
sum not exceeding ten crores of rupees as the Central Government 
may, after consultation with the Food Corporation of India, fix. 

I 
(2) The Central Government may, after such consultation, from 
time to time increase the capital of the State Food Corporation to 
such extent and in such manner as that Government may determine. 
(3) Such capital shall be provided-
5 (a) by the Central Government after due appropriation 
made by Parliament by law for the purpose, and 
(b) by the Food Corporation of Indie, 
in such proportion and subject to such terms and conditions as may 
be determined by the Central Government. 
) 
10 19. (1) The general superintendence, direction and management 
of the affairs and business of a State Food Corporation shall vest in 
a board of directors which shall consist of a Chairman, a General 
Manager and not more than ten other members, all of whom shall 
be appointed. by the Food Corporation of India after consultation 
IS with the Central Government and the State Government. 
-.-
(2) The General Manager shall~ 
(a) exercise such powers and perform such duties as the 
board of directors may entrust or delegate to him; and 
(b) receive such salary and allowances and be governed 
by such terms and conditions of service as the board of direc-
tors may, in consultation with the Food Corporation of India, 
fix~ I 
(3) The board of directors, in discharging its functions, shall act 
on business principles having regard to public interest and shall be 
~S guided by such instructions on questiOns of policy as may be given 
to it by the Food. Corporation of India. 
(4) If any doubt arises as to whether a question is or is not a 
question of policy, the matter shall be referred to the Central Gov-
ernment whose decision thereon shall be final. 
(5) The members of the board of directors, other than the 
30 General Manager,. shall be entitled to receive by way of remunera-
tion or fees such sums as may be prescribed: 
Provided that no official member shall be entitled to receive any 
remuneration other than any allowances admissible to him under 
35 the rules regulating his conditions of service. 
(6) The term of ofiice of, and the manner of ftlling caaual vacan-
cies among, the members of the board of directora shall b. IUCh u 
may be preacribed. \. 
Manage. 
ment of 
-'te 
F~d Cor-
poration. 

Disquali-
fication 
fOr 
office of 
member 
of board 
ofdirec_ 
tor •. 
, 
Removal 
andre-
silllation 
ofmem_ 
berlot 
board of 
directors. 
ZOo A person shall ·be disqualified. f.or 'being appointed as, and for 
being, a member of the board of directors of a State Food. Cor-
poration-
(a) if he is, or at any time has been, adjudicated. insolvent 
or has suspended payment of his debts or has compounded with S 
his creditors; or 
(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by • 
competent court; or 
(c) if he is or has been convicted of any offence which in 
the epinion of the Central Covernment involves moral turpi- 10 
tude; or 
(d) if he has been removed or dismissed from the service of. 
the Government or a corporation owned. or controlled by the 
Government; or 
(e) except in the case.of the Chairman or the qeneral I) 
Manager, if he is a salaried official of the Food Corporation of 
India or a State Food Corporation. 
21. (1) The Food. Corporation of India may,. at any time. after 
consultation with the State Food Corporation, remove the General 
Manager from office after giving him a reasonable opportunity of 20 
showing cause against the proposed removal. 
(2) The, board of directors of a State Food Corporation may re-
move from office any member of that board who-
(a), is or has become subject to any of the disqualifications 
mentioned in section 20, or 2S 
(b) is absent without leave of the board of directors from 
more than three consecutive meetings thereof without caUR 
sufficient, in the opinion of the board, to exonerate his absence. 
(3) A member of such board may resign his office by givina 
notice thereof in writing to the Food Gorporation of India and on 30 
such resignation being accepted, he shall be deemed to have vacated 
his office. 
Meetinp. 22. (1) The board of directors of a State Food Corporation shall 
meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of proc. 
dure' in regard to the transaction of business at its meeting. (in- 3S 
,eluding the quorum at meetings) as may be provided- by reiUlation. 
mad. by that Corporation under thi.l Aot. 

II 
(2) The. Chairman of the board of directors or, if for any rea.son 
'he is unable to attend any meeting, any other member of the.board 
elected by the members of the board present at the meeting, shall 
preside at the meeting. 
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the 
board of directors shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the 
members present and votin/!, and, in the event of an equality of votes, 
. the chairman or in hisabsenc('. the person presiding shall have and 
exercise a second or· casting vote. 
10 23. (1) A'State Food Corporation may appoint such officers and Appoint-
'other e~ploy~'.as it cOnsjders necessary for the efficient perform- :~!:. 
ance of Its functIons. etc., '&fld 
(2) Every person employed by a State Food Corporation under ~~~_ 
this Act shaH be subject to such conditions of service and shall be tiona of 
I!! entitled to such remunerati~n as may be determined by regulations service. 
made by that Corporation under this Act. 
%4. (1) The board of directors of a State Food Corporation may ~ecu-
constitute an Executive Committee which shall consist of- tmllve Com-
(a) the Chairman of the board of directors; 
(b) the General Manager; and 
(c) three other members of the board of directors, of whom 
one shall be a non-official. 
(2) The Chairman of the board of directors shall be the Chair-
man of the Executive Committee. 
2" (3) Subject to the general control, direction and superintendence 
of the board of directors, the Executive Committee shall be com-
petent to deal with any matter within the competence of the State 
Food Corporation. 
(4) The boaM of directors may constitute such other committees, 
30 whether consisting wholly of members of the board or whally of 
other persons or partly of such members and partly of other persons 
as it thinks fit, for such purposes as it may decide. 
(5) A committee constituted under this section shall meet at 
such times and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in 
35 regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the 
'quorum at meetings) as may be pro\'ided ·by regulations made by 
the State F..DOd COrporatiOllunder this Act. 
ttee 
and other 
commit_ 
tees. 

Member 
ot board 
oreom-
mittee 
thereof 
not to 
vote in 
. certain 
cues. 
Submit-
lion of 
pro. 
gramme 
ot 
activities 
andftnan-
cial uti. 
mates. 
Borrow-
in, 
powers 
of FOOd 
Corpora-
tion. 
I! 
, (~) The members of a committee (other than the directors of the 
board) shall be paid by the State Food Corporation such fees and 
allowanyes as may be fixed by it by regulations made under this 
Act, for attending the meetings of the committee and for attending 
to any other work of that Corporation. 'S 
--. 
%5. A member of the board of directors of a State Food Corpora-
tion or a committee thereof who has any direct or indirect pecuniary 
interest in any matter coming up for consideration at a meeting of 
the board of directors or committee thereof, shaU, as soon as possi-
ble after relevant circumstances have come to his knowledge, dis- 10 
1 
close the nature of his interest at such meeting and the disclosure 
shall be recorded in the minutes of the poard or the committee, as 
the case may be, and the members shaH not take any part in any 
deU~ation or decision of the board or the committee with respect IS 
to that matter. 
CHAPTER V 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
%6. (1) A-Food Corporation shall, before the commencement of 
each year, prepare a siBtement of programme of its activities during 
the forthcoming year as well as a financial estimate in respect thereof. 20 
thereof. I 
(2) The statement prepared under sub-section (1) shall, not lesa 
than three months before the commencement of each year, be sub-
mitted for approval- I 
(a) in the case of the Food Corporation of India, to the 2S 
Central Government; , 
(b) in the case of a State Food Corporation, to the Food 
Co1-p<)ration of India. 
(3) The statement and the financial estimate of a Food Corpora-
tion referred to in sub-section (1) may, with the approval of the 3D 
Central Government, in the case of the Food Corporation of India, 
or with the approval of the Food Corporation of India in the case of 
a State Food Corporation, be revised by the Food Corporation. 
21. (1) A Food Corporation may, for the purpose of carrying out 
its functions undet' this Act, take advances against stocks of food- 35 
grains or other foodstuffs held by it, or borrow money-
(i) from any scheduled bank, or 
(U) from any other bank or financial institution approved 
by the Central Government in this behalf. ! 

13 
.. (2) Th. Central Government ma1 ruarantee the loans ad 
adv.an.cestaken: . by a FOod Corporation under sub-section (J) as to 
the re-payment of prineipai and the payment of interest thereOA and 
otber incidental charles. 
5 28. A Food Corporation may lend or advance money to any per- Lendinl 
son engaged in the production of foodgrains upon the security of by Food 
foodgrains or such other security as may be prescribed, for any pur- C:0fpora -
d . h h d t' tion On pose connecte WIt suc pro uc IOn. security 
29. (1) A Food Corporation may enter into agreement with an~' 
ot food_ 
grains. 
Power to 
10 grower of food crops for the purchase of food grains after the har-
vest of such crops and any such agreement may provide toot any 
sum payable by the Corporation to the grower under such agree-
ment shall be payable to any scheduled bank or other financing 
agency nominated by the grower in this behalf to such extent .. 
enter 
into 
agree-
ment fot' 
purchue 
of food. 
I S may be specified in the agreement. grain8 
aft~r 
20 
(2) The scheduled bank or other financing agency referred to in harvest. 
sub-section (1) may, on the basis of any agreement referred to in 
that sub-section, lend money to a grower of foodcrops who has 
entered into such agreement. 
30. A Food Corporation may, upon such terms and conditions as 
it may think fit, guarantee any loan referred to in sub-section (2) of 
section 29, and also any other loan raised by a grower of foodcrops, 
which is repayable within a period not exceeding five years. 
Guaran-
tee by 
Food 
Corpora-
tion. 
31. (1) A Food CorporRtion shall have its own fund and all reo Funds of 
25 ceipts of the Corporation shall be credited thereto and all payments Food 
of the Corporation shall be met therefrom. Corpora_ 
(2) Such fund shaH be applied for meeting all administrative 
expenses of the Food Corporation and for carrying out the purpose! 
of this Act. 
30 32. A Food Corporation may invest its funds in the securities of 
the Central Govenunent or any State Government or in such other 
ma~n~r as may be prescribed. 
tion. 
Inveat. 
ment or 
fun<t.. 
33. (1) A FOod Corporation shall establish a reserve . fund to·AllOC&_ 
. which shall be credited every year such portion of its annual net tion of 
35 profits as that Corpor~tion thinksftt. . ... .urplua 
,~··(2·) ~Att.r ma:kina pr9~isi~n"f~r a~ch .reserve fund and tot bad' pl'08t •• 
and doubttul debt., depreciation in assets and all . other matters 
13"(B) LS-3. 

Ac:ounts 
and 
audit. 
Annual 
report On 
the work-
lnlof 
Food 
.Corpor&.o: 
tlQIII .. 
l' 
which are ullually Provided for by companies -regtstere<i and incor-
porated under the Compaules Act, 185S; tho balaneeof tta annual 1 of 1151. 
net profits shan be paid- I 
(a) in the case of the Food Corporation of India, to the 
Central Government, and S 
(b) in the case of a State Food Corp:lration, to the Central 
Government and the Food Corporation of India in the same pro-
portion as the capital provided by them. 
34. (1) A Food Corporation shall maintain proper accounts and 
other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of aceounts 10 
including the profit and loss account and the balance sheet in such 
form a~ may be prescribed. 
(2) The accounts of a Food Corporation shall be audited by 
auditors duly qualified to act as auditors of companies under section 
226 of the Companies Act, 1956. IS 1 of 1956. 
(3) The auditors shall be applJinted annually by the Food' Cor-
poration from among a list of auditors approved by 
tne Central Government on the advice of the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General' of India. 
(4) The auditors shall be supplied with a copy of the .mnual 20 
balance sheet and the profit and loss account of the Food Corporation 
and it shall be their duty to examine them together with the accounts 
and vouchers relating thereto, and they shall have a list delivered to 
them of all books kept by the Corpor~tion and shall at all reason-
able times have access to the books, accounts and other documents 25 
of the Corpon:tlon and may require from any officer of the Corpora-
tion such information and explanations as the auditors may think 
necessary for the performance of their duties liS auditors. 
(5) The auditors shall send a copy of their report together with 
an audi.ted copy of the accounts to the Food Corporation concerned 30 
and to the Central Government and, where the accounts relate to a 
State Food Corporation, also to the Food Corporation of India. 
35. (1) A Food Corporation shall, 81 soon C9 posstble after the 
end of each year, submit to the Central Government an annual 
reportoD the .working-aDd' amrtr., Of, tM- COrPanltioit . 35 
(2) . The Central Government abaU, sa. lOon.· ai, ml1 '- :aftel: the' 
receipt o! such report, C8UH IUch report and the. audit report 
received under IeCrti0D M: . to be· lalcl· 'befOi'e.~:;1:Iottr· Houiel:":of 
P~liament. 

11 
CHAP'l'D VI 
38. (1), ~o act or proceedina ot a,Food Corporation or a corn- V,eueie., 
m1ttee thereof or. aBoard of ManJlement .hall be invalid by etc., not 
5 reason only of the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the to invali-
constitution of, t~ board of directors of the Food Corporation or date acts _ or pro~ 
such committee or Board of Management. ceedings 
(2) No act done by any person acting in·good fa:th as a member 
of a board of directors of a Food Corporation or of a Board of 
10 Management shall be deemed to be invalid by reason only of his 
disqualification for being appointed as, or for be:ng, a member of such' 
board of directors or Board of Management. 
37. A Food Corporation may, by gener:d or special order in 
writing. delegate to the Chairman or any other member of the board 
IS of directors or the Secretary or other officer of the Corporation, 
subject to such condiiions and limitations, if any, as may be specified 
in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act as it 
may deem necessary. 
~' 
of ·Food -. 
Corpora-
tion, etc. 
Delega-
tion. 
38. Every director, member of an Advisory Committee or other Declara-
20 Committee, auditor, officer or other employee of a Food Corporation tion of 
and every member of a Bo:ud of Management and its staff shall, be- fidelity and fore entering upon h:s duties, make a declaration of fidelity and Iccrecy. 
secrecy in the form set out in the Schedule. 
39. (1) Every member of the board of directors of a Food Cor-
2S porat'on and of a Board v: Management shall be indemnn,ed by the 
Corpol'ation against all losses and expenses incut'red by him in the 
discharge of his duties except such as are caused by his own wilful 
act or default. 
(2) A member of the board of directors of a Food Corporation 
30 or a Board of Management shall not be re:>ponsible for any other 
member or for any officer or other employee of the Corporation or 
Board of Management or for any 10s3 or expense resulting to the 
Corporation from the insufficiency or deficiency of value of, or 
title to, any property or security acquired or taken on behalf of the 
35 Corpontioll ill lOod faith, or by the insolvency or wrongful act of 
my'pel'lClll.UDder abUptiOll1 to the Corporation or by .nytbing done 
Jngood faliA, om. the flX8C\Jtioo of- the duties of his ofllce or in relation 
~.~ . 
Indem-
nityof 
direc-
tOri. 

Protee. 
non of 
.etion 
taken 
under 
ibis Act. 
...:, 
18 
40. No suit or other legal proceedihg shan lie a.ainat a Food 
Corporation or a~y member of the board of directortl thereof or any 
oftlcer or other employee thereof or any member of a Board of 
Management or its ,staff or any other person authorised by a Food 
Corporation or a Board 'f)f Management to discharge any, function.!! 5 
under this Act for any loss or damage caused or 'lik~ly to be caused 
by anything which, is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pur~ilnce of this Act, 
41. (1) Whoever, without the consent in writing of a Food CorJ'O~ 
ration, uses its name in any prospectus or advertisement, shall be ro 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine whi('h may extend to one thousand rupees, or 
with both. 
(2) No court shall take cogni7..ance of any of{ence under sub-
section (1) except on a complaint in writing by an officer authorised r 5 
in this behalf by the Food Corporation concerned. 
Provision 42. For the purposes of the Income-tax Act, 1961. or any other 
relating enllctment for the time being in force relating to income-tax, super-
to income- tax or any other tax on income, profits or gains, a Food Corporation 
~,super_ shall be deemed to be a company within the meaning of the Income- 20 tax, t't:', 
Winding 
up ot 
Food 
Corpora-
tion, 
Power to 
make 
rule!!, 
tax Act, 1961, and shall be liable to tax accordingly on its income., 
profits and gains, 
43. No provision of law relating to the winding up of companies 
or corporations shall apply to a Food Corporation and it shall not 
be placed in liquidation save by order of the Central Government 25 
~d in such manner as that Government may direct. 
«. (1) The Central Government may. by notification in the 
Ofticial Gadtte, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act, 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
such rules may provide for- • 30 
(a) the term of office of. and the manner of filling casual 
vacancies among. and the other terms and (onditions of appoint-
ment of, the directors of the Corporation; 
(b) the composition of Advisory Committees and the terms 
and conditions of service of members thereof; 35 
(c) the additional functions which the Corporation may 
perform; 
(d) the remuneration or fees paYHi)le to the members of 
the board of directors of a State Food Corporation ,and the term 
of office of, and the manner of filling casual v.cancies. amon,. 40 
~uch members; 
43 of IGel 

17 
(e) the securities (other than foodgr.i~.) upon which • 
Food Corporation may lend or advanee mo~ey; 
(I> the manner in which a Food Corporation may' inveat 
its funds; 
(g) the form of the mmual statement of accounts and' the 
balance sheet to be prepared by a Food Corporation; 
(h) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed.-
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under thiI 
section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
10 House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive 
sessions, and if, before the' expiry of the session in which it is so 
laid or the session immediately following, bc.th Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the 
r 5 rule should not be made, the rule shall thereRfter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so 
however that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previousJy done under that 
rule. 
20 45. (1) A Food Corporation may, with the previous sanction of 
the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make regulations not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, to provide for all matters for which provision is neces· 
sary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions 
lS of this Act. 
30 
35 
(Z) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
such regulations may provide for-
(a) the methods of appointment, the conditions of service 
and the scales of pay of the officers and employees of a Food Cor-
,poration, other than the Secretary of the Food Corporation of 
India; 
(b) the duties and conduct of officers and employees of a 
Food Corporation, other than the Secretary aforesaid; 
(c) the functions and duties which may be entrusted or 
delegated to the managing director or, as the case may be, the 
General Manager, of a Food Corporation; 
(d) the times and places at which meetings of a Food COl'· 
poration or any committee thereof shall be held and the proCf-
dun to ~ follow,g thereat; 
Power 
of Food 
Corpora-
tion to 
make 
regula. 
tiOD& 
.. 

18 
:(e) th.f", and aliowanees-.payab)e to ih~ members of a 
committee ~der sub-section (6) Of section 14 of- sUb-section 
... "") of.-ct1oD 24; 
(1) generally, the emdent eonduet of the affairs of a Food 
Cf)rporation. 5 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification In the Offtcial 
Goette, . rescind ~ny regulation which it has sanctioned and there-
u~ such regulation shall c~ase to have effect. 
(4) Any regulation which may be made by the Food Corporation 
of India under this Act may be made by the Central Government 10 
within three months from the establishment o~ that Corporation 
and any regulation which may be made by a State Food Corpora-
tion under this Act may be made by the Food Corporation of India 
within three months from the establishment of such State Food 
Corporation; and any regulat·on so made may be a~te:ed or re3cind- IS 
ed by the Food Corporation concerned in the exercise of its pow~rs 
under this Act. 

'. 
THE SCHEDULE 
(Se, section 38) 
DBCLARA'llON OF FmELITY AND SIcOcY 
I, , declare that I will faith-
S :ully, truly and to the best of my judgment, skill and ability • 
execut~ and perform the duties which are required of mea 
director, member of committee, officer, 
employee 01' auditor (as the case may be) of the 
1<'000 Corpu.aL:on of lndi~ 
----... -. ---- or as memb3r' of the Board of Management 
10 Food COLporatlon 
at under the Food Corporat~on of India and 
which properly relate to the office or pJsition in or in relation to 
that Corporation held by me· 
• I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be 
IS communicated to any person not lEgally entitled thereto any infor-
mation r_Ia.ing to the affairs of the said Corporation or to the 
affairs of any person having any dealing with the said Corporation 
nor will I allow any person not legally entitled as aforesaid to 
inspect or have acces~ to any books or documents belonging to, or' 
20 in the po,;;sess;on of, the said Corporation and relating to the 
business of the said Corporation or the business of any person 
having any dealing with the said Corporation. 
(Signature)--------
Signed before me. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
It is considered desirable. in the interests of increased agricul-
tural. production as well as in the interests of the common consumer. 
to set up a State Agency for the purpose of undertaking trading in 
foodgrains in a commercial manner but within the framework of 
an over-all Government policy. Only by such a measure it will be 
possible to effectively implement any policy of ensuring that the 
primary producer obtains the minimum price that may be 
'announced. from time to time and to protect ~he consumer from the 
vagaries of speculative trade. 
2. The setting up of the Food Corporation of India. as provided 
for in this Bill, will. therefore, be one of the essential and important 
IItepS in the implementa~on of Government's food policy. The 
Corporation will be the first organised attempt to take up State 
trading in foodstuffs on an appreciable scale. The Agency will also 
be used to build up gradually buffer stocks. 
3. The Corporation will engage itself primarily in the purchase. 
storage. movement, distribution and sale of foodgrains. Provision 
has also been made in the Bill enabling the Corporation to deal in 
other foodstuffs if considered necessary by the Government. The 
Corporation may also discharge certain incidental functions as 
provided for in the Bill in consultation with· the Central 
Government. 
4. The Corporation will be encouraged to function generally as 
an autonomoUs organisation working on commercial lines. It is 
expected to secure fm' itself a strategic and commanding position 
in the foodgrains trade of the country. Bearing in mind the 
several large spheres in which the Corporation will ultimately have 
to operate, this Bill is being introduced to enable it to function as 
a statutory Corporation wholly owned by the Government. 
5. It is necessary that the Corporation should work with the 
active and continued co-operation of State Governments and their 
machinery. The Bill, therefore, provides for the setting up of 
Boards of Management or State Food Corporations. as the case may 
be, to secure such co-operation and participation in a practical and 
effective way. 
NEW DELHI; C. SUBRAMANIAM. 
'I'M 5th Novembfl'l", 1984. 

PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 
274 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 179(6) 164-Py. I, dated the 11th November, 1964 
from Shri C. Subramaruam, Minister of Food and Agriculture to the 
Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject-matter of the 
Food Corporations Bill, 1964, has reeommended under articles 117 (1) 
and 274(1) of the Constitution the introduction of the Bill in the Lot 
Sabha, and under article 117(3) of the Constitution, its consideration 
by the Lok Sabha. 
21 
1394 (B) LS-4 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
1. The original capital of the Food Corporation of India shall 
not exceed one hundred crores of rupees. The capital will be fixed 
by the Central Government and provided by it from. time to time 
after due appropriation made by Parliament by law for the purpose 
and ~ubject to such terms and conditions as may be determined by 
the Central Government. Provision has been made for increasing 
the capital of the Corporation by the Central Government from 
time to time. (Clause 5 of the Bill). 
2. The capital of a State Food Corporation shall not exceed ten 
crores of rupees. It will be fixed by the Central Government after 
consultation with the Food Corporation of India. The capital will 
be provided by the Central· Government after due appropriation 
made by Parliament by law for the purpose and by the Food Corpo-
ration of India, in such JXl'oportion and subject to such terms and 
conditions as may be determined by the Central Government. 
Provision has also been made for increasing the capital of a State 
Food Corporation by the Central Government in consultation with 
the Food Corporation of India. (Clause 18 of the Bill). 
3. Clause 27 of the Bill provides for the guarantee by the Central 
Government of the re-payment of principal and the payment of 
interest, etc., in respect of loans and advances taken by a Food 
Corporation from any scheduled bank or any other bank or financial 
institution approved by the Central Government against stocks of 
foodgrains or other foodstuffs held by it. The ultimate liafbility 
arising out of such guarantees cannot be estimated at this stage. 
4. Clause 30 of the Bill empowers a Food Corporation to guarantee 
any money lent by a scheduled bank or other financing agency to 
a grower of foodcrops on the basis of agreement entered into by 
that Corporation with the grower of food crops for the purchase of 
foodgrains after the harvest of such crops, and also any other loan 
raised by a grower of foodcrops, which is re-payable within a 
period not exceeding. five years. 
22 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 44 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to carry out the purposes of the Act. The matters in respect 
of which rules may be made are specified in sub-clause (2) of that 
clause. They relate inter alia to the toerm of office of and the 
manner of filling casual vacancies among the members of the board 
of directors of a r~ocd Corporation, the composition of Advisory 
Committees and the terms and conditions of service of members 
thereof, the additional functions which the Food Corporation of 
India may pernorm, the securities (other than fuodgrains) upon 
which a Food Corporation may lend or advance money and the 
form. of the annual statement of accounts to be maintained by a 
Food Corporation. The matters in respect of which rules may be 
made are of a routine or administrative nature. Moreover, the 
rules shall be subject to the scrutiny of ,Parliament. 
2. Clause 45 of the Bill empowers a Food Corporation to make 
regulations not inconsistent with the Act and the rules made there-• under for the purpose of giving E'·ffect to the provisions of the Act. 
The matt~rs which may be provided for by regulations relate to 
procedural or administrative detailis. 
3. The delegation 00 legislative power is thus of a normal 
character. 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of Food Corporations for the . 
purpose of trading in foodgrains and other foodstuff.. and 
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto. 
(S hri C. Subramaniam. 
Minister of F ODd and 
Agriculture. ) 