THE JALLIANWALA BAGH NATIONAL MEMORIAL
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
 to amend the Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the  Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial (Amendment)
Act, 2006.
2.  In  the Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to as the
Principal Act, in section 4,  for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(1) The Trustees of the Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial shall be the
following, namely:—
(a) the Prime Minister  — Chairperson,
(b) the President of the Indian National Congress,
(c) the Minister in-charge of  Culture,
(d) the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha,
Short title.
Amendment
of section 4.
25 of 1951.
Bill No. 74 of 2006
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(e)  the Governor of the State of Punjab,
(f)  the  Chief Minister of the State of Punjab, and
(g)  three eminent persons to be nominated by the Central  Government;”.
3.  For section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“5.   The Trustees  nominated under clause ( g) of sub-section (1) of section 4
shall be  Trustees for a period of five years, and shall be eligible for re-nomination.”.
4. After section 7 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“7A. The Trust shall meet at least once in a year to approve the audited accounts
of the Trust and shall transact such other business as may be considered necessary.”.
5. After section 8 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
 namely:—
‘‘8A. (1) The accounts of the Trust shall be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Trust to the
Comptroller and Auditor-General.
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Trust under this Act shall, have the
same rights and privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the
Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production
of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to
inspect the office of the Trust.
(3) The accounts of the Trust as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Trust and the
Central Government shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be, after it
is received, before each House of Parliament.”.
6. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘10A. Every rule or regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation
should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule or regulation.’’.
Substitution of
new section
for section 5.
Term of
office of
nominated
Trustees.
Insertion of
new section
7A.
Power to
approve audited
accounts.
Insertion of
new section
8A.
Accounts and
audit.
Insertion of
new section
10A.
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial Act, 1951 was enacted to provide for the
erection and management of a National Memorial to perpetuate the memory of those killed or
wounded on the 13th Day of April, 1919 in Jallianwala Bagh, Amritsar. The objects of the said
Act was to place the then existing Trust on a permanent basis, to establish a body corporate
to be known as the Trustees of the  Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial, to transfer to that
body all the property and funds and to confer upon that body all necessary powers for
carrying out the objects of the Trust.
2. The composition of the Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial Trust as provided under
the said Act includes three  Trustees appointed for life who are no more. The Government
cannot appoint Trustees in their place without making necessary amendments in the said
Act. Therefore, with a view to filling up the vacancies caused by the passing away of the life
Trustees and to make the Trust functional, it has become necessary to amend the said Act
through the  present Bill.
3. The Bill also seeks to provide for certification and auditing of the accounts of the
Trust by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of  India and its laying before each House of
Parliament.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; AMBIKA SONI.
The 17th  August, 2006.
3

ANNEXURE
EXRACTS FROM THE JALLIANWALA BAGH NATIONAL MEMORIAL ACT, 1951
(25 OF 1951)
* * * * * *
4.  (1) The Trustees of the Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial shall be the following,
namely:—
(a) Shri Jawaharlal Nehru,
(b) Dr. Saifuddin Kitchlew,
(c) Maulana Abul Kalam Azad,
(d) the President of the Indian National Congress,
(e) the Governor of the State of Punjab,
(f) the Chief Minister of the State of Punjab, and
(g) three persons nominated by the Central Government.
* * * * * *
5. (1) The three Trustees mentioned in clauses ( a), (b) and (c) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 4 shall be Trustees for life.
(2) Every Trustee nominated under clause (g) of the said sub-section shall be a Trustee
for a period of five years, and shall be eligible for renomination.
* * * * *
Trustees of the
Jallianwala
Bagh National
Memorial.
Term of office
of Trustees.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 to amend the Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial Act, 1951.
————
(Smt. Ambika Soni, Minister of  Tourism and Culture)
MGIPMRND—2392LS(S1)—21-08-2006.