AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

39 AUG 2005

Bill No. 96 of 2005.

THE NATIONAL CHILD WELFARE BOARD BILL, 2005
By
SHRI RAYAPATI SAMBASIVA RAO, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for the establishment of a National Child Welfare Board and for matters
connected therewith

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (/) This Act may be called the National Child Welfare Board Act, 2005.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, “child” means a person who has
not completed the age of eighteen years.

3. (/) There shall be established by the Central Government a Board to be known as
the “National Child Welfare Board” hereinafter referred to as the “National Board”
which shall consist of a Chairperson and four other members having special knowledge or
practical experience in the field of education, medicine, sports, culture and social services.

(2) It shall be duty of the National Board to enunciate the national policy for the
development of child.

Short title
and extent.

Definition.

National
Child Welfare
Board.


Child Welfare
Boards to be
created in
every State
and Union
territory.

Duties of
State/Union
Territory
Board.

Central
Government
to ensure

implementation

of National
Board's
policies.
Child Welfare
Fund,

Power to
make rules.

2

4. There shall be established by every State Government and the Union territe |]
administration, a Board to be known as the “State or Union Territory Child Welfare Board’
as the case may be, hereinafter referred to as the “State Board” or “Union Territ
Board” which shall consist of a Chairperson and such number of other members, as
State Government or the Union Territory administration may determine and nominate fror
amongst persons having special knowledge or practical experience in the field of educa
medicine, sports, culturé and social service

5. It shall be the duty of every State and Union Territory Board to—
(i) make recommendations to the National Board as regards—

(a) the ways to improve the health and ensure all-round development of
the children;

(b) the type of education which is to be imparted to each child, includi 18
technical education and vocationai training, keeping in mind the pecul
conditions existing in the State concerned

(ii) provide education, uniform, transportation and meals, etc., free of cost to
every child up to the twelfth standard;

(iii) select children having low family income for higher and technical education
and to meet all their expenses;

(iv) select talented children in different sports and ensure proper training to
them;

(v) provide free hostel facilities to needy children; and
(vi) provide scholarship te deserving children.

6. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to carry out the policy of the National
Board into effect through release of funds and materials.

7. The Central Government shall constitute a fund [0 be called the Child Welfare _
Fund which shall be utilised for carrying out activities related to the all round development
of children in the country. :

8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act

(2) in particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such
rules may provide for—

(a) the salary and other allowances payable to the members of the National
Board, State Boards and Union Territory Boards;

(b) the appointment of the other support staff and provision of office and furniture,
etc. for the National and Union Territory Boards; and

(c) any other matter which may be prescribed.


. STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

India is a developing country and a large number of people are uneducated,
unemployed and poor. Moreover, the children who are the future of the country, are
undernourished and education is not being imparted to them as per the requirement of the
present time. The rich people can spend money for better education of their children,
whereas the large majority of the poor people cannot afford to utilize the natural potentialities
of their children. Due to the lack of proper nourished diet and health care, the children
become victims of a number of diseases. Therefore, there is an urgent need to formulate a
national policy for the development of children. In this connection it is proposed to
establish Child Welfare Board. The Child Welfare Board will examine the capability and
capacity of the child and make recommendations for the better development of the child.

Hence this Bill.
New Deu: RAYAPAT! SAMBASIVA RAO
: July 12,2005,



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Child Welfare
Board. Clause 4 provides for the establishment of State or Union Territory Child Welfare
Boards. Clause 5 makes provision for education, uniform, etc. frée of cost to all children
up to twelfth standard. It further provides for selection of children for higher and
technical education and for meeting of all their expenditure by the State or Union
Territory Boards. Clause 6 provides that it shall be the duty of the Central Government
to carry out the policy of National Board by means of funds and materials. Clause 7
provides for establishment of Child Welfare Fund. This Bill, therefore, if enacted, iS
likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore per annum from the
Consolidated Fund of India.

It is also likely to involve a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty lakhs.



—7 a ee ee ee
- “4 कर

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.

The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the establishment of a National Child Welfare Board and for matters
connected therewith

(Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—-1748LS(S1)—28.07.2005.