AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 74 of 2021 
 
 
THE POPULATION (CONTROL) BILL, 2021 
By 
SHRI RAJENDRA AGRAWAL, M.P. 
A 
BILL 
 
to provide for measures and methods to control population and a comprehensive policy 
towards stabilizing the population of the country, promotion of schemes that incentivizes 
the small family norm, establishment of a National Population Control Authority and 
creating awareness regarding family planning and for all matters  
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
 
 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Population (Control) Act, 2021. 
  (2) It extends to the whole of India. 
    (3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
 
Short title, extent 
and 
commencement. 

2 
 
Definitions.  2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in all other cases the Central Government; 
(b) “Authority” means the National Population Control Authority constituted 
under Section 9; 
(c) “centre” means the Small Family-cum-Child Centre established under 
section 5; and 
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 
 
 
 
5 
 
Central 
Government to 
encourage, 
promote and 
motivate small 
family norm. 
3. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to encourage, promote and 
motivate married couples to opt for small family norm with a view to control the 
increasing population in the country. 
 
10 
Establishment of 
Small Family-
Cum-Child 
Welfare Centres. 
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, establish centres to be known as the ‘Small Family-Cum-Child Welfare 
Centres’, for every ten thousand of population in rural areas and for every 
thirty thousand in urban areas. 
(2) The Centre shall take steps for setting up of adequate facilities for — 
(a) guiding the married couples in the use of preventive methods of birth 
control; and  
(b) providing the married couples with suitable birth control devices 
free of charge. 
(c) carrying out sterilisation operations including post operation care of 
the persons who undergo operation and supply of necessary medicines to them 
free of charge; and 
(d)  ensuring arrangements for complete medical care to every child 
upto the age of five years free of charge.  
(3) The appropriate Government shall take adequate steps to encourage and 
mobilize the people to visit and avail the facilities being provided at the centres 
constituted under section 4. 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
25 
Time gap 
between 
Children. 
5. Any married couple shall not procreate second child within six years from the 
birth of first living child.   
 
30 
Insertion of new 
section 8B in Act 
No. 43 of 1951. 
Disqualification 
procreating more 
than two living 
children. 
6. After section 8A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:—  
“8B. A person having two or more than two living children on the date of 
commencement of this Act shall be disqualified and not eligible to contest any 
election if he procreates any more living child one year after the commencement of 
this Act.” 
43 of 1951 
 
 
 
 
35 
Undertaking by 
the Government 
Employees. 
7. Every Government employee shall submit an undertaking in writing to the 
designated Authority that he shall not procreate more than two living children: 
Provided that the Government employees having more than the two living 
children on or before the commencement of this Act shall not procreate any more 
living child one year after such commencement. 
 
 
 
40 
 

3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
8. (1) The Central Government shall, within one year of the coming into 
force of this Act, constitute an Authority to be known as the National 
Population Control Authority for carrying out the purpose of this Act. 
(2) The National Population Control Authority shall consist of— 
(a) Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare — ex-officio, 
Chairperson; 
(b) Chairperson, National Commission for Women— ex-officio, member; 
(c) Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development — ex-officio, 
member; 
(d) Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment — ex-officio, 
member; and 
(e) two persons, with experience of at least fifteen years in the social 
sector, one of whom shall be a women to be appointed by Central Government 
in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff 
as it considers necessary for the efficient functioning of the Authority. 
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and terms and conditions of 
services of the members, officers and staff of the Authority shall be such as may 
be prescribed. 
Constitution 
of National 
Population 
Control 
Authority. 
20 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
30 
 
9. The Authority shall— 
(a) recommend to the appropriate Government, the measures for the population 
control; 
(b) encourage, promote and motivate the newly married couples not to 
procreate more than two living children;  
(c) ensure dissemination of proper information regarding safe family planning 
methods such as contraception and spacing between birth of two children; and 
(d) undertake such other functions as it may deem fit and expedient for the 
purposes of this Act. 
10. The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such 
rules of procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be 
prescribed. 
Functions of 
the Authority. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meetings of 
the Authority. 
 11. If any Government employee contravenes the provisions of section 8, he shall 
not be eligible for any further promotion and increment during the service.  
Penalty. 
 
35 
12. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by 
Parliament in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes 
of this Act from time to time. 
Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 
 
 
40 
 
13. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with 
the provisions of this Act as may appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the 
removal of the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of three years from the 
date of commencement of this Act. 
Power to 
remove 
difficulty. 
 14. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any 
other law for the time being in force. 
Savings. 

4 
 
Power to make 
rules. 15. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in Official Gazette make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 

5 
 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India is the second most populous country after China. It is estimated that it will surpass China’s population 
by the year 2030, becoming the most populous country in the world. Having only 2.4 per cent of global land area, we 
have more than seventeen per cent of the global population making it one of the most densely populated nations of 
the world. This scenario is compelling; at least half the population live in slums and under squalid conditions. The 
boom has created overcrowding due to which law and order situation is deteriorating. Unemployment is rising rapidly 
causing frustration amongst the unemployed, particularly the youth who are being lured by anti-national and anti-
social elements. There is unparallel transformation of human values, social institutions and economic structures. 
Agriculture land holdings are becoming smaller and smaller. The housing needs are far beyond the available finances 
and the shortage is appalling. Educational facilities are becoming hopelessly poor. Overcrowding is also causing 
environmental degradation. 
In a developing country such as India where a large section of the population still lives in abject poverty 
with little to no resources, the need for stabilization of the population growth becomes crucial. It is, however, 
unfortunate that despite availability of various birth control measures and several Family Planning Programmes, the 
population continues to rise menacingly. An attempt has been made through this Bill to offer a comprehensive 
package for the control of booming population. 
The need is to not just prepare the masses for family planning and population control, but also provide them 
with medical equipments and contraceptives to do it effectively. The need is  also to provide better opportunities for 
girl child to become an active member of labour force and contribute to national development. 
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for measures and methods to control population and a comprehensive 
policy towards stabilizing the population of the country, promotion of schemes that incentivizes the small family 
norm, establishment of a National Population Control Authority and creating awareness regarding family planning.  
 
Hence this Bill. 
 
     NEW DELHI; RAJENDRA AGRAWAL 
October 25,  2019. 
5 
 

6 
 
 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 
     Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Small Family-Cum-Welfare Centres across the 
country in rural and urban areas. Clause 8 provides for the constitution of National Population Control Authority 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. It also provides for appointment of persons with experience, officers 
and staff to the Authority. Clause 12 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds 
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crore may involve as recurring 
expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
           A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be involved. 
 
 
 
5 6 
 

7 
 
 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of 
the Bill. As rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
7 
  

8 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
to provide for measures and methods to control population and a comprehensive policy towards stabilizing the 
population of the country, promotion of schemes that incentivizes the small family norm, establishment of 
 a National Population Control Authority and creating awareness regarding family planning 
 and for all matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
(Shri Rajendra Agrawal, M.P.) 
 
8 
  
  