THE TAXATION LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
A
BILL
further to amend the  Income-tax Act, 1961,  the Customs Act, 1962, the Customs Tariff Act,
1975, the Central Excise Act, 1944 and the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Taxation  Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, sections 2 to 16 (except sections 2, 7 and
11 to 16) shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April, 2005.
CHAPTER II
DIRECT TAXES
Income-tax
2. In section 2 of  the Income-tax Act, 1961 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the
Income-tax Act),  in clause (44), after the words “powers of a Tax Recovery Officer”, the
following shall be inserted, namely:—
“and also to exercise or perform such powers and functions which are conferred on, or
assigned to, an Assessing Officer under this Act and which may be prescribed”.
. Short title
and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
43 of 1961.
AS INTRODUCDED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 74 of  2005

2
3. In section 10 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 2006,—
(a) after clause (23BBE), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(23BBF ) any income of the North-Eastern Development Finance
Corporation Limited, being a company formed and registered under the Companies
Act, 1956:
Provided that in computing the total income of the North-Eastern
Development Finance Corporation Limited, the amount to the extent of—
(i) twenty per cent. of the total  income for assessment year beginning
on the 1st day of April, 2006;
(ii) forty  per  cent.  of    the   total   income   for   assessment   year
beginning on the 1st day of April, 2007;
(iii) sixty per cent. of the total income for assessment year beginning
on the 1st day of April, 2008;
(iv) eighty per cent. of the  total  income for assessment year beginning
on the 1st day of April, 2009;
(v) one hundred per cent. of the total income for assessment year
beginning on the 1st day of April, 2010 and any subsequent assessment
year or years,
shall be included in such total income;”;
(b) in clause (23C),—
(i) in the eighth proviso, for the words, brackets and letters “notification
issued by the Central Government under sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) shall,
at any one time, have effect for such assessment year or years, not exceeding
three assessment years”, the words, brackets, figures and letters “notification
issued by the Central Government under sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v), before
the date on which the Taxation  Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005 receives the assent
of the President, shall, at any one time, have effect for such assessment year or
years, not exceeding three assessment years” shall be substituted;
(ii) after the eighth proviso, the following provisos shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Provided also that where an application under the first proviso is
made on or after the date on which the Taxation  Laws (Amendment) Bill,
2005 receives the assent of the President, every notification under sub-
clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) shall be issued or approval under sub-clause
(vi) or sub-clause (via) shall be granted or an order rejecting the application
shall be passed within the period of twelve months from the end of the
month in which such application was received:
Provided also that where the total income, of the fund or trust or
institution or any university or other educational institution or any hospital
or other medical institution referred to in sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v)
or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via), without giving effect to the provisions
of the said sub-clauses, exceeds the maximum amount which is not
chargeable to tax in any previous year, such trust or institution or any
university or other educational institution or any hospital or other medical
institution shall get its accounts audited in respect of that year by an
accountant as defined in the Explanation below sub-section (2) of section
288 and furnish along with the return of income for the relevant assessment
year, the report of such audit in the prescribed form duly signed and verified
by such accountant and setting forth such particulars as may be
prescribed:”.
1 of 1956.
Amendment
of section 10.

3
4. In section 12A of the Income-tax Act, in clause (b), for the words and figures “the
provisions of section 11 and section 12 exceeds fifty-thousand rupees in any previous year”,
the words and figures “the provisions of section 11 and section 12 exceeds the maximum
amount which is not chargeable to income-tax in any previous year” shall be substituted with
effect from the 1st day of April, 2006.
5. In the Income-tax Act, in section 35, in sub-section (1), with effect from the 1st day
of April, 2006,—
(a) in clause ( ii), for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted,
namely:—
“Provided that such association, university, college or other institution for
the purposes of this clause—
(A) is for the time being approved, in accordance with  the guidelines,
in the manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed; and
(B) such association, university, college or other institution is
specified as such, by notificaiton in the Official Gazette, by the Central
Government,’’;
(b) in clause ( iii), for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted,
namely:—
“Provided that such university, college or other institution for the purposes
of this clause—
 (A) is for the time being approved,  in accordance with  the guidelines,
in the manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed; and
(B) such university, college or other institution is specified as such
by notification in the Official Gazette, by the Central Government,’’;
(c) in the second proviso, for the word “authority”, the word “Government” shall
be substituted;
(d) in the third proviso, for the words, brackets and letters “notification issued
by the Central Government under clause (ii) or clause (iii) shall, at any time, have effect
for such assessment year or years, not exceeding three assessment years”, the words,
brackets, figures and letters “notification issued, by the Central Government under
clause (ii) or clause (iii), before the date on which the Taxation  Laws (Amendment)
Bill, 2005 receives the assent of the President, shall, at any time, have effect for such
assessment year or years, not exceeding three assessment years” shall be substituted;
(e) after the third proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted at the end,
namely:—
‘‘Provided also that where an application under the first proviso is made
on or after the date on which the Taxation  Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005 receives
the assent of the President, every notification under clause ( ii) or clause ( iii)
shall be issued or an order rejecting the application shall be passed within the
period of twelve months from the end of the month in which such application
was received by the Central Government:’’.
6. In section 40 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (a), in sub-clause (ia), with effect from
the 1st  day of April, 2006,—
(a) after the words “commission or brokerage,”, the words “rent, royalty,” shall
be inserted;
(b) in the Explanation, after clause (iv), the following clauses shall be inserted at
the end, namely:—
‘(v) “rent” shall have the same meaning as in clause (i) to the Explanation
to section 194-I;
(vi) “royalty” shall have the same meaning as in Explanation 2 to clause
(vi) of sub-section (1) of section 9;’.
Amendment
of section
12A.
Amendment
of section 35.
Amendment
of section 40.

4
7. In section 40A of the Income-tax Act in sub-sections (3) and (4), for the words “a
crossed cheque drawn on a bank or by a crossed bank draft”, wherever they occur, the words
“an account payee cheque drawn on a bank or account payee bank draft” shall be substituted.
8. In section 56 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2),—
(a) in clause (v), —
(i) after the words, letters and figures “after the 1st day of September,
2004”, the words, letters and figures “but before the 1st day of April, 2006” shall
be inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 2006;
(ii) in the proviso, after clause (d), the following  clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(e) from any local authority as defined in the Explanation to clause
(20) of section 10; or
 (f) from any fund or foundation or university or other educational
institution or hospital or other medical institution or any trust or institution
referred to in clause (23C) of section 10; or
 (g) from any trust or institution registered under section 12AA.”;
(b) after clause ( v) and the Explanation, the following shall be inserted with
effect from the 1st day of April, 2007, namely:—
“(vi) where any sum of money, the aggregate value of which exceeds fifty
thousand rupees, is received without consideration, by an individual or a Hindu
undivided family, in any previous year from any person or persons on or after the
1st day of April, 2006, the whole of the aggregate value of such sum:
Provided that this clause shall not apply to any sum of money received —
(a) from any relative; or
(b) on the occasion of the marriage of the individual; or
(c) under a will or by way of inheritance; or
(d) in contemplation of death of the payer; or
(e) from any local authority as defined in the Explanation to clause
(20) of section 10; or
(f) from any fund or foundation or university or other educational
institution or hospital or other medical institution or any trust or institution
referred to in clause (23C) of section 10; or
(g) from any trust or institution registered under section 12AA.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, “relative” means—
(i) spouse of the individual;
(ii) brother or sister of the individual;
(iii) brother or sister of the spouse of the individual;
(iv) brother or sister of either of the parents of the individual;
(v) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the individual;
(vi) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the spouse of the
individual;
(vii) spouse of the person referred to in clauses (ii) to (vi).”.
9. In section 139 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 2006, —
(a) in sub-section (4C), in clause (e),—
(i) for the word, brackets and figures “sub-clause (vi)”, the words, brackets
and figures, “sub-clause (iiiad) or sub-clause ( vi)”  shall be substituted;
Amendment
of section 56.
Amendment
of section
139.
Amendment
of section
40A.

5
(ii) for the word, brackets and figures “sub-clause ( via)”, the words,
brackets and figures, “sub-clause (iiiae) or sub-clause (via)”  shall be substituted;
(b) after sub-section (4C), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
(4D) Every university, college or other institution referred to in clause (ii)
and clause (iii) of sub-section (1) of section 35, which is not required to furnish
return of income or loss under any other provision of this section, shall furnish
the return in respect of its income or loss in every previous year and all the
provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, apply as if it were  a return  required
to be furnished under sub-section ( 1).”.
10. In section 143 of the Income-tax Act, in sub- section ( 3), after the proviso, the
following proviso shall be inserted, with effect from the 1st day of April, 2006, namely:—
“Provided further that where the Assessing Officer is satisfied that the activities
of the university, college or other institution referred to in clause (ii) and clause (iii) of
sub-section (1) of section 35 are not being carried out in accordance with all or any of
the conditions subject to which such university, college or other institution was
approved, he may, after giving a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the
proposed withdrawal to the concerned university, college or other institution,
recommend to the Central Government to withdraw the approval and that Government
may by order, withdraw the approval and forward a copy of the order to the concerned
university, college or other institution and the Assessing Officer.”.
11. In section 155 of the Income-tax Act, after sub-section ( 11), the following sub-
section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(11A)  Where in the assessment for any year, the deduction under section 10A
or section 10B or section 10BA has not been allowed on the ground that such income
has not been received in convertible foreign exchange in India, or having been received
in convertible foreign exchange outside India, or having been converted into convertible
foreign exchange outside India, has not been brought into India, by or on behalf of the
assessee with the approval of the Reserve Bank of India or such other authority as is
authorised under any law for the time being in force for regulating payments and
dealings in foreign exchange and subsequently such income or part thereof has been
or is received in, or brought into, India in the manner aforesaid, the Assessing Officer
shall amend the order of assessment so as to allow deduction under section 10A or
section 10B or section 10BA, as the case may be, in respect of such income or part
thereof as is so received in, or brought into, India, and the provisions of section 154
shall, so far as may be, apply thereto, and the period of four years shall be reckoned
from the end of the previous year in which such income is so received in, or brought
into, India.”.
12. In section 194-I of the Income-tax Act, in the Explanation, for clause ( i), the
following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(i) “rent” means any payment, by whatever name called, under any lease, sub-
lease, tenancy or any other agreement or arrangement for the use of  (either separately
or together) any, —
(a) land; or
(b) building (including factory building); or
(c) land appurtenant to a building (including factory building); or
(d) machinery; or
(e) plant;  or
(f) equipment; or
(g) furniture; or
(h) fittings,
whether or not any or all of the above are owned by the payee;’.
Amendment
of section
143.
Amendment
of section
155.
Amendment
of section
194-I.

6
13. In section 194 J of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1), —
(i) in clause (b), the word ‘‘or’’ shall be inserted at the end;
(ii) after clause (b), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(c) royalty, or
(d) any sum referred to in clause (va) of section 28,”;
(iii) in the first proviso, in clause (B),—
(a) in sub-clause (ii), for the words and brackets “clause (b):”, the words
and brackets “clause (b), or” shall be substituted;
(b) after sub-clause (ii), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(iii) twenty thousand rupees, in the case of royalty referred to in
clause (c), or
(iv) twenty thousand rupees, in the case of sum referred to in
clause (d):”;
(iii) in the Explanation, after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘(ba) “royalty” shall have the same meaning as in Explanation 2 to clause
(vi) of sub-section (1) of section 9;’.
14. In section 246A of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section ( 1), after clause ( j), the
following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
 “(ja) an order of imposing or enhancing penalty under sub-section ( 1A) of
section   275;”.
15. In section 275 of the Income-tax Act, after sub-section ( 1), the following sub-
section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) In a case where the relevant assessment or other order is the subject-
matter of an appeal to the Commissioner (Appeals) under section 246 or section 246A
or an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal under section 253 or an appeal to the High Court
under section 260A or an appeal to the Supreme Court under section 261 or revision
under section 263 or section 264 and an order imposing or enhancing or reducing or
cancelling penalty or dropping the proceedings for the imposition of penalty is passed
before the order of the Commissioner (Appeals) or the Appellate Tribunal or the High
Court or the Supreme Court is received by the Chief Commissioner  or the Commissioner
or the order of revision  under section 263 or section 264 is passed, an order imposing
or enhancing or reducing or cancelling penalty or dropping the proceedings for the
imposition of penalty may be passed on the basis of assessment as revised by giving
effect to  such order of the Commissioner (Appeals) or, the Appellate Tribunal or the
High Court, or the Supreme Court or order of revision under section 263 or
section 264 :
Provided that  no order of imposing or enhancing or reducing or cancelling
penalty or dropping the proceedings for the imposition of penalty shall be passed—
(a) unless the assessee has been heard, or has been given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard;
(b) after the expiry of six months from the end of the month in which the
order of the Commissioner (Appeals) or the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court
or the Supreme Court is received by the Chief Commissioner  or the Commissioner
or the order of revision  under section 263 or section 264 is passed:
Provided further that the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 274 shall
apply in respect of the order imposing or enhancing or reducing penalty under
this sub-section.”.
Amendment
of   section
194J.
Amendment
of section
246A.
Amendment
of section
275.

7
16. In Income-tax Act, for section 288B, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“288B.  Any amount payable, and the amount of refund due, under the provisions
of this Act shall be rounded off to the nearest multiple of ten rupees and for this
purpose any part of a rupee consisting of paise shall be ignored and thereafter if such
amount is not a multiple of ten, then, if the last figure in that amount is five or more, the
amount shall be increased to the next higher amount which is a multiple of ten and if the
last figure is less than five the amount shall be reduced to the next lower amount which
is a multiple of ten.”.
CHAPTER III
I
NDIRECT TAXES
Customs
17.  In the Customs Act, 1962 (hereafter referred to as the Customs Act), in section 17,
after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:–
“(5) Where any assessment  done under sub-section ( 2) is  contrary to the
claim of the importer or exporter regarding valuation of goods, classification,
exemption or concessions of duty availed consequent to any notification therefor
under this Act, and in cases other than those where the importer or the exporter, as
the case may be, confirms his acceptance of the said assessment in writing, the
proper officer shall pass  a speaking order within fifteen days from the date of
assessment of the bill of entry or the shipping bill, as the case may be.”.
18.  In section 18 of the Customs Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:–
“(3) The importer or exporter shall be liable to pay interest, on any amount
payable to the Central Government, consequent to the final assessment order under
sub-section (2), at the rate fixed by the Central Government under section 28AB from
the first day of the month in which the duty is provisionally assessed till the date of
payment thereof.
(4) Subject to sub-section (5), if any refundable amount referred to in clause (a)
of sub-section (2) is not refunded under that sub-section within three months from the
date of assessment of duty finally, there shall be paid an interest on such unrefunded
amount  at such  rate fixed by the Central Government under section 27A till the date of
refund of such amount.
(5) The amount of duty refundable under sub-section (2) and the interest under
sub-section (4), if any, shall, instead of being credited to the Fund, be paid to the
importer or the exporter, as the case may be, if such amount is relatable to–
(a) the duty and interest, if any, paid on such duty paid by the importer, or
the exporter, as the case may be, if he had not passed on the incidence of such
duty and interest, if any, paid on such duty to any other person;
(b) the duty and interest, if any, paid on such duty on imports made by an
individual for his personal use;
(c) the duty and interest, if any, paid on such duty borne by the buyer, if he
had not passed on the incidence of such duty and interest, if any, paid on such
duty to any other person;
(d) the export duty as specified in section 26;
(e) drawback of duty payable under sections 74 and 75.”.
Substitution of
new section for
section 288B.
Rounding off
amount
payable and
refund due.
Rou
Amendment
of section 17.
Amendment
of section 18.
 52 of 1962.

8
19. In section 28 of the Customs Act,—
(a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:–
“(1A) When any duty has not been levied or has been short-levied or the
interest has not been charged or has been part paid or the duty or interest has
been erroneously refunded by reason of collusion or any  wilful mis-statement or
suppression of facts by the importer or the exporter or the agent or employee of
the importer or exporter, to whom a notice is served under proviso to  sub-section
(1) by the proper officer, may pay duty in full or in part as may be accepted by
him, and the interest payable thereon under section 28AB and penalty equal to
twenty-five per cent. of the duty specified in the notice or the duty so accepted
by such person within thirty days of the receipt of the notice.”;
(b) to sub-section (2),  the following provisos shall be added, namely:–
“Provided that if such person has paid the duty in full  together with
interest and penalty under sub-section (1A), the proceedings in respect of such
person and other persons to whom notice are served under sub-section (1) shall,
without prejudice to the provisions of sections 135, 135A and 140, be deemed to
be  conclusive as to the matters stated therein:
Provided further that, if such person has paid duty in part, interest and
penalty under sub-section (1A), the proper officer shall determine the amount of
duty or interest not being in excess of the amount partly due from such person.”.
20.  After section 28B of the Customs Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“28BA. (1) Where, during the pendency of any proceeding under section
28 or section 28B, the proper officer is of the opinion that for the purpose of
protecting the interests of revenue, it is necessary so to do, he may, with the
previous approval of the Commissioner of Customs, by order in writing, attach
provisionally any property belonging to the person on whom notice is served
under sub-section (1) of section 28 or sub-section (2) of section 28B, as the case
may be, in accordance with the rules made in this behalf under section 142.
(2) Every such provisional attachment shall cease to have effect after the
expiry of a period of six months from the date of the order made under sub-
section (1):
Provided that the Chief Commissioner of Customs may, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, extend aforesaid period by such further period or periods as
he thinks fit, so, however, that the total period of extension shall not in any case
exceed two years:
Provided further that where an application for settlement of case under
section 127B is made to the Settlement Commission, the period commencing from
the date on which such application is made and ending with the date on which an
order under sub-section (1) of section 127C is made shall be excluded from the
period specified in the preceding proviso.”.
21. In section 104 of the Customs Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) If an officer of Customs empowered in this behalf by general or special order
of the Commissioner of Customs has reason to believe that any person in India or
within the Indian customs waters has committed an offence punishable under section
132 or section 133 or section 135 or section 135A or section 136, he may arrest such
person and shall, as soon as may be, inform him of the grounds for such arrest.”.
Amendment
of section 28.
Insertion of
new section
28BA
Provisional
attachment to
protect
revenue in
certain cases.
Amendment
of section 104.

9
22. In section 108 of the Customs Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) Any gazetted officer of Customs duly empowered by the Central Government
in this behalf, shall have power to summon any person whose attendance he considers
necessary either to give evidence or to produce a document or any other thing in any
inquiry which such officer is making under this Act.”.
23. After section 110 of the Customs Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“110A.  Any goods, documents or things seized under section 110, may, pending
the order of the adjudicating officer, be released to the owner on taking a bond from him
in the proper form with such security and conditions as the Commissioner of Customs
may require.”.
   24. After section 114A of the Customs Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“114AA.  If a  person knowingly or intentionally makes, signs or uses, or causes
to be made, signed or used, any declaration, statement or document which is false or
incorrect in any material particular, in the transaction of any business for the purposes
of this Act, shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding five times the value  of goods.”.
25. In section 124 of the Customs Act, in clause (a), for the words “writing informing”,
the words  “writing with the prior approval of the officer of Customs not below the rank of  a
Deputy Commissioner of Customs, informing” shall be substituted.
26. In section 129D of the Customs Act, in sub-section ( 2), for the words “such
authority”, the words “such authority or any officer of Customs subordinate to him” shall be
substituted.
27. In section 132 of the Customs Act, for the words “six months”, the words “two
years” shall be substituted.
28. In section 133 of the Customs Act, for the words “six months”, the words “two
years” shall be substituted.
29. In section 137 of the Customs Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the words and figures
“section 135”, the words, figures and letter “section 135 or section 135A” shall be substituted.
30. After section 154A of the Customs Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“154B. (1) If the Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient
in the public interest to publish the names of any person and any other particulars
relating to any proceedings or prosecutions under this Act in respect of such person,
it may cause to be published such names and particulars in such manner as it thinks fit.
(2) No publication under this section shall be made in relation to any penalty
imposed under this Act until the time for presenting an appeal to the Commissioner
(Appeals) under section 128 or the Appellate Tribunal under section 129A, as the case
may be, has expired without an appeal having been presented or the appeal, if presented,
has been disposed of.
Explanation.–In the case of a firm, company or other association of persons, the
names of the partners of the firm, directors, managing agents, secretaries and treasurers
or managers of the company, or the members of the association, as the case may be,
may also be published if, in the opinion of the Central Government, circumstances of
the case justify it.”.
Amendment
of section
108.
Insertion of
new section
110A.
Provisional
release of
goods,
documents
and things
seized
pending
adjudication.
Insertion of
new section
114AA.
Penalty for
use of false
and incorrect
material.
Amendment
of section
124.
Amendment
of section
129D.
Amendment
of section
132.
Amendment
of section
133.
Amendment
of section
137.
Insertion of
new section
154B
Publication
of
information
respecting
persons in
certain cases.

10
Customs tariff
31.  In section 8B of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, in the first proviso to sub-section (1),
for the words “all such countries”, the words “developing countries each with less than three
per cent. import share” shall be substituted.
Excise
32. In section 11A of the Central Excise Act, 1944 (hereafter referred to as the Central
Excise Act),–
(a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) When any duty of excise has not been levied or paid or has been short-
levied or short paid or erroneously refunded, by reason of fraud, collusion or any wilful
mis-statement or suppression of facts, or contravention of any of the provisions of this
Act or the rules made thereunder with intent to evade payment of duty, by such person
or his agent, to whom a notice is served under proviso to sub-section (1) by the Central
Excise Officer, may pay duty in full or in part as may be accepted by him, and the
interest  payable thereon  under section 11AB  and penalty  equal to  twenty-five      per
cent. of the duty specified in the notice or the duty so accepted by such person within
thirty days of the receipt of the notice.”;
(b) to sub-section (2),  the following provisos shall be added, namely:—
“Provided that if such person has paid the duty in full together with,
interest and penalty under sub-section (1A), the proceedings in respect of such
person and other persons to whom  notice are served under sub-section ( 1)
shall, without prejudice to the provisions of sections 9, 9A and 9AA, be deemed
to be conclusive as to the matters stated therein:
Provided further that, if such person has paid duty in part, interest and
penalty under sub-section (1A), the Central Excise Officer, shall determine the
amount of duty or interest not being in excess of the amount partly due from
such person.”.
 33.  After section 11DD of the Central Excise Act, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:—
“11DDA. (1) Where, during the pendency of any proceeding under section 11A
or section 11D, the Central Excise Officer is of the opinion that for the purpose of
protecting the interests of revenue, it is necessary so to do, he may, with the previous
approval of the Commissioner of Central Excise, by order in writing, attach provisionally
any property belonging to the person on whom notice is served under sub-section (1)
of section 11A or sub-section ( 2) of section 11D, as the case may be, in accordance
with the rules made in this behalf under section 142 of the Customs Act, 1962.
(2) Every such provisional attachment shall cease to have effect after the expiry
of a period of six months from the date of the order made under sub-section (1):
Provided that the Chief Commissioner of Central Excise may, for reasons to be re-
corded in writing, extend the aforesaid period by such further period or periods as he thinks
fit, so, however, that the total period of extension shall not in any case exceed two years:
Provided further that where an application for settlement of case under section
32E is made to the Settlement Commission, the period commencing from the date on
which such application is made and ending with the date on which an order under sub-
section (1) of section 32F is made shall be excluded from the period specified in the
preceding proviso.”.
 34. In section 35E of the Central Excise Act, in sub-section (2), for the words “such
authority”, the words “such authority or any Central Excise Officer subordinate to him” shall
be substituted.
Amendment
of section 8B
of Act 51 of
1975.
Amendment
of section 11A.
Insertion of
new section
11DDA.
Provisional
attachment to
protect
revenue in
certain cases.
Amendment
of section
35E
1 of 1944.
52 of 1962.

11
35.  After section 37D of the Central Excise Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“37E. (1) If the Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient
in the public interest to publish the names of any person and any other particulars
relating to any proceedings or prosecutions under this Act in respect of such person,
it may cause to be published such names and particulars in such manner as it thinks fit.
(2) No publication under this section shall be made in relation to any penalty
imposed under this Act until the time for presenting an appeal to the Commissioner
(Appeals) under section 35 or the Appellate Tribunal under section 35B, as the case
may be, has expired without an appeal having been presented or the appeal, if presented,
has been disposed of.
Explanation.—In the case of a firm, company or other association of persons,
the names of the partners of the firm, directors, managing agents, secretaries and
treasurers or managers of the company, or the members of the association, as the case
may be, may also be published if, in the opinion of the Central Government,
circumstances of the case justify it.”.
36.  (1) In the Central Excise Rules, 2002, made by the Central Government in exercise of
the powers conferred by section 37 of the Central Excise Act, rule 16 thereof as published in
the Official Gazette vide notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue), No. G.S.R. 143(E), dated the 1st March, 2002 shall stand amended
and shall be deemed to have been amended retrospectively in the manner as specified in
column (2) of the Schedule for the period specified in column (3) of that Schedule against the
rule specified in column (1) of that Schedule.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court,
tribunal or other authority, any action taken or anything done or purported to have been
taken or done, at any time during the period commencing on and from the 29th day of May,
2003 and ending with the 8th day of July, 2004 under the rule as amended by sub-section (1),
shall be deemed to be and always to have been, for all the purposes, as validly and effectively
taken or done as if the amendment made by sub-section (1) had been in force at all material
times.
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Central Government shall have and shall be
deemed to have the power to make rules with retrospective effect as if the Central Government
had the power to make rules under section 37 of the Central Excise Act, retrospectively, at all
material times.
Explanation.–For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no act or omission
on the part of any person shall be punishable as an offence, which would not have been so
punishable if this section had not come into force.
CHAPTER  IV
M
ISCELLANEOUS
37. In section 25 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, for the words and figures ‘‘under
section 19”, the words, brackets and figures “by notification under sub-section (1) of section
24” shall be substituted.
Insertion of
new section
37E
Publication of
information
respecting
persons in
certain cases .
Amendment
of rule 16 of
the Central
Excise Rules,
2002.
Amendment
of section 25
of Act 74 of
1956.

THE SCHEDULE
(See section 36)
Provisions of Amendment Period of
the Central effect of
Excise Rules, amendment
2002 to be
amended
(1) (2) (3)
Rule 16 of the
Central Excise
Rules, 2002 as
published vide
notification No.
G .S.R. 143 (E),
dated the
1st March,
2002.
In the Central Excise Rules, 2002, in rule 16, after
sub-rule (3), the following provisos shall be inserted,
namely:–
‘Provided that for the purposes of this rule,
“assessee” shall  include wire drawing unit, which has
cleared the goods on payment of an amount equal to
the duty at the rate applicable to drawn wire on the
date of removal and on the value determined under
relevant provisions of the Act and the rules made
thereunder:
Provided further that the amount paid under the
first proviso shall be allowed as CENV AT credit as if it
was duty paid by the assessee who removes the
goods.'.
29th day of May,
2003 to
8th day of July,
2004 (both days
inclusive).
12

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Several suggestions on amendments to Direct Tax Laws and Indirect Tax Laws have
been received in the course of the current year and after due consideration, some of these
have been accepted. It is proposed to take up these suggestions in this Bill, which will
thereby supplement the proposals made through the Finance Bill, 2005. The Bill, inter alia,
proposes to carry out certain amendments in the Income-tax Act, 1961, the Customs Act,
1962, the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, the Central Excise Act, 1944 and the Central Sales Tax Act,
1956 with the object of rationalizing and simplifying certain procedures, widening of tax base
and plugging loopholes leading to leakage of revenue.
2. The Bill seeks to amend the Income-tax Act, 1961 so as to streamline the approval
and monitoring process for certain charitable entities, scientific research associations, etc.,
prescribing filing of return by certain charitable entities with aggregate annual receipts below
one crore rupees, requiring payment exceeding twenty thousand rupees by way of an account
payee cheque or account payee bank draft, prescribing TDS on renting of plant and machinery,
equipment, royalty and non-compete fee and phased withdrawal of exemption to North-
Eastern Finance Development Corporation Limited over the next five years. It is further
proposed to exclude (from the previous year 2004-2005) any sum received from a charitable
entity or a local authority without consideration from the ambit of  ‘income from other sources’.
It is also proposed to aggregate the said sums received without consideration (from the
previous year 2006-2007) and to enhance the existing limit of twenty-five thousand rupees to
fifty thousand rupees for the purpose of inclusion under ‘income from other sources’. Certain
other amendments such as rounding off of demands or refunds to the nearest multiple of ten
rupees, empowering the Tax Recovery Officer to exercise limited powers of the Assessing
Officer, allowing for revision of penalty orders on receipt of appellate orders regarding
assessment, etc., are also proposed to be carried out in the Income-tax Act.
  3.The Bill also seeks to carry out certain amendments in the Customs Act, 1962,
Customs Tariff Act, 1975 and Central Excise Act, 1944 which inter alia facilitates voluntary
payment of tax dues so as to provide a mechanism for resolving disputes at the earliest, to
facilitate recovery of amount due as revenue to the Government and to incorporate certain
measures to curb evasion of Customs and Central Excise duties.
4. The Bill also seeks to amend the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 so as to expeditiously
and smoothly resolve inter-State disputes, regarding levy of Central Sales Tax by the State
Governments by ensuring that all pending proceedings are transferred to the Authority
notified under sub-section (1) of section 24 of the said Act.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. The notes on clauses explain the
various provisions of the Bill.
N
EW DELHI; P. CHIDAMBARAM.
The 9th  May, 2005.
13
————
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 AND 274 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. F. No. 4/TLAB/2005-TPL, dated the 9th May, 2005 from
Shri P. Chidambaram, Minister of Finance to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Taxation Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 recommends under Article 117(1) and (3) and 274(1) of the Constitution
of India, introduction and consideration of the above Bill by the Lok Sabha.

Notes on clauses
Income-tax
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend section 2 of the Income-tax Act relating to definitions.
The existing provisions contained in clause (44) of the said section provides that “Tax
Recovery Officer” means any Income-tax Officer who may be authorised by the Chief
Commissioner or Commissioner, by general or special order in writing, to exercise the powers
of a Tax Recovery Officer.
It is proposed to amend the said clause so as to provide that the Tax Recovery Officer
may also exercise or perform such powers and functions which are conferred on, or assigned
to, an Assessing Officer under the Income-tax Act and which may be prescribed.
This amendment will take effect from the date on which the Bill receives the assent of
the President.
Clause 3 seeks to amend section 10 of the Income-tax Act relating to incomes which
shall not be included in total income.
Under the existing provision contained in section 10 of the Income-tax Act, any income
falling within the various clauses of that section shall not be included in computing the total
income of a previous year of any person.
It is proposed to insert a new clause (23BBE) in section 10 so as to provide that any
income of the North-Eastern Development Finance Corporation Limited, a company formed
and registered under the Companies Act, 1956, shall not be included in computing its total
income. It is further provided that the income of the North-Eastern Development Finance
Limited shall be included in the total income to the extent of the percentage of its total income
specified in the proposed clause (23BBE).
Under the existing provisions contained in the eighth proviso to clause ( 23C) of
section 10, any notification issued by the Central Government under sub-clause (iv) or sub-
clause (v) of the said clause (23C), shall, at any one time, have effect for any assessment year
or years not exceeding three assessment years including an assessment year or years
commencing before the date on which such notification is issued.
It is proposed to amend the eighth proviso to clause (23C) of the said section so as to
provide that where the notification is issued under sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) of said
clause (23C) before the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005 receives the assent of the
President, such notification shall continue to be effective for a period of three assessment
years including an assessment year or years not exceeding three assessment years
commencing before the date on which such notification is issued.
Under the existing provisions contained in the first proviso to clause (23C) of section
10, the fund or trust or institution or any university or other educational institution or any
hospital or other medical institution referred to in sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) or sub-
clause (vi) or sub-clause (via) of said clause (23C) shall make an application in the prescribed
form and in the manner to the prescribed authority for the purpose of grant of exemption
under those sub-clauses. However, no time limit has been provided for grant of approval or
issue of notification under the said sub-clauses.
It is proposed to insert ninth proviso after the eighth proviso so as to provide that
where any application for issue of notification or grant of approval under sub-clause (iv) or
sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via) of clause (23C) is filed on or after the
date on which this Bill receives the assent of the President, every such notification shall be
issued or order granting approval or order rejecting the application shall be passed before
the expiry of twelve months from the end of the month in which the application was received.
Under the existing provisions contained in second proviso of clause (23C), the Central
Government or the prescribed authority before notifying or approving the entities referred to
14

15
in sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via) may call for such
documents including audited annual accounts. However, there is no stipulation for getting
their accounts audited by an accountant or furnishing the audit report along with the return
of income.
It is further proposed to insert tenth proviso after the ninth proviso as so inserted so
as to provide that where the total income of the fund or trust or institution or any university
or other educational institution or any hospital or other medical institution referred to in sub-
clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via), without giving effect to
the provisions of the said sub-clauses of clause (23C), exceeds the maximum amount which
is not chargeable to tax in any previous year, such trust or institution or university or other
educational institution or hospital or other medical institution shall get its accounts audited
by an accountant as defined in the Explanation below sub-section ( 2) of section 288 and
furnish along with the return of income for the relevant assessment year, the audited accounts
and the report of such audit in the prescribed form duly signed and verified by such
accountant and setting forth such particulars as may be prescribed.
These amendments will take effect from 1st day of April, 2006 and will, accordingly,
apply to assessment year 2006-2007 and subsequent years.
Clause 4 seeks to amend section 12A of the Income-tax Act relating to conditions as to
registration of trusts, etc.
Under the existing provisions contained in section 12A of the Income-tax Act, where
the total income of the trust or institution as computed under that Act without giving effect
to the provisions of sections 11 and 12 exceeds fifty thousand rupees in any previous year,
the accounts of the trust or institution for that year shall be audited and such audit report
shall be furnished along with the return of income.
It is proposed to amend the said section so as to provide that the accounts of the trust
or institution for that year shall be audited and such audit report shall be furnished along
with the return of income if the total income of such trust or institution exceeds the maximum
amount which is not chargeable to income-tax in any previous year.
This amendment will take effect from 1st day of April, 2006 and will, accordingly, apply
in relation to the assessment year 2006-2007 and subsequent years.
Clause 5 seeks to amend section 35 of the Income-tax Act relating to expenditure on
scientific research.
Under the existing provisions contained in the proviso to clause (ii) and the proviso to
clause (iii) of sub-section (1) of section 35 of the Income-tax Act, the Central Government
grants the approval to an association, university, college or other institution. These provisions
do not provide for the manner, guidelines and the conditions subject to which approval is
required to be granted.
It is proposed to amend the proviso to clause (ii) and the proviso to clause (iii) of sub-
section (1) of section 35 so as to empower the Central Board of Direct Taxes to lay down, by
rules, the manner in which an association, university, college or other institution is to be
granted approval and the guidelines and conditions to be fulfilled for grant of such approval
by the Central Government.
Under the second proviso to the aforesaid sub-section ( 1), the Central Government
before granting approval may call for any documents or information and may also make such
inquiries as it may deem necessary. Under the third proviso to the aforesaid sub-section (1),
the approval granted at any one time has effect for three assessment years.

16
 It is  proposed to amend the second proviso to the said sub-section ( 1) so as to
provide that the Central Government may make such inquiries as it may deem necessary. It is
further proposed to amend the third proviso to the said sub-section (1) so as to provide that
there would be no requirement for renewal of the approval where the approval is granted
before the date on which the Bill receives assent of the President,  such approval granted
before that date shall remain effective for the period for which the approval was granted. It is
also proposed to provide for disposing the application for approval within twelve months of
receipt of the same.
This amendment will take effect from the 1st day of April, 2006 and will, accordingly
apply in relation to the assessment year 2006-07 and subsequent years.
Clause 6 seeks to amend section 40 of the Income-tax Act relating to amounts not
deductible.
Under the existing provisions contained in sub-clause (ia) of clause (a) of section 40,
non-deduction of tax on payment of interest, commission or brokerage, fees for professional
services or fees for technical services, or amounts payable to a contractor or sub-contractor,
results in the disallowance of the sum, in the computation of income of the payer, on which
tax is required to be deducted under Chapter XVII-B.
It is proposed to amend sub-clause (ia) of clause (a) of section 40 so as to extend the
provisions thereof to payments of royalty and rent. It is also proposed to provide for the
definition of the terms “royalty” and “rent” in the explanation to the sub-clause.
This amendment will take effect from 1st day of April, 2006 and will, accordingly, apply
in relation to the assessment year 2006-2007 and subsequent years.
Clause 7 seeks to amend section 40A of the Income-tax Act relating to expenses or
payments not deductible in certain circumstances.
Under the existing provisions contained in sub-section ( 3) and sub-section ( 4) of
section 40A, it is provided that any payment exceeding twenty thousand rupees not made by
way of a crossed cheque or crossed bank draft shall attract a disallowance to the extent of
twenty per cent. of such sum, in the computation of income of the payer.
It is proposed to amend sub-section ( 3) and sub-section ( 4) so as to provide that a
disallowance to the extent of twenty per cent. of the sum of payment shall be made where any
payment exceeding the limit of twenty thousand rupees is made otherwise than by an account
payee cheque or account payee bank draft.
These amendments will take effect from the date on which the Bill receives assent of
the President.
Clause 8 seeks to amend section 56 of the Income-tax Act relating to income from other
sources.
Under the existing provision contained  in clause (v) of sub-section (2) of section 56 of
the Income-tax Act, where any sum of money exceeding twenty five thousand rupees  is
received by an individual or a Hindu undivided family without consideration from any person
on or after the 1st day of September, 2004, the whole of such sum is included in the total
income in the hands of the recipient. As per the proviso to the said clause, this clause shall
not apply to any sum of money received from any relative or on the occasion of the marriage
of the individual or under a will or by way of inheritance or in contemplation of the death of
the payer.
It is proposed to amend the proviso to clause (v) of sub-section (2) of section 56 so as
to provide that this clause shall not apply to any sum of money received from any local
authority as defined in the Explanation to clause ( 20) of section 10 or from any fund or
foundation or university or other educational institution or hospital or other medical institution
or any trust or institution referred to in clause (23C) of section 10 or from any trust or
institution registered under section 12AA.

17
This amendment will take effect retrospectively from the 1st day of April, 2005 and will,
accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 2005-2006 and subsequent years.
It is further proposed to amend clause ( v) of sub-section ( 2) of section 56 so as to
provide that the said clause shall be applicable to any sum of money exceeding twenty five
thousand rupees received by an individual or Hindu undivided family without consideration
from any person before the 1st day of April, 2006.
This amendment will take effect from 1
st day of April, 2006 and will, accordingly, apply
in relation to the assessment year 2006-2007 and subsequent years.
It is also proposed to insert a new clause ( vi) after clause ( v) of sub-section ( 2) of
section 56 so as to provide that where any sum of money, the aggregate value of which
exceeds fifty thousand rupees, is received without consideration by an individual or a Hindu
undivided family in any previous year from any person or persons on or after the 1st day of
April, 2006, the whole of the aggregate value of such sum shall be included in the total
income.
This amendment will take effect from 1st day of April, 2007 and will, accordingly, apply
to assessment years 2007-2008 and subsequent years.
Clause 9 seeks to amend section 139 of the Income-tax Act relating to return of income.
Under  the existing provisions contained in  sub-clause (e) of clause (4C) of section 139
of the Income-tax Act, every fund or institution referred to in sub-clause ( iv) or trust or
institution referred to in sub-clause ( v) or any university or other educational institution
referred to in sub-clause (vi) or any hospital or other medical institution referred to in sub-
clause (via) shall furnish their return of income if the total income without giving effect to the
provisions of section 10 exceeds the maximum amount which is not chargeable to tax.
It is proposed to amend the said sub-clause (e) of clause (4C) of section 139 so as to
provide that any university or other educational institution referred to in sub-clause (iiiad) or
any hospital or other medical institution referred to in sub-clause (iiiae) of clause (23C) of
section 10 shall furnish their return of income if their total income without giving effect to the
provisions of section 10 exceeds the maximum amount which is not chargeable to tax.
This amendment will take effect  from 1
st day of April, 2006 and will, accordingly, apply
in relation to the assessment year 2006-2007 and subsequent assessment years.
Sub-clause (b) of the said clause seeks to insert sub-section (4D) requiring a university,
college or other institution referred to in clause ( ii) and clause ( iii) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 35 to furnish return of income.
This amendment will take effect from the 1st day of April, 2006 and will, accordingly,
apply in relation to the assessment year 2006-2007 and subsequent years.
 Clause 10 seeks to amend section 143 of the Income-tax Act relating to assessment.
It is proposed to insert a proviso after the first proviso in sub-section (3) of section 143
to provide that during the course of assessment proceedings the assessing officer should
satisfy himself regarding the activities of the university, college or other institution whether
these are being carried out in accordance with all or any of the guidelines and conditions
subject to which approval was granted and may recommend to the Central Government to
withdraw the approval.
This amendment will take effect from the 1st day of April, 2006 and will, accordingly,
apply in relation to the assessment year 2006-2007 and subsequent years.
Clause 11 seeks to amend section 155 of the Income-tax Act relating to other
amendments.
The existing provisions of section 155, inter alia , provide for rectification of an
assessment order wherein deduction under section 80HHC, 80HHD, 80HHE, etc., has not
been allowed on the ground that export income has not been received in convertible foreign

18
exchange in India, or having been received in convertible foreign exchange outside India, has
not been brought into India, by or on behalf of the assessee before completion of assessment
and such income is subsequently brought into India with the approval of the Reserve Bank
of India or such other competent authority within the prescribed time.
It is proposed to insert a new sub-section (11A) in the said section so as to provide that
the Assessing Officer shall amend the order of assessment to allow deduction under section
10A or section 10B or section 10BA, as the case may be, in respect of export income or part
thereof, which is received in, or brought into, India with the approval of the Reserve Bank of
India or such other competent authority within the prescribed time. It is also proposed that
the provisions of section 154 shall, so far as may be, apply thereto, and the period of four
years for rectification of assessment shall be reckoned from the end of the previous year in
which such income is so received in, or brought into, India.
This amendment will take effect from the date on which the Bill receives the assent of
the President.
Clause 12 seeks to amend section 194-I of the Income-tax Act relating to tax deduction
at source on rent.
Under the existing provisions contained in section 194-I, tax is required to be deducted
at source on payment of rent. The term “rent” has been defined in the Explanation to the said
section to, inter alia, mean payment for use of any building (including factory building)
together with furniture, fittings and the land appurtenant thereto whether or not such building
is owned by the payee.
It is proposed to amend the definition of “rent” in the Explanation to section 194-I so
as to provide that the provisions of the said section are applicable whether the items are
rented separately or together. It is also proposed to expand the list of items by including
machinery, plant and equipment. This section is proposed to be made applicable whether or
not any or all of the items are owned by the payee.
This amendment will take effect from the date on which the Bill receives assent of the
President.
Clause 13 seeks to amend section 194J of the Income-tax Act relating to fees for
professional or technical services.
Under the existing provisions contained in sub-section (1), tax is required to be deducted at
source on any payment of a sum to a resident exceeding twenty thousand rupees by way of fees
for professional services or fees for technical services at the rate of five per cent. of such sum.
It is proposed to amend sub-section (1) of section 194J so as to include “royalty” and
“any sum referred to in clause (va) of section 28” for applicability of the provisions of the
said sub-section. The term “royalty” is proposed to be defined in the explanation to the
section.
These amendments will take effect from the date on which the Bill receives assent of
the President.
Clause 14 seeks to amend section 246A of the Income-tax Act relating to appealable
orders before Commissioner (Appeals).
The existing provision of sub-section ( 1) of said section provides a list of orders
against which an appeal may be filed to the Commissioner (Appeals) by an assessee who
is aggrieved by any of the orders mentioned therein.
It is proposed to amend the said sub-section so as to provide that an appeal to the
Commissioner (Appeals) may also be filed against an order imposing or enhancing penalty
under sub-section (1A) of section 275.
This amendment will take effect from the date on which the Bill receives the assent of
the President.

19
Clause 15 seeks to amend section 275 of the Income-tax Act relating to bar of limitation
for imposing penalties.
Under the existing provisions contained in the proviso to the clause (a) of sub-section
(1) of said section, in a case where the relevant assessment or other order is the subject
matter of an appeal to the Commissioner (Appeals), and he passes the order on or after
1st June, 2003 disposing of such appeal, an order imposing penalty shall be passed before
the expiry of the financial year in which the proceedings in the course of which action for
imposition of penalty has been initiated, are completed or within one year from the end of the
financial year in which order of Commissioner (Appeals) is received. Further, under the
existing provisions contained in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of said section, in a case where
the relevant assessment or other order is the subject matter of revision under section 263 or
section 264, the penalty order shall be passed before the expiry of six months from the end of
the month in which such order of revision is passed.
It is proposed to amend the said section so as to provide that in a case where the
relevant assessment or other is the subject-matter of an appeal to the Commissioner (Appeals)
under section 246 or section 246A or an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal under section 253 or
an appeal to the High Court under section 260A or an appeal to the Supreme Court under
section 261 or revision under section 263 or section 264 and an order imposing or enhancing
or reducing or cancelling penalty or dropping the proceedings for the imposition of penalty
is passed before the order of the Commissioner (Appeals) or the Appellate Tribunal or the
High Court or the Supreme Court is received by the Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner
or the order of revision under section 263 or section 264 is passed, an order imposing or
enhancing or reducing or cancelling penalty or dropping the proceedings for the imposition
of penalty may be passed on the basis of assessment as revised by giving effect to such
order of the Commissioner (Appeals) or the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court or the
Supreme Court or order of revision under section 263 or section 264. It is further proposed to
provide that  no order of imposing or enhancing or reducing or cancelling penalty or dropping
the proceedings for the imposition of penalty shall be passed after the expiry of six months
from the end of the month in which the order of the Commissioner (Appeals) or the Appellate
Tribunal or the High Court or the Supreme Court is received by the Chief Commissioner  or
the Commissioner or the order of revision  under section 263 or section 264 is passed.
This amendment will take effect from the date on which the Bill receives the assent of
the President.
 Clause 16 seeks to amend section 288B of the Income-tax Act relating to rounding off
of tax, etc.
The existing provisions of the said section provides that the amount of tax (including
tax deductible at source or payable in advance), interest, penalty, fine or any other sum
payable, and the amount of refund due, under the provisions of the Income-tax Act shall be
rounded off to the nearest rupee.
It is proposed to substitute the said section by a new section so as to provide that any
amount payable, and the amount of refund due, under the provisions of this Act shall be
rounded off to the nearest multiple of ten rupees and for this purpose any part of a rupees
consisting of paise shall be ignored and thereafter if such amount is not a multiple of ten,
then, if the last figure in that amount is five or more, the amount shall be increased to the next
higher amount which is a multiple of ten and if the last figure is less than five the amount shall
be reduced to the next lower amount which is a multiple of ten.
This amendment will take effect from the date on which the Bill receives the assent of
the President.
Customs
Clause 17 seeks to insert sub-section ( 5) in section 17 of the Customs Act, 1962 to
provide for a speaking order within fifteen days from the date of assessment of a bill of entry

20
or a shipping bill in the event the assessing officer is of a view contrary to the claim of the
importer or exporter regarding valuation of goods, classification, exemption or concessions
of duty availed consequent to any notification under the Act.
Clause 18 seeks to insert sub-section (3), sub-section (4) and sub-section (5) to section
18 of the Customs Act, 1962 to provide for a mechanism to regularize the payments of duty
short levied and interest thereon and duties that are to be refunded on finalisation of a
provisional assessment.
Clause 19 seeks to —
(i) insert sub-section (1A) and provisos to sub-section (2) in section 28 of the Customs
Act, 1962 so as to provide an option for voluntary payment within thirty days of receipt of a
notice by an importer or exporter or any other person who has been issued with the show
cause notice for evasion of duty on suppression of facts and wilful mis-statement or for by
reason of collusion under the proviso to sub-section ( 1).
(ii) envisage a reduced amount of penalty at the rate of twenty-five per cent. of the
duty specified in the notice,  to avail, the option, such person may pay the duty specified in
the said notice either in full along with interest and penalty at the rate of  twenty-five per
cent., of the duty paid or a part thereof along with interest and penalty at the rate of twenty-
five per cent., of the duty so accepted and paid.
(iii) The scheme also envisages termination of proceedings against the co-noticee if
any, to the proceeding in the event of payment of duty in full along with interest and twenty
five per cent. of duty is paid as penalty within thirty days of receipt of the notice.
Clause 20 seeks to insert a new section 28BA in the Customs Act, 1962 to provide for
provisional attachment of property belonging to a person to whom a notice is served under
sub-section (1) of section 28 or sub-section ( 2) of section 28BA to protect the interest of
revenue in certain cases.
Clause 21 seeks to amend section 104 of the Customs Act, 1962 to include within its
ambit the power to arrest a person who has committed an offence punishable under section
132 or 133 or 135A or 136.
Clause 22 seeks to substitute sub-section (1) of section 108 of the Customs Act, 1962
to empower the Central Government to designate a gazetted officer of Customs to be
empowered under the Act for the purpose of summoning any person whose attendance he
considers necessary either to give evidence or to produce a document or any other thing in
any inquiry under the Act.
Clause 23 seeks to insert a new section 110A in the Customs Act, 1962 to facilitate
provisional release of goods, documents and things seized pending adjudication.
Clause 24 seeks to insert a new section 114AA in the Customs Act, 1962 to provide for
penalty for use of false and incorrect material, declaration, statement, etc., in the transaction
of any business for the purpose of the Act.
Clause 25 seeks to amend section 124 of the Customs Act, 1962 to provide for prior
approval of the officer of a rank not below that of a Deputy Commissioner of Customs before
issuing a show cause notice proposing for confiscation of seized goods under the Act.
Clause 26 proposes to amend sub-section (2) of section 129D of the Customs Act to
facilitate an officer other than the adjudicating authority to file an appeal before the
Commissioner (Appeals) or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be.
Clause 27 proposes to amend section 132 of the Customs Act, 1962 to enhance the
maximum punishment from six months to two years in cases, where a declaration, document,
statement, etc., containing false and incorrect information material particular is produced in
the transaction of business under the Act.

21
Clause 28 seeks to amend section 133 of the Customs Act to enhance the maximum
punishment of imprisonment from six months to two years in cases of obstruction to the
customs officers while performing their duties.
Clause 29 of the Customs Act, 1962 seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 137 to
provide for prior sanction for prosecution of offences under section 135A in relation to
preparations.
Clause 30 seeks to insert a new section 154B in the Customs Act, which empowers the
Central Government to publish the names and other particular information relating to any
proceedings or prosecutions under the Act in respect of any person as the Central Government
may think fit.  Sub-section (2) provides that no publication shall be made in relation to any
penalty imposed under the Act if the time of presenting an appeal before the Commissioner
(Appeals) or the Tribunal has expired without an appeal having been presented or has been
disposed of.  It is also provided to publish the names of directors, managing agents, secretaries,
treasurers or managers of the company or the partners of a firm.
Customs Tariff
Clause 31 seeks to amend the first proviso to sub-section (1) of section 8B of the
Customs Tariff Act, 1975 to remove the ambiguity concerning exemption from an application
of safeguard duty for developing countries with a view to align with corresponding provision
under Article 9.1 of WTO Agreement on Safeguard.
Excise
Clause 32 seeks to—
(i) insert sub-section (1A) and provisos to sub-section (2) in section 11A of the Central
Excise Act, so as to provide an option for voluntary payment  within thirty days of receipt of
a notice by a producer, manufacturer or any other person who has been issued with the show
cause notice for evasion of duty on account of fraud, suppression of facts and wilful mis-
statement or for erroneous refund under the proviso to sub-section (1).
(ii)  envisage a reduced amount of penalty at twenty-five per cent. of the duty specified
in the notice. To avail the option such person may pay the duty specified in the said notice
either in full along with interest and penalty at the rate of twenty-five per cent., of the duty
paid or a part thereof along with interest and penalty at twenty five-per cent., of the duty so
accepted and paid. The scheme also envisages termination of proceedings against the co-
noticee if any, to the proceeding in the event of payment of duty in full along with interest and
twenty-five per cent. of duty is paid as penalty within thirty days of receipt of the notice.
Clause 33 seeks to insert a new section 1 1DDA in the Central Excise Act, 1944 to
provide for provisional attachment of property belonging to a person to whom a notice is
served under sub-section (1) of 11A or sub-section (2) of 11D to protect revenue in certain
cases.
Clause 34 seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 35E of the Central Excise Act, 1944
to facilitate an officer other than the adjudicating authority to file an appeal before the
Commissioner (Appeals) or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be.
Clause 35 seeks to insert a new section 37E in the Central Excise Act to provide for
publication of information relating to any proceedings or prosecutions under the Act in
respect of such person as the Central Government may think fit.  Sub-section (2) categorically
prescribes that no publication shall be made in relation to any penalty imposed under the act
until the time of presenting an appeal, before the Commissioner (Appeals) or the Tribunal,
has been expired without an appeal having been presented or has been disposed of.  It is also
provided to publish the names of directors, managing agents, secretaries, treasurers or
managers of the company or the partners of a firm.

22
Clause 36 seeks insert two provisos in sub-rule (3) of rule 16 of the Central Excise
Rules, 2002 retrospectively for the period from 29th day of May 2003 and ending with 8th day
of July, 2004 to declare independent wire drawing units as “assessee” to resolve multiple
proceedings and also to redress the grievances of discrimination against wire drawing units.
The process of “wire drawing” from “wire rods” has been held as not amounting to manufacture
by the Supreme Court.  Therefore, the benefit of credit of duty availed by the manufacturers
was withdrawn on 29.5.2003 by a circular issued by the Board. However, certain manufacturers
continued to pay duty and to pass on the credit to the ultimate buyer for further manufacture.
By an amendment vide section 89 of the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2004, note 10 was inserted in
Section XV of the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 to declare the said process as 'manufacture'.
Miscellaneous
Clause 37 seeks to amend section 25 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 to provide for
transfer of proceedings relating to inter-State disputes falling under section 6A read with
section 9 of the said Act pending before an appellate authority of a State or the Union
territory to the Authority notified under section sub-section ( 1) of section 24 of the said
Act.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLATION
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend section 2 of the Income-tax Act so as to provide
that the Tax Recovery Officer may also exercise or perform such powers and functions
which are conferred on, or assigned to, an Assessing Officer.  The proposed amendment
empowers the Central Board of Direct Taxes to prescribe, by rules, such powers and functions
to be exercised by the Tax Recovery Officer.
2. Item (ii) of sub-clause (b) of clause 3 of the Bill seeks to insert two new provisos
after the eighth proviso in clause (23C) of section 10 of the Income-tax Act relating to
incomes not included in the total income.  In the tenth proviso as so inserted after the ninth
proviso, it is proposed that where the total income of the fund or trust or institution or any
university or other educational institution or any hospital or other medical institution referred
to in sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via), without giving
effect to the provisions of the said sub-clauses of clause (23C) of section 10, exceeds the
maximum amount which is not chargeable to tax in any previous year, such trust or institution
or university or other educational institution or hospital or other medical institution shall
get its accounts audited by an accountant as defined in the Explanation below sub-section
(2) of section 288 and furnish along with the return of income for the relevant assessment
year, the audited accounts and the report of such audit in the prescribed form.  This proviso
confers power upon the Central Board of Direct Taxes to notify, by rules made by it, the form
in which such report of audit is to be furnished along with the return of income and the
particulars which such report shall contain.
3. Sub-clause (a) of clause 5 seeks to empower the Central Board of Direct Taxes to
prescribe the guidelines, the manner and the conditions subject to which approval is to be
granted to an association university, college or other institution under clause (ii) of sub-
section (1) of section 35 of the Income-tax Act. Sub-clause (b) of clause 5 seeks to empower
the Central Board of Direct Taxes to prescribe the guidelines, the manner and the conditions
subject to which approval is to be granted to a university, college or other institution under
clause (iii) of sub-section (1) of section 35 of the Income-tax Act.
4. The matters in respect of which rules may be made in accordance with the aforesaid
provisions of the Bill are matters of procedure or detail and it is not practical to provide for
them in the Bill itself.
5. The delegation of legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character.
2323

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961
(43 OF 1961)
* * * * *
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(44)  “Tax Recovery Officer” means any Income-tax Officer who may be authorised
by the Chief Commissioner or Commission, by general or special order in writing, to
exercise the powers of a Tax Recovery Officer;
* * * * *
CHAPTER III
I
NCOMES WHICH DO NOT FORM PART OF TOTAL INCOME
10. In computing the total income of a previous year of any person, any income falling
within any of the following clauses shall not be included—
* * * * *
(23C)  any income received by any person on behalf of—
(i) the Prime Minister’s National relief Fund; or
(ii) the Prime Minister’s Fund (Promotion of Folk Art); or
(iii) the Prime Minister’s Aid to Students Fund; or
(iiia) the National Foundation for Communal Harmony; or
(iiiab) any university or other educational institution existing solely for
educational purposes and not for purposes of profit, and which is wholly or
substantially financed by the Government; or
(iiiac) any hospital or other institution for the reception and treatment of
persons suffering from illness or mental defectiveness or for the reception and
treatment of persons during convalescence or persons requiring medical attention
or rehabilitation, existing solely for philanthropic purposes and not for purposes
of profit, and which is wholly or substantially financed the Government; or
(iiiad) any university or other educational institution existing solely for
educational purposes and  not for purposes  of profit if the aggregate annual
receipts of such university or educational institution do not exceed the amount
of annual receipts as may be prescribed; or
(iiiae) any hospital or other institution for the reception and treatment of
persons suffering from illness or mental defectiveness or for the reception and
treatment of persons during convalescence or of persons requiring medical
attention or rehabilitation, existing solely for philanthropic purposes and not for
purposes of profit, if the aggregate annual receipts of such hospital or institution
do not exceed the amount of annual receipts as may be prescribed; or
(iv) any other fund or institution established for charitable purposes which
may be notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette, having regard
to the objects of the fund or institution and its importance throughout India or
throughout India or throughout any State or States; or
(v) any trust (including any other legal obligation) or institution wholly for
public religious purposes of wholly for public religious and charitable purposes,
which may be notified by the Central Government in Official Gazette, having
Definitions.
Income not
included in
total income.
24

25
regard to the manner in which the affairs of the trust or institution are administered
and supervised for ensuring that the income accruing thereto is properly applied
for the objects thereof;
(vi) any university or other educational institution existing solely for
educational purposes and not for purposes of profit, other than those mentioned
in sub-clause (iiiab) or sub-clause ( iiiad) and which may be approved by the
prescribed authority; or
(via) any hospital or other institution for the reception and treatment of
persons suffering from illness or mental defectiveness or for the reception and
treatment of persons during convalescence or  of persons requiring medical
attention or rehabilitation, existing solely for philanthropic purposes of profit,
other than those mentioned in sub-clause (iiiac) or sub-clause (iiiae) and which
may be approved by the prescribed authority:
Provided that the fund or trust or institution or any university or other
educational institution or any hospital or other  medical institution referred to in
sub-clause (iv)  or sub-clause ( v) or sub-clause ( vi) or sub-clause ( via) shall
make an application in the prescribed form and manner to the prescribed authority
for the purposes of grant of the exemption, or continuance thereof, under sub-
clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via):
Provided further that the Central Government, before notifying the fund or
trust or institution, or the prescribed authority, before approving any university
or other educational  institution or any hospital or other medical institution,
under sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause ( v) or sub-clause ( vi) or sub-clause ( via),
may call for such documents (including audited annual accounts) or information
from the fund or trust or institution or any university or other educational
institution or any hospital or other medical institution, as the case may be, as it
thinks necessary in order to satisfy itself about the genuineness of the activities
of the fund or trust or institution or any university or other educational institution
or any hospital or other medical institution, as the case may be, and the Central
Government or the prescribed authority,  as the case may be, may also make such
inquiries as it deems necessary in this behalf:
Provided also that the fund or trust or institution or any university or
other educational institution or any hospital or other medical institution referred
to in sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via)—
(a) applies its income, or accumulates it for application, wholly and
exclusively to the objects for which it is establishment and in a case where
more than fifteen per cent. of its income is accumulated on or after the 1st
day of April, 2003, the period of the accumulation of the amount exceeding
fifteen per cent. of its income shall in no case exceed five years; and
(b) does not invest or deposit its fund, other than—
(i) any assets held by the funds, trust or institution or any
university or other educational institution or any hospital or other
medical institution where such assets form part of the corpus of the
fund, trust or institution or any university or other educational
institution or any hospital or other medical institution as on the 1st
day of June, 1973;
(ia) any asset, being equity shares of a public company, held
by any university or other educational institution or any hospital or
other medical institution where such assets form part of the corpus
of any university or other educational institution or any hospital or

26
other medical institution as on the 1st day of  June, 1998;
(ii) any assets (being debentures issued by, or on behalf of,
any company or corporation), acquired by the fund, trust or
institution or any university or other educational institution or any
hospital or other medical institution before the 1st day of March,
1983;
(iii) any accretion to the shares, forming part of the corpus
mentioned in sub-clause (i) and sub-clause ( ia), by way of bonus
shares allotted to the fund, trust or institution or any university or
other educational institution or any hospital or other medical
institution;
(iv) voluntary contribution received and maintained in the
form of jewellery, furniture or any other article as the Board may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify,
for any period during the previous year otherwise than in any one or more of the
forms or modes specified in the sub-section (5) of section 11:
Provided also that the exemption under sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v)
shall not be denied in relation to any funds invested or deposited before the 1st
day of April,  1989, otherwise than in any one or more of the forms or  modes
specified in sub-section (5) of section 11 if such funds do not continue to remain
so invested or deposited after the 30th day of March, 1993:
Provided also that the exemption under sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via)
shall not be denied in relation to any funds invested or deposited before the 1st
day of June, 1998, otherwise than in any one or more of the forms or modes
specified in sub-section (5) of section 11 if such funds do not continue to remain
so invested or deposited after the 30th day of March, 2001:
Provided also that the exemption under sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v)
or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause ( via) shall not denied in relation to voluntary
contribution, other than voluntary contribution in cash or voluntary contribution
of the nature referred to in clause ( b) of the third proviso to this sub-clause,
subject to the condition that such voluntary contribution is not held by the trust
or institution or any university or other educational institution or any hospital or
other medical institution, otherwise than in any one or more of the forms or
modes specified in sub-section (5) of section 11, after the expiry of one year from
the end of the previous year in which such asset is acquired or the 31st day of
March, 1992, whichever is later:
Provided also that nothing contained in sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v)
or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via) shall apply in relation to any income of the
fund or trust or institution or any university or other educational institution or
any hospital or other medical institution, being profits and gains of business,
unless the business is incidental to the attainment of its objectives and separate
books of account are maintained by it in respect of such business:
Provided also that any notification issued by the Central Government
under sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause ( v) shall, at any one time, have effect for
such assessment year of years, not exceeding three assessment years (including
an assessment year or years commencing before the date on which such
notification is issued as may be specified in the notification:
Provided also that any amount of donation received by the fund or
institution in terms of clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 80G in respect of

27
which accounts of income and expenditure have not been rendered to the
authority prescribed under clause (v) of sub-section (5C) of that section, in the
manner specified in that clause, or which has been utilized for purposes other
than providing relief to the victims of earthquake in Gujarat or which remains
unutilised in terms of sub-section (5C) of section 80G and not transferred to the
Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund on or before the 31st day of March, 2004
shall be deemed to be the income of the previous year and shall accordingly by
charged to tax:
Provided also that where the fund or trust or institution or any university
or other educational institution or any hospital or other medical institution referred
to in sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via) does
not apply its income during the year of receipt and accumulates it, any payment
or credit out of such accumulation to any trust or institution registered under
section 12AA or to any fund or trust or institution or any university or other
educational institution or any hospital or other medical  institution referred to in
sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via) shall not
be treated as application of income to the objects for which such fund or trust or
institution or university or educational institution or hospital or other medical
institution, as the case may be, is established:
Provided also that where the fund or institution referred to in sub-clause
(iv) or trust or institution referred to in sub-clause (v) is notified by the Central
Government or any university or other educational institution referred to in sub-
clause (vi) or any hospital or other medical institution referred to in sub-clause
(via), is approved by the prescribed authority and subsequently that Government
or the prescribed authority is satisfied that—
(i) such fund or institution or trust or any university or other
educational institution or any hospital or other medical institution has
not—
(A) applied its income in accordance with the provisions
contained in clause (a) of the third proviso; or
(B) invested or deposited its funds in accordance with the
provisions contained in clause (b) of the third proviso; or
(ii) the activities of such fund or institution or trust or any university
or other educational institution or any hospital or other medical institution—
(A) are not genuine; or
(B)  are not being carried out in accordance with all or any of
the conditions subject to which it was notified  or approved,
it may, at any time after giving a reasonable opportunity of showing cause
against the proposed action to the concerned fund or institution or trust or any
university or other educational institution or any hospital or other medical
institution, rescind the notification or, by order, withdraw the approval, as the
case may be, and forward a copy of the order rescinding the notification or
withdrawing the approval to such fund or institution or trust or any university or
other educational institution or any hospital or other medical institution and to
the Assessing officer;
12A.   The provisions of section 11 and section 12 shall not apply in relations to the
income of any trust or institution unless the following conditions are fulfilled, namely:—
(b) where the total income of the trust or institution as computed under this Act
without giving effect to the provisions of section 11 and section 12 exceeds fifty
thousand rupees in any previous year, the accounts of the trust or institution for that
Conditions as
to registration
of trusts, etc.

28
year have been audited by an accountant as defined in the Explanation below sub-
section (2) of  section 288 and the person in receipt of the income furnishes along with
the return of income for the relevant assessment year the report of such audit in the
prescribed form duly signed and verified by such accountant and setting forth such
particulars as may be prescribed.
* * * * *
35.  (1) In respect of expenditure on scientific research, the following deductions shall
be allowed—
* * * * *
(ii) an amount equal to one and one-fourth times of any sum paid a scientific
research association which has as its object the undertaking of scientific research or to
a university, college or other institution to be used for scientific research:
Provided that such association, university, college or institution is for the time
being approved for the purposes of this clause by the Central Government by
notification in the Official Gazette;
(iii) an amount equal to one and one-fourth times of any sum paid to a university,
college or other institution to be used for research in special science or statistical
research:
Provided that such university, college or institution is for the time being approved
for the purposes of this clause by the Central Government by notification in the
Official gazette;
(iv) in respect of any expenditure of a capital nature on scientific research related
to the business carried on by the assessee, such deduction as may be admissible
under the provisions of sub-section ( 2):
Provided that the scientific research association, university, college or other
institution referred to in clause ( ii) or clause ( iii) shall make an application in the
prescribed form and manner to the Central Government for the purpose of grant of
approval, or continuance thereof, under clause (ii) or, as the case may be, clause (iii):
Provided further that the Central Government may, before granting approval
under clause ( ii) or clause ( iii), call for such documents (including audited annual
accounts) or information from the scientific research association, university, college or
other institution as it thinks necessary in order to satisfy itself about the genuineness
of the activities of the scientific research association, university, college or other
institution and that authority may also make such inquiries as it may deem necessary
in this behalf:
Provided that any notification issued by the Central Government under clause
(ii) or clause (iii) shall, at any one time, have effect for such assessment year or years,
not exceeding three assessment years (including an assessment year or years
commencing before the date on which such notification is issued) as may be specified
in the notification.
* * * * *
40.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in sections 30 to 38, the following
amounts shall not be deducted in computing the income chargeable under the head “Profits
and gains of business or profession”—
(a)  in the case of any assessee—
* * * * *
(ia) any interest, commission or brokerage, fees for professional services
or fees for technical services payable to a resident, or amounts payable to a
Expenditure
on scientific
research.
Amounts not
deductible.

29
contractor or sub-contractor, being resident, for carrying out any work (including
supply of labour for carrying out any work), on which tax is deductible at source
under chapter XVII-B and such texts has not been deducted or, after deduction,
has not been paid during the previous year, or in the subsequent year before the
expiry of the time prescribed under sub-section (1) of section 200:
Provided that where in respect of any such sum, tax has been deducted in
any subsequent year or, has been deducted in the previous year but paid in any
subsequent year after the expiry of the time prescribed under sub-section (1) of
section 200, such sum shall be allowed as a deduction in computing the income
of the previous year in which such tax has been paid.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-clause,—
(i) “commission or brokerage” shall have the same meaning as in
clause (i) of the Explanation to section 194H;
(ii) “fees for technical services” shall have the same meaning as in
Explanation 2 to clause (vii) of sub-section (1) of section 9;
(iii) “professional services” shall have the same meaning as in clause
(a) of the Explanation to section 194J;
(iv) “work” shall have the same meaning as in Explanation III to
section 194C;
* * * * *
40A. (1) The provisions of this section shall  have effect notwithstanding anything to
the contrary contained in any other provision of this Act relating to the computation of
income  under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.
(2) (a) Where the assessee incurs any expenditure in respect of which payment has
been or is to be made to any person referred to in clause ( b) of this sub-section, and the
Assessing Officer is of opinion that such expenditure is excessive or unreasonable having
regard to the fair market value of the goods, services of facilities for which the payment is
made or the legitimate needs o the business or profession of the assessee or the benefit
derived by or accruing to him therefrom, so much of the expenditure as is so considered by
him to be excessive or unreasonable shall  not be allowed as a deduction.
(b) The persons referred to in clause (a) are the following, namely:—
(i) where the assessee is an individual any relative of the assessee;
(ii) where the assessee is a company, any director of the company,
firm, association of persons or Hindu partner  of the firm, or member
undivided family of the association or family, or
any relative of such director,
partner or member;
(iii) any individual who has substantial interest in the business or
profession of the assessee, or any relative of such individual;
(iv) a company, firm, association of persons or Hindu undivided family
having a substantial interest in the business or profession of the assessee or
any director, partner or member of such company, firm, association or family, or
any relative of such director, partner or member;
(v) a company, firm, association of persons or Hindu undivided family of
which a director, partner or member, as the case may be, has a substantial interest
in the business or profession of the assessee; or any director, partner or member
of such company, firm, association or family or any relative of such director,
partner or member;
Expenses or
payments
not deductible
in certain
circumstances.

30
(vi) any person who carries on a business or profession,—
(A) where the assessee being and individual, or any relative of such
assessee, has a substantial interest in the business or profession of that
persons; or
(B) where the assessee being a company, firm, association of persons
or Hindu undivided family, or any director of such company, partner of
such firm or member of the association or family, or any relative of such
director, partner or member, has a substantial interest in the business or
profession of that person.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, a person shall be
deemed to have a substantial interest in a business or profession, if,—
(a) in a case where the business or profession is carried on by a
company, such person is, at any time during the previous year, the beneficial
owner of shares (not being shares entitled to a fixed rate of dividend
whether with or without a right to participate in profits) carrying not less
than twenty per cent. of the voting power;  and
(b) in any other case, such person is, at any time during the previous
year beneficially entitled to not less than twenty per cent. of the profits of
such business or profession.
(3) Where the assessee incurs any expenditure in respect of which payment is made,
after such date (not being later than the 31st day of March, 1969) as may be specified in this
behalf by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette, in a sum exceeding
twenty thousand rupees otherwise than by a crossed cheque drawn on a bank or by a
crossed bank draft, twenty per cent. of such expenditure  shall not be allowed as a deduction:
Provided that where an allowance has been made in the assessment for any year not
being an assessment year commencing prior to the 1st day of April, 1969, in respect of any
liability incurred by the assessee for any expenditure and subsequently during any previous
year the assessee makes any payment in respect thereof in a sum exceeding twenty thousand
rupees otherwise than by a crossed cheque drawn on a bank or by a crossed bank draft, the
allowance originally made shall be deemed to have been wrongly made and the Assessing
Officer may recompute the total income of the assessee for the previous year in which such
liability was incurred and make the necessary amendment, and the provisions of section 154
shall, so far as may be, apply thereto, the period of four years specified in sub-section (7) of
that section being reckoned from the end of the assessment year next following the previous
year in which the payment was so made:
Provided further that no disallowance under this sub-section shall be made where any
payment in a sum exceeding twenty thousand rupees is made otherwise than by a crossed
cheque drawn on a bank or by a crossed bank draft, in such cases and under such
circumstances as may be prescribed, having regard to the nature and extent of banking
facilities available, considerations of business expediency and other relevant factors.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or
in any contract, where any payment in respect of any expenditure has to be made by a
crossed cheque drawn on a bank or by a crossed bank draft in order that such expenditure
may not be disallowed as a deduction under sub-section (3), then the payment may be made
by such cheque or draft, and where the payment is so made or tendered, no person shall be
allowed to raise, in any suit or other proceeding, a plea based on the ground that the payment
was not made or tendered in cash or in any other manner.
* * * * *
(7) (a) Subject to the provisions of clause (b), no deduction shall be allowed in respect
of any provision (whether called as such or by any other name) made by the assessee for the
payment of gratuity to his employees on their retirement or on termination of their employment
for any reason.

31
(b) Nothing in clause (a) shall apply in relation to any provision made by the assessee
for the purposes of payment of a sum by way of any contribution towards an approved
gratuity fund, or for the purpose of payment of any gratuity, that has become payable during
the previous year.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where any provision
made by the assessee for the payment of gratuity to his employees on their retirement or
termination of their employment for any reason has been allowed as a deduction in computing
the income of the assessee for any assessment year, any sum paid out of such provision by
way of contribution towards an approved gratuity fund or by way of gratuity to any employee
shall not be allowed as a deduction in computing the income of the assessee of the previous
year in which the sum is so paid.
* * * * *
(9) No deduction shall be allowed in respect of any sum paid by the assessee as an
employer towards the setting up or formation of, or as contribution to, any fund, trust,
company, association of persons, body of individuals, society registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860 or other institution for any purpose, except where such sum is so paid,
for the purposes and to the extent provided by or under clause ( iv) or clause ( v) of sub-
section (1) of section 36, or as required by or under any other law for the time being in force.
(10) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 9), where the Assessing
Officer is satisfied that the fund, trust, company, association of persons, body of individuals,
society or other institution referred to in that sub-section has, before the 1st day of March,
1984, bona fide laid out or expended any expenditure (not being in the nature of capital
expenditure) wholly and exclusively for the welfare of the employees of the assessee referred
to in sub-section ( 9) out of the sum referred to in that sub-section, the amount of such
expenditure shall, in case no deduction has been allowed to the assesseee in respect of such
sum and subject to the other provisions of this Act, be deducted in computing the income
referred to in section 28 of the assessee of the previous year in which such expenditure is so
laid out or expended, as if such expenditure had been laid out or expended by the assessee.
(11) Where the assessee has, before the 1st day of March, 1984, paid any sum to any
fund, trust, company, association of persons, body of individuals, society or other institution
referred to in sub-section (9), then, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law or
in any instrument, he shall be entitled—
(i) to claim that so much of the amount paid by him as has not been laid out or
expended by such fund, trust, company, association of persons, body of individuals,
society or other institution (such amount being hereinafter referred to as the unutilized
amount) be repaid to him, and where any claim is so made, the unutilized amount shall
be repaid, as soon as may be, to him;
(ii) to claim that any asset, being land, building, machinery, plant or furniture
acquired or constructed by the fund, trust, company, association of persons, body of
individuals, society or other institution out of the sum paid by the assessee, be
transferred to him, and where any claim is so made, such asset shall be transferred, as
soon as may be, to him.
*                                *                                  *                                       *                                *
56.  (1)  *                              *                                 *                             *                                *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-
section (1), the following incomes, shall be chargeable to income-tax under the head “Income
from other sources”, namely:—
(i) dividends;
(ia) income referred to in sub-clause (viii) of clause (24) of section 2;
(ib) income referred to in sub-clause (ix) of clause (24) of section 2;
Income from
other sources.
21 of 1860.

32
(ic) income referred to in sub-clause ( x) of clause ( 24) of section 2, if such
income is not chargeable to income-tax under the head “Profits and gains of business
or profession”;
(id) income by way of interest on securities, if the income is not chargeable to
income-tax under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”;
(ii) income from machinery, plant or furniture belonging to the assessee and let
on hire, if the income is not chargeable to income-tax under the head “Profits and gains
of business or profession”;
(iii) where an assessee lets on hire machinery, plant or furniture belonging to
him and also buildings, and the letting of the buildings is inseparable from the letting
of the said machinery,  plant or furnitur4e, the income from such letting, if it is not
chargeable to income-tax under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”;
(iv) income referred to in sub-clause ( xi) of clause ( 24) of section 2, if such
income is not chargeable to income-tax under the head “Profits and gains of business
or profession” or under the head “Salaries”.
(v) where any sum of money exceeding twenty-five thousand rupees is received
without consideration by an individual or a Hindu undivided family from any person
on or after the 1st day of September, 2004, the whole of such sum:
Provided that this clause shall not apply to any sum of money received—
(a) from any relative; or
(b) on the occasion of the marriage of the individual; or
(c) under a will or by way of inheritance; or
(d) in contemplation of death of the payer.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, “relative” means—
(i) spouse of the individual;
(ii) brother or sister of the individual;
(iii) brother or sister of the spouse of the individual;
(iv) brother or sister of either of the parents of the individual;
(v) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the individual;
(vi) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the spouse of the individual;
(vii) spouse of the persons referred to in clauses (ii) to (vi).
* * * * *
CHAPTER XIV
P
ROCEDURE FOR ASSESSMENT
139. (1)   *                              *                                 *                             *                                *
(4C) Every—
(a) scientific research association referred to in clause (21) of section 10;
(b) news agency referred to in clause (22B) of section 10;
(c) association or institution referred to in clause (23A) of section 10;
(d) institution referred to in clause (23B) of section 10;
(e) fund or institution referred to in sub-clause (iv) or trust or institution referred
to in sub-clause ( v) or any university  or other educational institution referred to in
sub-clause (vi) or any hospital or other medical institution referred to in sub-clause
(via) of clause (23C) of section 10;
Return of
income.

33
(f) trade union referred to in sub-clause ( a) or association referred to in sub-
clause (b) of clause (24) of section 10,
shall, if the total income in respect of which such scientific research association, news
agency, association or institution, fund or trust or university or other educational institution
or any hospital or other medical institution or trade union is assessable, without giving effect
to the provisions of section 10, exceeds the maximum amount which is not chargeable to
income-tax, furnish a return of such income of the previous year in the prescribed form and
verified in the prescribed manner and setting forth such other particulars as may be prescribed
and all the provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, apply as if it were a return required
to be furnished under sub-section ( 1).
* * * * *
143. (1) *                                *                                *                                *                                *
(3) On the day specified in the notice,—
(i) issued under clause (i) of sub-section (2), or as soon afterwards as may be,
after hearing such evidence and after taking into account such particulars as the
assessee may produce, the Assessing Officer shall, by an order in writing, allow or
reject the claim or claims specified in such notice and make an assessment determining
the total income or loss accordingly, and determine the sum payable by the assessee
on the basis of such assessment;
(ii) issued under clause (ii) of sub-section (2), or as soon afterwards as may be,
after hearing such evidence as the assessee may produce and such other evidence as
the Assessing Officer may require on specified points, and after taking into account all
relevant material which he has gathered, the Assessing Officer shall, by an order in
writing, make an assessment of the total income or loss of the assessee, and determine
the sum payable by him or refund of any amount due to him on the basis of such
assessment:
Provided that in the case of a—
(a) scientific research association referred to in  clause (21) of section 10;
(b) news agency referred to in  clause (23B) of section 10;
(c) association or institution referred to in  clause (23A) of section 10;
(d) institution  referred to in  clause (23B) of section 10;
(e) fund or institution referred to in sub-clause (iv) or trust or institution
referred to in sub-clause ( v) or any university or other educational institution
referred to in sub-clause (vi) or any hospital or other medical institution referred
to in sub-clause (via) of clause (23C) of section 10,
which is required to furnish the return of income under sub-section (4C) of section 139, no
order making an assessment of the total income or loss of such scientific research association,
news agency, association or institution or fund or trust or university or other educational
institution or any hospital or other medical institution, shall be made by the Assessing
officer, without giving effect to the provisions of section 10, unless—
(i) the Assessing Officer has intimated the Central Government or the prescribed
authority the contravention of the provisions of clause (21) or clause (22B) or clause
(23A) or clause ( 23B) or sub-clause ( iv) or sub-clause ( v) or sub-clause ( vi) or sub-
clause (via) of clause ( 23C) of section 10, as the case may be, by such scientific
research association, news agency, association or institution or fund or trust or
university or other educational institution or any hospital or other medical institution,
where in his view such contravention has taken place; and
Assessment.

34
(ii) the approval granted to such scientific research association or other
association or institution or university or other educational institution or hospital or
other medical institution has been withdrawn or notification issued in respect of such
news agency or fund or trust or institution has been rescinded.
* * * * *
194 I. Any person, not being an individual or a Hindu undivided family, who is
responsible for paying to a resident any income by way of rent, shall, at the time of credit of
such income to the account of the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by the
issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier, deduct income-tax
thereon at the rate of—
(a) fifteen per cent. if the payee is an individual or a Hindu undivided family; and
(b) twenty per cent. in other case:
Provided that no deduction shall be made under this section where the amount of such
income or, as the case may be, the aggregate of the amounts of such income credited or paid
or likely to be credited or paid during the financial year by the aforesaid person to the
account of, or to, the payee, does not exceed one hundred and twenty thousand rupees:
Provided further that an individual or a Hindu undivided family, whose total sales,
gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on by him exceed the
monetary limits specified under clause (a) or clause (b) of section 44AB during the financial
year immediately preceding the financial year in which such income by way of rent is credited
or paid, shall be liable to deduct income-tax under this section.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section—
(i) “rent” means any payment, by whatever name called, under any lease, sub-
lease, tenancy or any other agreement or arrangement for the use of any land or any
building (including factory building), together with furniture, fittings and the land
appurtenant thereto, whether or not such building is owned by the payee;
(ii) where any income is credited to any account, whether called “Suspense
account” or by any other name, in the books of account of the person liable to pay
such income, such crediting shall be deemed to be credit of such income to the account
of the payee and the provisions of this section shall apply accordingly.
194J. (1) Any person, not being an individual or a Hindu undivided family, who is
responsible for paying to a resident any sum by way of—
(a) fees for professional services, or
(b) fees for technical services,
shall, at the time of credit of such sum to the account of the payee or at the time of payment
thereof in cash or by issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier,
deduct an amount equal to five per cent. of such sum as income-tax on income comprised
therein:
Provided that no deduction shall be made under this section—
(A) from any sums as aforesaid credited or paid before the 1st day of July, 1995;
or
(B) where the amount of such sum or, as the case may be, the aggregate of the
amounts of such sums credited or paid or likely to be credited or paid during the
financial year by the aforesaid person to the account of, or to, the payee, does not
exceed—
(i) twenty thousand rupees, in the case of fees for professional services
referred to in clause (a), or
Rent.
Fees for
professional
or technical
services.

35
(ii) twenty thousand rupees, in the case of fees for technical services
referred to in clause (b):
Provided further that an individual or a Hindu undivided family, whose
total sales, gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on
by him exceed the monetary limits specified under clause ( a) or clause ( b) of
section 44AB during the financial year immediately preceding the financial year
in which such sum by way of fees for professional services or technical services
is credited or paid, shall be liable to deduct income-tax under this section:
Provided also that no individual or a Hindu undivided family referred to in
the second proviso shall be liable to deduct income-tax on the sum by way of
fees for professional services in case such sum is credited or paid exclusively for
personal purposes of such individual or any member of Hindu undivided family.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “professional services” means services rendered by a person in the course
of carrying on legal, medical, engineering or architectural profession or the profession
of accountancy or technical consultancy or interior decoration or advertising or such
other profession as is notified by the Board for the purposes of section 44AA or of this
section;
(b) “fees for technical services” shall have the same meaning as in Explanation
2 to clause (vii) of sub-section (1) of section 9;
(c) where any sum referred to in sub-section ( 1) is credited to any account,
whether called “suspense account” or by any other name, in the books of account of
the person liable to pay such sum, such crediting shall be deemed to be credit of such
sum to the account of the payee and the provisions of this section shall apply
accordingly.
288B. The amount of tax (including tax deductible at source or payable in advance),
interest, penalty, fine or any other sum payable, and the amount of refund due, under the
provisions of this Act shall be rounded off to the nearest rupee and, for this purpose, where
such amount contained a part of a rupee consisting of paise then, if such part is fifty paise
or more, it shall be increased to one rupee and if such part is less than fifty paise it shall be
ignored.
*                                *                                  *                                       *                                *
E
XTRACTS FROM THE CUSTOMS  ACT, 1962
(52 OF 1962)
*                                  *                                  *                                *                                    *
28. (1)*                        *                                   *                               *                                    *
(2) The proper officer, after considering the representation, if any, made by the person
on whom notice is served under sub-section ( 1), shall determine the amount of duty or
interest due from such person (not being in excess of the amount specified in the notice) and
thereupon such person shall pay the amount so determined.
  *                                   *                                   *                                 *                                    *
  104.  (1) If an officer of customs empowered in this behalf by general or special order
of the Commissioner of customs has reason to believe that any person in India or within the
Indian customs waters has been guilty of an offence punishable under section 135, he may
arrest such person and shall, as soon as may be, inform him of the grounds for such arrest.
*                                  *                                  *                                *                                    *
Notice for
payment of
duties,
interest, etc.
Rounding off
of tax, etc.
Power to
arrest.

36
  108.  (1) Any gazetted officer of customs shall have power to summons any person
whose attendance he considers necessary either to give evidence or to produce a document
or any other thing in any inquiry which such officer is making in connection with the smuggling
of any goods.
*                                  *                                  *                                *                                    *
   124. No order confiscating any goods or imposing any penalty on any person shall
be made under this Chapter unless the owner of the goods or such person—
(a) is given a notice in writing informing him of the grounds on which it is
proposed to confiscate the goods or to impose a penalty;
(b) is given an opportunity of making a representation in writing within such
reasonable time as may be specified in the notice against the grounds of confiscation
or imposition of penalty mentioned therein; and
(c) is given  reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter:
Provided that the notice referred to in clause (a) and the representation referred
to in clause (b) may, at the request of the person concerned be oral.
 *                                  *                                  *                                *                                    *
129 D. (1)*                        *                                 *                               *                                    *
    (2) The Commissioner of Customs may, of his own motion, call for and examine the
record of any proceeding in which an adjudicating authority subordinate to him has passed
any decision or order under this Act for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality or
propriety of any such decision or order and may, by order, direct such authority to apply to
the Commissioner (Appeals) for the determination of such points arising out of the decision
or order as may be specified by the Commissioner of Customs in his order.
*                                  *                                  *                                *                                    *
CHAPTER XVI
O
FFENCES AND PROSECUTIONS
   132. Whoever makes signs or uses, or causes to be made, signed or used, any
declaration, statement or document in the transaction of any business relating to the customs,
knowing or having reason to believe that such declaration, statement or document is false in
any material particular, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
six months, or with fine, or with both.
  133.  If any person intentionally obstructs any officer of customs in the exercise of
any powers conferred under this Act, such person shall be punishable with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
 *                                  *                                  *                                *                                    *
   137. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under section 132, section
133, section 134 or section 135, except with the previous sanction of the commissioner of
Customs.
 *                                  *                                  *                                *                                    *
Power to
summons
persons to
give evidence
and produce
documents.
Issue of show
cause notice
before
confiscation
of goods, etc.
Powers of
Board or
Commissioner
of Customs to
pass certain
orders.
False declara-
tion, false
documents, etc.
Obstruction
of officer of
customs.
Cognizance of
offences.

EXTRACTS FROM THE COUSTOMS TARIFF ACT, 1975
(51 OF 1975)
*                                  *                                  *                                *                                    *
  8B.  (1)  If the Central Government, after conducting such enquiry as it deems fit, is
satisfied that any article is imported into India in such increased quantities and under such
conditions so as to cause or threatening to cause serious injury to domestic industry, then,
it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, impose a safeguard duty on that article:
Provided that no such duty shall be imposed on an article originating from a developing
country so long as the share of imports of that article from that country does not exceed three
per cent. or where the article is originating from more than one developing countries, then, so
long as the aggregate of the imports from all such countries taken together does not exceed
nine per cent. of the total imports of that article into India:
Provided further that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
exempt such quantity of any article as it may specify in the notification, when imported from
any country or territory into India, from payment of the whole or part of the safeguard duty
leviable thereon.
(2) The Central Government may, pending the determination under sub-section ( 1),
impose a provisional safeguard duty under this sub-section on the basis of a preliminary
determination that increased imports have caused or threatened to cause serious injury to a
domestic industry:
Provided that where, on final determination, the Central Government is of the opinion
that increased imports have not caused or threatened to cause serious injury to a domestic
industry, it shall refund the duty so collected:
Provided further that the provisional safeguard duty shall not remain in force for more
than two hundred days from the date on which it was imposed.
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1) and sub-section ( 2), a
notification issued under sub-section (1) or any safeguard duty imposed under sub-section
(2), unless specifically made applicable in such notification or such imposition, as the case
may be, shall not apply to articles imported by a hundred per cent. export-oriented undertaking
or a unit in a free trade zone or in a special economic zone.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expressions "hundred per cent.
export-oriented undertaking”, “free trade zone” and “special economic zone” shall have the
meanings assigned to them in Explanation 2 to sub-section (1) of section 3 of Central Excise
Act, 1944.
(3) The duty chargeable under this section shall be in addition to any other duty
imposed under this Act or under any other law for the time being in force.
(4) The duty imposed under this section shall, unless revoked earlier, cease to have
effect on the expiry of four years from the date of such imposition:
Provided that if the Central Government is of the opinion that the domestic industry
has taken measures to adjust to such injury or threat thereof and it is necessary that the
safeguard duty should continue to be imposed, it may extend the period of such imposition:
Provided further that in no case the safeguard duty shall continue to be imposed
beyond a period of ten years from the date on which such duty was first imposed.
(5) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official gazette, make rules for
the purposes of this section, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, such
rules may provide for the manner in which articles liable for safeguard duty may be identified
and for the manner in which the causes of serious injury or causes of threat of serious injury
in relation to such articles may be determined and for the assessment and collection of such
safeguard duty.
Power of
Central
Government
to impose
safeguard duty.
1 of 1944.
37

38
(6) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “developing country” means a country notified by the Central Government
in the Official Gazette for the purposes of this section;
(b) “domestic industry” means the producers—
(i) as a whole of the like article or a directly competitive article in India; or
(ii) whose collective output of the like article or a directly competitive
article in India constitutes a major share of the total production of the said article
in India;
(c) “serious injury” means an injury causing significant overall impairment in the
position of a domestic industry;
(d) ‘threat of serious injury” means a clear and imminent danger of serious injury.
(7) Every notification issued under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is
issued, be laid before each House of Parliament.
* * * * *
————
E
XTRACT FROM THE CENTRAL EXCISE ACT, 1944
(1 OF 1944)
* * * * *
11A (1) * * * * *
(2) The Central Excise Officer shall, after considering the representation, if any, made
by the person on whom notice is served under sub-section (1), determine the amount of duty
of excise due from such person (not being in excess of the amount specified in the notice)
and thereupon such person shall pay the amount so determined.
* * * * *
35E. (1) * * * * *
     (2) The Commissioner of Central Excise may, of his own motion, call for and examine
the record of any proceeding in which an adjudicating authority subordinate to him has
passed any decision or order under this Act for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the
legality or propriety of any such decision or order and may, by order, direct such authority to
apply to the Commissioner (Appeals) for the determination of such points arising out of the
decision or order as may be specified by the Commissioner of Central Excise in his order.
* * * * *
————
E
XTRACT FROM THE CENTRAL SALES TAX ACT, 1956
(74 OF 1956)
* * * * *
   25.  On and from the date when the Authority is constituted under section 19, every
appeal arising out of the provisions contained in this Chapter—
(i) which is pending immediately before the constitution of such Authority before
the appellate authority constituted under the general sales tax law of a State or of the
Union territory, as the case may be; or
(ii) which would have been required to be taken before such Appellate Authority,
shall stand transferred to such authority on the date on which it is established.
* * * * *
Powers of
Board or
commission
of Central
Excise to pass
certain orders.
Transfer
of pending
proceedings.
Recovery of
duties not
levied or not
paid or short
levied or
short-paid or
erroneously
refunded.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Income-tax  Act, 1961, the Customs Act, 1962, the Customs Tariff Act,
1975, the Central Excise Act, 1944 and the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956.
————
(Shri P. Chidambaram, Minister of Finance)
MGIPMRND—966LS—10.05.2005.