16 AUG 2001:

AS INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

Bill No. 74 of 2001

THE INSURANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001
. A
BILL
Further to amend the Insurance Act, 1938.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
* follows:—

1. () This Act may be called the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 2001, Short title and

ae commence-
(2) It shail come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification ment.

5 in the Official Gazette, appoint:

Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act
. and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed
as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.

4 of 1938. 2.'In section 2 of the Insurance Act, 1938 (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Amendment of
10 Act),— . section 2,

(a) ia clause (/), for the words “qualifications as. may be prescribed”, the words
“qualifications as may be specified by the regulations made by the Authority” shall be
substituted;

(b) in clause (3), sub-clause (v} shall be omitted;



Amendment of
section 20.

Amendment of
section 15.

Amendment of
section 288.

Amendment of
section 288,

Amendment of
section 318.

Amendment of
section 40.

Amendment of
section 42.

(2) after clause (8), the following clause shall be inserted, narnely:—

‘(8A) “insurance co-operative society” means any insurer being a
co-operative society,—

(a) which is registered on or after the commencement of the Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 2001, as a co-operative society under the Co-operative
Societies Act, 1912 or under any other law for the time being in force in any
Staté relating to co-operative societies or under the Multi-State
Co-operative Societies Act, 1984;

(6) having a minimum paid-up capital, (excluding the deposits required
to be made under section 7), of Tupees one hundred crores;

(c) in which no body corporate, whether incorporated or not, formed
or registered outside India, either by itself or through its subsidiaries or
nominees, al any time, holds more than twenty-six per cent. of the capital
of such Co-operative Society;

(d) whose sole purpose is to carry on life insurance business or
general insurance business in India;’;

(4) after clause (0A), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“(10B) “intermediary or insurance intermediary” shall have the meaning
assigned to it in clause (f) of sub-section (/) of section 2 of the Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999."

3. In section 2C of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be inserted at the end, namely:—
“(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), an insurance co-
operative society may carry on any class of insurance business in India under this Act
on or after the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 2001.”.

4. In section 15 of the principal Act, in sub-section (7) for the portion beginning with
the words “to the Authority in the case of the accounts and statements” and ending with the
words “from the end of the period to which they refer”, the words “to the Authority within six
months from the end of the period to which they refer" shall be substituted.

5. In section 28A of the principal Act, for the words “in the prescribed form” at both
the places where they occur, the words “, in the form specified by regulations made by the
Authority” shall be substituted.

6. In section 28B of the principal Act, for the words “in the prescribed form” at both the

places where they occur, the words “, in the form specified by the regulations made by the
Authority,” shall be substituted.

7. In section 31B of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words “the sum of five
thousand rupees in that year”, the words “such sum as may be specified by the regulations
made by the Authority” shall be substituted.

8. In section 40 of the principal Act,—

(a) in sub-section (4), for the words “except an insurance agent or a principal,
chief or special agent”, the words “except an insurance agent or an intermediary or
insurance intermediary” shall be substituted;

(0) in sub-section (2A), for the words “no insurance agent”, the words “no
insurance agent or intermediary or insurance intermediary” shall be substituted.

9. In section 42 of the principal Act—

(a) in sub-section (3), for the brackets and letter “(e)”, the brackets and letters
“(e), (ea)” shall be substituted;

5
2 of 1912,

51 of 1984.

10

i
|

2 41 of 1999,

।
|



(b) in sub-section (4),-—

(i) in clause (e), for the words “that he does not possess”, the words “that
in the case of an individual, he does not possess” shall be substituted;

(i) after clause (e), the following clause shali be inserted, namely:—

5 “(ea) that in the case of a company or firm making an application
under sub-section (/) or sub-section (3), a director or a partner or one or
more of its officers or other employees so designated by it and in the case
of any other person, the chief executive, by whatever name called, or one
or more of his employees designated by him, do not Possess the requisite

“10 qualifications and practical training and have not passed such an
examination as required under clauses (०) and (/);".

10. In section 42A of the principal Act, after sub-section (8), the following sub-section
shall be inserted at the end, namely:—

“(9) No insurer shall, on or after the commencement of the Insurance
15 (Amendment) Act, 2001, appoint or transact any insurance business in India through
any principal agent, chief agent or special agent.”.
ll. After section 42D of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—

“42E, (1) No intermediary or insurance intermediary shall be paid or contract to
20 be paid by way of commission, fee or as remuneration in any form, an amount exceeding
thirty percent. of the premium payable as may be specified by the regulations made by
the Authority, in respect of any policy or policies effected through him:
Provided that the Authority may specify different amounts payable by way of
commission, fee or as remuneration to an intermediary or insurance intermediary for
25 different classes of business of insurance.

_ (2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in this Act, the Authority
may, by the regulations made in this behalf, specify the requirements of capital, form of
business and other conditions to act as an intermediary or insurance intermediary.”.
12, In section 49 of the principal Act,

% (a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) for the words and letter “balance sheet in Form I as set forth in the
Fourth Schedule”, the words “balance-sheet in such form as may be specified
by the regulations made by the Authority” shall be substituted;

(i) for the second proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted,
35 namely;— .
“Provided further that the share of any such surplus allocated to or
reserved for the shareholders, (including any amount for the payment of
dividends guaranteed to them, whether by way of first charge or otherwise)
shall not exceed such sums as may be specified by the Authority and such
4 - share shall in no case exceed ten per cent. of such surplus in case of
participating policies and in other cases the whole thereof.”;
(6) in sub-section (2), for the words, figures, brackets and letters “paragraph
8(1) of the abstract prepared in accordance with Part II of the Fourth Schedule to this
Act”, the words, brackets and figures “an abstract of the Feport of the actuary referred
45 - to in sub-section (J) of section 13.” shail be substituted.
13. In section 64VB of the principal Act, after sub-section (5), the following sub-
section shall be inserted at the end, namely:— 5

“(© The Authority may, from time to time, specify, by the regulations made by it,
the manner of receipt of premium by the insurer.”.

Amendment of
section 428.

Insertion of new
section 428,

Commission,
brokerage or
fee payable to
intermediary or
insurance
intermediary.

Amendment of
section 49,

Amendment of
section 64VB,



Insertion of
new Part MIA,

Insurance
co-operative
society to be
an insurer,

Amendment of
section 1014.

Amendment of
section 114.

Amendment of
section LI4A,

14, After Part ता of the principal Act, the following Part shall be inserted, namely:—
“PART INA

InsuraNce Co-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES

94A., (1) Every insurance co-operative society shall be deemed to be an insurer
for the purposes of this Act.

(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all the provisions applicable to an
insurer being an Indian insurance company shall, so far as may be, apply to an insurance
co-operative society:

Provided that the Authority may, by notification, direct that any of the provisions
of this Act,—

(a) shall not apply to any insurance co-operative society; or
{b) shall apply to any insurance co-operative society only with such
exceptions, modifications and adaptations as may be specified in the notification.

(3) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub-section (/),
shall be laid in draft before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the

1. session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in disapproving the

issue of the notification or both Houses agree in making any modification in the
notification, the notification shall not be issued or, as the case may be, shall be issued
only in such modified form as may be agreed upon by both the Houses.”.

15. In section 101A of the principal Act, in sub-section (8), for clause (7; the following

clause shall be substituted, namely:—

48) “Indian re-insurer” means an Indian insurance company which has been
granted a certificate of registration under sub-section (2A) of section 3 by the Authority
to carry on exclusively the re-insurance business in India.’.

16. In section 114 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), clause (a) shall be omitted.

17. In section 114A of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(i for clause (a), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—

“(a) the qualifications to be possessed by actuaries;

(aa) the matters including fee relating to the registration of insurers under
section 377;

(i) in clause (8), for the words “fourth proviso”, the words “fifth proviso” shall
be substituted;
(iii) after clause (४), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—

“(ia) the form in which a return showing the investments made out of the
controlled funds shall be submitted by an insurer carrying on life insurance
business under sub-section (7) of section 28A;

(ib) the form in which a return showing all the changes that occurred in the
investments shall be submitted by an insurer carrying on life insurance business
under sub-section (2) of section 28A;

(ic) the form in which a return showing the investments made out of assets
shail be submitted by an insurer carrying on general insurance business under
sub-section (/) of section 288;

(id) the form in which a return showing all the changes that occurred in the
investments shall be submitted by an insurer carrying on general insurance
business under sub-section (2) of section 28B;

4S



5

(ie) the form of the statement and the sum to be specified under’ sub-
section (2) of section 31B;";

(iv) after clause (०), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely: —

“(va) the amount of commission, fee or as remuneration in any form not
55 exceeding thirty per cent. to be paid or contract to be paid under sub-section (1)
of section 42E;

(vb) the requirements of capital, form of business and other conditions
to act as an intermediary or insurance intermediary under sub-section (2) of
section 42E;

10 (vc) the form of balance-sheet, as may be specified by the Authority under
sub-section (7) of section 49;”;

(0) after clause (za), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“(zb) the manner of receipt of premium to be specified under sub-section
(6) of section 64VB.”. -

15 18. The First Schedule, the Second Schedule, the Thitd Schedule and the Fourth
Schedule to the principal Act shall be omitted.

Omission of
Schedules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

_ The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 was passed by
Parliament in December, 1999 by which the Insurance Act, 1938, the Life Insurance Corporation
Act, 1956 and the General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 were amended to
remove the exclusive privilege of nationalised insurance companies to transact life and
general insurance business and allow for entry of private sector players in the insurance
sector, It also provided for the setting up of a statutory regulatory authority to regulate,
promote and ensure orderly growth of the insurance industry. है

2. The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority has been established on the
19th April, 2000. The Authority has made regulations in all major areas of operations in the
insurance industry and matters connected therewith. Certificates of Registration have been
issued to twelve new private companies and some of them have already commenced insurance
business.

3, The Insurance Act, 1938 allows for only Indian insurance companies registered
under the Companies Act, 1956 to transact insurance business in India after registration with
the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority. Several representations have been
received to allow entry of co-operatives into the insurance sector. It is now proposed to
amend the Insurance Act, 1938 to allow their entry and to make necessary provisions in this
regard. It is expected that the entry of co-operatives in the insurance sector would increase
the insurance coverage, especially in rural areas,

4. For the smooth functioning of the insurance sector, some further amendments to the
Insurance Act, 1938 are also required, The Insurance (Amendment) Bill, 2001, inter alia,
contains provisions relating to payment of commission and fee for insurance intermediaries,
allowing flexibility in the eligibility qualifications for corporate agents, allowing a more flexible
mode of payment of premium through credit cards, smart cards, internet, etc., to be specified
by the regulations to be made by the Authority, change in the allocation of surplus of life
insurance business and consequential amendments for the smooth functioning of the sector.

5, The Bilt secks to achieve the above objects,

New Devi; हि "_-YASHWANT SINHA.
The 9th August, 2001.

5
:
i
|



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 17 of the Bill seeks to amend section {14A of the Insurance Act, 1938 to
empower the Authority to make regulations to provide for the qualifications to be possessed
by actuaries; the matters including fee relating to the registration of insurers under section 3;
the form in which a return showing the investments made out of the controlled funds shall be
submitted by an insurer carrying on life insurance business under sub-section (7) of section
284A; the form in which a return showing all the changes that occurred in the investments
shall be submitted by an insurer carrying on life insurance business under sub-section (2) of
section 28A; the form in which a return showing the investments made out of assets shall be
submitted by an insurer carrying on general insurance business under sub-section (/) of
section 28B; the form in which a return showing all changes that occurred in the investment
shall be submitted by an insurer carrying on general insurance business under sub-section
(2) of section 28B; the form of the statement and the sum to be specified under sub-section
(2) of section 31B; the amount of commission, fee or as remuneration in any form not exceeding
thirty per cent. to be paid or contract to be paid under sub-section (/) of section 428; the
requirements of capital, form of business and other conditions to act as an intermediary or
insurance intermediary under sub-section (2) of section 428; the form of balance-sheet, as
may be specified by the Authority under sub-section (/) of section 49; and the manner of
teceipt of premium to be specified under sub-section (6) of section 64५४8,

2. The matters in respect of which regulations may be made are matters of procedure
and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself.

3, The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.



Definitions.

Submission of
returns.

Return of
investments
relating to
controtled
fund and
changes
therein.

Returns of
investments
relating to the
assets and
changes
‘therein,

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INSURANCE AcT, 1938

हि (40७7 1938)
* * * *
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,—
(/) “actuary® means an actuary possessing such qualifications as may be
prescribed;
* * % * x

(3) “approved securities” means—
* * x * रू

(७) subject to the limitations contained in the proviso hereto, securities
guaranteed fully as regards principal and interest by a Provincia! Government in
Pakistan or charged on the revenues of any part of that Domination, and
debentures or other securities for money issued by or on behalf of the trustees,
of the port of Karachi:

Provided that securities or debentures specified in item (v) shall be
recognised as approved securities only for such purposes and for such period
and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. ,

Explanation.— In sub-clauses (i) and (iti) “Government of a State” in
relation to any period before the Ist November, 1956, means the Government of
a Part A State; , ग

* * है . * * *

15. (1) The audited accounts and statements referred to in section 11 or sub-section
(5) of section 13 and the abstract and statements referred to in section 13 shail be printed,
and four copies thereof shall be furnished as returns to the Authority in the case of the
accounts and statements referred to in section 11 or sub-section (5) of section 13 within six
months and/in the case of the abstract and statement referred to in section 13 within nine
months from the end of the period to which they refer:

Provided that the said period of six months shall in the case of insurers having their
principal place of business or domicile outside India and in the case of insurers constituted,
incorporated or domiciled in India but also carrying on business outside India be extended
by three months, and provided further that the Central Government may in any case extend
the time allowed by this sub-section for the furnishing of such returns by a further period not
exceeding three months.

* * * * *

28A. (1) Every insurer carrying on life insurance business, shall every year, within
thirty-one days from the beginning of the year, submit to the Authority a return in the
prescribed form showing as at the 31st day of March of the preceding year, the investments
made out of the controlled fund referred to in section 27A, and every such return shall be
certified by a principal officer of the insurer.

(2) Every insurer referred to in sub-section (7) shall also submit to the Authority a
return in the prescribed form showing all the changes that occurred in the investments
aforesaid during each of the quarters ending on the last day of March, June, September and
December within thirty-one days from the close of the quarter to which it relates, and every
such return shall be certified by a principal officer of the insurer.

28B. (J) Every insurer carrying on general insurance business, shall, every year, within
thirty-one days from the beginning of the year, submit to the Authority a return in the
prescribed form showing as at the 31st day of March of the preceding year the investments
made out of his assets referred to in section 27B, and every such return shall be certified by
a principal officer of the insurer.



41 of 1999.»

9

(2) Every insurer referred to in sub-section (1) shall also submit to the Authority a
return in the prescribed form showing all the changes that occurred in the investments
aforesaid during each of the quarters ending on the last day of March, June, September and
December within thirty-one days from the close of the quarter to which it relates, and every
such return shall be certified by a principal officer of the insurer,

(3) Every insurer shall submit, along with the returns referred to in sub-sections (7)
and (2), a statement, where any part of the assets are in the custody of a banking company,
from that company, and in any other case, from the Chairman, two directors and a principal
officer, if the insurer is a company, or from a principal officer of the insurer, if the insurer is not
acompany, specifying the assets, which are subject to a charge and certifying that the other
assets are held free of any encumbrance, charge, hypothecation or lien, and every such
statement after the first shall also specify the charges created in respect of any.of those
assets since the date of the statement immediately preceding, and, if any such charges have
been liquidated, the date on which they were so liquidated.

* * * x *
318, (7) * * * * *

(2) Every insurer shall, before the close of the month following every year, submit to
the Authority a statement, in the form specified by the regulations made by the Authority,
showing the remuneration paid, whether by way of commission or otherwise, to any person
in cases where such remuneration exceeds the sum of five thousand rupees in that year.

* * * ® *

CoMMISSION AND REBATES AND LICENSING OF AGENTS

40. (1) No person shall, after the expiry of six months from the commencement of
this Act, pay or contract to pay any remuneration or reward whether by way of commission
or otherwise for soliciting or procuring insurance business in India to any person except an
insurance agent or a principal, chief or special agent.

* * क्र * *

(2A) Save as hereinafter provided, no insurance agent shall be paid or contract to be
paid by way of commission or as remuneration in any form any amount in respect of any
policy not effected through him:

Provided that where a policy of life insurance has lapsed, and itcannot under the terms
and conditions applicable to it be revived without further medical examination of the person
whose life was insured thereby, an insurer, after giving by notice in writing to the insurance
agent through whom the policy was effected if such agent continues to be an agent of the
insurer an opportunity to effect the revival of the policy within a time specified in the notice,
may pay to another insurance agent who effects the revival of the policy an amount calculated
at a rate not exceeding half the rate of commission at which the agent through whom the
policy was effected would have been paid had the policy not lapsed, on the sum payable on
revival of the policy on account of arrear premiums (excluding any interest on such arrear
premiums) and also on the subsequent renewal premiums payable on the policy.

* * * * *

42, * * * * *

(3) A licence issued under this section, after the date of the commencement of the
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999, shall remain in force for a
period of three years only from the date of issue, but shall, if the applicant, being an individual
does not, or being a company or firm any of its directors or partners does not, suffer from any
of the disqualifications mentioned in clauses (9) (c), (d), (०) and () of sub-section (4) and
the application for renewal of licence reaches the issuing authority at least thirty days before
the date on which the licence ceases to remain in force, be renewed for a period of three years
at any जाए time on payment of the fee determined by the regulations made by the Authority
which shail not be more than rupees two hundred and fifty, and additional fee of an amount
determined by the regulations not exceeding rupees one hundred by way of penalty, if the

Power to
restrict
payment of
excessive
remuneration,

Prohibition of
Payment by way
of commission
oratherwise for
procuring busi-
ness,

Licensing of in-
surance agents,



Restriction on
dividend's and
bonuses.

Re-insurance
with Indian
fe-insurers.

application for renewal of the licence does not reach the issuing authority at least thirty days
before the date on which the licence ceases to remain in force;

* * * .# *

(4) The disqualifications above referred to shall be the following:—

* * * * *

(e) that he does not passes the requisite qualifications and practical training for a
period not exceeding twelve months, as may be specified by the regulations made by the
Authority in this behalf;

* * * * *

49, (/) No insurer, being an insurer specified in sub-clause (a) (ii) or sub-clause (b) of
clause (9) of section 2, who carries on the business of life insurance or any other class or
sub-class of insurance business to which section 13 applies, shall, for the purpose of declaring
or paying any dividend to shareholders or any bonus to policy-holders or of making any
payment in service of any debentures, utilize directly or indirectly any portion of the life
insurance fund or of the fund of such other class or sub-class of insurance business, as the
case may be, except a surplus shown in the valuation balance-shect in Form I as set forth in
the Fourth Schedule submitted to the Authority as part of the abstract referred to in section
15 as a result of an actuarial valuation of the assets and liabilities of the insurer; nor shall he

increase such surplus by contributions out of any reserve fund or otherwise unless such *

contributions have been brought in as revenue through the revenue account applicable to
that class or sub-class of insurance business on or before the date of the valuation aforesaid,
except when the reserve funds is made up solely of transfers from similar surpluses disclosed
by valuations in respect of which returns have been submitted to the Authority under
section 15 of this Act or to the Central Government under section 11 of the Indian Life
Assurance Companies Act, 1912:

Provided that payments made out of any such surplus in service of any debentures
shall not exceed fifty per cent, of such surplus including any payment by way of interest on
the debentures, and interest paid on the debentures shall not exceed ten per cent. of any
such surplus except when the interest paid on the debentures is offset against the interest
credited to the fund or funds concerned in deciding the interest basis adopted in the valuation
disclosing the aforesaid surplus:

Provided further that the share of any surplus allocated to or reserved for the
shareholders (including any amount for the payment of dividends guaranteed to them,
whether by way of first charge or otherwise) shall not exceed seven and a half per cent. of
such surplus.

(2) For the purposes of sub-section (J), the actual amount of income-tax deducted at
source during the period following the date as at which the last preceding valuation was
made and preceding the date as at which the valuation in question is made may be added to
such surplus after deducting an estimated amount for income-tax on such surplus, such
addition and deduction being shown in paragraph B(/) of the abstract prepared in accordance
with Part I! of the Fourth Schedule to this Act.

* * * * *
PARTIVA
RE-INSURANCE
101A. (1) * के * * *
(8} In this section,—
* * * “ +

(ii) “Indian re-insurer” means an insurer specified in sub-clause (b) of clause (9)
of section 2 who carries on exclusively re-insurance business and is approved in this
behalf by the Central Government.

* * * ok *

6 of 1912.



11

114. (/) * * * . * *

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may prescribe—

(a) the qualifications to be possessed by actuaries;

* 7 * * *

114A. (7) * * * * *

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-—

(a) the matters including fee relating to the registration of insurers under section 3;

* * * * . *

(g) the manner in which an abstract of the report of the actuary to be specified under
the fourth proviso to sub-section (/) of section 13;

* * * * *

‘THEFIRST SCHEDULE
(See section 11)
REGULATIONS AND FORMS FOR THE PREPARATION OF BALANCE SHEET
PARTI
REGULATIONS

1. The balance-sheet required to be prepared in respect of every class of business
carried on by an insurer is in the form in which it is set out in Part II of this Schedule (Form A),
appropriate to a case where the insurer maintains a separate fund in respect of life insurance
business. .

2, The batance-sheet of life insurance business shall be prepared as a separate docu-
ment. The balance-sheet of any class of business may be prepared as a separate document
instead of being incorporated by the addition of columns and headings in the general balance-
sheet, but the totals of each such separate balance-sheet (showing the total assets of the
class of business, the balance at the credit of the life insurance fund or other separate fund

- oraccount, the amount of shareholders’ undivided profits, and outstanding liabilities) must

in any case be incorporated in the general balance-sheet.
3. If any combined balance-shect is for any purpose issued by an insurer, it shall be in

accordance with the Form set out in this Schedule, and there shall not be included among the
assets shown in any such combined balance-sheet any amount in respect of any holding in
or advance to any insurer whose assets and liabilities have been incorporated therein. Every
combined balance-sheet must show clearly on the face thereof that it is a combined balance-
sheet and must set out fully the name of every insurer whose assets and liabilities have been
incorporated therein; if the assets and liabilities of any person not being an insurer are
included in a combined balance-sheet the fact miust be stated thereon. .

4. Where any guarantee has been given by an insurer (otherwise than in the ordinary
course of re-insurance business) in respect of the policies of any other insurer, the balance-
shect of the insurer by whom the guarantee was given must show clearly the name of every
insurer whose policies have been so guaranteed and the extent of the guarantee:

Provided that this regulation shall not apply where a combined balance-sheet is issued
incorporating the assets and liabilities of the insurer whose policies are guaranteed.

5. Where any part of the assets of an insurer is deposited in any place outside India 38
security for the owners of policies issued in that place, the balance-sheet shall state that part
of the assets has becn so deposited, and if any such part forms part of the life insurance
fund, shall show the amount thereof and the place where it is deposited. Where any com-
bined balance-sheet is issued by an insurer for any purpose, the information required by this
regulation shall be shown in the aggregate in respect of all the insurers whose assets and
liabilities have been incorporated in the balance-sheet. ड़

Power of 1
Central
Government
to make rules.

Power of
Authority to
make
regulations.



an i

6, There shall be appended to the palance-sheet a statement in Form AA as set out in
Part II of this Schedule showing the market value and the book value of the assets in India.

7, Every balance-sheet shall contain the following certificates, namely:—

(a) a certificate signed by the same persons as are required by this Act to sign
the balance-sheet explaining how the values as shown jn the balance-sheet of the
Investments in Stocks and Shares have been arrived at, and how the market value
thereof has been ascertained for the purpose of comparison with the values so shown,

(8) a certificate signed by the same persons as are required by this Act to sign
the balance-sheet and signed also, SO far as respect the value of any items shown in
the balance-sheet under the heading of “Reversions and Life Interests”, by an actuary,
certifying that the values of all the assets have been reviewed as at the date of the
balance-sheet, and that in their belief the assets set forth in the balance-sheet are
shown in the aggregate at amounts not exceeding realisable or market value under the
several headings—"“Loans”, “Reversions and Life Interests”, “§nvestments”, Agent's
Balances”, “Outstanding Premiums”, “Interests, Dividends and Rents Out-standing”,
“Interest, Dividends and Rents Accruing but not Dee”, “Amounts due from other
Persons or Bodies carrying on Insurance Business”, Sundary Debtors”, “Bills Receiv-
able”, “Cash” and the several items specified under “Other Accounts”:

Provided that if the persons signing the certificate are unable to certity that the
assets set forth in the balance-sheet are 50 ‘shown as aforesaid, a full explanation of the
bases upon which the values shown in the balance-sheet have been assessed shall be
given in the certificate;

(०) Where the balance-sheet relates either wholly or in part to life insurance busi-
ness, a certificate signed by the samie persons as are required by this Act to sign the
balance-sheet and by the auditor certifying that no part of the assets of the life insurance
fund has been directly or indirectly applied in contravention of the provisions of this Act
relating to the application and investment of life insurance funds; and

(d) certificate signed by the auditor (which shall be in addition to any other
certificate or report which he is required by law to give with respect to the balance-
sheet) certifying—
( that he has verified the cash balance and the securities relating (० the
insurer’s loans, reversions and fife interests, and investments;

(ii) to what extent, ifany, he has verified the investments and transactions
relating to any trusts undertaken by the insurer as trustee; and

(iii) in the case of a combined palance-sheet, that he has audited the
balance-sheet and accounts of every insurer whose assets and fiabilities are
incorporated therein, or that any such balance-sheet and accounts which have
not been audited by jim have been certified by independent auditors. The said
certificate shall contain a reference 10 such reservations, if any, as may have
been made by any auditor upon any report or certificate given by him with
respect to the balance-sheet and accounts of any insurer whose assets and
liabilities are incorporated in the combined balance sheet.

8. If the values shown in the balance-sheet in respect Of “Holdings in Subsidiary
Companies” or “FJouse Property 0 in India (ii) out of India” have been increased since the
Jast previous balance-sheet, the certificate required by paragraph (9) of the last foregoing
regulation shall state the amount of every increase not solely due to the cost of subsequent
additions or, as respects holdings in controlled companies, 10 increased profits, and shall
contain an explanation of the reason therefor.

9. For the purpose of this Schedule the following expressions have the meanings
hereby respectively assigned to them, namely:—

a “combined balance-sheet” includes any combined statement made by an



13

insurer or assets and liabilities in the form of a balance-sheet which in-
cludes the assets and liabilities, of any other insurer; and

(6) “market value” means as respects any asset the market value thereof as
ascertained from published market quotations, or if there be no such value, its fair
value as between a willing buyer and a willing seller.

PART वर
Forms
Form A
Form of Balance-sheet |

Balance-shee:
Life and = Other Life and = Other
Annuity Classes Total Annuity Classes Total
Business _ of Business Business _ of Business
(1) (2)* (1) (2)*
|
Rs. ९. Rs. 9. Rs.P. Rs.P. 25.7. Rs.P. |
Shareholders’ capital Loans:- |
{each class to be stated On Mortgages of Pro- j
Separately). perty within India.
Authorised: On Mortgages of Pro-
: perty outside India.
shares of Rs.....
each Rs.
On Security of munici-
pal and other pubic
Subscribed. rates.
...Shares of Rs.... On Stocks and Shares,

each Rs.
Called up:

On insurers’ policies
within their surrender

value.
Less: Unpaid calls. On personal security. :
Reserve of Contin- To subsidiary companies
gency Accounts {a): (other than-reversionary (0.
Investment Reserve Reversions and Life
Account, Profit and Interests purchased.
Los’s Appropriation Loans on reversions and
Account Balance, ' -Life Interests.’ 7
Balances of Funds and
Accounts:
Life Insurance Fund- Debentures and Debenture Stocks of

° subsidiary reversionary companies (0.
(i) Business in India-

(ii) Business outside India Ordinary Stocks and
Shares of subsidiary i

Fire Insurance Business reversionary companies |
Account. 0). ह |
Marine Insurance Business पु |
Account, Miscellaneous Loans to subsidiary re- !
Insurance Business Account (m). versionary companies (/). :
Other accounts, if any Investments: ;
(to be specified) (0. Deposit with the Reserve :
Pension or Superan- Bank of India (Securities
nuation Accounts (5). to be specified).
Debenture Stock per Indian Government
cent... Securities State Govem-

Loans and Advances ment Securities, British,
(c). British Colonial and British Dominion
Government Securities. |

Bills payable (०).



Estimated Liability in
respect of outstanding
claims, whether due or ,
intimated (4).

‘Annuities due and unpaid (d).
Outstanding Dividends...

Amounts due to other
persons or Bodies
carrying on Insurance
Business. (०0.

Sundry Creditors (in-
cluding outstanding
and accruing expenses
and taxes (०).

Other sums owing by
the Insurer (particulars)
to be given {¢)
Contingent Liabilities
(to be specified) ().

Foreign Government
Securities, Indian Mu-
nicipal Securities.
British and Colonial
Securities.

Foreign. Securities.
Bonds, Debentures,
Stocks and other Securities
whercon Interest is
guaranteed by the Indian
Government or 8 State
Government.

Bonds, Debentures,

Stocks and other Securities
whereon

interests is guaranteed by

the British or any Colonial Government.

Bonds, Debentures,
Stocks, and other
Securities whercon
Interest is guarantecd
by any For-
eign Government.
Debentures of any Railway
in India. Debentures of any
railway out of India.
Preference or guaranteed
shares of any railway in
India, Brought forward.
Preference or guarantecd
shares of any railway
out of India.
Railway Ordinary
Stocks (i) in India (ii) out of
India.
Other Debentures and
Debenture Stock of Companies
incorporated (0) in India
(1) out of India.
Other guaranteed and
preference Stocks and Shares of
Companies incorporated
(0 in India (i) out of
India.
Other Ordinary Stacks
and Shares of Companies
incorporated (in India (४)
out of India.
Holdings in Subsidiary companies
() Howse property (i) in India (ii) out
of India. -
Freehold and Leasehold
ground rents and rent
charges.
‘Agent's Balances
Outstanding Premiums
(8) @.
ens. Dividends, and
“Stents outstanding (d).
Interest, Dividends and
Rent accruing but not
due (a).

|
|
|
4
|
|
|
|



15 cree \
Amounts due from णी.

persons or bodies carry,
Insurance Business (A).
Sundry Debtors (0.
Bills Receivable...
Cash:

At Bankers on Deposit Acco
At Bankers on Current
Account and in hand

At Call and Short Notice
0).
Other Accounts (to be specified) (2).

* Assets and Liabilities, Shareholders’ Capital and Reserves, not allocated to any
class of business specified in column (1) must be shown in column (2).
Notes

(a) The Reserves or Contingency Accounts must be separately stated.

(b) If the insurer has not full and unrestricted control of the assets constituting
the Pension or Superannuation Accounts, either those accounts and the assets and
liabilities relating thereto must be omitted from the balance-sheet or the assets of
‘which the insurer has not such control must be clearly indicated on the face of the
balance-sheet. हि

(०) If the insurer has deposited security as cover in respect of any of these items,
the amount and nautre of the securities so deposited must be clearly indicated on the
face of the balance-sheet.

(d) These items are or have been included in the corresponding items in the
Revenue or Profit and Loss Account. Outstanding and accruing interest, dividends
and rents must be shown after deduction of income-tax or the income-tax must be
provided for amongst the liabilities on the other side of the balance-sheet.

(०) Such items as amount of liability in respect of bills discounted, uncalled
4 capital of subsidiary companies, uncalled capital of other investments, etc., must either
4 be shown in their several categories under the heading “Contingent Liabilities” or the
appropriate items on the assole side must be set out in such details as will clearly

‘indicate the amount of the uncalled capital. :

(0) As respects life and annuity! business full particulars of holdings in and loans :
to subsidiary companies must be stated, giving the name of each company, the number.
and description of each class of shares.fteld, the amounts paid-up thereon, and the
yalue at which the holdings in each company stand in the balance-sheet.

(g) Either this item must be shown net or the commission must be provided for
amongst the liabilities on the other side of the balance-sheet.

(h) The aggregate amount owing by a subsidiary company or subsidiary~-~-
companies is to be shown separately from all other assets and the aggregate amount
owing to a subsidiary company or subsidiary companies is to be shown separately
from all other liabilities.

& ( Amounts due from directors and officers must be shown separately.
4 0) No amounts must be entered under this heading unless fully secured. If not
E fully secured, the amounts must be included under the heading “Sundry Debtors”.
है (0 Under this heading must be included such items as the following, which must
: . be shown under. separate headings suitably described: Office furniture, good will,
a preliminary, formation and organisation expenses, development expenditure account,
3 discount on debentures issued, other expenditure carried forward to be written off in
future years, balance being loss on Profit and Loss Appropriation Account, etc. The
amounts included in the balance-sheet must not be in excess of cost.
: (0) Under the head “Other accounts, if any (to be specified)” on the left hand.
q side, fines realised from the staff and their contribution towards the provident fund, if
| लि any, should be shown under separate sub-heads. ~~
(m) Where the insurer is required to maintain a separate account in respect of
any sub-class of miscellaneous insurance business this heading is to be split up
accordingly.



FORM AA

Classtified Summary of the Assets in India of the ...,..... Company on ....- AD.
Class of Asset Book value | Market value | Remarks
as per (a) as per (b) | as per (८)
below below below

[Rs | | Rs. |

(1) Government of India Securities
(2) Indian State Government Securities ...

(3) Indian Municipal, Port and Improvement
Trust Securities including Debentures ......
(4). Debentures of Indian Railways ........-+-+-+

(5) Guaranteed and Preference Shares of Indian
Railways
(6) Annuities of Indian Railways
(7). Ordinary Shares of Railways in India
(8) - Other Debentures of concerns in India ........
(9) Other Guaranteed and Preference Shares of
concems in India
(10) Other ordinary Shares of concerns in India .
(11) Loans on the Company’s policies effected in
India and within their surrender value .....-
(12) Loans on mortgage of property in India ...... 7
(13) Loans on personal security to persons
domiciled and resident in India
(14) Other loans granted in India (particulars to be
stated) .......eee eee ee
(15) Land and house property in India .
(16) Cash on deposit in Banks in India .
(17) Cash in hand and on current account in banks
in India ...
(18) Agent’s balances and outstanding premiums ....
(19) Interest, dividends and rents either outstanding
or accrued but not due

(20) Other assets in India (to be specified)

The statement shall show—

(a) the value for which credit is taken in the balance-sheet for each of the
abovementioned classes of assets,

(b) the market value of such of the abovementioned classes of assets as has
been ascertained from published quotations after deduction of accrued interest in-
cluded in market prices in those cases where accrued interest is included elsewhere
in the balance-sheet,

(८) how the value of such of the abovementioned classes of assets as has not
been ascertained from published quotations has been arrived at, and

(d) the rates of exchange at which the values of the assets other than in rupee
currency have been converted into rupees.

The market values need not be shown separately where they are not less than the book
values and_a certificate to that effect is appended to the statement.

16



17

No amounts on account of any of the following items may be entered in the state-

ment:—
Goodwill.
Preliminary expenses, formation, organisation or development expenses.

Commission or discount on shares or debentures issued.

Commuted Commission.
Expenditure carried forward to be written off in future years.

‘THESECOND SCHEDULE
(See section 11)

REGULATIONS AND FORMS FOR THE PREPARATION OF PRoFiT AND Loss ACCOUNTS
PART |
REGULATIONS

1; The items on the income side of the Profit and Loss Account and Profit and Loss
Appropriation Account must relate to income whether actually received or not, and the items
on the expenditure side must relate to expenditure whether actually paid or not.

2. Deductions from Interest, Dividends and Rents to be shown in respect of income-tax
must include all amounts in respect of Indian (Central) income-tax whether or not ithas been
or is to be deducted at source or paid direct.

3. The Interest, Dividends and Rents less income-tax thereon shown in the Revenue
Accounts for any classes of business other than life insurance business, including annuity
business may, if the insurer so desires, be included with the corresponding items in the Profit
and Loss Account.

PART II
Forms
FROMB
Fors OF Prorir AND Loss ACCOUNT

Profit and Loss Account of. . for the year ended 19

Indian (Central) Taxes on the Insurer Interest, Dividends and Rents (not

Profit’s (not applicable to any particular applicable to any particular Fund or

Fund or Account ... . Account) Rs. 7

Expenses of Management (not appli- Less- Income-tax thereon Rs..

cable to any particular Fund or Profit on realisation of Investments

Account) «sess (not credited to Reserves or any
particular Fund or Account) ...

Loss on Realisation of Investments (not Appreciation of Investments {not

charged to Reserves or any particular credited to Reserves or any particular

Fund or Account) .....

Fond or Account) ..
Profit transferred from Revenue

Depreciation of Investment (not
Account (details to be given)

charged to reserves or any particular
Fund or Account)... ae
Loss transferred from Revenue Accounts
(details to be given) .. न Transfer Fees ....
Other Income (to be specified)
Balance being loss for the year
carried to Appropriation Account ...

Other expenditure (to be specified) .....

Balance for the year carried to
Appropriation Account ..

balance-sheet, the amount must be shown separately.

*If any sum has been deducted from this item and entered on the assets side of the हु



FORM C
. Form OF Profit AND Loss APPROPRIATION ACCOUNT
Profit and Loss Appropriation Account of . for the year ended...

19...
[ Rs. P] Rs. B
Balance being loss brought forward Balance brought forward from fast
from last year ... year...
* Balance being, loss for the year brought Less-Dividends since paid in respect
from Profit and Loss Account (as in of last year (to be specified and if

“free of tax” to be so stated)*

Form 8)......
Dividends paid during the yearon
account of the current year (to be speci- .
fied and if “free of tax” to be so stated) ...
Transfers to any particular Funds or

Accounts (details to be given) .....

Balance for the year brought from
Profit and Loss Account (as in Form

8) ....
Balance at end of the year as shown in Balance being loss at end of the year
the Balance-sheet .... as shown in the Balance-sheet
|

*Note-—This ilem may be shown on the other side of the account if preferred.

THE THIRD SCHEDULE

(See section 11)

REGULATIONS AND FORMS FOR THE PREPARATION OF REVENUE ACCOUNTS
PART I

= REGULATIONS

1. Form D is, as set out in Part If of this Schedule, appropriate for life insurance
. business, but a separate revenue account must be prepared for every class or sub-class of
business in respect of which the insurer is required to maintain a separate account.

2, Form Fis, as set out in Part IT of this Schedule, appropriate for fire insurance and for
Marine insurance business. A separate revenue account in the same form must be prepared
for miscellaneous insurance exclusive of any sub-class of such business in respect of which
the insurer is required to maintain a separate account. For a sub-class of miscellaneous
insurance in respect of which the insurer is required to maintain a separate account, Form D
or Form Fas set out in Part II of this Schedule may be used with such modifications as the
Authority may authorise.

3. If any combined revenue account is for any purpose issued by an insurer it must be
in accordance with the forms specified in this Schedule and must clearly show on the face
thereof that it is a combined revenue, account, and must set out fully the name of every
insurer required to. make. separate returns under this Act whose revenue and expenditure
have been included therein; if the revenue and expenditure of any person not being an
insurer are included in a combined revenue account, the fact must be stated therein.

4, The items on the income side of the revenue account must relate to income whether
actually received or not, and the items on the expenditure side must relate to expenditure
whether actually paid or not.

5. Re-insurance premiums, avhether on business ceded or accepted, are to be brought
into account gross (i.e., before deducting commissions) under the head of premiums.

6. As respects life insurance business the following statements shall be furnished to
the Authority every year showing details provided for in a Form pertaining thereto:—



19
(A) A statement in Form DD as set forth in Part IT of this Schedule.
(8) A statement in Form DDD as set forth in Part IT of this Schedule.
(0) A statement in Form DDDD as set forth in Part II of this Schedule.

7. In addition to the revenue account, information shall be supplied of the gross
premium written direct in India, that is, the premium income without taking into account
premiums on re-insurances ceded or accepted, for every class or sub-class of business in
respect of which the insurer is required 10 maintain a separate account.

7A. In addition to the revenue account, information shal! also be supplied of the
gross Claims payable directly by the insurer in India (that is to say, the claims without
taking into account claims on re-insurance ceded or accepted) separately for fire, marine and
miscellaneous insurance business and the provisions of sections 20 and 116A shall not
apply to any information so supplied.

8. Any office premises which form part of the assets of a life insurance fund must be
treated as an interest earning investment, and accordingly, in the revenue account for life

insurance business a fair rent for the premises must be included under the heading “Interest,

Dividends and Rents” and in the revenue account for every class of business for which the
premises are used proper charges for the use thereof must be included under the heading
“Expenses of Management”.

9. Where an insurer carries on the business of life insurance in conjunction with any
other class of insurance business the expenses of management charged to the life insurance
revenue account must not include more than a reasonable proportion of the common ex-
penses and in particular, no such account must be charged with more than a fair sum for
the use of any office premises having regard to the income from the various classes of
business carried on and to the extent to which the premises are used for the purposes of
each class of business. है

10. Deductions from interest, dividends and rents in respect of income-tax must
include all income-tax charged on such income whether or not it has been or is to be
deducted at source or paid direct; the income-tax to be shown’ as so deducted in the Life
{nsurance Revenue Account is Indian (Central), Indian (State), United Kingdom, Foreign
and Dominion income-tax, but the income-tax to be shown as deducted in revenue accounts
of any other classes of business is Indian (Central) income-tax only.

PART II
Forms
FORM D
Form OF REVENUE ACCOUNT APPLICABLE 10 LIFE INSURANCE BUSINESS
Revenue Account of for the year ended 9 ,
in respect of Business.
Busi- | Busi- | Total Busi- | Busi- | Total
ness ness ness: ness
— within | out of — within | out of
India | India india | India
(a) fa)
Rs. | Rs. | Rs. Rs. | Rs. | Rs.
Claims under Policies Balance of Fund at the

(including provision for
claims due or intimated),
less Re-insurances— ..

beginning of the year ..

Premiums, less Re-

insurances—
By death ,.........- . हि
हु 0) First year premiums,
By maturity .......... where the maximum
Annuities, less  Re- premiums-paying period
insurances ........... (g) is—

two years:



20

Busi- | Busi- | Busi- | Busi- | Total
ness | ness ness | ness
—_ within | out of | | within | out of
India | India India | India
@) (a)
) | | Rs.

Surrenders (including
surrenders of Bonus), less
Re-insurances .....-+ 5

Bonuses in Cash, less Re-
jnsurances ....+++ see

Bonuses in Reduction of
Premiums, less Re-
insurances .. +++

Expenses of Management
(b)—

1.. (a) Commission to

Jnsurance agents (less that

_ on Re-insurances) ...--

(b) Allowances and
Commission [other than
commission included in
sub-item (a) preceding]

2, Salaries, etc. (other than to
agents and those contained
initem No.1) ..-.--++

3. Travelling expenses ...-
4, Directors’ fees
5. Auditors’ fees ...-++++
6, Medical fees
7. Law. charges
8. Advertisements ...-++-
9, Printing and Stationery .

10. Other expenses of
management accounts to
be specified . | "०००० ०५*

11. Rents for offices
belonging to and occupied
by the insurer ...+- +++

12, Rents -of other offices
occtipied by the insurer
Bad Debts ....-+- rans
United Kingdom, Indian,
Dominion and Foreign
‘Taxes ..--- deere eee
Other Expenditure (to be
specified)
Profit transferred to Profit
and Loss Account

Balance of Fund at the end of
the year ag shown in the
Balance-shect Rs. Rs.

| [ RS.

three
four yeats—————
five years:

years———-—

six years:

seven years~—

eight years

nine years:

ten yeats———-
eleven yeats————
twelve years or over

(Gacluding throughout
life)-—

Ga Renewal premiums
(iii) Single premiums
Consideration for Annuities

granted, less Re-
insurances (०) "0००० ५५

Interest, Dividends and
Rents .. ७७००० ०००० bene

Less—Income-tax thereon

Registration Fees ..
Other Income (to be specified
[CO eee ज्ज्ज्््ल्लल्

Loss transferred to Profit and
Loss Account 6... +++

‘Transferred from Appropria-
tion Account ...-..-++



2t

Notes

(a) These columns apply only to business the premiums in respect of which are
ordinarily paid outside India.

If any question arises whether any premiums are ordinarily paid outside India, the
Authority shall decide the question and his decision shall be final.

(6) If any sum has been deducted from this item and entered on the assets side of the
balance-sheet, the amount so deducted must be shown separately. Under this item the
- salary paid to the managing agent or managing director shall be shown separately from
the total amount paid as salaries to the remaining staff.

(c) All single premiums for annuities, whether immediate or deferred, must be included
under this heading.

(d) Indian, United Kingdom, Foreign and Dominion income-tax on Interest, Divi-
dends and Rents must be shown under this heading less any rebates of income-tax recovered
from the revenue authorities in respect of expenses of management. The separate heading
on the other side of the account is for United Kingdom, Indian, Foreign and Dominion
taxes, other than those shown under this item.

(९) Under the head “Other Income” fines, if any, realised from the staff must be
shown separately. All the amounts received by the insurer directly or indirectly whether
from his head office or from any other source outside India shall also be shown separately
in the revenue account except such sums as properly appertain to the capital account.

(0 In the case of an insurer having his principal place of business outside India the
expenses of management for business out of India and total business need not be split up
into the several sub-heads, if they are not so split up in his own country.

(g) Where the maximum premiums-paying period includes a fraction of a year, such
fraction shall be ignored for the purposes of this revenue account.



FORM DD

Classified statement of life insurance palicies of the. Company,
for the year ending या
New life insurance business in respect of Total life insurance
which a premium has been paid in the year business in force at”
end of the year
Number Sumsin- Single premiums
ofpoli- suredand (including considera- Yearly Number Sumsin- Premium
- cies annuities tionforimmediate renewal of sured with income for
perann- ordeferredannu- premium policies bonuses which
um ities and all other income and credit has -

premiums paid at
the outset where no
subsequent premium
is payable)

annuities been taken

perannum inthe
revenue
account

Sec Rs, Cee EEE Sane aes Sana छ_

Rs. Rs.

Ordinary policies
In India,
Outof India.

Total

Annuity contracts, etc.
In India.
‘Out of India.

‘Tota!

Group insurance policies
In Indi
‘Gut of India.

Total

‘Phe amount should be stated fo the nearest rupees and after: deduction of re-insurances.

22



FORM DDD

Additions to and deductions from policies of the Company

for the year ending. 419..... «
SS Or Oinary insta
policies insuring money to Annuities
be paid on death or sur- हि
yivance
No. Sum Reversionary |No. | Annuity
assured bonus per
additions annum
Rs, Rs. Rs.

(1) Policies at beginning of year —-

(2) New policies received

(3) Old policies revived ----

(4) Old policies changed and increased ----

(5) Bonus additions allotted ----

Discontinued during year’

(6) By Death—

(7) Bysurvivance or the happening of the .
contingencies insured against other than death ----

(8) By expiry of term under temporary insurances ----

(9) By surrender of policy ~

(10) By surrender of bonus --

(11) . By forfeiture or lapse --

(12) By change and decrease ----

(13) By being not taken up

,

Total discontinued

Total existing at end of year

A separate statement must be given in respect of each class of life insurance business
for which a separate revenue account is submitted and all amounts stated shall be total
gross amount without taking into account re-insurances ceded or accepted.

Insurers having their principal place of business in India shall give the information
required in the form separately for business transacted in India and business transacted
outside India and insurers having their principal place of business outside India will furnish
information regarding business transacted in India only.

23



FORM DDDD

Particulars of the policies forfeited or lapsed in the last year under review,
and of policies revived and reinstated for full benefits, classified
according to the year in which they were issued.

Year in which the policies Youiwuhichthepolices | फरफशण Suminsured—Numberof—-Suminsured
were issued हि policies under poli- policies under poli-
forfeited cies in revivedand cies in coluran
orlapsed column 2_—_reinstated for 4
full benefits
] 2 3 rn 3
Rs ‘ Rs.

Year ending 19......, being the year under review

Year ending 19...., being the year previous to

that under review

And so on, the number of and sum insured under policies forfeited or lapsed in the
last year under review being stated after classification according to each of the preceding
years in which they were issued.

A separate statement must be given in respect of each class of life insurance business
for which a separate revenue account is submitted and all amounts stated shall be total
gross amounts without taking into account reinsurances ceded or accepted.

Insurers having their principal place of business in India shall give the information
required in the form separately for business transacted in India and business transacted
outside India and insurers having their principal place of business outside India will furnish
information regarding business transacted in India only.

FORM F

For oF REVENUE ACCOUNT APPLICABLE 10 Fire INSURANCE BUSINESS MARINE
INSURANCE BUSINESS AND MISCELLANEOUS INSURANCE BUSINESS

for the year ended... 19, in respect of...

Revenue Account of.

TR
Claims under Policies, less Re-insu- Balance of Account at beginning of the
rances (a)(d): year:
Paid during the year Rs. Reserve for unexpined Risks Rs.
Total estimated liability in respect of Additional Reserve (if any) Re

outstanding claims at end of the year

whether due or intimated
Rs. Premiums, less Re-insurances (d)

‘Total

Less—Outstanding at end of previous Interest, Dividends and Rents Rs,
year (0) Rs.  Less—Income-tax thereon Rs.
Commission on direct Business Commission on Re-insurances.ceded .
Commission on Re-insurances accepted Other Income (to be'epecified) (०) .
Expenses of management (c) Loss transferred to profit and Loss Account......
Bad Debts ‘Transfer from Appropriation Account «.......---
United Kingdom, indian, Domi-

nion and Foreign Taxes

Other Expenditure (to be specified)

Profit transferred to Profit and Loss

Account.

Balance of Account at the end of the

year as shown in the Balance-sheet.

Reserve for unexpired Risks, being per

cent, of premium income of year Rs,

Additional Reserve (if any) Rs.
Rs. Rs.

24



4 of 1938.

4of 1938.

Nores

(a) This item must include all expenses directly incurred in relation to assessment
of claims of the nature of survey fees, fees for police reports, legal fees, court
expenses and other similar charges, but should not include any establishment
or administration expenses except in so far as they relate to any employee
exclusively employed on survey or assessment of losses.

(6) Ifin any year the claims actually paid and those still unpaid at the end of that
year in respect of the previous year or years are in excess of the amount in-
cluded in the previous year’s revenue account as provision for outstanding
claims, then the amount of such excess must be shown in the revenue account.

(c) If any-sum has been deducted from this item and entered on the assets side of
the balarice-sheet the amount so deducted must be shown separately.

(d) Where the account is furnished under the provisions of section 11 of the Insur-
ance Act, 1938, separate figures for claims paid to claimants in India and
claimants outside India, and for premiums derived from business effected in
India and effected outside India must be given.

(e) | All the amounts received by the insurer directly or indirectly whether, from his

head office or from any other source outside India shall also be shown sepa-

rately in the revenue account except such sums as properly appertain to the
capital account.

*Whether the account is furnished under the provisions of clause (b) ot sub-
section (2) of section 16 of the Insurance Act, 1938, by an insurer to whom that
section applies, separate figures for business within India and business out of India
must be given against the items marked with an asterisk. Against all other items the
total amount for the business as a whole may be given.

THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
_ (See section 13)

REGULATIONS. FOR THE PREPARATION OF ABSTRACTS OF ACTUARIES’ REPORTS AND REQUIREMENTS
APPLICABLE TO SUCH ABSTRACTS .

PARTI
REGULATIONS

1. Abstracts and Statements must be so arranged that the numbers and letters of the

_ paragraphs correspond with those of the paragraphs of Part I of this Schedule.

2. In showing the proportion which that part of the annual premiums reserved as a
provision for future expenses and profits bears to the total of the annual premiums, in
accordance with the requirements of paragraph 4 of Part Il of this Schedule, no credit is to
be taken for any adjustments made in order to secure that no policy is treated as an asset.

3. (7) The average rate of interest yielded in any year by the assets constituting a life
insurance fund shall, for the purposes of paragraph 5 of Part II of this Schedule, be calculated
by dividing the interést of the year by the mean fund of the year; and for the purposes of
any such calculation the interest of the year shall be taken to be the whole of the interest
credited to the life insurance fund during the year after deduction of income-tax charged
thereon (any refund of income-tax in respect of expenses of management made during the
year being taken into account), and the mean fund of the year shall be ascertained by
adding a sum equal to one-half of the amount of the life insurance fund at the beginning of
the year to a sum equal to one-half of that fund at the end of the year, and deducting from
the aggregate of those two sums an amount equal to one-half of the interest of the year. है

25



(2) For the purposes of the calculation aforesaid either—

(a) all profits and income arising during the year from sums invested in reversions
shall be included in the interest credited to the life insurance fund during the year; or

(6) such portion of the life insurance fund as is invested in the purchase of
reversions, and the profits and income arising therefrom, shall be excluded from the
calculation; but in that case a statement must be added to the information required
under the said paragraph 5, showing, in respect of the portion of the fund so excluded
as aforesaid, the average rate of annual profit and income for which credit has been

taken during the five years last preceding the valuation date, and explaining the manner *

in which thé said average rate has been calculated.

पर (3) The information given in accordance with the requirements of the said paragraph 5
shall show clearly by which of the methods hereinbefore in this regulation mentioned the
sums invested in reversions and the profits and income arising therefrom have been dealt
with. है

4. Every abstract prepared वी '४०००्ैक्षाए८ with the requirements of Part II of this
Schedule shall be signed by an actuary and shall-contain a certificate by him to the effect that
he has satisfied himself as to the accuracy of the valuations made for the purposes thereof
and of the valuation data:

Provided that,in the case of an abstract prepared on behalf of an insurer, if the actuary
who signs the abstract is not a permanent officer of the insurer, the certificate as the accuracy
of the valuation data shall be given and signed by the principal officer of the insurer and the
actuary shall include in the abstract a statement signed by him showing what precautions he
has taken to ensure the accuracy of the data,

5, For the purposes of the Schedule the following expressions have the meanings
hereby respectively assigned to them, namely:—

“extra premium” means a charge for any risk not provided for in the minimum
contract premium;

“Gnter-valuation period” means, as respects any valuation, the period to the
valuation date of the valuation from the valuation date of the last preceding valuation
in connection with which an abstract was prepared under this Act or under the
enactments repealed by this Act, or, in a case where no such valuation has been made
in respect of the class of business in question, from the date on which the insurer
began to carry on that class of business; हे

“maturity date” means the fixed date on which any benefit will become payable
either absolutely or contingently;

‘net premiums” means as respects any valuation the premiums taken credit for
in the valuation

“premium term” means the period during which premiums are payable;

“valuation date” means as respects any valuation the date as at which the
valuation is made. >

PARTI

REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO AN ABSTRACT IN
RESPECT OF LIFE INSURANCE BUSINESS

The following tabular statements shall be annexed to every abstract prepared in
accordance with the requirements of this Part of this Schedule, namely:—

(a) a Consolidated Revenue Account, in the Form G annexed to this Part of this

Schedule, for the inter-valuation period (except that it shall not be necessary to prepare-



27

such an account in respect of any class of business so long as the insurer deposits
annually with the Authority an abstract in respect of that class of business), and

(6) a Summary and Valuation in the Form H annexed to this Part of this Schedule
of the policies included at the valuation date in the class of business to which the
abstract relates; and

(c)a Valuation Balance-sheet in the Form -I annexed to this Part of this Schedule;
and

(वी) a statement in Form DDD as set forth in Part II of the Third Schedule of the
additions to and deductions from the number of policies and the sums insured
thereunder for each class of life insurance for the inter-valuation period (except that it
shall not be necessary to prepare such statement in respect of any class of business so
long as the insurer deposits annually with the Authority an abstract in respect of that
class of business);

and every such abstract shall show—
1. The valuation date.

2. The general principles and full details of the methods adopted in the valuation of
each of the various classes of insurances and annuities shown in the said Form H, including
statements on the following points;—
(a) whether the principles were determined by the instruments constituting the
company or by its regulations or bye-laws or how otherwise;
(७) the method by which the net premiums have been arrived at and how the . ‘
ages at entry, premium terms and maturity dates have been treated for the purpose of
the valuation;

{c) the methods by which the valuation age period from the valuation date to the
maturity date, and the future premium terms, have been treated for the purpose of the
valuation; हु |

(वी) the rate of bonus taken into account whereby the method of valuation definite
provision is made for the maintenance of a specific rate of bonus;

(e) the method of allowing for—

(i) the incidence of the premiumrincome; and
(éi) premiums payable otherwise than annually;

(f) the methods by which provision has been made for the following matters,
namely:—

(0) the immediate payment of claims;
(ii) future expenses and profits in the case of limited payment and paid-up
_ policies; हि पु
, _ (iii) the reserve in respect of lapsed policies, not included in the valuation,
but under which a liability exists or may arise; and whether any reserves have
been made for the matters aforesaid; हु है
(8) whether under the valuation method adopted any policy would be treated as
an asset, and, if so, what steps, if any, have been taken to eliminate such asset,
(h) a statement of the manner in which policies on under-average lives and
policies subject to premiums which include a charge for climatic, military or other extra fos
risks have becn dealt with; and है न
(0) the rates of exchange at which liabilities in respect of policies issued in
foreign currencies have been converied into rupees and what provision has been
made for possible increase of liability arising from future variations in the rates of
exchange. ड़ ले



3, The table of mortality used, and the rate of interest, assumed, in the valuation,

4. The proportion which that part of the annual premiums reserved as a provision for
future expenses and profits bears to the total of the annual premiums, separately specified in
respect of insurances with immediate profits, with deferred profits, with profits under
discounted bonus systems, and without profits.

5, The average rates of interest yiclded by the assets, whether invested or uninvested,
constituting the life insurance fund for each of the years covered by the valuation date.

6. The basis adopted in the distribution of profits as between the insurer and policy-
holders, and whether such basis was determined by the instruments constituting the company,
or by its regulations or bye-laws, or how otherwise.

7. The general principles adopted in the distribution of profits among policy-holders,
including statements on the following points, namely:— . :

(a) whether the principles were determined by the instruments constituting the
company, or by its regulations or bye-laws, or how otherwise;

(b) the number of years’ premiums to be paid, period to elapse and other conditions
to be fulfilled before a bonus is allotted;

(८) whether the bonus is allowed in respect of each year’s premium paid, or in
respect of each completed calender year or year of assurance or how otherwise; and

(d) whether the bonus vests immediately on allocation, or, if not, the conditions
of vesting.

8. (1) The total amount of profits arising during the inter-valuation period, including
profits paid away and sums transferred to reserve funds or other accounts during that
period, and the amount brought forward from the preceding valuation (to be stated separately)
and the allocation of such profits—

(b) among policy-holders with immediate participation, giving the number of the
policies which participated and the sums assured thereunder (excluding bonuses);

(2) among policy-holders with deferred participation, giving the number of the
policies which participated and the sums assured thereunder (excluding bonuses);

(व) among policy-holders in the discounted bonus class, giving the number of
the policies which participated and the sums assured thereunder (excluding bonuses);

(a) to interim bonus paid;

(e) to the insurer or, in the case of an insurance company, among shareholders or
. , © shareholders’ accounts (any such sums passed through the accounts during the
\ inter-valuation period to be separately stated);
AY (f) to every reserve fund or other fund or account (any such sums passed through
‘NS the accounts during the inter-valuation period to be separately stated);
1. (g) as carried forward unappropriated.
(2) Specimens of bonuses. allotted as a result of this valuation to policies for one
thousand rupees— है

(a) for the whole term of life effected at the respective ages of 20, 30 and 40, and
having been in force respectively for five years, ten years and upwards at intervals of
ten years; and .

(b) for endowment insurances effected at the respective ages of 20, 30 and 40, for
endowment terms of fifteen, twenty and thirty years, and having been in force
respectively for five years, ten years and upwards at intervals of ten years;

together with the amounts apportioned ur“ * the various manners in which the bonus is
receivable.



29

9. A statement in Form J annexed to this Part of this Schedule of specimen policy
reserve values held or required to be held according to the methods adopted in the valuation,
and specimen minitnum surrender values in respect of whole life insurance policies for
Rs. 1,000 with premiums payable throughout life effected at the respective ages of 20, 30, 40
and 50, and immediately on payment of the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh,
eighth, ninth, tenth, fifteenth and twentieth annual premivm; with similar specimen policy
reserve values and specimen surrender values in respect of whole life insurance policies subject
to premiums payable for 20 years and of endowment insurance policies maturing at age 55.

10. A statement showing how the liability under any disability clause in a policy has
been determined in the valuation with full information of the tables of sickness or accident
used for the purpose.

FORM G
Consolidated Revenue Account of........fol....
commencing...
Business ” Business
जा within Total _ within Total
India (a) India (a)
Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs.

Claims. under Policies
(including provisions for
-claims due or intimated),
less Re-insurances—

By death

By Maturity

Annuities, less Re-insurances
Surrenders (including
surrenders of Bonus)

1655 Re-insurances.....0.
Bonuses in cash, less re-
insurances.
Bonuses in reduction 01
Premiums, less Re-in-
इचाज०९६.............
Expenses of Manage-
ment (b) (e)~

1. (व) Commission to in-
surance agents (less
that on Re-insurances)

(0) Allowances and
commission other than
commission included
in sub-item (a) prece-
ding... 7

2. Salaries, etc., other
than to agents and
those contained in
sub-item 1 (४) pre-
cedin, aoe

3. Travelling ex-

penses...

. Directors’ fees.

. Auditors’ fees..

saw

Balance of Life Insurance
Fund at the beginning

of the period,

Premiums, 1658
Re-insurances—

(i) First year premiums
Gi) Renewal premiums
(iii) Single premiums
Consideration for An-
nuities granted, less Re-
insurances (०)...

Interest, Dividends and

Rents... Rs,

Less—Income-tax thereon
(४) Rs,
Registration Fees.. .

Other Income (to be
specified)...

Loss transferred to Profit
and Loss Account,

‘Transferred from Appro-
priation Account.



Business Business
_ within Total _ within ‘Total
India (a) India (a)

Rs, Rs. Rs. Rs.
8. Advertisements.......

9. Printing and Sta-
tioner, पु

10, Oiher expenses of
management (ac-

1f. Other payments
(accounts to be
specified)...
12, Rent for offices |
belonging to and i
coceupied by the |
insurer... |
13. Rents of other
offices occupied
by the insurer
Bad debts.......
United Kingdom,
Indian, Dominion and
Foreign Taxeé..........
Other Expenditure (to
be specified)...

Profit transferred to
Profit and Loss Ac-
count......

Balance of Life Insur-
ance Fund at end of

the period as shown in
the Batance-sheet........4

Rs. Rs.

Notes
(a) These columns apply to all business except business the premiums in respect :
of which are ordinarily paid outside India. If any question arises whether any premiums
are ordinarily paid inside or outside India, the Authority shall decide the question and
his decision shall be final.

(6) If any sum has been deducted from this item and entered on the assets side
of the balance-sheet, the amount so deducted must be shown separately.

(०) All single premiums for annuities, whether immediate or deferred, must be
included under this heading.

(d) Indian, United Kingdom, Foreign and Dominion Income-tax on Interest,
Dividends and Rents must be shown under this heading, less any rebates of income-
tax recovered from the revenue authorities in respect of expenses of management. The
separate heading on the other side of the account is for United Kingdom, Indian,
Foreign and Dominion taxes, other than those shown under this item.

(e) In the case of an insurer having his principal place of business outside India
the expenses of management for the total business need not be split up into the several
sub-heads, if they are not so split up in his own country.



FORMH

Summary and valuation of the Policies of..

Particulars of the Valuation
Policies for Valuation
Description of Number Sums Bonuses Office Net Sums | Office Net Net
‘Transactions of assured yearly yearly Assured yearly yearly Li
polices pre-press and pres pre lities
miums miums Bonuses miums miums
0) @) @) a) 6) (6) 0) (8) (9) (10)
DIVISION I
Insurances
Group A-
With immediate participation in
profits...

For whole term of life.
Other classes (to be specified)..
Extra premiums...
Total insurance:
Deduct—Re-insurances.
Net insurances.

Group B-

With deferred participation in

Other classes (to be specified)..
Extra premiums....
Total insurances:
Deduct—Re-insurances.
Net insurances...

Group C-
‘Under discounted bonus systems.
For whole term of life.
Other classes (to be specified),
Extra premiums...
Total insurance:
Deduct—Re-insurances.......
Net insurances.

Group D-
Without participation in profits.
For whole term of life.
Other classes (to be specified).
Extra premiums...
Total insurances.
Deduct—Re-insurances.
Net Insurance.........
Total insurances without profits...
‘Total of the insurances shown in all
groups...
Deduct—Re-insurances.
Net amount of insurances.
Adjustments, if any (to be separately
specified).

DIVISION Ii
Annuities on lives
Immediate Annuities.
Deferred Annuities with return of
premiums...
Deferred Annuities without return
of premiums.
Other classes (to be specified).

Net Annuities on Live:
Total of the results (after deduction of Re-insurances),

31



1. Items in this Summary are to be stated to the nearest rupee.

2. No policy of insurance upon the lives of group of persons, whereby sums
assured are payable in respect of the several persons included in the group, is to be
included in Groups A, B, C or D of this Form: any such policies must be shown in a
separate Group which must be added to the Form.

3. If polices without participation in profits but which a guaranteed rate of
bonus are issued, they must be separately specified in Group D of this Form.

4. Policies under which there is a waiver of premiums during disability must be:
shown as a separate class,

5, Separate forms must be prepared in respéct of classes of policies valued by
different tables of mortality or at different rates of interest of invol ving the valuation of
net premiums on different basis.

6. In cases where separate valuations of any portion of the business are required
- under local laws in places outside India and reserves based on such valuations are
deposited in such places, a statement must be furnished in respect of the business 50
valued in each such place showing the total number of policies, the total sums assured
and bonuses, the total office yearly premiums, and the total net liability on the basis as
to mortality and interest adopted in each such place with a statement as to such basis
respectively.
7, Office and net premiums and the values thereof must be shown after deduction
of abatements made by the application of bonus.

FORM-I

Valuation Balance-sheet of.....

Rs. Rs,

Net liability under business as shown in the Balance of Life Insurance Fund
Summary and valuation of policies, as shown in the Balance sheet
Surplus, if any. Deficiency, if any... soe

Nore

If the proportion of surplus allocated to the insurer, or the case of an insurance company to
shareholders, is not uniform in respect of all classes of insurances, the surplus must be
shown separately for the classes to which the different proportions relate.

FORMJ

Specimen policy reserve values and minimum surrender values under

Qos policy for Rs. 1,000
Age at entry 20 Age at entry 30 Age atentry40 Age at entry 50
Number of annuat Reserve Minimum Reserve Minimum Reserve Minimum Reserve Minium
premiums paid up value surrender value —suttender value surrender value —_ surrender
to the valuation date value value value value

y
2

Note.— Items in this Form to be stated to the nearest rupee, हु

Note.—- The reserve value is to be based on the mte of office: premium payable by an insured who entered
at the age shown and who had, by the valuation date, paid the number of annual premiums shown
in the first column. 2



THE FIFTH SCHEDULE
(See section 13)

REGULATIONS FOR PREPARING STATEMENTS OF BUSINESS IN FORCE AND REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE
10 sucH STATEMENTS

PARTI
REGULATIONS

1. Statements prepared under this Schedule must be prepared, so far as practicable, in
tabular form and must be identified by numbers and letters corresponding with those of the
paragraphs of Part II of this Schedule.

2. Except with respect to rates of premium or contributicn, items in statements prepared
under this Schedule are to be shown to the nearest rupee.

3, Extra premium shown in the Forms of Summary and Valuation prepared under the
Fourth Schedule to this Act must not be included in statements prepared under this Schedule.

4. Every statement prepared under this Schedule shall be signed by the actuary making
the investigation in connection with which it is prepared.

5. For the purposes of this Schedule the following expressions have the meanings
hereby respectively assigned to them, namely:—

(a) “annual loading” means the provision made for future expenses and profits;

* *

* * *


LOK SABHA

A
BLL

further to amend the Insurance Act, 1938.

|
|

(Shri Yashwant Sinha, Minister of Finance}

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1838LS—10-8-2001.