     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
       
Bill No. 74 of 2022
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSIST ANCE FOR GEO-MAPPING
OF TREES IN THE STA TE OF MADHY A  PRADESH
BILL, 2022
By
SHRI SUDHEER GUPTA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Madhya Pradesh
to meet the expense of geo-mapping of trees and sapling during
plantation in State of Madhya Pradesh.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:–
1. (1)This Act may be called Special Financial Assistance for
Geo-Mapping of Trees in the State of Madhya Pradesh Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5

2.  In the Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) “geo-mapping” means  the  process  of  converting  raw  data  from
surveys into a  geo-map  that helps  by  providing a  visualization  of  the
location of utilities quickly and accurately;
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(c) “saplings” means a young tree specifically one not over four inches
(about 10 centimeters) in diameter at breast height; and
(d) “tree” includes palm, skump, brush-wood and cane.
3.  There shall be paid such sums of money out of the Consolidated Fund
of  India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special
financial assistance to the State of Madhya Pradesh to meet to costs of
geo-mapping of trees and saplings during plantation in the State of Madhya
Pradesh.
Definitions.
Special financial
assistance to the
State of Madhya
Pradesh.
2
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Madhya Pradesh is a forest rich State and is ranked first among the States in
terms of the Recorded Forest Areas (RFA). The State has sizeable tribal and rural
population which is dependent on the forests for their livelihood and basic needs.
As per the Champion and Seth Classification of Forest Types (1968), the forests
in the State of Madhya Pradesh belong to five forest type groups, which are further
divided into 21 Forest Types. The State of Madhya Pradesh is a pioneering State
in the implementation of the Joint Forest Management (JFM) movement in the
country. The State has a strong JFM network through 15,228 Joint Forest
Management Committees (JFMC) V an Samrakshan Samiti (VSS), Eco Development
Committees (EDC) covering an area of 66,874 sq. km.
Located in Central India, Madhya Pradesh is the second largest State covering
an area of 3,08,252 sq. km. which is 9.38 per cent. of the geographical area of the
country and is bordered on the west by Gujarat, on the northwest by Rajasthan, on
the north east by Uttar Pradesh, on the east by Chhattisgarh and on the south by
Maharashtra. The State lies between 21o 17' N to 26o 52' N latitude and
74 o 08' E to 82 o 49' E longitudes.
Physiographical, the State can be divided into four regions, viz. the low lying
areas in north and north-west of Gwalior, Malwa plateau, Satpuda and Vindhyan
Ranges. Madhya Pradesh has a subtropical climate. The annual rainfall ranges
800 mm to 1800 mm and the annual temperature varies from 22o C to 25o C. The State is
drained by a number of rivers, which include Narmada, Tapti, Son, Betwa, Shipra and
Chambal. The State has 50 districts, of which 21 are tribal districts. The State does not
have any hill district.
As per the 2011 census, the State of Madhya Pradesh has a population of
72.63 million accounting to 6 per cent. of India’s population. The rural and urban
population stands at 72.37 per cent. and 27.63 per cent., respectively. Tribal population
of the State is 21.09 per cent. The population density of the State is 236 per sq. km.,
which is much lower than the national average. The 19th livestock census 2012 has
reported a total livestock population of  36.33 million.
The Inter-governmental Panel on Climate Change has estimated nearly 1 billion
of hectares of trees are needed to reduce climate change to about 1.5o C. The challenge,
however, is where to put those trees. A new study indicates that through Geo-Mapping
of Trees and Saplings during plantation, locations can be identified where new trees
can be planted.
It is, therefore, necessary that the Central Government should provide special
assistance to the State of Madhya Pradesh to meet the cost of geo-mapping of trees
and saplings during plantation in the State of Madhya Pradesh.
Hence this Bill.
       NEW DELHI;                                                                   SUDHEER GUPTA
29 January, 2022.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of money out
of the Consolidated Fund of  India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation
provide, as special financial assistance to the State of Madhya Pradesh to meet the
costs of Geo-Mapping of Trees and Saplings during the plantation in the State of
Madhya Pradesh.
The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of Consolidated
Fund of India. As the sums of moneys which will be given to the State of Madhya
Pradesh as special financial assistance by appropriation by law made by Parliament
will be known only after the plans to be implemented by the State Government with
the approval of Government of India are identified, it is not possible at present to
give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be involved out of the
Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
4

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Madhya Pradesh to
meet the expense of geo-mapping of trees and sapling during
plantation in State of Madhya Pradesh.
————
(Shri  Sudheer Gupta, M.P .)