1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI FAGGAN SINGH KULASTE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follow:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2018.
2. In the Eighth Scheduled to the Constitution, existing entries 5 to 22 shall be
renumbered as entries 6 to 23, respectively and before entry 6 as so renumbered, the following
entry shall be inserted, namely:—
“5. Gondi”.
Bill No. 74 of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title.
Amendment of
the Eighth
Schedule.5

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our Country is a multilingual country. At present twenty-two languages being spoken
and written by our citizens have only been recognised in the Eighth Schedule to the
Constitution of India. These languages represent the culture of a specific region. A person
learns most of the things through his mother tongue only. Language is the light of knowledge.
But it is unfortunate that despite the fact that crores of people in the States of
Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Telangana, West Bengal, Jharkhand, Bihar
and Vidarbha region of Maharashtra along with tribal community use the ‘Gondi’ language,
yet it is not included in Eight Schedule to the Constitution so far. Gondi Language is struggling
hard to maintain its existence and dignity.
The glory of a society or country is established by the language in which its literature
is written. If we go through the history of Gondi language, we are able to know that the Gondi
Community has its own history of almost fifteen hundred years which is the oldest one
worldwide. In nutshell, Gondi language and its dialect is in vogue since 12-13 BC and being
used in written and conversation form, respectively. Even rockediets, vision letters, certificates
and royal orders were prepared in Gondi language. Gondi language has a special contribution
in the development of Indian literature, history and way of life. Apart from abundant literature,
Gondi language is the voice of expression for our glorious culture. Gondi language is
the monther tongue of Gondi area that spreads over a vast territory of the States of
Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Vidarbha area of Maharashtra, West Bengal
Jharkhand and Bihar. The total number of people speaking Gondi language in the area of
thousands of square kilometres in most of the districts of frontier States is approximately six
crores. Many times, demand for inclusion of Gondi language in Eighth Schedule to the
Constitution has been raised by ordinary people, Gond people of the aforesaid States and
even public representatives have been raising this demand. Therefore, keeping in view the
emotions of people speaking Gondi language in different areas of different States covered by
gondwana region, Gondi language should be included in the Eighth Schedule to the
Constitution.
Inclusion of Gondi language in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution would not
only conserve and save Gondi language but also preserve and encourage folk dances, folk
songs, folk traditions, nature worship and other cultural heritage.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; FAGGAN SINGH KULASTE
February 8, 2018

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
EIGHTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 344(1) and 351]
Languages
1. Assamese.
2. Bengali.
3. Bodo.
4. Dogri.
5. Gujarati.
6. Hindi.
7. Kannada.
8. Kashmiri.
9. Konkani.
10. Maithili.
11. Malayalam.
12. Manipuri.
13. Marathi.
14. Nepali.
15. Oriya.
16. Punjabi.
17. Sanskrit.
18. Santhali.
19. Sindhi.
20. Tamil.
21. Telugu.
22. Urdu.
* * * * * *

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
————
(Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4177LS(S3)—05-03-2018.