AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 94 of 2005

THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION)
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
By
Suri GINGEE N. RAMACHANDRAN, M.P
A
BILL
further to amend the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition)
(Amendment) Act, 2005

(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the Ist May, 2005

970. 5 2. In section 10 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970, in sub-
section (1), the following proviso shall be added at the end, namely:—

"Provided that the contract labour employed in an establishment covered by the
notification issued under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been absorbed in
that establishment on a permanent basis from the date of issue of notification

Short title and
commencement.

Amendment
of Section
10.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Contract labour plays a significant and important role in almost all industries, in
agriculture and allied operations and in service sector. It generally refers to workers engaged
through an intermediary and is based on a triangular relationship among the user enterprises,
the contractor including the sub-contractor, and the workers. These workers are very large in
number and generally belong to the unorganised sector. The concern for providing legislative
protection to this category of workers, whose condition was found to be abysmal by various
Commissions and Committees, coupled with the judgment of the Supreme Court of India in
the Standard Vacuum Refinery Company case, resulted in the enactment of the Contract
Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970. The Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition)
Act, 1970 was enacted to regulate the employment of Contract Labour in certain establishments
and to provide for its abolition in certain circumstances and for matters connected therewith.

The proposed amendment becomes necessary to save the interests of contract labour
in the country. It is proposed that in case Government decides to prohibit contract labour in
a particular type of industry, then in that case the contract workers working in that industry
on that day shall be deemed to be permanent employees of that industry. They should be
given the benefits enjoyed by the permanent workers of the principal employer after
absorption. Besides being in consonance with the Directive Principles of State Policy, this
amendment will help in reducirig the exploitation of labour to a great extent. This amendment
has become all the more necessary after Indian market has been thrown open as a result of
liberalisation.

New DELHI; GINGEE N. RAMACHANDRAN
July 11,2005.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for permanent absorption of contract labour upon issuance
of a notification by the appropriate Government for prohibiting employment of contract
labour in relation to an establishment. Since establishments under the control of the
Government are within the purview of the Act, it is possible that contract labour may have to
be permanently absorbed in Government establishments. This would entail expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely that an annual recurring expenditure of about
rupees fifty crore will be incurred. |

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees eighty crore is also likely to be incurred.



- ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND Aso ition) Act, 1970
(Act No. 37 oF 1970)
* * * *
10. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the appropriate Government
may, after consultation with the Central Board or, as the case may be, a State board, prohibit,
by notification in the Official Gazette, employment of contract labour in any process, operation

or other work in any establishment.

(2) Before issuing any notification under sub-section (1) in relation to an establishment,
the appropriate Government shall have regard to the conditions of work and benefits provided
for the contract labour in that establishment and other relevant factors, such as - (a) whether
the process, operation or other work is incidental to, or necessary for the industry, trade,
business, manufacture or occupation that is carried on in the establishment;

(b) whether it is of perennial nature, that is to say, it is of sufficient duration having
regard to the nature of industry, trade, business, manufacture or occupation carried on in

that establishment, |
(c) whether it is done ordinarily through regular workmen in that establishment or an
establishment simiiar thereto;

(d) whether it is sufficient to employ considerable number of whole-time workmen.
Explanation: If a question arises whether any process or operation or other work is of

perennial nature, the decision of the appropriate Government thereon shall be final.

x % * *

~ Prohib

Empl

0


LOK SABHA

A
BILL |
further to amend the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970.

(Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—1657LS-1—01.08.2005.