1
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
PROF. SAUGA TA ROY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 .
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central  Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 74 of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. For section 124A of the Indian Penal Code 45 of 1860, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—
"124A. Whoever, by words, either spoken or written or by signs, or by visible
representation, or otherwise, brings or attempts to bring into hatred or contempt, or
excites or attempts to excite disaffection towards the principles of democracy,
secularism or national unity enshrined in the Constitution of India or when such
words or actions directly results in the use of violence or incitement of violence and
results in the commission of a grevious offence shall be punished with imprisonment
for life, to which fine may be added, or with imprisonment which may extend to three
years, to which fine may be added, or with fine.
Explanation 1.— The expression "disaffection" includes disloyalty and all
feelings of enmity.
Explanation 2.—Comments expressing disapprobation of the measures of the
Government with a view to obtain their alteration by lawful means, without exciting or
attempting to excite hatred, contempt or disaffection, do not constitute an offence
under this section.
Explanation 3.— Comments expressing disapprobation of the administrative
or other action of the Government without exciting or attempting to excite hatred,
contempt or disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this section.
Sedition.
Substitution of
new section
for section
124A.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The offence of sedition in the Indian Penal Code, 1860 has been a subject of
controversy for a long time. Many of our freedom fighters were charged under this including
Bal Gangadhar Tilak, Annie Besant and Mahatama Gandhi. Recently, a few students of
Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi were arrested reportedly on the charge of sedition,
which has been opposed by many. The need is to amend section 124A of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 in the interest of democracy and freedom of expression as enshrined in article 19
of the Constitution of India.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; SAUGA TA ROY
March 2,  2016.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 of 1860)
*******
124A. Whoever, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible
representation, or otherwise, brings or attempts to bring into hatred or contempt, or excites
or attempts to excite disaffection towards, the Government established by law in India, one
shall be punished with imprisonment for life, to which fine may be added, or with imprisonment
which may extend to three years, to which fine may be added, or with fine.
Explanation 1.—The expression "disaffection" includes disloyalty and all feelings
of enmity.
Explanation 2.— Comments expressing disapprobation of the measures of the
Government with a view to obtain their alteration by lawful means, without exciting or
attempting to excite hatred, contempt or disaffection, do not constitute an offence under
this section.
Explanation 3.—Comments expressing disapprobation of the administrative or other
action of the Government without exciting or attempting to excite hatred, contempt or
disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this section.
******
4

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Prof. Saugata Roy, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—5320LS(S3)—16.04.2016.