AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

17 DFC nna

Bill No, 74 of 2004

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004
By
Suri C.K, CHANDRAPPAN, M.>P.

A

BILL
JSurther to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called the Constitution. (Amendment) Bill, 2004.

(2) Itshall come into force on such date
inthe Official Gazette, appoint.

as the Central Government may, by notification

2. After article 100 of the Constitution, the following heading and article shall be

inserted, namely:—

Recall of Members

“100A. (1) Parliament may by law provide that a member of either House of Parliament
may be recalled by the electorate which elected him on all or any of the following grounds:—

(a) physical or mental incapacity
the functions of the office; or

rendering that member incapable of performing

Short title and
‘commencement.

Insertion of
new article
100A.

Right to
recall the
Member of
Parliament.


2

(6) misconduct or misbehaviour likely to bring hatred, ridicule, contempt
disrepute to the office; or

(c) persistent deserting of the electorate without reasonable cause; or

(d) any other ground which may be prescribed by law.

(2) Ifa member of either House of Parliament is recalled under the provisions of
enacted in accordance with clause (1), his seat shall thereupon become vacant.”


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS,

It is always presumed that in a democracy, power ultimately rests with the people, the
electorate, But in our Constitution there is no provision by which the people can exercise
this power and recall their eleeted representative if he forfeits their confidence or behaves in
an irresponsible manner. This helps to create conditions favourable for irresponsible
behaviour, political defection and various other corrupt practices on the part of legislators.
They feel that they are not accountable to their electorate for five years, if they are once
elected.

This is an important aspect which weakens our democracy. In the past, there have
been instances when, in several States in our country, people challenged the authority of
elected legislators in the street saying that they have lost confidence in their elected
representatives. They had practically no constitutional remedy for redressing their grievances.
This led to an explosive situation which threatened the very existence of our democracy.

In this background, it is necessary to include a provision in our Constitution to provide
the electorate the Right to Recall, as has been provided in the Constitution of the Republic of
Uganda and may be in seme other countries. The Constitution of Uganda provides the
electorate the right to recall a Member of Parliament before the expiry of the term in certain
circumstances mentioned therein. Inclusion of a similar provision in our Constitution would
not only strengthen our democracy but also make the legislators more accountable to the
people whom they represent. In the changing political scenario, the general public opinion is
in favour of making this kind of provisions in our Constitution.

Hence this Bill.

‘New Deut; C.K. CHANDRAPPAN
June 8, 2004


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri C.K. Chandrappan, M.P,)

MGIPMRND—881LS—21.09.2004,