Bllt No. 75 of 195' 
THE ROAD TRANSPORT CORPORATIONS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
'2---"1 J II f)6 

64 of 1950 • 
37 of 1956. 
DiU No. ZS of 19S6 
THE ROAD TRANSPORT CORPORATIONS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCD ~ LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Road Transport Corporations Act, 1950. 
BE it enacted by Parl'iamer.t in the Seventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Road Transport Corporations Short title. 
(Amendment) Act, 1956. 
, 2. After sect:on 47 of the Road Transport Corporations Act, 1950, Insertion 
the following section shall be inserted, namely:- ~!:ti~: 47A 
10 
15 
20 
"47A. (1) Where on account of the reorganisation of States Spec!~l . . . prOVISion 
under the States Reorganisation Act, 1956. the whole or any for recons-
part of a State in respect of which a Corporation was, ~i~tif~t~ 
immediately before the 1st day -of November, 1956, functioning ofs:r~a~ 
and operating, is transferred on that day to another State and t~orpora-IOns. 
by reason of such transfer, it appears to the State Government 
necessary or expedient that the Corporation should be reconsti-
tuted or reorganised in any manner whatsoever or that it 
should be dissolved, the State Government may frame a scheme 
for the reconstitution, reorganisation or dissolution of the Corpo-
ration including proposals regarding the formation of new Corpo-
rations, the amalgmation, of the Corporation with any other 
Corporation, body corporate or a commercial undertaking 
of another State Government, the transfer W. the assets. rights 
and liabilities of the Corporation in whole or in part to any 
other Corporation, body corporate or a commercial undertaking 
of another State Government and the transfer or re-employ-
ment of any' workmen of the Corporation, and the State Gov-

2 ; 
emment may forward the scheme to the Central Government 
for approval. 
EzplaMti<m.-For the purpose of framing any scheme under 
this sub-section, "State Government",-
(i) in relation to the Bombay State Road Transport 5 
Corporation, the Kutch State Road Transport Corporation 
and the Saurashtra State Road Transport Corporation, shall 
mean the Government of the State of Bombay, as formed 
under the States Reorganisation Act, 1956; and 
(ii) in relation to the PEPSU Road Transport Corpora- 10 
tion, shall mean the Government of the State of Punjab, as 
formed under the provisions of the States Reorganisation 
Act, 1956. ' 
(2) On receipt of any sUch scheme, the Central Govern-
ment may, after consultation with the State Governments IS 
concerned, approve the scheme with or without modifications 
and for the purpose of giving effect to the approved scheme, the 
Central Government may, from time to time, make such order 
in relation thereto as it thinks fit and every order so made shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything contained in this Act. 20 
(3) Any order made under sub-section (2) may provide 
for all or any of the following matters. namely:-
.(a) the dissolution of the Corporation. notwithstanding 
anything contained in section 39; 
(b) the reconstitution or reorganisation, in any manner 2S 
whatsoever, of the Corporation including the establish-
ment, where necessary, of more than one Corporation in 
any State; 
(c) the amalgamation of two or more Corporations, or 
of one Corporation with any other body corporate 'or a 30 
commercial undertaking of any other State Government; 
(d) the extension of the area for which the Corpora-
tion is established, or the exclusion of any area therefrom; 
(e) the transfer, in whole or in part, of the assets, 
rights and liabilities of the Corporation ipcluding the 3S 
transfer ofi>any licences or permits granted to the Corpora-
tion, to any other Corporation,' body corporate or a com-
mercial undertaking of any other State Government, and 
tb~ terms and conditions of such transfer; 

51 of 1956. 
3 
(f) the transfer or re-employment of any workmen of 
the COIporationto, or by, any such transferee, aLd, subject 
to the provisions of section 111 of the States Reorganisa-
tion Act, 1956, the terms and conditions of service appli-
cable to such workmen after such transfer or re-employ-
ment; 
(g) such incidental, consequential and supplemental 
matters as may be necessary to give effect to the approved 
scheme. 
10 (4) Where an order is made under this section transfer-
ring the assets, rights and liabilities of any Corporation, then, 
by virtue of that order, such assets, rights and liabilities of the 
Corporation shall vest in, and be the assets, rights and inabilities 
of,. the transferee." 
I, 3. (1) The Road Transport Corporations (Amendment) 
nance, 1956, is hereby repealed. 
Ordi- Repeal of 
Ordinance 
8 of 1956. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
taken in the exercise of any powers conferred by or under the said 
Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken in the 
20 exercise of the powers conferred by or under this Act as if this Act 
were in force on the date on which such thing was done or action 
was taken. 

STATEMENT OF OBJEC'l'S AND REASONS , 
Under the Road Transport Corporations Act, 1950, some of the 
State Governments have established road transport corporations 
for their States with a view to provide an efficient and economical 
system of road transport service therein. On account of the 
territorial changes brought about by the re-organisation of States, 
some of the road transport corporations have to function in more . l 
than one State and some States have more than one corporation 
functioning within their jurisdiction. Although under section 109 
of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, road transport corporations 
can function and operate with effect from the 1st November, 1956, 
in those areas in which they were functioning and operating 
immediately before that day; it was thought that administrative 
difficulties might arise if a road transport corporation were to 
function in areas included in another State or if there were more 
than one such corporation functioning within the same State. In 
order to overcome these difficulties, it was considered necessary to 
take immediate steps for the re-constitution and· re-organisation of 
the existing road transport corporations of States in accordance 
with the scheme of re-organisation of States. An Ordinance 
amending the Road Transport Corporations Act, 1950, for the 
purpos~ was, therefore, promulgated on 1st November, 1956. 
This Bill merely seeks to replace the Ordinance by an Act of 
Parliament. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 20th November l 1956. LAL BAHADUR. 

LOK sABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Road Transpon CorporatiOll5 
Act, 19SG. 
(Shri Lal Bahatlur, Minister of Railways trnd rrans;ort) 