LOK SUHlt. 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
T HS mON ORE MINES IABOUR WELFARE CRSS (AMENDHENT) 
BILL. 1967 
(TQ be/As intrqg~ced Y!. Lok Sabh&!) 
1 • Page 1. in the narginal heading to olause 2,-
t.2L. "section" .r.ellA. "section 1. n 
2. Page 2, line '26,-
after "or" ~ 
3. Bage 3. line 11,-
Ii I' • 
after" prescribed" insert 
"by rules made Wlder this Act" 
4. Page 3. line 15,-
afte.r "prescribed" insert -
"by rules made under this ~ctlf 
5. Page 4. line 14,-
for "compliment" ~ "complement" 
-
NEt,y DELHI. 
__ ~_13. 1967 
Jyaistha 23, 1889 r~aka·} 

!l8 of 1961. 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABUA ON 
1 9 JUN 19~7 
8111 No. 75 of 1967 
THE IRON ORE MINES LABOUR WELFARE CESS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1967 
A 
SILL 
further to amend the Iron Ore Mines Labour Welfare Cess Act, 1961. 
BE it enacted by ParliameIlit in the Eighteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Iron Ore Mines Labour WeIrare Short ti 
Cess (Amendment) Act, 1967. and COl' 
mencc_ 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Gov~m- ment. 
meIlit may, by notification in the Offieid Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In section 1 of the Iron Ore Mines Labour Welfare Cess Act, Amend 
1961 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for suD-section ment of 
(2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, na.melJ:.- section· 
10 "(2) 1.t extends to the whole of India!' 

Insertion 3. After section 1 of the principal Act, the following section 
of nt~W 1A shan be inserted, nam.ely:-sec Ion • 
Defini-
tions. 
:' ~ 
'1A. In tlj~ AOt, unless the context. otherwise requires,-
(a) "export" means taking out of India to a place out-
ltide India; 
(b) "factory" and "occupier" have the meanings res-
pectively assigned to them in clauses (m) and (n) of sec-
tion 2 of the Factories Act, 1948; 
(c) "metallurgical factory" means-
s 
(i) a factory in which iron or steel is being pro- 10 
ceased or manufactured; 
(ii) any other factory, being a factory in which iron 
ore is used for any purpose, which the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare to be a metallurgical factory for the purpose~ IS 
of this Act; 
(d) "owner" has the meaning assigned to it in clause 
(1) of section 2 of the Mines Act, 1952.'. 
Substitu- 4. For section 2 of the principaJ Act, the following sections shall 
tion of be substituted, namely: - 20 
new sec_ 
tions for 
section 2. 
Levy and 
collection 
of cess on 
iron ore. 
"2 With effect from such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall 
be levied and collected as a cess for the purposes of this Act 
on all iron ore produc.ed in any mine-
(a) a duty of customs, where such iron ore is exported; 2S 
~ I 
(b) a duty of excise', where such iron ore is sold or 
otherwise disposed of to the occupier of any metallurgical 
factory or is used by the owner of the mine for any purpose, 
at SICh rate not exceeding fifty paise per metric torme of iron 3° 
ore u·tbe.CeDtral: Government may, from time to time, fix by 
notification in the Official Gazette. 
63 of 1948. 
35 of 1952. 

3 
2A. (1) Every duty of customs leviable under this Act on any Payment 
iron ore shaD be .payable to the Central Government by the per- of duty of 
son by whom the iron ore is exported. cusdtomd tS 
, ~ uy 
(2) Every duty of excise leviable under this Act on any irOD of excise. 
S ore shall be payable-
(a) to the oecupier of theblettlUurgicai factory, by the 
person by whom such iron ore is sold or otherwise disposed 
of to such occupier; 
(b) to the Central Government, by the owner of the mine 
10 where the iron ore is USl.-d by 8ui:h owner for any purpose, 
within such period as may be prescribed. 
(3) All amounts received by the occupier of any metaUurgi-
cal factory under' clouse (a) of sub-section (2) JlhaU be paid by-
him to the Central Government within such period as may be 
I S prescribed.". 
5. In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-scction (2) , after Amcnd-
clause (a), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely: _ mcnt of section 8. 
"(a·a) the period within whieh the person sellin.g or other-
wise disposing of the iron arc shall pay the duty of excise to 
.20 the occupier of the metallurgical factory; 
(aaa) the peri.od within which the owner of the mine 
shall pay the duty of excise to' the Central Government; 
(aaaa) the period witthin which the occupier of the metallur-
gical factory shall pay to the Central Government the duty of 
2S excise received by him;". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Section 2 of the Iron Ore Mines Labour Welfare Cess Act, 1961, 
provides for the levy of a cess, on all iron ore produced in any mine, 
alt such rate not exceeding fifty paise per metric tonne as the 
Central Government may from time to time fix by notification in 
the Officia'l Gazette. At prese'nt, the rate of cess thus levied is 
twenty-five paise per metric tonne. The proceeds of the cess levied 
and collected, reduced by the cost of collection, are being utilised 
to promote the welfare of labour employed in the iron ore mining 
industry. For collection of the cess, eight Cess Commissioners 
have been appointed in the impOrtant iTon ore producing States. 
The cost of machinery for collection comes to about four to five 
per cent. of the cess collected. This cost of collection is Uke'ly 
to he higher when the full compliment of staff necessary for check-
inf!, inspection, supervision and accounting is appointed. In order 
to reduce the expenditure towards the cost of collection, it is pro-
pos:'d to amend the Act so as to collect the cess as a duty of cus-
t()rr.~ i'n respect of iron ore which is exported out of India and as a 
duty of excise in respect of imn ore which is sold or otherwise dis-
posed of by the owners of mines to steel plants and other units 
producing- pig iron, etc. The cess as duty of customs will be col-
lected through the agency of the Customs Department (as is being 
do'nf' in the case of cess on mica) and as duty of excise will be 
colleded through the agency of the steel plants, etc., at the time 
of receipt of the despatches by them. A saving of apprOXimately 
two lakhs of rupees is expected from this change in the mode of 
collection of cess. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above object. 
NEW DELHI; JAISUKHLAL HATH!. 
The 30th May, 1967. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDID4 
Clause 4 of the BiN seeks to substitute section 2 of the Iron OJ 
Mines La·bour Welfare Cess Act, 1961, which provides for the Ie, 
of a cess at such rate not exceeding 50 paise per metric tonne I 
iron ore produced, as the Central (;<)vemment may fix from tin 
to time. The rate of cess in the new section 2 will be the san 
though there will be change in the mode of its collection. 
2. Th'~ present method of levy of cess is on production. T} 
new section 2 envisages the cess to be levied as duty of custon 
on exports and as duty of excise on all iron ore despatched to th 
Steel Plants and Units producing pig iron or otherwise consumir 
iron ore. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) ha~ 
agreed to charge 112 per cent. of the co1lections as administrath 
charges to cover the cost of collection. Although no clause of n 
Bill, when enacted" directly involves ex.penditure from the Cor 
soIidated Fund of India, assuming that similar 1/2 per cent. ~ 
"collecting agencies' charges" may become payable to Iron an 
Steel Factories and other units producing Pig IrO'n and taking th 
figures of 10 million tonnes on exports (Revised figure of 1964) an 
11' 29 million tonnes on domestic consumption, the total amour, 
payable as collection charges will be Rs. 12,500 plus Rs. 14,410 i.e 
Rs. 26,910 say Rs. 30,000 in a calendar year or in a financial yeal 
The change in the mode of cdUection will entail a saving of apprc 
ximately two lakhs of rupees in the cost of machinery of collectio 
of cess . 
......... • lr ...... 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5 of the Bill which seeks to amend election 8 of the Iron 
Ore Mines Labour Welfare Cess Act, 1961, empowers the Central 
Government to make rules with respect to the periods within which 
the persons liable to pay the duty of excise shall pay the same. 
This is a matter of detail and the delegation of legislative power 
is thus of a norma1 character. 
6 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE IRON ORE MINES LABOUR WELFARE CESS ACT, 1961 
(58 OF 1961) 
'" '" '" '" '" • 
Short title, 
extent and 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu com. 
1./ (1) '" • • '" '" • 
and Kashmir. menee. 
ment. 
'" '" • '" '" '" 
2. With effect from such date as the Central Government may, Levy and 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be levied collection 
and collected, as a cess for the purposes of this Act on all iron ore ~)f cess on 
produced in any mine, a duty of excise at such rate not exceeding lron ore. 
fifty naye paise per metric tonne of iron ore as the Ce'ntral Gov-
ernment may, from time to time, fix by notification in the Oftlcial 
Gazette. 
'" '" '" '" '" '" 
8. (1) '" '" '" '" '" '" 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of 
the foregoing power, such rules ~ provide for-
(a) the assessment and collection of a. cess levied under 
this Act; 
• • • • '" 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
7 - -.... - .. _. -~ ---" 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
funher to amend the Iron Ore Mines Labour Welfare Cess 
Act, 1961. 
(Shri Jai Sukh Lal Hathi, 
Minister of Labour (9)> 
Rehabilitation-) 