I 
\ 
I, 
, 
10 
IS 
BlU N.. 'l6 .f 1,1. 
,rHE SMUGGLERS AND FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANIPULATORS 
(FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY) AMENDMENT BILL, 1879 
A 
BILL 
I 
to amend the Smugglers and FOreign Exchange Manipulator, 
(Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Smugglen and ForeiID. ~ 
M.anipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Amendment Act, 1979., 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In section 12 of the Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulaton 
(Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1978 (hereinafter referred to .. the 
principal Act),-
..... 
(a) after 8ub-leGtion (6), the following lub-lection.hall be 
inserted, namely:-
II (6A, Notwithstanding anything contained in aub-lecUon 
(6), where the Chairman considers it necessary 10 to do for the 
expeditious disposal of appeals under this section, he may 
constitute a Bench of two members and a Bench 10 c:onstituted 
may exercise and discharge the powers and functiON of the 
Appellate Tribunal: 
-'-
Short 
title 
~-eom-
mIbC!t-
ment. 
Amend· 
...... , of 
IeCUaa 
12 of 
Act II 
ot It7e. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
26. 
Provided that if the members of a Bench so constituted 
differ on any point or points, they shall state the point of 
points on which they difter and refer the same to a third mem-
ber (to be specified by the Chairman) for hearing on such point 
or points and such point or points shall be decided according to 5 
the opinion of that member."; . 
(b) after sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(8) On application to the Appellate Tribunal and on pay-
ment of the prescribed fee, the Tribunal may allow a party to 10 
any appeal or any person authorised in this behalf by such party 
to inspect at any time during offic~ hours, any relevant records 
"and registers of the Tribunal and obtain a certified copy of any 
part thereof,". 
3. In section 26 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2);, after clause j Sr 
(0), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(00) the fees which shall be paid for the inspection of the 
records and registers of the Appellate Tribunal or for obtaining a 
certified copy of any part thereof under sub-section (8) of section 
Ir'" . . " H., 
, " l' 
20 

I' S~tion (6) of 'sectiDil12' 1)f the Smugglers and Foreiglf' BxtIlange 
'Manipulaten' '(Farfeiture- 'fJI' PPope~y) Act,l9T8 pI'ovtdes,thlitthetJtafr-
,man-of tile' AppeUate'Tribunal ,under tklat section' may cOnstitute Beb1ehIes 
cOl'urh;tRtg of three"Members_ he'liringappeats ut\der ·th'e 'Act;· As 
only,ai,three-memberTribunal' has' beenCO'ftlltftotedim4er ttYe _tldn. 
in 1the"6aY.L1ooday,'working of the Trfbunarlft"hB!beeti foundtM1!\lfhen 
w;'member avaib·himself ofileave'tm' groul'ld ~frtlln_ ete.; the" 1'11-
b\.m.al is notable' to functien. " It. is,therefol'e; pMpbled:' to' aiHRd tWis 
section to provide for constitution of Benches consisttnr' ot't'wtJ'DltiiIl-
bers and to make a suitable provision for resolving dift'erences which 
may occur on any point or points between such members while dis-
pl)sing of an appeal. 
2. It is also proposed to avail of the present opportunity to imple-
ment the assurance given to the Lok Sabha Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation [vide Tenth Report of the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation (Sixth Lok Sabha) pages 14 to 15] to the effect that the 
rule-making provision in the Act would be suitably amplified so as to, 
spell out expressly that the power thereunder to make nlles includes 
tht' power to provide for fees for the inspection of records and the 
registers of the Appellate Tribunal or for ob'taining certified copies of 
any part thereof. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; ZULFIQUARUlLA. 
The 9th May, 1979. 

€l ..... 3 af the Bill Heka to amend 8ub~tion (2) of MCticm 28 of 
the· Smugglers and Foreian Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of Pro-
pany) Act, 1976 to in8ert a new clause (a8) therein. The Dew clause 
ia tor providing that rules may be made under the aectloD with reapect 
to the .... which shall be paid for the inspection of the reeords and 
the reptera of tbe Appellate Tribunal or for obtaining a cert1fted copy 
of any part ~reof under lub-eection (8) of aection 12. Thia pertains 
to a matter of detail. Heace the delegation of legislative power iJ of a 
AQfmal ch~actel'. 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE SMUGGLERS AND FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANIPULATORS 
(FORFEITURE OF PRoPERTY) Acr, 1976 
(13 OJ' 1978) 
• • • • • 
12. (1) • • • • • 
(6) The powers and functions of the Appellate Tribunal may be 
exercised and dischargec by Benches consisting of three members and 
constituted by the Chairman of the Appellate TribunaL 
(7). The Appellate Tribunal may regulate its own procedure. 
• • • • • 
26. (Jt) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, ·namely:-
(a) the terms and conditions of sefVic~, 0} ... the C9~ and 
othermen'tbers of the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (S) of 
section 12; . ·'1 ' 
• • • 
, 
Consti-
tution 
of Appel-
late Tri-
bunal. 
Power 
to make 
rules. 

LOK SABHA 
-
A 
BILL 
c:tt; rj_Ci' ~1l.SmuI81.r.and Foreign Exchange Maoipulatcq 
~For(~itur~ of Propertr) Act, 19'1~. 
(Shf'i ZulfiqU4",Ua, 
Minister of StAt. i~ t~ ~i~tmv 
f>t nftClMe·l 