WK SABHA 
00 RRIGENDi. 
to 
THE CRIMINAL AND EIEaT ION LlWS AMSNDMENr BILL, 1968 
(to_b!ll8_int~~U.9.es! i,n_IQk_S,ibbA) 
1. Page 2, l~e 26,-
~fter "containing" 
2. Page 3, line 4,-
for " In" re~ "in" 
3. Page 6, line 25,-
4. Page 7, line 3 from bottom,-
" " , 
!g,£ "(Amendment)" read "Amendment" 
5. Page 9,'line 26,-
~ "with" 
6. Page 9, line 27,-
.52..m!1 "w i th" 
7. Page 12, line 5,-
m "However" read "Whoever" 
Bhadra 4, 18 0 (Saka) 

Ie 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SASHA OK 
21 AUG 1968 
IR ".75 ot INa 
THE CRIMINAL J\)lD ELECTION :LA:WS 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1968 
A 
Jm.L 
f1t+the, to' amenclthe htclian pencil Code. the Code of C,·tmina.l Pro. 
fJidl.We. 18Mtl1td tJte ReyYreB'entatttm Of the People Act. 1851 cmcI 
t6' ~ 4§tti1l:Bt prinftng and pulllicafion of cemi,ift of)j..:-
ffeINdIle If'Itmfm-s. 
13'&' it -enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the 
Repu;blic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Criminal and E1eetion Laws Amend- Short title. 
in~l1t Act, r968. 
J. 1ft the bldian Penal Code ~hereMafter referred to as the Penal SuMdCl'tion 
CdlCie) .. tier semon lSSA, the f6U~ tedton iht11 I5Ie *.bttitutecl, o! ~'--llOi'I lor 
name)y: - t 'l'. MCUoo. - '. , ISlA. 
"l53A. (1) Whoever- Pl'ODlOt.t.DJ 
(a) by words, either spoken or written, or by mills or ~llY it-
by vtsibte representations or otherwise, pPOmotes, or 

ditferent 
groups on 
grounds of 
religion, 
race, lan-
guage, place 
of birth, 
residence, 
etc., and 
doing acts 
prejudicial 
to mainte-
nance of 
harmony. 
Offence 
committed 
in place of 
worship, 
etc. 
Amendment 
of section 
so~. 
Statements 
creating or 
promoting 
enmity, 
hatred or 
ill-will 
between 
dasses. 
Offence 
under sub-
section (.3) 
committed 
tn plaee of 
worshIP. 
etc. 
..... 2 
attempts to promote, on grounds of religion, race, place ot 
birth, residence, language, caste or community or any other 
ground wha L:;cJC ,eT, disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred 
or ill-will betwt. en different religious, radal, language or 
regional groups or castes or communities, or 5 
(b) commits any act :which is prejudicial 'to the main-
tenance of harmony between different religious, racial, lan-
guage or regional groups, or castes, or communities, and 
which disturbs or is likely to disturb the public tranquillity, 
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to.co 
three years, or with fine, or with both. 
(2) Whoever commits an offence specified in sub-section (1) 
in any place of worship or in any assembly engaged in the per-
formance of religious worship or religious ceremonies, shall be 
punished with imprisonment which shall not be less than two 
years but which may extend to five years and shall also be IS 
liable to fine.". 
3. Section 505 of the Penal Code shall be re-numbered as sub-sec-
tion (1) of that section, and-
(i) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, in the Exception, ),0 
for the words "of this section", the words "of this 8ub-section" 
shall be substituted; 
" (to after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following 
sub-sections shall be inserted, namely: - . 
"(2) Whoever makes, publishes or circulates any state- J.5 
ment or report containing, rumour or alarming news with 
intent to create or promQ~, or which is likely to create or 
promote, on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, resi-
dence"language, caste or commWlity or any other il'oWld 
" . whatsoever, feelings of enmity. hatred or ill .. will between 
.", ; different religious, racial, language or regional groups, or,;o 
castes or communities, shall be pWlished with imprison .. 
· ment which may extend to three years, or with fln'e, or with 
both. 
(3) Whoever commits an offence specified in sub-sec-
tion (2) in any place of worship or in any assembly' engaged 3S 
· ~ the performance of religiOUS worship or religious cere-
·moni~, shall be pWlished with imprisonment which shall 
· not be less than two" years but which may extend to five 
years and shall also be liable to fine.". 
Amendment 
of Act, or C' 
1898• 
4. In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898,-
· (a) in section 196, for the words lithe State Government a). 
8omeoft\cer empowered 'by the State Government in this ." 

5 
10 
15 
20 
3 !1 
behalf", the' words "the State Government or District MagiF 
trate or such other offtcer as may be empowered by the State 
Government in this behalf" shall be substituted; , ,. 
(b) In Schedule 11,-
(i) for the entries in columns 1 to 8 relating'tO, section 
153A, the following entries shall be substituted" n~~ly:-
2 3 4 s 6 7 8 
.. IS3A(I) Promoting 
enmity 
between 
classes • ., 
May 
arrest 
without 
. warrant. 
Warrant Not 
bailable.' 
Ditto Imprison- Prelidrl'lcy 
ment of Magistrate 
either' or 
descrtp- Magistrate 
tionfoa". of the 
IS3A(z) 
,. 
.,; r I 
Promoting 
enmity 
between 
classe!! in 
"lace of 
worship, 
etc. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto 
three first 
years-, ". c1ass.'l 
or fine, 
or both. 
Ditto Imprison- Ditto."; 
'meDt of ' 
,either,'· . ,',. 
descrip- • 
". tion t"6tI' " 
, ~~nle:lo' . : 
yean but 
m.y.ex~ ". r ., 
,~:ed~rI' )' .r. ~ 
andtinllJ: . (I:; , '.' 
. : \' 
. ,(ii) for the entry in column 3 relating to section -IN, 
the entry "shall not arrest without warrant" shall be subs.-, 
tituted; 
. " -(iii) for .the entries in columns 1 to 8 relating to sectiOn, 
. 50S. the following entries shall be substituted, namely:- . 
.\ . 
----r---.--- --- ----------, ---~-'-----' - -.-.-.---.--- ~. 
2 3 5 6 7 8 
-,_.,_,....,._. __ ~' .- .. -.~--.-----.--.------ .---.------- .. -- , ,I 
3S .. 5<?S(I) False Ditto 
statement,' 
rumOUl',' 
. Ditto Not 
bailable. 
Not ImpriaOl,l-ProsidOQl:Y, 
com- ment of M8gj8trat~ 
~, . ...' 
~. ; 
" etc., with 
intent to 
caus~ 
mutiny or 
offence 
~ against the~ 
public 
peace. 
pound- eitberor 
,able deacrip- ~~e 
tion for of the first 
tbree .·1 ',daIS. 
years,"or' 
fine, or ' both. .. 
.')., .. , 
! · .. ·.1· 

Amtadnaent 
of Iec:tklft 
t. 
------_._ .. _----_. __ .. _--_._----- .... _ .. __ ._--
3 
. _----_.- ------- ... _----_ ... ----
PalH May Ditto 
,tatantat, arrest 
15 7 
------_ .. _---- .--_ .... _-_ . 
Ditto Ditto Imprison- Ditto 
ment of 
either nunour, without 
etc., with warrant. 
inteDt to 
descrip- S 
tion for 
create~-
mit,. 
hatied Or 
ill-wiD 
between 
dilrerent 
cJ .. ea. 
three 
yean. or 
fine, or 
both. 10 
Fal.. Ditto Ditto 
statement, 
Imprison- Ditto."; 
ment of IS 
Ditto Ditto 
nunour, 
etc., mad. 
in placa 
of wonhi~. 
~tc .• with 
InteGt to 
create en-
mity, 
hatred or 
in-will. . 
. either 
description 
for not 
less than 
two yean 
but I11Q' 
fextend to 
five years, 
and fine. 
20 
2S 
(tv) for the entries in columns 3 and 7 relating to sec-
tion 50S as applicable to "Criminal intimidation" (first para-
graph), th~ entries "shall not arrest without warrant" and. 
"imprillOnment of either description for 2 years, or fine, or 
both" shall, respectively, be substituted. 30 
I. In section 8 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, in .. 3 of J9S I • 
Bub-section (1), for the words, figures and letters "section 171E or 
.action 171,. of the Indian Penal Code", the words, figures and 
letters llsection 153A or section 171E or section 171F or sub-section 
(2) or IUb-lection (3) of section &05 of the Indian Penal Code" sha1l3,S 
be substituted. 
Power to t. (n The Central Government or a State Government or any 
=:::pre-! authority so authorised by the Central Government in this behalf, if 
publiClitiona. satisfied that such action is nece"JSary for the purpose of preventing 
or combRting any activity prejudicial to the maintenance of com- 40 
munal harmony and affecting or likely to affect public order, may, 
by order In writing addressed to the printer, publisher or editor, 
pre1llbtt th.' prmting or publication of any document or any class of 
GOOWMl'lU of _,. matier relating to a particular subjeet or class of 
~ for a specified period or in a particular issue or issues of a 45 
l'1ewlptlper er periodical: 
Provided that no such order shall remain in force lor more tho 
twe •• fttRS frOM the making thereof: 

Provided further that the person against whom the order haa 
been made may, within ten days of the communication of die order, 
make a representation,-
(i) to the Central Government, where luch order Is made 
5 by the Central Government or any authority authorised by it; 
and 
(ii) to the State Government, where such order is made by 
the State Government, 
::Jnd the Central Government or the State Government, as the case 
10 may be, may, after consultation with a Committee, to be known as 
Press Consultative Committee, dispose of the matter, modifying, 
confirming or rescinding the order. 
(2) In the event of disobedience of an order made under sub-
section (1). the Central Government or the State Government or 
IS the authority issuing the order, as the case may be, may, without 
prejudice to any other penalty to which the person guilty of the dis-
obedience is liable under this Act or under any other law for the 
time being in force, order the seizure of copies of the publication 
made in violation of an order made under sub-section (1), and of 
20 any printing press or other instrument or apparatus used in the 
publication. 
7. Whoever contravenes, disobeys or neglects to comply with any Penalty. 
order made under section 6 of this Act, shall, on conviction, be puni-
shed with imprisonment of either description which may extend 
25 to one year, or with fine up to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
8. (1) A Press Consultative Committee referred to In the se('ond Compo~ition 
proviso to sub-section (1) ot section 6, shall consist of such number cro~~~lf:ti~e 
of persons, being editors, publishers anel joumallsts, as may be Committee. 
'bed bid d thO _....... and rules In presen y ru es rna e un er IS ~nlon. respect 
30 (2) The Central Govemment may make rules for the constitution 
of Press Consultative Committees, the term of oftlce of the members 
of such Committees, the allowances, It any, to be paId to such 
memben for attenclJng the meetings of the Committee and the 
manner of ftJUng casual vacancies among them. and Inr all matters 
35 eonnected therewith or incideatal thereto. 
ther~f. 

6 
(3) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power under sub-section (2), such rules may provide for aU-
or any of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the number of persons who may be appointed as members 
of a Press Consultative Committee and the class or category of 5 
persons from whom .iuch members are to be appointed;' 
(b) the authority or authorities which may make such 
appointments; 
(c) the procedure to be followed by the Central Government 
or the State Government, as the case may be, in consulting the 10 
Press Consultative Committee; 
(d) the procedure to be followed by the Press Consultative, 
Committee; 
(e) any other matter for which rules have to be made for 
enabling the Press Consultative Committee to function. IS 
(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each HouSe of Parliament while it. is in 
session for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in 
one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of 
the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, .20 
both Houses agree in makiag any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thez:e-
after have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect as the 
caSe may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity or anything previously done 25 
under that rule. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Pursuant to the acceptance by the Government of the recommenda-
tions of the National Integration Council to prevent and remove 
communal and regional tensions, it is proposed to amend sections 
153A and 505 IPC and Schedule II of the Code of Criminal Procedure 
with a view to amplifying the scope of these sections, providing 
enhanced punishment for offences under these sections committed in 
a place of worship, and making offences under sections 153A IPC and 
505 IPC (only offences relating to enmity or hatred between commu-
nities, etc.) cognizable. 
2. A provision is also being made whereby offences under section 
153A and provision made in the Bill under section 505 !PC would 
constitute a disqualification under section 8 of the Representation of 
the People Act, 1951. 
3. The National Integration Council had also recommended that 
powers should be taken to prevent the publication of alarming, incor-
rect or provocative news or views likely to promote communal ill-will 
or hatred or to disturb communal harmony, and had suggested that this 
may be done on the lines of provisions of section 2 of the Punjab 
Special Powers (Press) Act, 1956. A provision has accordingly been 
made in this Bill to prohibit the printing or publication of any matter 
fora specified period not exceeding two months if the Central Govern-
ment or the State Government is satisfied that such action is 
necessary in the interest of maintenance of communal harmony. 
NEW DELw; Y. B. CHAVAN. 
The 30th July. 1968. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 221 15 I 68-Poll.l (A) , dated the 21st August 1968, 
from Shri Y. B. Chavan, Minister of Home Affairs to the Secretary, 
Lok Sabha]. 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
.... riminal and Election Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1968, recommends 
)nsideration of the Bill in the Lok Sabha under article 117 (3) of 
r'le Constitution of India. 

NO~$ on clauih 
Clause 2.··-Promotine enmity between different groups on grounds 
of religion, race, language, etc., is made an offence un'der section 
15lA of the Indian Penal Code. It is proposed to include therein 
promoting enmity between different groups on grounds, such as, 
place of birth, or residence as well. It is also proposed to widen the 
scope of the provision so as to make promotion of disharmony or 
feelings of ill-will an offence punishable thereunder. Clause (b) of 
the said S€ction provides for the punishment for doing acts prejudicial 
to the maintenance of harmony between different groups. That 
provision is also proposed to be widened so as to include acts 
prejudiCial to the maintenance of harmony between difterent 
regional groups as well. I t is also proposed to provide for enhan<:ed 
punishment and a minimum punishment for any such offence com-
mitted in place of worship. The section is heini iubstituted by this 
claUSe to achieve the above purpose. 
Clause 3.--Section 505 of the Indian Penal Code penalises the mak-
ing, publishing or circulation of any statement, rumour Or report whith 
is conducive to public mischief, The section does not deal specifically 
with rumours or alarming news which may create tension or· ill-will 
between different communities so long as they are not intended 
or likely to incite commission of an offence. New sub-osection (2) 
which is being inserted is intended to widen the scope of the section 
so as to include such rumours or alarming news with intent to 
create or promote, on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, resi-
dence, language, caste or community or any other ground whatso-
ever, feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-will between different religiOUS, 
racial, langua.ge or regional groups or castes or communities, as well. 
It is also proposed to provide for enhanced punishment and a 
minimum punishment for any such offence committed in place of 
worship, Section 505 is being amended for this purpose. 
Clause 4.-Section 196 of the Criminal Proee<iure Code provides 
that certain offences including an offence under section 153A of the 
Indian Penal Code shall not be taken cognizance of by a Court 
unless upon a complaint made by order of, or under authority from 
the State Government or some officer empowered by the State 
Government in this behalf. It is proposed to amend 151.e section 10 
as to empower the District Magistrate to a'U~rise prosecution. 
Schedule II of the Crimine-l Procedure Code· is .. being amended 
with a view to make oftenees under section 1~3A and section 105 (iD. 
. ., 
I 
8 

9 
60 far as they relate to offences relating to enmity or hatred between 
communities, etc.) of the Indian Penal Code cognizable and nen-
bailable. 
Clause 5.--Section 8 of the Representation of the People Act 
deals with the disqualification of a candidate who is convicted for 
certain offences. The section is being amended so as to make a COll-
viction for an offence punishable under section 153A and section 505 
of the Indian Penal Code (offences relating to enmity or hatred bet-
ween communities, etc.) a disqualification. The scope of the dis-
qualification in relation to section 50S would extend also to convic-
tions under the above-mentioned sections for making objectionable 
use of places of worship as well. 
Clause 6.-This is intended to empower the Central Government 
or a State Government Or any authority authorised by the Central 
Government to curb publications prejudicial to the maintenance of 
communal harmony. It is intended to enable the concerned Govern-
ment to prohibit, for a period not exceeding two months, the printing 
or publication of alarming, incorrect or provocative news or of views 
likely to promote communal ill-feeling or hatred or to disturb 
cOnUnunal harmony. It also provides that the person so affected can 
make a representation within ten days to the Central or the State 
Government, as the case may be, and that Government after consul-
tation with Press Con9Ultative Committee dispose of the matter, 
modifying, confirming or reSCinding the order. 
Clause 7 is intended to provide for a penalty of imprison-
ment of either description which may extend to one year or with 
fine up to rupees one thousand or with both for an accused who 
contravenes, disobeys or neglects to comply with any order passed 
under clause 6. 
Clau3e 8 gives broadly the composition of the Press Consultative 
Committee which would consist of editors, publishers and journalists 
and empowers the Central Government to make rules for the con-
stitution of the Committees, the term of office of the members of 
the Committees, the allowances, if any, to be paid to such members 
for attending the meetings of the Committees and the manner of 
filling casual vacancies among them and for all matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. The rules would also specify the 
number of members of each Committee, the class or category of 
persons from whom such members are to be appointed, the autho-
rity or authorities which may make such appointment, the proce-
dure for consulting the Committee and the proc'edure to be follow-
ed by the Press Consultative Committee. It also provides for lay-
ing on the Table of each House of Parliament rules so made and the 
rules are subject to the approval of Parliament. . 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 6 of the Criminal and Election Laws Amendment Bill, 
10ea provides for consultatiop by the Gover~ment with the Press 
Consultattve Committet!. ClauseS of the Bill provides for the cons-
titution of such a Committee the member$ where ot will be ap-
pointed by th~ prescribed authority. 'nte e]!:penditure is pot ex-
pected to be large and is not ljkely to exceed Rs. 18,400 (recurrine) 
annually. ' 
10 

M£MORANt>uM REGARbUkl DttEGAfEb t.:rotSLATtON 
Clause 8erf the 9il1~wel'S the Cel'itrtl O~1tient to make 
rules for the constitution of tM PreIiIl Consultative Committee. 'l1le 
matters in respect of which rules may be made relate inter alia to 
the term of office of the members of the Committee, the allowances";' 
if any, to be paid to such members for attending the meetings ot the 
Committee and the manner of filling casual vacari~ amon'g them 
and for all matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The 
rnles would also specify fhe nUmDet- of members of tlle Committee, 
the dass 01' categOry of ~ons from whom such members are to 
be appointed, the authority or attthorities which may make such 
appointMent, the procedure for consulting the Comtnittee and' the 
procec!ut~ to be fonowed by the Press Consultative Committee. 
These matters pertaining to procedure or detail are necessary for 
the effective admimistration of the provisions ofthiJ Bill and &oS 
such the delegation of legislative power is of a ftOrmel cltuact.er. 
, 1 
1'1 

Promotin& 
enmity 
between 
di1fcrent 
groups on 
grounds of 
religion, 
race, lan-
guage, etc., 
and doing 
acts pre-
judicial to 
maintenance 
of harmony. 
Statements 
conducing 
to public 
mischief. 
• 
ANNEXURE 
ErntACTS PROM THE INDIAN PUAL CoDE, 1860 
(46 OF 1860) 
• • 
153A. However-
• 
(a) by words, either spoken or, written, or by signs or by 
visible representationS or otherwise, prom()tes, or attempts to 
promote, on grounds of religion, race, langUage, cast~or commu-
nity or any other ground whatsoever, feelings of enmity or hat-
red between different religious, racial or language groups or 
castes· or communities, or 
(b) commits any act which is prejudicial to the maintenance 
. of harmony between difterent religious, racial or language 
groups or castes or communities and which disturbs or is likely 
to disturb the public tranquillity, 
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend· to three 
years, or with fine, or with both . 
• • • • • 
505. Whoever makes, publishes or circulates any statement, 
rumour or report,-
(a) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, any 
officer, soldier, sailor or airman in the Army, Navy or Air Force 
of India to mutiny or otherwise disregard or fail in his duty as 
such; or 
(b) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, fear or 
alarm to the public or to any section of the public whereby any 
person may be induced to commit an offence against the State 
or against the public tranquillity; or 
(c) with intent to incite, or which is likely to incite, any 
class or community of persons to commit any offence against 
any other class or community, 
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
12 

4~ of 1860. 
la 
~.x~eptj.ort.-It does not amount. to . .-n o1fence, withinth. meaning 
of this section, when the person making, publishing or circulating any 
such statement, rumour or report, has reasonable grounds for be-
lieving that such statement, rumour or report is true and makes, pub-
lishes, or circulates it without any such intent as aforesaid . 
• • • • 
ExRTACTS FROM nu: CODB or CRIMINAL PROCJ:DUD, 1898 
(501' 1898) 
'" '" • '" 
118. No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable prosecution 
under Chapter VI or IXA of the Indian Penal Code (except section for oft'eDCetIh .. . galnet t c 127 and section 171F, so far as It relates to the offence of personation, State. 
or punishable under section l08A, or section 153A, or section 294A, 
or section 295A, or section 505 of the same Code, unless upon com-
plajnt made by order of, or under authority from the State Govern-
nient or .ome officer empowered by the State Government in thi. 
behalf. 
'" '" '" • 
.,' 
SCHEDULE II 
TABULAR STATEMENT OF OFFENCES 
EXPLAKATOIlY NOTE.-The entries in the second and seventh 
columns of this Schedule, headed respectively "Offence" ~d "Punish-
ment under the Indian Penal Code", are not intended .. definitions 
of the offences and punishments described in the several correspond-
ing sections of the Indian Penal Code. or even abstracts of those 
sections, but merely as references to tile subject of th'e section, the 
number of which is given in the first column. 
. The third column of this Schedule applies also to the police in 
the· towns of Calcutta and Bombay. 
'" • • • • 

14 
----- ----
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
Section Oft'ence Whether Whether Whether Whether Punish- By what 
tbe aw~t bail- compound- ment Court 
police or a twa- able or .,Ie or under triable. 
may moDI shall not. not. the 
arroIt ordinarily Indian 
without itNe in Penal 
warrant tbe fint Code. 
or DOt. inuance. 
_.----------------------- .------~---.. ~~----- ---
<.' • • • • • 
IS3 A Promot- ShaUDOt Warrant. Nl1t ball- Ditto Imprison- Presidency 
~ en- anai" able. ment M~ate ty bet- witbout of or it-
ween warrant. either trate of 
clanes. desert the fint 
tiDIl ",'1. 
. J' ~ : 2 yearl, 
01' .... 
ortloth. 
" .. OWJlct ,or Ditt.Q SummODI .u.bIe: Dit*> JliIIe .r hetiden-
occupier 1,Q90 .cy M.,il-
eft.d, nsPRS. trite Or 
Datt"'- ~tI'.te 
iDa- of the 
......... :·'first or 
of riot, .. 8IJDII. 
etc. c1,,~s. 
• • • • • 
CHAPTU XXII-CiUMlNAL INTIMIDATION, INSULT AND AmfOYANCE 
• • • • • 
soS Fake Ditto Ditto Not bail- Not com- Ditto Presidency 
Blalt- , ... poundable . M1t:;!lte 
JDCDt, ru- or 11-
maur, etc., trate of 
circulatell. the first 
with d .... 
intent to 
'~ 
JWlriD¥ or, 
otrenc:e 
=lic peace. 
506 Criminal Diteo DhtAl ~ Comp...-o. Ditto ~ 
intinil- able. ~ute dation. or 1-
trate of 
llae fintor 
second 
dais • 
.. • • • • 

of 1860. 
I! 
EXTRAC'I' nOM THE R!PRI'SENTATION OF TJq PIloPLI: ACT, 1951 
(43 or 1951) 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER III 
DUlQUALInCATIONS 1"OR MUOERSHIP or PARLIA.MENT AND STATE 
LzGISLATUUS 
• • • • • 
8. (1) A person convicted of an offence punishable under section Di.qulllflc:a-
171E or section 171F of the Indian Penal Code, or under section 125 ~~ion 
or section 135 or clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 136 of this fe; certain 
Act shall be disqualified for a period of six years from the date of 0 enc.. 
such conviction. 
* * • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian: Penal Code, the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898 and the Representation of the People Act, 
195 I and to provide against printing and publication of 
certain objectionable matters. 
896~ 9nV L ~ 
(Shri Y. B. ChatJan, Minister of Home ADairs.) 