! 
Bill No. 75 of 1'!fA, 
THE FORWARD CONTRACTS (REGULATION) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LaIC SABHA 
ON 18m: NOVEMBER, 1960) 

Ie i-
i 
am!! •. Z5 01.1960 
THE FORWARD CONTRACfS (REGULATION) 
. AMENDMENT BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCIID IN LOK SABIlA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Forward Contra.cts (Regulation) Act, 1952 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleven~h Year. the RepubUc 
of India as foUows:-
1. This Act may be called the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Short dtle. 
Amendment Act, 1960. 
S 2. In sub-section (2) of section 1 of the Forward Contra,~ts (ltegu- AmeDdmaat 
7" of 19sa. lation) Act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the of aectioJl I. 
words "except the State of Jammu mad Kashmir" sballlo>e omktad. 
3. In section 2 of the principal Act,- Ameaf_t-*' o _uuDa. 
(a) for clause (j), the followine clauses shall be substituted, 
C 10 - narI)ely: - .. 
IS 
• (j) "recognised association" means an associatioD to 
which recognition for the time being has been granted by the 
Central Government under section 6 in respect of goods or 
classes of goods specified in such recognition; 
(jj) "ragistered as8OCiation" means an association to 
which for the time being a certificate of registratioD has been 
granted by the Commission under section 1~;'; 
(b) to clause (n). the words "and which is subject to such 
conditions relating to its transferabiUty as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this 
behalf" &ball be added at the eDd. 

,. In sub-section (2) of section 3 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words "hut not exceeding three", the words "but 
not exceedinK four" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substi-
tuted, namely:- S 
"Provided that the members to be so appointed shall be 
persons of ability, integrity and standing who have shown 
capacity in dealing with problems relating to commerce or 
commodity markets, or in administration or who have special 
knowledge or practical experience in any matter which ren- 10 
del'S them suitable for appointment on the Commission.". 
5. In section 4 of the principal Act,-
(a) for clause (b), the following chause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(b) to keep forward markets under observation and to IS 
take such action in relation to them as it may consider neces-
sary, in exercise of the powers assigned to it by or under this 
Act;"; 
(b) in clause (e), for the words "any recognised associa-
tion", the words "any recognised association or registered associa- 20 
tion or any member of such association" shall be substitulted. 
Imerdon of 8. In Chapter II of the prinCipal Act, after section 4, the following 
~ eecdoD section shall be inserted, namely:-
"4A. (1) The Commission shall, in the performance of its 
functions, have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of 3S 
Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit in respect of the follow- 5 of 1908. 
ing matters, namely:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any 
person and examining him on oath; 
('b) requiring the discovery and production of any doeu- 30 
ment; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof 
from any office; 
(e) any other matter which may be preacribed.. 35 

4' of 1860. 
.. 5 of 1860. 
0 5 of 1898. 
4' of 1860. 
o 
10 
IS 
3 
(2) The Commission shall have the power to require any 
person, subject to any privilege which may be claimed by that 
person'under any law for the time being in force, to furnish infor-
mation on such points or matters as, in the opinion of the 
Commission, may be useful for. or relevant to, any matter under 
the consideration of the Commission and any person so required 
shall be deemed to be legally bound to furnish such information 
within the meaning of section 176 of the Indian Penal Code. 
(3) The Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court and 
when any offence described in section 175, section 178, section 
179, section 180 or section 228 of the Indian Penal Code is com-
mitted in the view or presence of the Commission, the Commis-
sion may, after recording the facts constituting the offence and 
the statement of the accused as provided for iil the Code of Crimi-
nal Procedure, 1898, forward the case to a magistrate having 
jurisdiction to try the same and the magistrate to whom any such 
case is forwarded shall proceed to hear the complaint against the 
accused as if the case had been forwarded to him under section 
482 of the said Code. 
(4) Any proceeding before the Commission shall be- deemed 
to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sectiens 193 
and 228 of the Indian Penal Code. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of enforcing the attendance 
of witnesses, the local limits of the Commission's jurisdiction 
2S shall be the limits of the territory of India.". 
7. In section 8 of the principal Act,-
, 
(a) for sub-section (1), the following 
substituted, namely:-
sub-section soon be 
"(1) Every recognised association and every member 
thereof shall furnish to the. Central Government such periodi-
cal returns relating to its affairs, or the affairs of its members, 
or his affairs, as the case may be, as may be prescribed."; 
(b) in clause (a) of sub-section (2), after the words 
"recognised association", the words "or a member theri~o.f" and 
35 after the words "any of its members", the words "or his airairs, 
as the case may be," shall be inserted; 
(c) after sub-section (3), the following sub~ection shall be 
inserte.d, namely:-
" (4) Every recognised association arid every member 
thereof shall maintain such books of account and other docu-
AmendmeDt 
of BectiOD 8. 

4 
naentsas tl1e Commission may specify ancl tM books of ae-
oount and <other documents 80 spectfted shaH be preerved 
for fileR period not exceeding three years as the Commission 
may 'Ipecify and.hanbe subject to inspection at 8ll reason-
.able times by the Commission.". S 
A ..... 'iilent .. i'~ tRl~t.ion {1) ·of l8Ctiol'l 9 ·of the principal Aat, tile fol-
ofllCdoD 90 10wiDInb-aectiQD shall he aubstituted, namely:-
•• (1) Every recognised association shall furnish to the Com-
mission three copies of its annual report.". 
Amezadmlllt 9. 1n section 9A of the principal Act.-
of I8CtioD 9A. 10 
{C&) in IUb-eectJon (%)-
m clauses ~a). (Q)~ (c). (d) and (e) shall be re-iettered 
as cl~uJes (b), (c), (d), (e) and (g) respectivelJ ·aDd be-
fOl'e clause (b) as so re-lettered., the following clau.ae shall be, 
and shall be deemed always to have been, inserted, IS 
namely:-
"(4) the admDaion of • firm or a Hindu undivided 
family as a member;"; 
(ft) after dallle (e) as 80 re-lettered, the following 
clause shaD be insert~ namely: _ 20 
II (f) the retirement at every annual general meet-
ing of all directors or such n1lllnber or proportion of their 
total number as may be ~Uied in the rules;"; 
(iii) in clause (g) as so re-Iettered, for the expression 
"clauses (a), (b), (e) and (d)", the expreS$~ "clauses (a) ~S 
to (f)" shall be substituted: 
(~) 1ft lUb-seetion (2), for the ~ession "clauses (a) to 
(~", the expression "clauses (a) to (g) If shall be substituted j 
(~) iD.lU~ion (3), tor the exprelJ8iol'l "cla·uses (a) to 
(e)", tAe expr_on uclausel (rb) to (e) and (g)" shall be sub- 30 
IiitvtecL 
AmIDdmeat 10. For su'b-section (3) of section 10 of the principal Act, the fol-
of __ JoP lowing sub-aeet1Oft shall be substituted, namely:-
•• (3) Where, in pursuance of sub-section (2), any rules have 
been D\de or amencled, the nJlft 50 made or amended shall be 3S 
p~ ~ t.lw a...tte of lD«h. .. ehaU, t:bmwpon, have 

I of 1956. 
10 
C) 
IS 
20 
f) 
"',~ 
3S 
S 
e8Iet aotlwWutancUne anytJajPJ ~ the COD~ .. aiD .. in the 
Companies Act, L966, or any other iaw lor tae· Ume beiDa. in farce, 
a. if they had been made or ..ended by the ~ ass0-
ciation coneerBfli.". 
11. In sectioh 11 of the priAcipal Aat.- ~ 
ohecdoa II. 
(iii)' in lub-secticm (J), after clawle (a). tbe followiDl .lause 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"('Ua) .peclfY the bye-l&.WB the contravention of any of 
which shall make a forward contract entered into otherwise 
than b1 accordance with the bye-laws illegal uncfer sub-
section (3A) of section 15;"; 
(b) in sub-section (4), the words "and also in the Ofticial 
Gazette of the State in which the principal office of the recognis-
ed association is sitUate" shall be omitted. 
lI2. In section 12 of the principal Act-,-- AuJMdnumt of MCtioD 13. 
( a) in sub-section (2), for the wordS "and, also In t1ie Official 
Gazette of the State in which the principal oftlce of the reCognis-
ed association is situate, and on the publication thereof In the 
GAzette of India the bye-laM so made or amended shall have 
effect", the words "and shall thereupon have effect" shall be 
substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (4), for the words "subject to the condi-
tion of previous publication", tbe wordS "subject to such condi-
tions in reaard to previous publication as may be- pr'escribed" 
shall be substituted. \ 
13. Mter section 12 of the principal Act. the following sections riuerdOD 'Of 
shall be inserted, namely: - new ~ IzA_l ..... 
"12A. Any amendment of a bye-law under section 11 other ADDUc:atioD 
than an amendment made in pursuance of clause (4) or clause o( ~ 
(aa). of sub-section (3) of that section or under section 12 shall =t~e:r: 
also apply to aU forward contracts entered into befoft the date =r=:-nt 
of itlapproval by the Central Government or before the date of . 
iu pu~liCatton in the Gazette of finffa, as the case may be, and 
. remaining to be performed on or after the said date. 
12B. (I) If, in the interest of trade or in the public: mterest, Power~ 
the Commission considers it necessary to suspend a member ;O:~~ 
from hiS membership of any recognised association or to prohibit member of 
lU'eh member from entering into any forward contract for the ==== 
or to probl-
bit btiD fIOIII 
1ftdiDI. 

'sale or purchase in his own name or through another member of 
a recognised asscoiation of any goods or class of goods, then, not-
withstanding anything contained in any law for the time being 
in force or in the rules or bye-laws of a recognised association, 
the Commission may, after giving an opportunity to the member S 
concerned of being heard, by order suspend his membership of 
any association or prohibit him from entering into any such 
contract. 
(2) An order made under sub-section (1) shall specify the 
period for which the suspension or prohibition is to have eftect, 10 
but no such order shall be in force for more than three years in 
the aggregate. 
(3) No order made under sub-section (1) in respect of any 
member of a recognised association shall affect the validity of 
any forward contract entered into or made by, with or through 15 
such member on or before the date of such order and re-
maining to be performed on or after the said date; but the 
Commission may make such provision as it deems fit in such 
order or in any subsequent order for the closing out of any 
such forward contract.". 20 
IDaerdon of 14. After Chapter III of the principal Act, the following Chapter 
Wi A~pter shall be inserted, namely: - , 
Cerdlcate of 
reliatration 
to be obtain-
ed by aU 
••• odatioDi. 
"CHAPTER IlIA 
REGISTERED ASSOCIATIONS 
14A.. (1) No association concerned with the regulation and 25 
control of busiJless relating to forward contracts shall, after the 
commencement of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amend-
ment Act, 1960 (hereinafter referred to as such commencement), 
carryon such business except under, and in accordance with, the 
conditions of a certificate of registmtion granted under this Act 30 
by the Commission. 
(2) Every association referred to in sub-section (1) which 
is in existence at such commencement, before the expiry of six 
months from such commencement, and every association referred 
to in sub-section (1) which is not in existence at such commtlnce- 35 
ment, before commencing such business, shall make an applica-
tion for a certificate of registration to the Commission in such 
form and containing such particulars as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the Commission may in its discretion extend 
from time to time the period of siv months aforesaid up to one 
year in the aggregate. 40 

() 
o 
s 
10 
IS 
20 
7 
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed-
(a) to prohibit an association in existence at such 
commencement from carrying on its busi.ness", until the 
disposal of the application made by it under sub-section (2); 
or 
(b) to require a recognised association in existence at 
such commencement to make an application under sub-
section (2); and every such association shall, as soon as may 
be after such commencement, be granted free of cost by the 
Commission a certificate of registration. 
14B. On receipt of an application under section 14A, the ~tlorf 
. "d re.usa 0 
Commission, after making such enquiry as It conSI ers necessary certificate of 
in this behalf, may by order in writing grant a cer~ificate of reaistratioD. 
registration or refuse to grant it: 
Provided that before refusing to grant such certificate, the 
association shall be given an opportunity of being heard in the 
matter. 
14C. The provisions of sections 8 and 12B shall apply in Appl~tioD 
I t· t . t . t· th I' I t' t of sections 8 re a Ion 0 a regis ered aSSOCla lOn as ey app y m re a Ion 0 a and 12B to 
Il'ecognised association with the substitution of- reais~~ 
a88OClatIou. 
(i) references to the registered association, for referenc-
es to the recognised association; and 
(ii) the words "not exceeding two years", for the words 
"not exceeding three years" in section 12B.". 
'S 15. After sub-section (3) of section 15 of the principal Act, the Amen~ment 
follOWing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- ofaec:uOQ I,. 
"(3A) Any forward contract in goods entered into in 
pursuance, of sub-section (1) which at the date of the contract 
is in contravention of any of the bye-laws specified in this behalf 
30 under clause (aa)of sub-section (3) of section 11 shall be 
illegal. ... 
16. In clause (a) of section 16 and sub-section (3) of section 17 Amen4ment 
of the ~tinc~pa!, Act, for the words "entered into before the date of ~~ =~l~~~ 
the nobficabon , the words "entered into on or before the date of 
35 the notification" shall be substituted. 

Subltitutiou 
of IIIBW aec-
tiou for 
aec:tioD 2Q. 
Peu1tica. 
8 
17. For section 20 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"20. Any person who-
(a) (i) in any return, statement or other document 
required by or under this Act, makes a statement which is S 
false in any material particular, knowing it to be false, or 
wilfully omits to make a material statement; or 
(ii) without reasonable excuse (the burden of proving 
which shall be on him) fails to furnish any return, statement 
or other document or any information or to answer any ques- 10 
tion or to comply with any requisition made under this Act 
or any rules made thereunder; or 
. (iii) enters into any forward contract during the period 
of suspension of business of a recognised association in 
pursuance of a notification under section 14; or IS 
(b) is a member of any asSOCiation, other than a recog-
nised association, to which a certificate of registration has 
not been granted under this Act; or 
(c) publishes or circulates information relating to the 
rate at which any forward contract has been entered into 20 
in contravention of any of the bye-laws of a recognised 
association; or 
(d) organises, or assists in organising, or is a member 
of, any association in contravention of the provisions contain-
ed in the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 18; or 25 
(e) enters into any forward contract or any option in 
goods in contravention of any of the provisions contained in 
sub-section (1) or sub-seotion (3A) or sub-section (4) of 
section 15, section 17 or section 19, 
shall, on conviction, be punishable-
(i) for a first offence, with imprisonment which may 
extend to one year, or with a fine of not less than one 
thousand :rupees, or with both; 
(ii) for a second or subsequent offence under clause (d), 
30 
or under clause· (e) [other than an offence in respect of a 35 
contravention of the provisions of sub-section (4) of section 
15], with imprisonment which may extend to one year and 

,0 
5 
9 
also with fine: provided that in the absence of special 
reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of 
the court, the imprisonment shall be not less than one month 
and the fine shall be not less than one thousand rupees.". 
18. In section 21 of the principal Act,-
(a) to clause (g), the word "or" shall be added; 
(b) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(h) manipulates or attempts to manipulate prices in 
respect of forward contra~ts for the sale or purchase of 
any goods specified in any notification under section 15, in 
any area specified in that notification,"; 
(c) for the words "shall, on conviction, be punishable 
with imprisonment which may extend to two years, or with 
AmendmeDI of eectioa zr. 
15 fine, or with both.", the following shall be substituted, namely:-
20 
3S 
"shall, on conviction, be punishable-
(i) for a first offence, with imprisonment which may 
extend to two years, or with a fine of not less than one 
thousand rupees, or with both; 
(ii) for a second or subsequent offence, with 
imprisonment which may extend to two years and also 
with fine: provided that in the absence of special and 
adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the 
judgment of the court, the imprisonment shall be not 
less than one month and the fine shall be not lees than 
one thousand rupees.". 
19. After section 21 of the principal Act the following section lDIerdon of , new .eet ion 
shall be inserted, namely:- 2IA. 
"21A. Any court trying an offence punishable under sec- Power of 
tion 20 or section 21 may, if it thinks fit and in addition to any:U~ :rCei-
sentence which it may impose for such offence, direct that any ture of 
money, goods or other property in respect of which the o1fence property. 
has been committed, shall be forfeited to the Central Govern-
ment. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, property in 
respect of which an offence has been committed, shall include 
deposits in a bank where the said property is converted into 
such deposits.". 

10 
Inaertio~ of 20. After section 22 of the principal Act, the following sections 
~=::B shall be inserted, namely:-. . 
Power to 
search and 
leize books 
of account or 
othcrdocu-
~ta.' 
Presump-
tions to be 
drawu in 
cert&iD easel. 
"22A. (1) Any presidency magistrate or a magistrate of the 
first class may, by warrant, authorise any police officer not 
below the rank of sub-inspector to enter upon and search any S 
place where books of account or other documents relating to 
forward contracts or options in goods entered into in contraven-
tion of the provisions of this Act, may be or may be reason-
ably suspected to be, and such police officer may seize any 
such book or document, if in his opinion, it relates to any such 10 
forward contract or option in goods. 
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1898,. shall, so far as may be, apply to any search or seizure 
made under sub-section (1) as they apply to any search or 
seizure made under the authority of a warrant issued under IS 
section 98 of the said Code. 
22B. (1) Where any books of account Oil" other documents 
are seized from any place and there are entries therein making 
reference to quantity, quotations, rates, months of delivery, 
receipt or payment of differences or sale or purchase of goods 20 
or option in goods, such books of account or other documents 
shall be admitted in evidence without witnesses having to 
appear to prove the same; and such entries shall be prima 
jacie evidence of the matters, transactions and accounts pur-
ported to be therein recorded. 2S 
(2) In any trial for an offence punishable under section 21, 
it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that the 
place in which the books of account or other documents refer-
red to in sub-section (1) were seized, was used, and that the 
persons found therein were present, for the purpose of com- 30 
mitting the said offence. It. 
lDsertfOll of 2.1. After section 27 of the principal Act, the following section 
Dew sectlOll 27A.'· .. shall be inserted, namely:-
Protect!c,q of 
action taken 
fagoed 
faith. 
"27A. (1) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie in any 
court against the Central Government or any member, officer 3S 
or servant of the Commission for anything which is in good 
faith done or intended to be done under this Act, or any rule 
or bye-law made. thereunder. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie in any court 
against the governing body or any member, office-bearer or 40 
servant of any recognised association or against any person 
1 • 

II 
appointed under sub-section (1) of section 13 for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done with the 
approval, or at the instance, of the Commission and in pur-
suance of this Act, or of any rule or bye-law made there-
5 under.". 
22. After clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 28 of the prin- Ame~lDCI1t 
.:ipal Act, the following clause shall be inserted, namely: _ ofaechon 28. 
"(cc) the manner in which applications for certificates of 
registration may be made under section 14A and the levy of 
10 fees in respect of such applicationsj". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Experience gained in the administration of the Forward COD-
tracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 during the last 6 years has revealed 
that the present provisions of the Act are not adequate to deal with 
excessive speculation and other malpractices now prevalent in some 
of the forward markets. 'Persons indulging in illegal forward trad-
ing canhot be prosecuted for want of adequate documentary evidence. 
Further, persons found guilty of violation of the provisions of the 
Act often get away with a light punishment. Trading outside official 
hours in associations recognised for forward trading cannot be stop-
ped under the existing provisions of the Act. The object of the Bill 
is to remove these and other difficulties which have been experienced 
in the working of the Act and to enable the Centrol Government and 
the Forward Markets Commission to exercise a stricter control over 
forward trading activities. Opportunity is being taken to extend the 
provisions of the Act to the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
2. The notes on clauses explain the important provisions of the 
Bill. 
NITYANAND KANUNGO. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 6th September, 1960. 
J 

Note. on clause. 
Clause 3 (b)-This clause enables the Central Government to im-
pose conditions regarding the transferability of specific delivery con-
tracts. One of the objects of conferring this power on the Central 
Government is to limit the nwnber of transfers in the case of such 
contracts. 
Clause 6-The Forward Markets Commission is being invested 
with certain powers of a civil court, such as, summoning and examin-
ing persons on oath, etc., on the lines of similar powers conferred on 
the Tariff Commission under the Tariff Commission Act, 1951. 
Clause 9-This clause makes an express provision for the admis-
sion of a firm or a joint Hindu family as a member of a recognised 
association. Under the Companies Act, 1956, a firm not being a legal 
person is debarred from becoming a member of a company registered . 
under that Act and since firms constitute the bulk of membership 
of recognised associations, provision for admission of a firm or a joint 
Hindu family as a member of such associations is deemed necessary. 
Clauses 11 and IS-These amendments will enable a recognised 
association to make certain kinds of transactions entered into in con-
travention of its bye-laws illegal, such as, kerb trading. 
Clause 13-This clause provides that an amendment made to a bye-
law even during the currency of a contract shall apply to subsisting 
contracts. It also empowers the Forward Markets Commission to 
suspend any member of a recognised association. 
Clause 14-All associations are required to get themselves regis-
tered with the Forward Markets Commission. The registration of 
associations will enable the Commission to have G census of all asso-
ciations that are now trading in transferable specific delivery contracts 
in free commodities as well as non-transferable specific delivery con-
tracts in regulated or prohibited commodities, end to ascertain the 
extent to which such associations misuse the non-transferable specific 
delivery contracts for speculative purposes. 
Clauses 17, .18 and 19-A minimum penalty of a fine of Rs. 1,000 
is being prescribed for any offence under the Act and a compulsory 
sentence of imprisonment is proposed for a second or a subsequent 

14 
offence of IEl serious nature. In addition, the court has been empower-
ed to forfeit any illegal gain or property acquired by trading in con-
travention of the provisions of the Act. 
Clause 20--This amendment authorises police officers not below 
the rank of Sub-Inspector to enter and search any place and seize 
documents in pursuance of a warrant issued by a Presidency or a 
First Class Magistrate. Any books of account or other documents 
seized in exercise of this power shall be prima facie evidence of the 
transactions recorded therein. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 1969 con-
templates registration of Associations and tightening up of the 
enforcement provisions. This is likely to involve some increale in 
the work load of the Forward Markets Comm'ssion, which might 
necessitate the strengthening of the Commission by awointment of 
a fourth Member and some additional staff, the cost of which is esti-
mated at about Rs. 50,000' 00 per annum. 
:IS 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 22 enlarges the rule-making power of the Central Govern-
ment and empowers it to make rules regm-ding the manner in which 
applications for certificates of registration may be made under 
section 14A and the levy of fees in respect of such applications. Pro-
visions for these matters are generally made in rules. The delegation 
of power is of 6 normal character. 
·fCJ 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE FORWARD CONTRACTS (REGULATION) Act, 
1952 (74 OF 1952) 
• • • • 
Short title, 1. 
extent aDd 
COIDJDel1CC-
ment. • • • • 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir. 
• • • • 
DdlnitiOQl. 2. 
Establish-
ment and 
( , \ constitutiOD 
" of the For-
ward Markets 
CoIDD1iSSiOD. 
• • • • 
(j) "recognised association" means an association which is 
for the time being recognised by the Central Government under 
section 6; 
• • • • 
(n) "transferable specific delivery contract" means a specl1ic 
delivery contract which is not a non-transferable specific delivery 
contract. 
• • • • 
3. 
• • • • 
(2) The Commission shall consist of not less than two, but not 
exceeding three, members appointed by the Central Government one 
of them being nominated by the Central Government to be the 
Chairman thereof; and the Chairman and the other member or mem-
bers shall be either whole-time or part-time as the Central Govern-
ment may direct: 
Provided that one of the members to be so appointed shall be a 
person having knowledge of forward markets in India. 
• • • • 
17 

18 
4. The functions of the Commission Shall be-
• • • • 
('b) to keep forward markets under observation and to draw 
the attention of the Central Government or of any other pre-
scribed authority to any development taking place in, or in re-
lation to, such markets which, in the opinion of the Commission, 
is of sufficient importance to deserve the attention of the Central 
Government and to make recommendations thereon; 
• • • • 
(e) to undertake the inspection of the accounts and other 
documents of any recognised association whenever it considers it 
necessary; and 
• • • • 
Functions of 
the CoDUQi .. 
lion. 
8. (1) Every recognised association shall furnish to the Central ~o~ 
Government such periodical returns relating to its affairs or the vernment to 
affairs of its members as may be prescribed. . calli periodi-, ca re-turns or 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in .ub-section ~i~~~ :QUi-
(1), where the Central Government considers it expedient so to do, made. 
it may, by order in writing,-
(a) call upon a recognised association to furnish in writing 
s\lch information or explanation relating to its affairs or the 
affairs of any of its members as the Central Government may 
require, or 
• • • • 
9. (1) Every recognised association shall furnish to the 
Government a copy of its annual report. 
• • • • 
Central Furnishina 
of annual 
reports to the 
Cenual Gov-
ernnaeat ~ 
r~d 
aSlOCUtiolts. 
9A. (1) A recognised association may make rules or amend any Power ef 
rules made by it to provide for all or any of the following matters, reco~t'~ed aslOCla IOn 
nam.ely:- to make rules 
· . . . ~~ 
8r~~of (e) such incidental, consequential and supplementary mat- m .. 
ters as may be necessary to give effect to any of the matters :~~ta, 
specified in clauses (a), (b), (c) end (tl). etc.,. in spedal casel. 
(2) No rules of a recognised association made or amended in :re-
lation to any matter refenred to in clauses (a) to (e) of sUb-section 
(1) shall have effect until they have been approved by the Central 
Government and published by that Government in the Omela1 

Power of 
CentraQGoy-
ernment to 
direct rules 
to be made 
or to make 
rules. 
Power of 
ftICOsniIed usoclation to 
mau tJ,e-
(1 1s1'll. 
19 
Gazette and, in approving the rules so made or amended, the Central 
Government may make such modifications therein as it thinks fit, 
and on such publication, the rules as approved by the Central Gov-
ernment shall be deemed to have been validly made, notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in the Companies Act, 1956. I of 1956. 
(3) Where, before the commencement of the Forward Contracts 
(Regulation) Amendment Act, 1957, any rules have been made or 32 of 1957· 
amended in relation to any matter referred to in clauses (a) to (e) 
of sub-section (1), the rules so made or amended shall not be deemed 
to be invalid or ever to have been invalid merely by reason of the 
fact that the rules so made or amended are repugnant tc> any of the 
provisions of the Companies Act, 1956. 1 of 1956. 
• • • • 
10. 
• • • • 
(3) Where, in pursuance of sub-section (2), any rules have been 
made or amended, the rules so made or amended shall be published 
in the Gazette of India and also in the Official Gazette of the State 
in which the principal office of the recognised association is situate, 
and on the publication thereof in the Gazette of India, the rules so 
made or amended, shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in the Indian Companies Act, 1913, or any other law for the 7 of 1913. 
time being in force, have effect as if they had been made or amended 
by the recognised association concerned. 
• • • • • • 
11. 
• • 
• • • • • 
(4) Any bye-laws made under this section shall be subject to 
such conditions in regard to previous publication as may be prescrib-
ed, and when approved by the Central Government, shall be 
published in the Gazette of India and also in the Official Gazette of 
the State in which the principal office of the recognised association is 
situate: 
Provided that the Central Government may, in the interest of the 
uade or in the public interest, by order in writing, di9pense with the 
c:ondition of previous publication, in any case. 
• • • • • • 

20 
12. • • • • • Power of Central CJo. 
(2) Where, in pursuance of this section, any bye-laws have been:U~ to 
made or amended, the bye-laws so made or amended shall be publish- ~b~ 
ed in the Gazette of India and also in the Official Gazette of the State co-:;uc:er-
in which the principal office of the recognised association is situate, aaaociationa. 
and on the publication thereof in the Gazette of India the bye-laws so 
made or amended shall have effect as if they had been made or 
amended by the recognised association. 
• • • • • • 
(4) The making or the amendment or revision of any bye-laws 
under this section shall be in all cases be subject to the condition of 
previous publication: 
Provided that the Central Government may, in the interest of the 
trade or in the public interest, by order in writing, dispense with the 
condition of previous publication. 
• • • • • • 
16. 
• • • • • • 
(a) every forward contract for the sale or purchase of any 
goods specified in the notification, entered into before the date 
of the notification and remaining to be performed after the 
said date and which is not in conformity with the provisions of 
section 15, shall be deemed to be closed out at such rate as the 
Central Government may fix in this behalf, and different rates 
may be fixed for different classes of such contracts; 
• • • • • • 
CoDRequenc-
es of QOtifica-
tion under 
leCtion IS" 
17. , Power to 
prohibit for-
• • • • • • ward con-
tracts in 
certain cases. 
(3) Where a notification has been issued under sub-section (1), 
the provisions of section 16 shall, in the absence· of anything to the 
contrary in the notification, apply to all forward contracts for the 
sale or purchase of any goods specified in the notification entered 
into before the date of the notification and remaining to be perform-
ed after the said date as they apply to all forward contracts for the 

Penalty for 
contraven-
tion of cer-
tain provi-
sions of 
Chapter IV. 
Penalty for 
owning or 
keeping 
place used 
21 
sale or purchase of any goods specified in the notification under 
section 15. 
• • • • • • 
20. (1) Any person who-
(a) without reasonable excuse (the burden of proving which 
shall be on him) fails to comply with any requisition made under 
sub-section (3) of section 8; or 
(b) organises, or assists in organising, or is a member of, 
any association in contravention of the provisions contained in 
the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 18; or 
(c) enters into any forward contract or any option in 
goods in contravention of any of the provisions contained in sub-
section (1) of section 15, section 17 or section 19. 
shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
(2) Any person who enters into any forward contract in contra-
vention of the provisions contained in sub-section (4) of section 15 
shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine. 
21. Any person who-
• • • • • • 
~~e:=d shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment which 
contracts in extend to two years, or with fine. or with both. soodl. 
may 
• • • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 of 
the Const itution of India, recommended tQ Lok Sabha the 
consideration of the Bill. 
M. ~. K.t\UL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Nityanand Kanungo, 
Minister of Commerce.) 