But. No. 75 oF 1991

THE FINANCE (No. 2) BILL, 1991

(AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA)


The Finance (No.2) Bill, 1991
(As introduced in Lok Sabha)
Corrigenda

At page 4,—
(i) inline 32, for “after clause (ii), the following clause",
read “after sub-clause (ii), the following sub-clause";
(ii) in line 35, for “aplicable", read “applicable”.
Atpage 10,—
(i) in line 23, for"assesse”, read “assessee";
{ii) inline 52, for “following clause *, read “following
sub-clause”.
At page 28,—
(i) inline 25, for “sub-section (1)", read “sub-section (2);
(ii) inline 28, for “interest”, read “chargeable interest”.
At page 29, in line 45, after “sub-section (2/, insert * of that
section”.
At page 33, in line 37, for “of the following three", read “three of
the following”.
‘At page 35, in line 2, for “sub-sections (1) and (2)", read “sub-
section (1) or sub-section (2. हु


Clauses

SSBBRERSERESSSASHRESRA Seer H9MRe

aes

THE FINANCE (No. 2) BILL, 1991

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES

CHAPTER |

PRELIMINARY

Short title and commencement.
CHAPTER II

RATES OF INCOME-TAX

Income-tax.

CHAPTER III
DIRECT TAXES

Income-tax
Amendment of section 2.
Amendment of section 9.
Amendment of section 10.
Amendment of section 11.
Amendment of section 12A.
Amendment of section 13.
Amendment of section 17.
Amendment of section 29.
Amendment of section 32.
Amendment of section 35.
Insertion of new section 35AC
Amendment of section 36.
Insertion of new section 43D.
Amendment of section 44D.
Amendment of section 45.
Amendment of section 47.
Amendment of section 48.
Amendment of section 49.
Insertion of new section 54H.
Amendment of section 57.
Substitution of new section for section 71
Amendment of section 74.
Amendment of section 80008.
Amendment of section 80G.
Amendment of section 80554.
Amendment of section 80110.
Amendment of section 80110.
insertion of new section 80HHE.
Amendment of section 80-1.
Insertion of new section 80-18.
Amendment of section 80-O.
Insertion of new section 80Q.
Amendment of section 80QQA.
Substitution of new section for section 80U.
Amendment of section 88.
Amendment of section 90.
Amendment of section 115A.


(ii)

CLAUSES

40. _ Insertion of new section 11588.

41, Amendment of section 119.
Amendment of section 132.
Amendment of section 139.
Amendment of section 140A.
Amendment of section 143.
Amendment of section 153.
Amendment of section 155.
Amendment of section 161
Amendment of section 193.
Amendment of section 194.
Amendment of section 194A.
Amendment of section 194BB.
Insertion of new section 194EE.
Insertion of new sections 194G and 194H.
Amendment of section 195.
Insertion of new section 196B.
Amendment of section 197A.
Amendment of sections 198 to 200 and 202, 203, 203A and 205.
Amendment of section 204.
Amendment of section 206.
Amendment of section 2340.
Amendment of section 244A.
Amendment of section 245BA.
Amendment of section 245D.
Amendment of section 254.
Amendment of section 272A.
Amendment of section 273A.
Amendment of section 279.
Insertion of Twelfth Schedule.
Consequential amendments.

SEISHESSASEBSSHRSS

Wealth-tax
71, Amendment of section 5.
72, Amendment of section 16.
73. Amendment of section 17A.
74. Amendment of section 18B.
75. Amendment of section 22BA.
76. Amendment of section 22D.
77. Amendment of section 27.
78. Amendment of section 34A.
79. Amendment of section 35-1
80. Amendment of section 37A.
81. Amendment of Schedule III.

Gift-tax

82. Amendment of section 4.
83. Amendment of section 5.
84. Amendment of section 15.
85. Amendment of section 16A.
86. Amendment of section 26.
87. Amendment of section 33A.
88. Amendment of section 35.

Interest-tax

89. Amendment of section 2.
90. Amendment of section 3.
91. Amendment of section 4.
92. Substitution of new section for section 5.
93. Amendment of section 6.
94. Amendment of section 7.


(iii)

Clauses
95. Amendment of section 8.
96. Substitution of new section for section 9.
97. Amendment of section 10,
98. _ Insertion of new section 10A.
99. Substitution of new sections for sections 11 to 13.
100. Amendment of section 15.
101. Omission of section 15A.
102. Amendment of section 16.
103. Amendment of section 17,
104. Substitution of new section for section 18.
105. Amendment of section 19.
106. Amendment of section 20.
107. Amendment of section 21.
108. Substitution of new sections for sections 23 to 26.
109. Amendment of section 28.
110. Amendment of section 29.
Expenditure-tax
111. Amendment of long title.
112. Amendment of section 2.
113, Substitution of new sections for sections 3 to 5.
114, — Substitution of new section for section 7.
115. Substitution of new section for section 15.
116. Amendment of section 24.
117. Amendment of section 31.
CHAPTER IV
INDIRECT TAXES
Customs
118. Amendment of Act 52 of 1962.
119. Amendment of Act 51 of 1975.
Excise
120. Amendment of Act 5 of 1986.
121. Amendment of Act 58 of 1957.
CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
122. Omission of section 35 of Act 18 of 1964.
123. Amendment of section 40 of Act 11 of 1983.
124. Repeal.

THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE.


43 0f 1961.

5

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
ON 24TH JULY, 1991.

Bill No. 75 of 1991

THE FINANCE (No. 2) BILL, 1991
A
BILL

to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central Government for the
financial year 1991-92.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER |
PRELIMINARY

1. (1) This Act may be called the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1991.

(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, sections 2to 117 and 124 (except sections 44, 46, 60, 64,
65, 67, 73, 74, 76, 77, 85, 86 and 118) shall be deemed to have come into force on the ‘1st day of April,
1991.

CHAPTER ॥
RATES OF INCOME-TAX

2. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), for the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1991, income-tax shall be charged at the rates specified in Part lof
the First Schedule and such tax as reduced by the rebate of income-tax calculated under Chapter VIII-A
of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the Income-tax Act) shall be increased,—

(a) inthe casesto which Paragraphs A, B, C and D of that Part apply, by a surcharge for purposes
of the Union; and
(b) in the cases to which Paragraph E of that Part applies, by a surcharge,
calculated in each case in the manner provided therein.
(2) Inthe casesto which Sub-Paragraph! or Sub-Paragraph Il of Paragraph A of Part | of the First

Schedule applies, where the assessee has, in the previous year, any net agricultural income exceeding
six hundred rupees, in addition to total income, and the total income exceeds,—

(i) in acase to which the said Sub-Paragraph | applies, twenty-two thousand rupees, and
(ii) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph Il applies, twalve thousand rupees,
then —
(a) the net agricultural income shall be taken into account, in the manner provided in clause (b)
[that is to say, as if the net agricultural income were comprised in the total income after, —
(0 incase to which the said Sub-Paragraph | applies, the first twenty-two thousand rupees,
and
(ii) in a.case to which the said Sub-Paragraph ॥ applies, the first twelve thousand rupees,
Of the total income but without being liable to tax], only for the purpose of charging income-tax in
respect of the total income; and
(®) the income-tax chargeable shall be calculated as follows:—
6) the total income and the net agricultural income shall be aggregated and the amount of
income-tax shall be determined in respect of the aggregate income at the rates specified in Sub-

Paragraph | or, as the case may be, Sub-Paragraph Il of the said Paragraph A, as if such
aggregate income were the total income;

(ii) the net agricultural income shall be increased —

(A) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph | applies, by a sum of twenty-two thousand
rupees; and

Short ttle and
‘commence:

Income-tax.


2

(8) in acase to which the said Sub-Paragraph Il applies, by a sum of twelve thousand
rupees,

and the amount of income-tax shalll be determined in respect of the net agricultural income as so
increased at the rates specified in Sub-Paragraph | or, as the case may be, Sub-Paragraph Il of
the said Paragraph A, as if the net agricultural income as so increased were the total income;
the amount of income-tax determined in accordance with sub-clause (i) shall be reduced
by the amount of income-tax determined in accordance with sub-clause (ii) and the sum so
artived at shall be the income-tax in respect of the total income:

Provided that the amount of income-tax so arrived at, as reduced by the rebate of income-tax
calculated under Chapter VIII-A of the Income-tax Act, shall, in the case of every person having a total
income exceeding seventy-five thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union
calculated at the rate of twelve per cent. of such income-tax and the sum so arrived at shall be the
income-tax in raspect of the total income.
(3) In cases to which the provisions of Chapter Xi! or Chapter XII-A or sub-section (14) of section
161 or section 164 or section 164A or section 167B of the Income-tax Act apply, the tax chargeable
shall be determined as provided in that Chapter or that section, and with reference to the rates imposed
by sub-section (1) or the rates as specified in that Chapter or section, as the case may be:

Provided that in respect of any income chargeable to tax under section 115B or section 115BB of the
Income-tax Act,—
(a) the ircome-tax computed under section 1158 shall be increased by a surcharge calculated at
the rate of fifteen per cent. of such income-tax; and
(0) the income-tax computed under section 11588 shall be increased,—

{i)in the case of a person other than a company, being a resident in India, by a surcharge for

Purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of twelve per cent. of such income-tax; and

(i
such income-tax.

(4) In cases in which tax has to be deducted under sections 193, 194, 194A, 1948, 19488, 1940
and 195 of the Income-tax Act at the rates in force, the deduction shall be made at the rates specified in
Part Ilof the First Schedule and shall be increased —

(a) inthe cases to which the provisions of sub-i
for purposes of the Union; and

(6) in the cases to which the provisions of sub-item (a) of item 2 of that Part apply, by a
surcharge,

jem (a) of item 1 of that Part apply, by a surcharge

calculated in each case in the manner provided therein.

(5) Incases in which tax has to be deducted under sections 1940, 194EE, 1946 and 194 H of the
Income-tax Act, the deduction shall be made at the rates specified in those sections and shall be
increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of twelve percent. of such
deduction:

Provided that in the case of an assessee, being a domestic company, the provisions of this sub-
section shall have effect, as if for the words “twalve per cent.”, the words “ifteen per cent.” had been
‘substituted.

(6) Incasesin which tax has to be collected under section 2060 of the Income-tax Act, the collection
shall be made at the rate specified in that section and shall be increased by asurcharge for purposes of
the Union calculated at the rate of twelve per cent. of such collection:

Provided that in the case of a buyer, being a domestic company, the provisions of this sub-section
shall have effect, as if for the words “twelve per cent.”, the words “fifteen per cent.” had been
substituted,

(7) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (8), in cases in which income-tax has to be calculated
under the first proviso to sub-section (5) of section 132 of the Income-tax Act or charged under sub-
section (4) of section 172 or sub-section (2) of section 174 or section 175 or sub-section (2) of section
176 of the said Act or deducted under section 192 of the said Act from income chargeable under the
head “Salaries” or in which the "advance tax” payable under Chapter XVII-C of the said Act has to be
computed, atthe rate or rates in force, such income-tax or, as: the case may be, "advance tax" shallbeso
calculated, charged, deducted or computed at the rate or rates specified in Part Ill of the First Schedule
and such tax as reduced by the rebate of income-tax calculated under Chapter VIII-A of the said Act
shall be increased, —

(a) inthe cases towhich Paragraphs A, 8, C and 0 of that Part apply, by a surcharge for purposes
of the Union; and

10) in the cases to which Paragraph E of that Part applies, by a surcharge,

10

20

in the case of a domestic company, by a surcharge calculated at the rate of fifteen per cent. of 7°

30

35

45

50

55


3

calculated in each case in the manner provided therein:
Provided that in cases to which the provisions of Chapter Xl! or Chapter XII-A or sub-section (1A) of
section 161 oF section 164 or section 164A or section 1678 of the Income-tax Act apply, "advance tax”
5 Shallbe computed with reference to the rates imposed by this sub-section or the rates as specified inthat
Chapter or section, as the case may be:

Provided further that in respect of any income chargeable to tax under section 1158 of the Income-
tax Act, the "advance tax” computed under the first proviso shall be increased by a surcharge for
Purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of fifteen per cent. of such “advance tax”.

10 _ (8) Inthe cases to which Sub-Paragraph I or Sub-Paragraph I! of Paragraph A of Part Ill of the First
‘Schedule appiies, where the assessee has, in the previous year or, if by virtue of any provision of the
Income-tax Act, income-tax is to be charged in respect of the income of a period otherthan the previous
year, in such other period, any net agricultural income exceeding six hundred rupees, in addition to total
income and the total income exceeds, —

15 (i) 108 0359 to which the said Sub-Paragraph | applies, twenty-two thousand rupees, and
(fl) ॥# 8 case to which the said Sub-Paragraph Il applies, twelve thousand rupees,

then, in calculating income-tax under the first proviso to sub-section (5)of section 132 of the Income-tax
Act or in charging income-tax under sub-section (2) of section 174 or section 175 or sub-section (2) of
section 176 of the said Act or in computing the "advance tax” payable under Chapter XVII-C of the said
20 Act, at the rate or rates in force —

(a) the net agricultural income shall be taken into account, in the manner provided in clause (b)
[that is to say, as if the net agricultural income were comprised in the total income after.—

(i) in acase to which the said Sub-Paragraph | applies, the first twenty-two thousand rupees,
and

25 (i) in a.case to which the said Sub-Paragraph ॥ applies, the first twelve thousand rupees,

of the total income but without being liable to tax], only for the purpose of calculating, charging or
‘computing such income-tax or, as the case may be, "advance tax” in respect of the total income;
and

10) such income-tax or, as the case may be, “advance tax" shall be so calculated, charged or
30 computed as follows:—

19 the total income and the net agricultural income shall be aggregated and the amount of
income-tax or "advance tax” shall be determined in respect of the aggregate income at the rates
specified in Sub-Paragraph lor, as the case may be, Sub-Paragraph llof the said Paragraph A, as.
if such aggregate income were the total income;

& (i) the net agricultural income shall be increased —
(A) in acase to which the said Sub-Paragraph | applies, by a sum of twenty-two thousand
rupees; ani
(8) _in2.case to which the said Sub-Paragraph ॥ applies, by a sum of twalve thousand
rupees,
40 and the amount of income-tax or “advance tax" shall be determined in respect of the net

agricultural income as so increased at the rates specified in the said Sub-Paragraph lor, as the
case may be, the said Sub-Paragraph ॥ as ifthe net agricuttural income as so increased were the
total income;

(ii) the amount of income-tax or “advance tax" determined in accordance with sub-clause ()
4s shallbe reducedby the amountof income-taxor, as the case may be, “advance tax" determined in
accordance with sub-clause (iiJand the sum so arrived at shall be the income-tax or, as the case

may be, “advance tax” in respect of the total income:

Provided that the amount of income-tax or “advance tax” so arrived at , as reduced by the rebate of
income-tax calculated under Chapter VIII-A of the said Act, shall, in the case of every person having a

50 ‘otal income exceeding seventy-five thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the
Union calculated at the rate of twelve per cent. of such income-tax or, as the case may be, “advance tax”
and the sum so arrived at shallbe the income-taxor, as the case may be, "advance tax" in respectol the
total income.

(9) For the purposes of this section and the First Schedule —

& (a) “company in which the public are substantially interested” means a company within the
meaning of clause (78) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, and includes a subsidiary of such
‘company if the whole of the share capital of such subsidiary company has been held by the parent
company or by its nominees throughout the previous year:

(0) “domestic company” means an Indian company, or any other company which, in respect of

6 _itsincome liable to income-tax under the Income-tax Act for the assessment yearcommancingontha

1stday of April, 1991, has made the prescribed arrangements for the declaration and payment within
India of the dividends (including dividends on preference shares) payable out of such income in



Amendment
of section 2

Amendment of
section 9,

\mendment of
potion 10.

4
accordance with the provisions of section 194 of the Act;

(c) “insurance commission" means any remuneration or reward, whether by way of commission
oF otherwise, for soliciting or procuring insurance business (including business relating to the
‘enewal or revival of policies of insurance);

(d) "investment company” means a company whose gross total income (as defined in section 5
808 of the Income-tax Act) consists mainly of income which is chargeable under the heads “Income
{rom house property”, "Capital gains" and “Income from other sources" of of income by way of
interest on securities

(@) “net agricultural income”, in relation to a person, means the total amount of agricultural
income, from whatever source derived, of that person computed in accordance with the rules 10
contained in Part IV of the First Schedule;

(f) “tax-free security means any security of the Central Government issued or declared to ७७
income-tax 100, or any security of a State Government issued income-tax free, the income-tax
Whereon is payable by the State Government;

(9) “rading company” means a company whose business consists mainly in dealing in goods or 15
merchandise manufactured, produced or processed by a person other than that company and
whose income attributable to such business included in its gross total income (as defined in section
808 of the Income-tax Act) is not less than fifty-one per cent. of the amount of such gross total
income;

(h) allother words and expressions used in this section or in the First Schedule but not defined in 20
this sub-section and defined in the Income-tax Act shall have the meanings respectively assigned to
them in that Act.

CHAPTER Ill
DIRECT TAXES
Income-tax 25
3. In section 2 of the Income-tax Act —

(9) inclause (290), alter the words “in the case of an individual”, the words “, association of
persons or, as the case may be, body of individuals" shall be inserted ;

(0) in clause (37A), with effect from the 151 day of October, 1991,—

(i) in sub-clause (ii), for the figures, latter and word ",194D and 195", the word, figures and letter 30
“and 194D" shall be substituted ;

(ii) atter clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely :-—

"60 or the purposes of deduction of tax under section 195, the rate or rates of income-tax
‘Specified in section 115A or the rate or rates of income-tax specified in this behalf in the Finance
Act of the relevant year, whichever is aplicable ; " 35

4, In section 9 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (vi), —

(a) after the existing proviso and before Explanation 1, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely —

“Provided further that nothing contained in this clause shall apply in relation to so much of the
income by way of royalty as consists of lumpsum payment made by a person, who is a resident, for 40
the transfer of all or any rights (including the granting of a licence) in respect of computer software
Supplied by a non-resident manufacturer along with a computer or computer-based equipment
under any scheme approved under the Policy on Computer Software Export, Software Development
and Training, 1986 of the Government of India. " ५

(b) in Explanation 1, for the words “foregoing proviso", the words “first proviso” शा be 45
substituted ;

(c) after Explanation 2, the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely :--

‘Explanation 3.—For the purposes of this clause, the ‘expression “computer software” shall have
the meaning assigned to it in clause (b) of the Explanation to section BOHHE, *

5. In section 10 of the Income tax Act —
(a) in clause (3), in the proviso, with elfect from the 1st day of October, 1991,—
1010 clause (ji), the word “or" shall be inserted at the end ;
(ii)atter clause (ii), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
" (iv)winnings from races including horse races; " ;
(b) in clause (4), for sub-clause (i, the following sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:— 55

“(iin the case of an individual, any incomeby way of interest on moneys standing to his credit ina
Non-Resident (External) Account in any bank in India in accordance with the Foreign Exchange


5
8०108 Regulation Act, 1973 and the rules made thereunder :

Provided that such individual is a person resident outside India as defined in clause (q) of section 2 of
the said Act oris a person who has been permitted by the Reserve Bank of India to maintain the aforesaid
Account;

5.10) after clause (8), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely :--
‘(8A) in the case of a consuttant —

(a) any remuneration or fee received by him or it, directly or indirectly, out of the funds made
available to an international organisation [hereatter referred to in this clause and clause (8B) as
the agency] under a technical assistance grant agreement between the agency and the

10 Government of a foreign State; and

() any other income which accrues or arises to him or it outside India, and is not deemed to
accrue or arise in India, in respect of which such consultant is required to pay any income or social
‘security tax to the Government of the country of his or its origin.

Explanation.— In this clause, “consultant” means —

15 (any individual, who is either not a citizen of India or, being a citizen of India, is not ordinarily
resident in India; or

(i) any other person, being a non-resident,

engaged by the agency for rendering technical services in India in connection with any technical
assistance programme or project, provided the following conditions are fulilled, namely :—

20 (1) the technical assistance is in accordance with an agreement entered into by the Central
Government and the agency; and

(2) the agreement relating to the engagement of the consultant is. approved by the prescribed
authority for the purposes of this clause;
(88) in the case ol an individual who is assigned to duties in India in connection with any technical

assistance programme and project in accordance with an agreement entared into by the Central
Government and the agency —

(a) the remuneration received ‘by him, directly or indirectly, for such duties from any consultant
referred to ॥ ०३७5७ (8A); and

(2) any other income of such individual which accrues or arises outside India, and is not
2 deemed to accrue or arise in India, in respect of which such individual is required to pay any
income or social security tax to the country ठे his origin, provided the following conditions are
tutfilled, namely —
(i) the individual is an employee of the consultant referred to in clause (8A) andis either
Rot a citizen of India or, being a citizen of India, is not ordinarily resident in India; and

35 (il) the contract of service of such individual is approved by the prescribed authority before
the commencement of his service; ';

(d)in clause (9,/--

(0 after the words, brackets and figure "in clause (87, the words, brackets, figures and letters "or
clause (8A) or, as the case may be, clause (8B) shall be inserted:
40 (i) alter the words "foreign State”, the words ‘or, as the case may be, country of origin of such
member” shall be insarted ;

(e) alter clause (10८), the following clause shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been
inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1962, namely -—

“(10D) any sum received under a life insurance policy, including the sum allocated by way of
bonus on such policy

(0 in clause (15), in sub-clause (iv) —

(Jin item (0), after the words and figures "Export-Import Bank of India Act, 1981,”, the words and
figures "or the National Housing Bank established under section 3 of the National Housing Bank Act,
‘of 1987. 1987, " shall be inserted ;

2 (i) alter item (f), the following item shall be inserted, namely -—

‘(fa) by 3 scheduled bank, on deposits in foreign currency where the acceptance of such
deposits by the bank is approved by the Reserve Bank of India.

Explanation.— For the purposes of this item, the expression “scheduled bank" shall have the
meaning assigned to it in clause (i) of the Explanation to clause (vila) of sub-section (1) of
55 section 36 ; ';

(ii) in the Explanation below item (g), for the words, brackets and letters “items (f) and (6),
+the words, brackets and letters "items (f), (fa) and (6) shall be substituted ;



6
(iv) the following Explanation shall be inserted at the end, namely -—

‘Explanation—For the purposes of this sub-clause, the expression “industrial
Undertaking” means any undertaking which is engaged in—

(8) the manutacture or processing of goods; or

(0) the business of generation or distribution of electricity or any other form of power;
or

(०) mining ; or

(2) the construction of ships; or

(०) the operation of ships or aircrafts ; ' ;

(9) inclause (21), in the second proviso, for the words * Provided further”, the following shall be

substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1990,
namely —

“Provided further that the exemption under this clause shall not be denied in relation to voluntary
contribution, other than voluntary contribution in cash or voluntary contribution of the nature referred
to in clause (b) of the first proviso to this clause, subject to the condition that such voluntary
contribution is nat held by the scientific research association, otherwise than in any one or moreof the
forms or modes specified in sub-section (5) of section 1 1, after the expiry of one yearfrom the end of
the previous year in which such asset is acquired or the 31st day of March, 1992, whichever is
later:

Provided also” ;
(A) in clause (23)—

60 inthe fourth proviso, for the words, figures and letters “the 30th day of March, 1990", the
words, figures and letters "the 30th day of March, 1992" shall be substituted and shall be deemed to
have bean substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1990 ;

(ii) after the fourth proviso, the following proviso shall be insened and shall be deemed to have
been inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1990, namely -—

“Provided also that the exemption under this clause shall not be denied in relation to voluntary
contribution, other than voluntary contribution in cash or voluntary contribution of the nature
referred to in clause (b) of the third proviso to this clause, subject to the condition that such
voluntary contribution is not held by the associationorinstitution, otherwise than in anyone
‘oF more of the forms or modes specified in sub-section (5) of section 11, after the expiry of one
year from the end of the previous year in which such asset is acquired or the 31st day of March,
1992, whichever is later.

(in clause (230) —

(2) in the fourth proviso, for the words, figures and letters “the 30th day of March, 1990", the
words, figures and letters “the 30th day of March, 1992" shall be substituted and shall be deemed to.
have been substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1990;

(0) गीश the fourth proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have
been inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1990, namely —

“Provided also that the exemption under sub-clause (iv)or sub-clause (v) shall not be denied
in relation to voluntary contribution, other than voluntary contribution in cash or voluntary
contribution of the nature referred to in clause (b) of the third proviso to this sub-clause, subject to
the condition that such voluntary contribution is not held by the trustor institution, otherwise than in
any oneor more of the forms or modes specified in sub-section (5) of section 11, aflerthe expiry of
‘one year fromthe endof the previous year in which such asset is acquiredorthe 31st day of March,
1992, whichever is later.”.

Amendment

section 6. In section 11 of the Income-tax Act, for sub-section (4A), the following sub-section shall be
4 substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1992, namely —

(44) Sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) or sub-section (3A) shall not apply in
relation to any income of a trust or an institution, being profits and gains of business, unless the
business is incidental to the attainment of the objectives of the trust or, as the case may be, institution,

and separate books of account are maintained by such trust or institution in respect of such
business. *

Amendment 7.In section 12A of the Income-tax Act, in clause (a), in the proviso, forthe words “after the expiry of the
stsection period aforesaid”, th

words “at any time before the expiry of three years from the date of creation of the
120. ‘trust or establishment of the institution” shall be substituted with effect {rom the 1st day of October,
1991.
Amendment 8. In section 13 of the Income-tax Act, —
12 (a) in sub-section (1),in clause (6), in the proviso, after clause (i), the following clause shall

be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1983,

25

40

45

55


namely :-—

(ia) any asset, not being an investment or deposit in any of the forms or modes specified in sub-
section (5) of section 11, where such asset is not held by the trust or institution, otherwise than in
any of the formsor modes specified in sub-section (5) of section 1 1, after the expiry of one yearfrom
the end of the previous year in which such asset is acquired or the 31st day of March, 1992,
Whichever is later

(0) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have
been inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1983, namely —

+(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (d) of sub-section (1), where any assets
(being debentures issued by, or on behalf of, any company or corporation) are acquired by the trust
r institution after the 28th day of February, 1983 but before the 25th day of July, 1991, the
‘exemption under section 11 or section 12 shall not be denied in relation to any income other than the
income arising to the trust or the institution from such assets, by reason only thal the funds of thetrust
or the institution have been invested in such assets if such funds do not continue to remain so
invested in such assets after the 31st day of March, 1992. ”.

9. In section 17 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (2), after sub-clause (४), the following shall be Amendmen
inserted, namely :-- atsecton

‘Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to, —

10 the value of any medical treatment provided oan employee or any member of his family in any
hospital maintained by the employer ;

(ii) any sum paid by the employer in respect of any expenditure actually incurred by the employee
on his medical treatment or treatment of any member of his family in any hospital maintained by
Government or any local authority or any other hospital approved by the Government for the
purposes of madical treatment of its employees ;

(iil) any portion of the premium paid by an employeriin relation to an employes, to effect or tokeep
in force an insurance on the haalth of such employee under any scheme approved by the Central
Government for the purposes of clause (ib) of sub-section (1) of section 36 ;

(iv) any sum paid by the employer in respect of any premium paid by the employee to effect orto
keep in force an insurance on his health or the health of any memberof his family under any scheme
approved by the Central Government for the purposes of section 80D ;

(v)any sum paid by the employer in respect of any expenditure actually incurred by the employee
onhis medical traatment or treatment of any member of his family [other than the treatment reterred
toin clauses () and (i)] ; so, however, that such sum does not exceed five thousand rupees, in the
previous year,in the case of the employee and further five thousand rupees in the case of his
family ;

(vi) any expenditure incurred by the employer on —

(1) medical treatment of the employee, or any member of the family of such employee, outside
India ;

(2) travel or stay abroad of the employee or any member of the family of such employee for
medical treatment ;

(3)!ravel and stay abroad of one attendant who accompanies the patient in connection with
such treatment,

subject to the condition that the expenditure on travel referred to in sub-clauses (2)and (3)of this
clause shall be excluded from perquisite only inthe case of an employee whose gross total income,
as computed before including therain the said expenditure, does not exceed seventy-five thousand
fupeas and subject to such further conditions and limits in relation to such expenditure as the Board
may, having regard to the guidelines, if any, issued by the Reserve Bank of India in this behalf,
prescribe ;

(vi) any sum paid by the employer in respect of any expenditure actually incurred by the
employee for any of the purposes specified in clause (vj) subject to the conditions specified in or
under that clause,

Explanation —For the purposes of clause (2), —
())"hospital” includes a dispensary or a clinic ;

(ii) family’, in relation to an individual, shall have the same meaning as in clause (5) of section
10; and

(iii) "gross total income” shall have the same meaning as in clause (5) of section 80B;'

10. Insection29 of the Income-tax Act, forthe figures and letter "430", the figures and letter “43D"shall Amendment
be substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1992. ofsection



8
omen of 14. Insection 32 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (i), with effect from the 1st day of

April, 1992,—

(a) in the second proviso, for the words “and is used otherwise than in a business of running iton
hire for tourists : *, the following shall be substituted, namely :--

“unless it is used —

(i) in a business of running it on hire for tourists; or

(ii) outside India in his business or profession in another country:

(b) after the second proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, 1911७)

“Provided also that where any asset falling within a block of assets is acquired by the assessee
during the previous year and is put to use for the purposes of business or profession for a period of
less than one hundred and eighty days in that previous year, the deduction under this clause in
respect of such asset shall be restricted to fifty per cent. of the amount calculated at the percentage
prescribed under this clause in the case of block of assets comprising such asset: ".

Amendment of 12. In section 35 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1), for clause (ii), the following clause shall be
section 35. substituted, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1992, namely:-—

“(ii) any sum paid to a university, college or other institution to be used for research in social science
or statistical research :

Provided that such university, collage or institution is for the time being approved for the purposes ot
this clause by the prescribed authority by notification in the Official Gazette ; ".

Insertionof —_13, After section 3548 of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted with effect fromthe
SSX” 1st day of April, 1992, namely —

i 3580. (1) Where an assessee incurs any expenditure by way of payment of any sum to a public

on eligible sector company or a local authority or to an association or institution approved by the National

projects or Committee for carrying out any eligible project or scheme, the assessee shall, subject tothe provisions

schemes. of this section, be allowed a deduction of the amount of such expenditure incurred during the previous
year :

Provided that a company may, for claiming the deduction under this sub-section, incur expenditure
either by way of payment of any sum as aforesaid or directly on the eligible project or scheme.

(2) The deduction under sub-section (1) shall not be allowed unless the assessee furnishes along
with his return of income a certificate —

(a) where the payment is to a public sector company or a local authority or an association or
institution referred to in sub-section (1), from such public sector company or local authority or, as the
case may be, association or institution ;

(b) in any other case, from an accountant, as defined in the Explanation below sub-section (2
of section 288,

in such form, manner and containing such particulars (including particulars relating to the progress in
the work relating to the eligible project or scheme during the previous year) as may be prescribed.

(3) Where a deduction under his section is claimed and allowed for any assessment year in respect
of any expenditure referred to in sub-section (1), deduction shall not be allowed in respect of such
expenditure under any other provision of this Act for the same or any other assessment year.

Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, —

(a)"National Committee" means the Committee constituted by the Central Government, from
amongst persons of eminence in public life, in accordance with the rules made under this Act ;

(0) "eligible project or scheme" means such project or scheme for promoting the social and
economic welfare of, or the uplift of, the public as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, specify in this behalf on the recommendations of the National Committee. ".

12/०5/7४०६: 14. In section 36 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1)—
of section
(i)in clause (vila), with effect from the 1st day of April, 1992,--
(a)atter sub-clause (b), the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:

“(¢) a public financial institution or a State financial corporation or a State industrial investment
corporation, an amount not exceeding five per cent. of the total income (computed before making
any deduction under this clause and Chapter VI-A). * ;

(b) inthe Explanation, after clause (i), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely :--

“(iil "public financial institution” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 4A of the
Companies Act, 1956 ;

(iv) “State financial corporation” means a tinancial corporation established under section 3 or

2

25

35

45

50

ss

1 ० 1956.


; 1951

Jot 1956.

1 of 1956.

1 of 1956.

63 of 1951

Tot 1956,

9

section 3A or an institution notified under section 46 of the State Financial Corporations Act,
1951;

(0 *State industrial investment corporation” means a Government company within the
meaning of section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956, engaged in the business of providing lo
5 term finance for industrial projects and approved by the Central Government under clause (\
of this sub-section:

(ii)in clause (viii), for the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be substituted and shall be
deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1987, namely:—

‘Explanation.—tn this clause —

10 (a) “inancial corporation” shall include a public company

(0) "public company” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 3 of the Companies Act,
6

1956.'.

15. After section 43C of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted with effect from the
1st day of April, 1992, namely:-—

15 _ ‘43D. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other provision of this Act, inthecase
of a public financial institution or a scheduled bank or a State financial corporation or a State industrial
investment corporation, the income by way of interest in relation to such categories of bad or doubtful
debts as may be prescribed having regard to the guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank of India in
relation to such debts, shall be chargeable to tax in the previous year in which itis credited by the public

20 financial institution or the scheduled bank or the State financial corporation or the State industrial
investment corporation to its profit and loss account for that year or, as the case may be, in which it is
actually received by that institution or bank or corporation, whichever is earlier.

Explanation. —For the purposes of this section —

(a) “public financial institution” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 4A of the
2% Companies Act, 1956;

()"scheduled bank" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (ii) of the Explanation to
clause (vila) of sub-section (1) of section 36;

(c) "State financial corporation" means a financial corporation established under section 3 or
section 3A or an institution notified under section 46 of the State Financial Corporations Act,
4951;

(0)'State industrial investment corporation” means a Government company within the meaning
of section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956, engaged in the business of providing long-term finance
for industrial projects and approved by the Central Government under clause (vill) of sub-section
(1) of section 36,"

3. 16.In section 44D of the Income-tax Act, after clause (c), the following clause shallbe inserted and
shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1989, namely:—

“(d) no deduction in respect of any expenditure or allowance shall be allowed under any of the said
‘sections in computing the income referred to in clause (ab) of sub-section (1) of section 115A.".

17. In section 45 of the Income-tax Act,—

40 _(a) insub-section (1), for the word, figures and letter “and 540", the figures, letters and word ", 545
and 54H" shall be substituted;

(b)in sub-section (5), in clause (a), for the words ‘income under the head "Capital gains” of the
Previous year in which the transfer took place’, the words ‘income under the head" Capital gains” of the
Previous year in which such compensation or part thereof, or such consideration or part thereof, was

45 _firstreceived' shallbe substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 1st
day of April, 1988,

18. In section 47 of the Income-tax Act, after clause (ix) and the Explanation thereto, the following
clause snall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 1st day of April,
1962, namely:—

x “(x) any transfer by way of conversion of debentures, debenture-stock or deposit certificates in any
form, of a company into shares or debentures of that company.”.

19. In section 48 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2), for the words “ten thousand rupees",
wherever they occur, the words ‘fifteen thousand rupees” shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day
of April, 1992,

55 __20. Insection 49 of the Income-tax Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shalllbe inserted
and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1962, namely:—

“(2A) Where the capital assset, being a share or debenture in a company, became the property of
the assessee in consideration of atransfer referred o in clause (x) of section 47, the cost of acquisition
ofthe assetto the assessee shallbe deemed tobe that partof the cost of debenture, debenture-stock or

Insertion of
newsection
430.
Special
Provision in
case of
income of
public
financial
institutions,
etc.

Amendment
of section
440.

Amendment
of section 45.

Amendment
of section 47.

Amendment
of section 48,

Amendment
of section 49


10
deposit certificates in relation to which such asset is acquired by the assessee.".

nsertion of 21, After section 54G of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted with effect from the
fewsection 4st day of October, 1991, namely:—

iAH.

xtension of "54H. Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 54, 548, 54D,54E and 54F, wherethetranster
me tfor of the original asset is by way of compulsory acquisition under any law and the amount of compensation
पाए awarded for such acquisition is not received by the assessee on the date of such transfer, the period for
lepositing or acquiring the new asset by the assessee referred to in those sections or, as the case may be, the period
swesting available to the assessee undar those sections for depositing or investing the amount of capital gain in
mauntol lation such compensation as isnot received on the date ofthe transfer, shallbe reckoned from the

date of receipt of such compensation:

Provided that where the compensation in respect of transfer of the original asset by way of
compulsory acquisition under any law is received before the 1st day of April, 1991, the aforesaid period
or pariods, if expired, shall extend up to the 31st day of December, 1991."

(mandmentot 22. In section 57 of the Income-tax Act, for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted and
ection57. shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the ist day of April, 1989, namely —
“Provided that nothing contained in clause (i) or clause (iii) shall apply in computing the income.
referred to in clause (a) or clause (aa) or clause (ab) of sub-section (1) of section 115A in the case of
an assessee, being a foreign company.” .
Jubstitution of 23. For section 71 of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be substituted with effect from the

yew section for April 4
tow section lor 181 day of April, 1992, namely -—

3et off of loss ‘71. (1) Where in respect of any assessment year the net result of the computation under any head of
fomonehead — income, other than “Capital gains”, is a loss and the assesse has no income under the head "Capital
igainstincome gains", he shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, be entitled to have the amount of such loss set

off against his income, if any, assessable for that assessment year under any other head.

(2) Whare in respect of any assessment year, the net result of the computation under any head of
income, other than "Capital gains”, is a loss and the assessee has income assessable under the head
"Capital gains”, such loss may, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, be set off against his income, i
any, assessable forthat assessment year under any head of income including the head “Capital gains”
(whether relating to short-term capital assets or any other capital assets).

(3) Where in respect of any assessment year, the net result of the computation under the head
“Capital gains” is a loss and the assessee has income assessable under any other head of income, the
assessee shall not be entitled to have such loss set off against income under the other head.’ .

24. In section 74 of the Income-tax Act. in sub-section (1). the words and figures "and such loss cannot
beoris not wholly set off against income under any other head of income in accordance with the provisions
of section 71, so much of the loss as has not been so set off, or where he has no income under any other
head” shall be omitted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1992.

Amendmentot 25. In section B0CCA of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991,—
neck. (a) in sub-section (1), inclause (), the brackets and words “(hereatter in this section referred to as
the National Savings Scheme)" shall be omitted ;

12) in sub-section (2), in clause (a), for the words “under the National Savings Scheme”, the words,
brackets, letter and figure “under the scheme referred to in clause (i) of sub-section (1/" shall be
substituted ;

(०) in Explanation 1, for the words “under the National Savings Scheme”, the words, brackets, letter
and figure “under the scheme red to in clause (i) of sub-section (1)" shall be substituted,

Amendmentof 20. In section 80G of the Income-tax Act,—

bcs de (a) in sub-section (1), in clause (i), after the words, brackets, figures and letters "sub-clause
कि, the words, brackets, figures and letters “or in sub-clause (jiaby' shall be inserted;

(b) in sub-section (2), in clause (a)—
(i) after sub-clause (89), the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely —
“{iliab) the Attica (Public Contributions-Iindia) Fund ; or” ;

(i after sub-clause (#6), the following clause shall be inserted with effect trom the 1st day of
April, 1992, namely: —

“(ilid) the Rajiv Gandhi Foundation, the deed of declaration in respect whereof was registerad
at New Delhi on the 21st day of June, 1991; or”;

(c)in sub-section (5), after clause (v), the following clause shall be inserted with effect from the 1st
day of October, 1991, namely -

“(vi) in relation to donations made after the 31st day of March, 1992, the institution or fund is for

Amendmentot
section 74.

2

35

40

45

55


5

10

11

the time being approved by the Commissioner in accordance with the rules made in this
behaif:

Provided that any approval shall have effect for such assessment year or years, nol exceeding
three assessment years, as may be specifiad in the approval. *

27. In section 80590 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2), with effect from the 1st day of April,
1992,—

(after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely :--

(839) any sum paid by the assessee in the previous year to a university, college or other institution
to be used for research in social science or statistical research :

Provided that such university, college or institution is forthe time being approved forthe purposes
Of clause (ii) of sub-section (1) of section 35 ;";

(ii) after clause (b), the following ciause shall be inserted, namely:—

1120) any sum paid by the assessee in the previous yoar to a public sector company or a local
authority orto an association or institution approved by the National Committee, for carrying oul any
eligible project or scheme :

Provided thatthe assessee furnishes the certificate referred ton clause (a) of sub-section (2) of
section 35AC trom such public sector company or local authority or, asthe case may be, association
or institution.

Explanation. — For the purposes of this clause, the expressions ‘National Committee” and
“eligible project or schema” shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the
Explanation 10 section 35AC..'.

28. In section BOHHC of the Income-tax Act—

(a)in sub-section (2)—

() in clause (8), in sub-clause (ii), after the words. "minerals and ores”, the brackets and words
"(other than processed minerals and ores specified in the Twelfth Schedule)” shall be inserted;

{i) he following Explanations shall be inserted at the end with attect from the 1st day of April,
1992, namely:—

“Explanation 1.—The sale proceeds referrad to in clause (a) shall be deemed to have bean
feceived in India where such sale proceeds ara credited to a separate account maintained for the
Purpose by the assessee with any bank outside India with the approval of the Reserve Bank of
India,

Explanation 2—For the removal of doubts, itis hereby declared that where any goods or
merchandise are transferred by an assessea to a branch, office, warehouse or any other
establishment of the assessee situate outside India and such goods or merchandise ara sold
from such branch, office, warehouse or establishment, then, such transter shailbedeemed tobe
export out of India of such goods and merchandise and the value of stich goods or merchandise
declared in the shipping bill or bill of export as referred to in sub-section (1) o! section 50 of the
Customs Act, 1962, shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be the sale proceeds
thereof”;

(©) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day of

April, 1992, namely:—

(3) For the purposes of sub-section —

(2) where the export out of India is of goods or meichandise manufactured by the assessee,
the profits derived from such export shallbe the amountwhich bears tothe profitsof the business,
tha same proportion as the export turnover in respect of such goods bears to the total turnover of
the business carried on by the assessee:

(6) where the export out of India is of trading goods, the protits derived from such export shail
be the export tumover in respect of such trading goods as reduced by the direct costs andindirect
costs attributable to such export;

(c) where the export out of India is of goods or merchandise manufactured by the assassee
and of trading goods, the profits derived trom such export shall, —

() in respect of the goods or meichandise manufactured by the assessee, ba the amount
Which bears tothe adjusted profits of the business, tha same proportion as the adjusted export
turnover in respect of such goods bearstothe adjusted totalturnoverofthe business carriedon
by the assessee; and

(i) in respect of trading goods, be the export turnover in respect of such trading goods as
reduced by the direct and indirect costs attributable to export of such trading goods.

Amendment
ofsection

of section
SOnTHC.


12
Explanation — For the purposes of this sub-section —
(a) “adjusted export turnover" means the export turnover as reduced by the export turnoverin
respect of trading goods;

(0) "adjusted profits of the business” means the profits of the business as reduced by the
Profits derived from the business of export out of India of trading goods as computed in the
manner provided in clause (6) of sub-section (3);

(¢) “adjusted total turnover” means the total turnover of the business as reduced by the export
tumover in respect of trading goods;

(2) “direct costs” means costs directly attributable to the trading goods exported out of India
including the purchase price of such goods:

(9) “indirect costs” means costs, not being direct costs, allocated in the ratio of the export
turnover in respect of trading goods to the total turnover:

(f) "trading goods" means goods which are not manufactured by the assessee.’:
() in sub-section (3A), with effect from the 1st day of April, 1992,—

10 in clause (a), the words ‘as computed under the head “Profits and gains of business or
profession" ' shall be omitted;

(iin clause (b), the brackets and words ‘(as computed under the head "Profits and gains of
business or profession’)' shall be omitted;

(d) in sub-section (4), for the words “on the basis of the amount of export turnover, the words “in
accordance with the provisions of this section” shall be substituted with effect from the 131 day of April,
1992;

(०) in the Explanation —

@) after clause (a), the tollowing clause shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been
inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1986, namely:

‘(2a) “export out of India” shall not include any transaction by way of sale or otherwise, ina
‘shop, emporium or any other establishment situate in India, not involving clearance at any
customs station as defined in the Customs Act, 1962:';

(i) (1) after clause (0), the following clause shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been
inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1987, namely :-—

‘(ba) “otal turnover" shall not include freight or insurance attributable to the transport o! the
goods or merchandise beyond the customs station as defined in the Customs Act, 1962:

Provided that in relation to any assessment year commencing on or atter the 1st day of April,
1991, the expression “total turnover” shall have effect as ifit also excluded any sum referred a in
clauses (iia), (ii) and (itic) of section 28;';

(2)after clause (ba)as so inserted, the: following clause shall be inserted, with effect from the 1st
day of April, 1992, namely :--

1094) “profits of the business” means the profits of the business as computed under the head
“Profits and gains of business or profession” as reduced by—

(1) ninety per cent. of any receipts by way of brokerage, commission, interest, rent,
charges or any other receipt of a similar nature included in such profits: and

(2) the profits of any branch, office, warehouse or any other establishment of the assessee
situate outside India;’;

(i) clause (bb) shall be omitted.
29. In section 8OHHD of the Income-tax Act —

(2) in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, with effect from the 1st day
of October, 1991, namely :--

‘Amendment
otsection
‘BOHHD.

“Provided that a hotel or, as the case may be, a tour operator approved by the prescribed
authority on or after the 30th day of November, 1989 and betore the {st day of October, 1991, shall
be deemed to have been approved by the prescribed authority for the purposes of this section in
relation tothe assessment year commencing onthe 1stday of April, 1989orthe 1st day of April, 1990
or, asthe case maybe, the 1st day of April, 1991 ifthe assessee was engaged inthe business of such
hotel or as such tour operator during the previous year relevant to any of the said assessment
years.";

(0) in sub-section (2), the following Explanation shall be inserted at the end, with etfect from the
1st day of Apri, 1992, namely :--

25

52 of 1962.

0
52 of 1962.


46 01 1973,

10

15

45

13

"Explanation —For the purposes of this sub-section, any payment received by an assessee,
‘engaged in the business of a hotel or of a tour operator or of a travel agent, in Indian currency
obtained by conversion of foreign exchange brought into India through an authorised dealer, from a
tour operator or, as the case may be, a travel agent on behalf of a foreign tourist or group of foreign
tourists, shall be deemed to have been received by the assessee in convertible foreign exchango if
the person making the payment furnishes to the assessee a certificate specified in sub-section
(2A).";

(c) alter sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, with effect from the 1st day of
April, 1992, namel

*(2A) Every person making payment to an assessee referred to in the Explanation to sub-
section (2) out of Indian currency obtained by conversion of foreign exchange received from or on
behatf of a foreign tourist or a group of foreign tourists shall furnish to that assessee a certificate in
the prescribed form indicating the amount received in foreign exchange, its conversion into Indian
currency and such other particulars as may be prescribed.’

(0) in sub-section (3), the following proviso shallbe inserted at the end, with eftect trom the 1st day
of April, 1992, namely:

‘Provided that where the assessee (hereafter in this proviso relerred to as the first assessee) in
raceipt at convertible foreign exchange trom or on behalf of a foreign fourist or a group of foreign
tourists, makes any payment to another assessee for providing services to such foreign tourist, then
the profit derived {rom services provided to foreign tourists in the case of the first assessee shall be
the amount which bears to the profits of the business of the first assessee (as computed under the
head "Profits and gains of business or profession’) the same proportion as the receipts specified in

sub-section (2), as reduced by such payment, bear to the total receipts ol the business carriedan by
the first assessee.’;

(e) in sub-section (6), for the words "amount of convertible foreign exchange received by the
assessee for services provided by him to the foreign tourist”, the following shall be substituted, with
sifect from the 1st day of April, 1992, namely—

“aggregate of the amount of convartible foreign exchange received by the assessee for services.
provided by him to foreign tourists and the payments received by him in Indian currency as referred
to in the Explanation to sub-section (2), as reduced by the payments made by him to the other
assessee as referred to in the proviso to sub-section (3):

(2) inthe Explanation, atter clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, with effect from the
jst day of April, 1992, namely:—

(0) “authorised dealer’, “foreign exchange” and “Indian currency” shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in clauses (b), (h) and (6) of section 2 of the Foreign Exchange
Regulation Act, 1973.'.

30. After section 80HHD of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—

"BOHHE. (1) Where an assessee, being an Indian company or a person (other than a company)
resident in India, is engaged in the business of —

(i) export out of India of computer software or its transmission from India to a place outside India
by any means;

(ii) providing technical services outside India in connection with the development or production
of computer software,

there shall, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this section, be allowed, in computing
the total income of the assessee, a deduction of the profits derived by the assessee from such
business:

Provided that no such deduction shall be allowed in relation to the assessment yearcommencingon
the 1st day of April, 1994 or any subsequent assessment year.

(2) The deduction specified in sub-section (1) shall be allowed only if the consideration in respect
of the computer software referred to in that sub-section is received in, or brought into, India by the
assessee in convertible foreign exchange, within a period ol six months from the end of the previous
year or, where the Commissioner is satisfied (for reasons to be recorded in writing) that the assessee
is, for reasons beyond his control, unable to do so within the said pariod of six months, within such
further period as the Commissioner may allow in this behalf.

(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1) , profits derived from the business referred to in that sub-
section shall be the amount which bears to the profits of the business, the same proportion as the
export turnover bears to the total turnover of the business carried on by the assessee.

(4) The deduction under sub-section (1) shall not be admissible unless the assessee furnishes in
the prescribed form, along with the return of income, the report of an accountant, as defined in the
Explanation below sub-section (2) of section 288, certifying that the deduction has been correctly
claimed in accordance with the provisions of this section.

Insertion of
newseetion
‘BOHHE,

Deduction in
respect of
profits from
export of
computer
software,
etc


14

(5) Where a daduction under this section is claimed and allowad in respect of profits of the business
reterredto in sub-section (1) for any assessment year, no deduction shall be allowed in relation to such
Profits undar any other provision of this Act for the same or any other assessment year,

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, —

(a) “convertible foreign exchange” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (a)of the
Explanation to section 80110;

(2) “computer software" means any computer programme recorded on any disc, tape, perforated
media or other information storage davice and includes any such programme which is transmitted
from India to a place outside India by any means;

(¢) "export turnover" means the consideration in respect of computer software received in, or
brought into, India by the assessee in convertible foreign exchanga in accordance with sub-section
(2), but does not include freight, telecommunication charges or insurance attributable to the
delivery of the computer software outside India or expanses, if any, incurred in foreign exchange in
providing the technical services outside India;

(0) “profits of the business” means the profits of the business as computed under the head
“Profits and gains of business or profession * as reduced by—

(1) ninety percent. of any receipts by way of brokerage, commission, interest, rent, charges or
any other receipt of a similar nature included in such profits: and

(2) the profits of any branch, office, warehouse or any other establishment of the assesses
situate outside India;

(@) “otal turnover" shall not include—
19 any sum referred to in clauses (ilia), (ib) and (lic) of section 28;

(i) any treight, telacommunication charges or insurance atttibutable to the delivery of the
computer software outside India; and

(ili) expenses, if any, incurred in foreign exchange in providing the technical services outside
ia

Amendment 31. In section 80-1 of the Income-tax Act,—

कक (a) in sub-section (1A), alter the figures, letters and words "151 day of April, 1990", the words,
figures and letters "but before the 1st day of April, 19917 shall be inserted;

(0) in sub-section (2), in clause (ii), for the words “Yourteen years", the words “ten years” shall ba

‘substituted;

(00 in sub-section (3), in clause (ii), for the Words “Yourteen years", the words “ten years" shall be
substituted;

(d) in sub-section (4), in clause (iv), for the figures "1995", the figures 1991" shall be
‘substituted;

(०) in sub-section (5), in the third proviso, atter the words, figures and latters “the 1st day of April;
1990", the words, figures and letters "but before the 1st day of April, 1991" shall be inserted.

nsertion of 32, After section 80-1 of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
naw, secton
8

Deduction in (8018 (1) Where the gross total income of an assessee includes any profits and gains derived {rom
pretty any business of an industrial undertaking or a hotel or operation of a ship (such business being
Sans trom hereinafter reterredto asthe eligible business), towhich hic cocien applies, there shall, in accordance
Industrial With and subject to the provisions of this section, be allowed, in computing the total income of the
orenatings _assessee, a deduction from such profits and gains of an amount equalto the percentage specified in
gic incertain sub-section (5) and tor such number of assessment years as is specified in sub-section (6).

cases,
(2) This section applies to any industrial Undertaking which fulfils all the following conditions,
namely:

10 itis not formed by spiiting up, or the reconstruction, of a business already in existence :

Provided that this condition shall not apply in respect of an industrial undertaking which is formed
as a 0801 of the re-establishment, reconstruction of revival by the assessee of the business of any
such industrial undertaking as is referred to in section 338, in the citcumstances and within the
period specified in that section;

{itis not formed by the transtor to a new business of machinery or plant previously sed for any
purpose;

(ii) ॥ manufactures or produces any article or thing, not being any article or thing specified in the
list in the Eleventh Schedule, or operates one or more cold storage plant or plants, in any part of
India:

Provided that the condition in this clause shall, in rolation to a small scale industrial undertaking,
apply as if the words "not being any article or thing specified inthe list inthe Eleventh Schedule” had
been omitted;

(iv) itbegins to manutacture or produce articles or things or to operate such plant or plants, at any
time during the period beginning on the 1st day of April, 1991 and ending on tha 31st day of March,

10


15

1995, or such further period as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,

specity with reference to any particular industrial undertaking;

(४) in 8 case where the industrial undertaking manutactures or Produces articles or things, the
undertaking employs ten or more workers in a manufacturing process carried on with the aid of
power, or employs twenty or mora workers in a manufacturing process carried on without the aid of
power.

Explanation 1.— For the purposes of clause (i) of this sub-section, any machinery or plant which
\was used outside India by any person other than the assessee shall not be regarded as machinery or
Plant previously used for any purpose, ifthe following conditions are fulliled. namely 7०

(a)such machinery or plant was not, at any time previous to the date of the installation by the
assessee, used in India;

(b)such machinery oF plant is imported into India from any country outside India; and

{c) no deduction on account of depreciation in respect of such machinery or plant has been
allowed or is allowable under the provisions of this Act in computing the total income of any person
{or any 99100 prior to the date of the installation of the machinery or plant by the assessee,

Explanation 2 —Whsre inthe case of an industrial undertaking, any machinery or plantoor any part
thereat previously used for any purpose is transferred to a new business and the total value of the

machinery or plant used in the business, then, for the Purposes of clause (ii) of this sub-section, the
condition specified therein shall be deemed to have been complied with.

(3) This section applies to any ship, where all the following conditions are fulfilled, namely:—
gi is owned by an Indian company and is wholly used for the purposes of the business carried
‘on by it;

{i) it was not, previous to the date of its acquisition by the Indian company, owned or used in
Indian territorial waters by a person resident in India: and
(i) t's brought into use by the Indian company at any time during the period beginning onthe 1st
day of April, 1991 and ending on the 31st day of March, 1995.
(4) This section applies to the business of any hotel, where conditions (0, (i), (v). and elther of the
conditions (i) or (iv), are (७॥॥७०, namely:—

(0 the business of tha hotel is not formed by the spliting up, or the reconstruction, of a business
already in existence or by the transfer to a new business ol a building previously used ae a hotel erat
any machinery or plant previously used for any purpose:

(i) the business of the hotel is owned and carried on by a company ragistered in India with a paid-up
Capital of not lass than five hundred thousand rupees;

(20 the business of the hotel, lated in a hilly area or a rural area ora place of pilgrimage or such

other place as the Central Government may having regard to the need for development at inlra,

i /ant considerations specify for the purpose of this

Clause, starts functioning af any time during the period beginning on the 1st day of Apri, 1990 and
ending on the 31st day of March, 1994;

(iv) the business of the hotel
(1) located in any place, or
(2) located In a place other than a place referred to in clause (ii) of this sub-section,
satis functioning at any time during the period beginning on the 1st day of April, 1991 and ending on
the 31st day of March, 1995;
1४ the hotel is for the time being approved by the prescribed authority
(5) The amount referred to in sub-section (1) shall be—

(i) in the case of an industrial undertaking, twenty-five per cent. of the profits and gains derived
from such industrial undertaking:

Provided that where the assessee isa company, the provisions of this clause shall have
effect as if for the words “twenty-five per cent.”, the words “thirty per cent." had been
substituted;

(ii) inthe case of a hotel referred to in clause (ii) of sub-section (4), fifty per cent. of the profits
and gains derived from the business of such hotel:

Provided hat the said hotel is approved by the prescribed authority for the purpose of this clause
in accordance with the rules made under this Act:

Provided further that the said hotel approved by the prescribed authority before the 318 day of
March, 1992, shallbe deemed to have been approved by the prescribed authority lor the purposes
Of this section in relation to the assessment year commencing on the tst day of April, 1991;

{il ia the case of a hotel reterred to in clause (iv) of sub-section (4), thirty per cant. of the profits
and gains derived trom the business of such hotel;



16
(iv) in the case of a ship, thirty per cent. of the profits and gains derived trom such ship.

(6) The number of assessment years relerred to in sub-section (1) shall, including the initial
assessment year, bo—

(i) twelve in the case of an assessee, being a co-operative society, deriving profits and gains
from an industrial undertaking;

(i) ten in the case of any other assessee deriving protits and gains from an industrial
undertaking;

(iil tenin the case of any other assessee deriving profits and gains, from a ship orthe business of
a hotel.

(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act, the profits and gains of an
eligible business to which the provisions of sub-section (1) apply shall, for the purposes of determining
the quantum of deduction under sub-section (5) forthe assessment year immediately succeeding the
initial assessment year or any subsequent assessment year, be computed as if such eligible business
ware the only source of income of the assessee during the previous year relevant to the initial
assessment year and to every subsequenl assessment year upto and including the assessment year
for which the determination is to be made,

(8) Where the assessee Is a person other than a company or a co-operative society, the deduction
under sub-section (1) from profits and gains derived from an industrial undertaking shall not be
admissible unless the accounts of the industrial undertaking for the previous year relevant to the
assessment year for which the deduction is claimed have been audited by an accountant, as defined in
the Explanation below sub-section (2) of section 288, and the assessee furnishes, along with his
return of income, the report of such audit in the prescribed form duly signed and verified by such
accountant.

(9) Where any goods held for the purposes of the eligible business are transferred to any other
business carried on by the assessee, or where any goods held for the purposes of any other business
carried on by the assessee are transferred to the eligible business and, in either case, the
consideration, if any, for such transfer as recorded in the accounts of the eligible business does not
correspond to the market value of such goods as on the date of the transfer, then, for the purposes of
the deduction under this section, the profits and gains of such eligible business shall be computed asif
‘he transfer, in either case, had been made al the market valua of such goods as on that date:

Provided that where, in the opinion of the Assessing Officer, the computation of the profits and gains
of the eligible business in the manner hereinbefore specified presents exceptional difficulties, the
‘Assessing Officer may compute such profits and gains on such reasonable basis as he may deem
fit

Explanation—In this sub-section, “market value’, in relation to any goods, means the price that
such goods would ordinarily fetch on sale in the open market.

(10) Where it appears to the Assessing Officer that, owing to the close connection between the
assesses carrying onthe eligible business to which this section applies and any other person, or for any
other reason, the course of business between them is so arranged that the business transacted
between them produces to the assessee more than the ordinary profits which might be expected to
arise in such eligible business, the Assessing Officer shall, in computing the profits and gains of such
sligible business for the purposes of the deduction under his section, take the amount of profits as may
be reasonably deemed ta have been derived therefrom.

(11) The Central Government may, alter making such inquiry as it may think fit, direct, by
notification in the Oficial Gazette, that the exemption conferred by this section shall not apply to any
class of industrial undertakings with effect from such date as it may specity in the notification.

(12) For the purposes of this section —

(a) “hilly area” means any area located at a height of one thousand metres or more above the sea
level;

(0) “industrial undertaking” shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Explanation to section
338;

(c) “initial assessment year means the assessment year relavant to the previous year in which
the industrial undertaking begins to manufacture or produce articles or things, of to operate its cold
‘storage piant or plants or the ship is first brought into use or the business of the hotel starts
functioning;

(d) "place of pilgrimage" means a place where any temple, mosque, gurudwara, church or other
place ० public worship of renown throughout any State or States is situated;

(०) “tural area” means any area other than—

(i) an area which | comprised within the jurisdiction of a municipality (whether known as a
municipality, municipal corporation, notified area committee, town area committee or by any
‘other name) or a cantonment board and which has a population of not less than ten thousand

10

15


10

8

17

according to the preceding census of which relevant figures have been published belore the first
day of the previous year; or

(i) an area within such distance not being more than fifteen kilometres from the local limits of
any municipality or cantonment board referred to in sub-clause (i), as the Central Government
may, having regard to the stage of development of such area (including the extent of, and
for, urbanisation of such area) and other relevant considerations specify in this behall by
Notification in the Official Gazette;

(0 “small-scale industrial undertaking” means an industrial undertaking where the aggregate
value ofthe machinery and plant (other than tools, jigs, dies and moulds) installed, ason the last day
of the previous year, forthe purposes of business of the undertaking does not exceed thiy five lakh
rupees and for this purpose the value of any machinery छा plant shall be,—

(1) in the case of any machinery or plant owned by the assesses, the actual cost thereof to the
assessee; and

(i) inthe case of any machinery or plant hired by the assessee, the actual cost thereof as in
the case of the owner of such machinery or plant.’.

33. In section 60-0 the Income-tax Act, after the words “an Indian company’, the words and brackets
ra person (other than acompany) who isesidentin India" shallbe inserted with eect from ihe 1stday of
April, 1992.

34. After section 807 of the Income-tax ‘Act, the following section shall be inserted, with effect from the
‘1st day of April, 1992, name!

"800. (1) Where in the case of an assessee the gross total income of the previous year relevant to
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of Apri, 1992, orto any one of the four assesement

years next following that assessment year, includes any profits and gains derived from a business

with and subject to the provisions of this section, be allowed, in computing the total income of the
assessee, 9 deduction {rom such protits and gains of an amount equal to twenty per cent. therect.

(2) In a.case where the assessee is entitled also to the deduction under section OHH or section
BOHHA or seclion 80HHC or section 80-10 section 80-IA or section 800 or section 80P, in relation to
Any Part of the profits and gains referred to in sub-section (1), the deduction under sub-section(1)shall
boallowad with raference to such profits and gains included in the gross totalincomeas reduced bythe
deductions under section BOHH, section BOHHA, section BOHHC, section 804, section 80-1A, section
80J and section 80P.

(3) For the purposes of this section, “books” shall not include newspapers, journals, magazines,
diaries, brochures, tracts, pamplets and other Publications of a similar nature by whatever name
called.”.

35. Insaction 80QQA, in sub-section (1), for the words "commencing onthe 1st. ‘day of April, 1980, orto
any one of the nine assessment years next following that assessment year, includes", the following shall
be substituted, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1992, namely :—

“commencing on—

(22 the 1st day of April, 1980, of to any one of the nine assessment years next following that
assessment year; or

(0) the 151 day of April, 1992, or to any one of the four assessment years next following that
assessment year,

includes”.

36, For section 80U of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be substituted, with effect rom
the 1st day of April, 1992, namoly:—

201). In computing the total income of an individual, being a resident, who, atthe endothe previous
year, is suffering from a permanent physical disabilty (including blindness) or is subject to mental
retardation, being a permanent physical disability or mental retardation specified in the rules made in
this behalt by the Board, which is certified by a physician, asurgeon, an oculist or a psychiatrist, as the
case may be, working in a Government hospital, and which has the effect of reducing considerably
Such individual's capacity. for normal work or engaging in a gainfut employment or occupation, there
Shall be allowed a deduction of a sum of twenty thousand rupees :

Provided that such individual produces the aloresaid certificate belore the Assessing Otficer in
respect of the first assessment year for which he claims deduction under this section:

Provided further that the requirement of producing ५ Pa aforesaid certificate from a physician, a
surgeon, an cult ora ist, as the case may be, working in a Government hospital shall not

(0 आ individual vito has ar already produced a ceniicate bebe ihe Assossing Officer under the
Provisions of this section as they stood immediately before the 1st day of April, 1992,

Explanation.— For the poses of this section, the ex; “Government hospital" shall have
the nanan assigned to hin the Expanaiion to seston BOGE

Amendmen
ofsection
80.0,

Insertion of
‘new section
809

Deduction i
respactot
profits and
gains from
the busines:
of

publication
of books,

‘of section
BOQQA.

‘Substitution
olnew
section for
‘section 800.
Deduction in
the case of
permanent
hy

(/27*#न


ofsection
88.

Amendment
ofsection
90.

‘Amendment
ofsection
115A.

Insertion of
new section
115AB.
Taxon
income from
tits,
purchasedin
foreign
currency or
capital pains
arising from
their

transfer.

18

37. In section 88 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2), with effect from the 1st day of April,
1992,—

(a) after clause (xiv), the following clause shall be inserted, namely :—
*(xiva) as subscription to any such deposit scheme of—

(a) a public sector company which is engaged in providing long-term finance for construction
or purchase of houses in India for residential purposes; or

(2) any authority constituted in India by or under any law enacted either for the purpose of
dealing with and satisfying the need for housing accommodation or for the purpose of planning,
development or improvement of cities, towns and villages, or for both,

not being a scheme the intereston deposits whereunder qualifies for the purposes of computing the
deduction under section 80L, as the Central Government may, by notification inthe Official Gazette,
specify in this behal

(b)in clause (xv),—

(i) the words, figures and letters “construction of which is completed after the 31st day of March,
1987, and the" shall be omitted;

(ii) sub-clause (8) shall ७७ omitted.

38. Section 90 of the Income-tax Act shall be renumbered and shall be deemed to have been
renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-
section shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted, with effect from the 1st day of April,
1972, namely:—

*(2) Where the Central Government has entered into an agreement with the Government of any
country outside India under sub-section (1) for granting relief of tax, or as the case may be, avoidance
of double taxation, then, in relationto the assessee to whom such agreement applies, the provisions of
this Act shall apply to the extent they are more beneficial to that assessee.”.

39, In section 115A of the Income-tax Act —
(a) in sub-section (1A),—

(i) after the words “an Indian concern”, the words “or in respect of any computer software to a
person resident in India” shall be inserted;

(ii) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—

"Provided further that such computer software is permitted according to the Import Trade
Control Policy of the Governmentof India for the time being in force tobe imported into India under
an Open General Licence,”;

(ii) the existing Explanation shallbe renumbered as Explanation 1 and after Explanation 1s
0 renumbered, the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—

‘Explanation 2—n this sub-section, the expression “computer software” shall have the
meaning assigned to it in clause (b)of the Explanation to section 80HHE:';

(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "purposes of the proviso", the words "purposes of the first
proviso” shall be substituted.

40. After section 115Acf the Income-tax Act, the following section shallbe inserted, with effect fromthe
1st day of April, 1992, namely:—

“11SAB. (1) Where the total income of an assessee, being an overseas financial organisation
(hereinafter referred to as Offshore Fund) includes—

(a) income received in respect of units purchased in foreign currency; or

(b) income by way of long-term capital gains arising from the transfer of units purchased in
foreign currency,

the income-tax payable shall be the aggregate of —

(i) the amount of income-tax calculatedon the income in respect of units referred :o in clause (2),
if any, included in the total income, at the rate of ten per cent.;

(ii) he amount of income-tax calculated on the income by way of long-term capital gains referred
to in clause (b),if any, included in the total income, at the rate of ten per cent,; and

i) the amountof income-tax with which the Offshore Fund would have been chargeable had its
total income been reduced by the amount of income referred to in clause (a) and clause (b).

(2) Where the gross total income of the Offshore Fund,—

(a) consists only of income from units orincome by way of long-term capital gains arising fromthe
transfer of units, or both, no deduction shall be allowed to the assessee under sections 2810 440 or
sub-section (2) of section 48 or clause (i) or clause (i) of section 57 or under Chapter VI-A;

10

5


46 of 1973,

15
1 of 1956,

52 of 1963,

19

(0) includes any income referred to in clause (a) ,the gross total income shall be reduced by the
amount of such income and the deduction under Chapter VI-A shall be allowed as ifthe gross total
income as so reduced were the gross total income of the assessee.

Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—

(a)"overseas financial organisation” means any fund, institution, association or body, whether
incorporated or not, established under the laws of acountry outside India, which has entered into an
arrangement for investment in India with any public sector bank or public financial institution or a
mutual {und specified under clause (23D) of section 10 and such arrangement is approved by the
Central Government for this purpose;

(6)"unit" means unit of a mutual fund specified under clause (23D) of section 10 or of the Unit
Trust of India;

(c) “foreign currency" shall have the meaning as in the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act,
1973;

(4) “public sector bank" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (23D) of section 10;

(8) “public financial institution shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 4A of the
Companies Act. 1956;

(0 "Unit Trust of India" means the Unit Trust of India established under the Unit Trust of India Act,
963.".

1
41. In section 119 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2)—

(i) in clause (a), for the figures and letters "210, 234A, 2348", the words, brackets"figures and
letters "sub-section (1A) of section 201, sections 210, 211, 234A, 2348, 2346" shall be
substituted;

(i) attor clause (b), the following clause shallbe inserted, with etfect from the 1st dayiof October,
1991, namely:-—

"(60 the Board may, ititconsiders it desirable or expediant so to do for avoiding genuine hardship
inany case orclass of cases, by generalor specialorder for reasons tobe specified therein, relax any
Tequirement contained in any of the provisions of Chapter IV or Chapter VI-A, wherethe assessea
has failed to comply with any requirement specified in such provision for claiming deduction
thereunder, subject to the following conditions, namely:—

(0 the default in complying with such requirement was due to circumstances beyond the control
of the assessee; and

(i) the assessee has complied with such requirement before the completion of assessment in
telation to the previous year in which such deduction is claimed :

Provided that the Central Government shall cause ‘every order issued under this clause to be laid
before each House of Parliament.”.

42. In section 132 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-seetion (8A), forthe word “Commissioner”, wherever it
occurs, the words "Director or, as the case may be, Commissioner” shall be ‘substituted with effect from
the 1st day of October, 1991,

43. In section 139 of the Income-tax Act, sub-section (10) shall be omitted,

44. In section 140A of the Income-tax Act. in sub-section (1), for the words and figures "section 139 or
section 148", the words and figuras "section 139 or section 142 or, as the case may be, section 148" shall
be substituted.

45. In section 143 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991,--
(@) in sub-section (2), for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:—

"Provided that no notice under this sub-section shall be served on ‘the assessee after the expiry of
twelve months from the end of the month in which the return is furnished.

(b) the following Explanation shall be inserted at the ‘end, namely:—

“Explanation.— An intimation sent to the assessoo under sub-section (1) or sub-section (18)
shall be deemed to be an order for the purposes of section 264.",

46. In section 153 of the Income-tax Act, in Explanation 1, the following proviso shall be inserted atthe
‘end, namely:—

“Provided that where immediately after the exclusion of the aforesaid time or period, the period of
limitation referred to in sub-sections (1), (2) and (2A) available to the Assessing Otficer for making an
order of assessment, reassessment orrecomputation, asthe case maybe, is lessthan sixty days, such
remaining period shallbe extondedio sixty days and the aforesaid period of limitation shall be deemed
tobe extended accordingly.”.

of section
119,

Amendment
‘of section
132.
Amendment

of section
139,

of section
140A.

Amendment
143,

153.


20

of 47. In section 155 of the Income-tax Act, after sub-section (102), the following sub-sections shall be
section 168. inserted with etfect from the 1st day of October, 1991, namely:—

(11) Where inthe assessment for any year, acapital gain arising from the transfer of any original
asset as is referred to in section 54H is charged to tax and within the period extended under that
“section the assessee acquires the new asset referred to in that section or, as the case may be, 5
deposits or invests the amount of such capital gain within the period so extended, the Assessing
Officer shall amend the order of assessment so as to exclude the amount of the capital gain not
chargeable to tax under any of the sections referredto in section 54H; and the provisions of section
154 shall, so far as may be, apply thereto, the period of four years specified in sub-section (7) ot
Section 154 being reckoned from the end of the previous year in which the compensation was
received by the assossee.

(12) Where in the assesssment for any year commencing before the 1st day of April, 1988, the
deduction under section 80-0 in respectof any income, being the whole or any part of income by way
of royalty, commission, fees or any similar payment as is referred to in that section, has not been
allowed on the ground that such income has not been received in convertible foreign exchange in 15
India, or having been received in convertible foreign exchange outside India, or having been
converted into convertible foreign exchange outside India, has not been brought into India, by or on
behalt of the assessee in accordance with any law forthe time being in force for regulating payments
and dealings in foreign exchange and subsequently such income or part thereof has been or is
received in, or brought into, India in the manner aforesaid, the Assessing Otficer shall amend the 20
order of assessment so as to allow deduction under section 80-O in respect of such income or part
thereof as is 50 received in, or brought into, India; and the provisions of section 154 shall, so tar as
may be, apply thereto, the period of four years specified in sub-section (7) of that section being
reckoned from the end of the previous year in which such income is s0 received in, or brought into,
India; so, however, that the period fromthe 1 stday of April, 1988 to the 30th day of September, 1991 25
shall be excluded in computing the period of four years.”.

0

+०“+९- कु of 48. In section 161 of the 0019-8९ Act, in sub-section (1A), the Explanation shall be omitted.
Ceienanwet 49. In section 193 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991,—

(a) for the words "Provided that”, the following shall be substituted, namely:—

“Provided that where, in the case of a scheduled bank, the Central Government is satisfied that 30
the total income of the bank justifies deduction of income-tax at a lower rate, it may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, specity the rate at which deduction of income-tax shall be made in the case of
such bank under this section and such notification shall, at any one time, have effect for such
assessment year or years, not exceeding three assessment years, as may be specified in the
notification: 8

Provided further that";

(0) the existing Explanation shall be renumbered as Explanation 1 and after Explanation 1 as so
renumbered, the following Explanation shall be inserted, namel

‘Explanation 2—For the purposes of this section, the expression “scheduled bank” shall have
the meaning assigned to it in clause (i) of the Explanation to clause (vila) of sub-section (1) of 40

‘section 36.'.
aaa 50. In section 194 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991,—
194. () after the words “distribution or payment to shareholder,", the words “who is resident in India,”
‘shall be inserted;
(ii) in the proviso, the words "who is resident in India," shall be omitted. 45
reer 51. In section 194A of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (3), clause (vii) shall be omitted with effect
194A. from the 1st day of October, 1991.

Amendment 52. In section 19488 of the Income-tax Act, the words “i

a an amount exceeding five thousand rupees”
19488.

‘shall be omitted with etfect from the 1st day of October, 1991.

Insertion of 53. After section 194E of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted with effect {from the 50
04 अं ‘1st day of October, 1991, namely:

Payments in “194EE. The person responsible for paying to any person any amount relerred to in clause (a) of
iowontsinder  SUb-Section (2) of section 80CCA shall, at the time of payment thereof, deduct income-tax thereon at
‘National the rate of twenty per cent.:

Set ae Provided that no deduction shall be made under this section where the amount of such payment or, 55

as the case may be, the aggregate amount of such payments to the payee during the financial years
less than two thousand five hundred rupees:

Provided further that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the paymentof the: ‘sajd amount
to the heirs of the assessee.",


2a

54. After section 194F of the Income-tax Act, the following sections shall be inserted, with effect from Insertion of

the 1st day of October, 1991, namely: पा and

1940.
"1946. Any person who is responsible for paying, on or after the 1st day of October, 1991 to any Commissior
Perso’, who is or has been stocking, distributing, purchasing or selling lotery tickets, any income by ००, ० sal
way of commission, remuneration or reward (by whatever name called) on such tickets, shall, at the (2000
time of credit of such income to the account of the payee or atthe time of payment of such income in
cashor by the issueot a cheque or draftor by any other made, whichever is earlier, deduct income-
tax thereon at the rate of ten per cent.

Explanation—For the purposes of this saction, where any income is credited to any account,
whether called "Suspense account”orby any other name, in the books of account of the person liableto
Pay such income, such crediting shall be deemed tobe credit of such income tothe account of the payee
and the provisions of this section shall apply accordingly.

194H. (1) Any person, not being an individual or a Hindu undivided family, who is responsible for Commissior
Paying, on or after the 1st day of October, 1991, to a resident, any income by way of commission (not brokerage,
being insurance commission referred to in section 1940) or brokerage, shall, at the time of credit of गए.
such income to the accountof the payee or at the time of payment of such income in cashorby the issue
of acheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier, deduct income-tax thereon atthe rate
of ten per cent.

(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply where the amount of such income or, as the
case may be, the aggregate of the amounts of such income credited or paid or likaly to be credited or
aid during the financial year by the person referred to in sub-section (1) to the account of, or fo, the
Payee, does not exceed two thousand five hundred rupees.

Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, —

() “commission or brokerage” includes any payment received or receivable, directly or indirectly,
by a person acting on behalf of another person for services rendered (not being professional
services) or for any services in the course of buying or selling of goods or in relation to any
transaction relating to any asset, valuable article or thing;

(i) "professional services” means services rendered by a person in the course of carrying on a
legal, medical, engineering or architectural profession or the profession of accountancy or technical
consultancy or interior decoration or such other profession as is notified by the Board for the
purposes of section 44AA;

(ii) where any income is credited to any account, whether called “Suspense account” or by any
other name, in the books of account of the person liable to pay such income, such crediting shall be
deemed to be credit of such income to the account of the payee and the provisions of this section
shall apply accordingly.’

55. In section 195 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991,— ‘aviencrent
(7 in sub-section (1), the words “or dividends” आ be omitted;
(i) in sub-section (2),—

(a) the word ", dividend” shall be omitted;
(0) the proviso shall be omitted.

56. After section 196A of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted, with effect from the Ipantisnot,
1st day of October, 1991, namely:— new

198.
"196B. Where any income is payable in respect of units referred to in section 1 15ABto an Offshore Income trom
Fund, the person responsible for making the payment shall, at the time of cradit of such income to the units.
account of the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by the issue of a cheque or dratt or by
any other mode, whichever is earlier, deduct income-tax thereon at the rate of ten per cent.”.

57. In section 197A of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991,—

section
(a) after the words, figures and letter “or section 194A", the words, figures and letters “or section Soya"
194&&- shall be inserted;

(b) tor the words, figures and letter "or, as the case may be, section 194A”, the words, figures and
letters “or section 194A or, as the case may be, section 194EE” shall be substituted.

58. In sections 198, 199, 200, 202, 203, 203A and 205 of the Income-tax Act, for the words, figures and Amendment
letter “section 195 and saction 196A", the words, figures and letters "section 194EE, section 1947, of sections
section 194G, section 194H, section 195, section 196A and section 1968" shall be substituted with effect

and 202,
from the 1st day of October, 1991. 203,203A ar
205.

59. In section 204 of the income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991,— ‘Amendment

(a) in the opening portion, after the word, figures and letter “section 194E,", the words, figures and 35°"
letters "section 194EE, section 194F, section 1946, section 194H," shall be inserted;



22

(b) in clause (ii), after the words "provisions of this Act,", the words “other than payments made by
or on behalf of the Central Government or the Government of a State," shall be inserted.

60. In section 206 of the Income-tax Act, for the words "shall prepare, within the prescribed time after
the end of each financial year, and deliver or cause to be delivered”, the words “shall, within the
Prescribed time afterthe end of eachfinancial year, prepare and deliver or cause to be delivered” shallbe
substituted,

61. In section 2340 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (7), in the opening portion, after the words *
~ in any financial year,", the words and figures “the assessee who is liable to pay advance tax under

section 208 has failed to pay such tax or” shallbe inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted
with effect from the 1st day of April, 1989.

Amendmentof 62. In section 244A of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1), the words “andone-hall", wherever they
section 244A, 0000, shall be omitted with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991.

*६+7ध्र*० “7 63. In section 24588 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the Ist day of October, 1991,—
section
(a) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-—

१54) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, the
Chairman may, for the disposal of any particular case, constitute a Special Bench consisting of
more than three Members.";

Amendmentot
section 206.

Amendmentot
Section 2340.

(0) in sub-section (6), the following shall be inserted at the end, namely:—

and the Special Bench shall sit at a place to be fixed by the Chairman out of the places specified in
relation to other Benches.”.

64. In section 2450 of the Income-tax Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), after the first proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—

"Provided further that the Commissioner shall furnish the report within a period of six months of
the receipt of communication from the Settlement Commission in case of all applications made
under section 2450 on or after the date on which the Finance (No. 2) Bill, 1991 receives the assent
of the President and if the Commissioner fails to furnish the report within the said period, the
Settlement Commission may make the order without such report.”;

(b) sub-section (1A) shall be omitted.

Amendmentof 65. In section 254 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (3), the words "Chief Commissioner or” shall
section254. be omitted.

Amendmentot
section 2450.

Amendmentot 66. In section 272A of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2), with effact from the 1st day of October,
section 272A, 4991,

(a) in clause (c), after the figures and letter "2068", the words, figures and letter “or section 20607"
shall be inserted;

(0) in clause (9), after the figures "203", the words, figures and letter "or section 2060" shalll be
inserted;

(c) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:

"Provided that the amountof penalty for failures in relation to returns under sections 206 and 206C
shall not exceed the amount of tax deductible or collectible, as the case may be.”.

‘Amendmentot 67. In section 273A of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be inserted at
section 273A. the end, namely:—

“Provided that where an order has been made in favour of any person under sub-section (1) on or
before the 24th day of July, 1991, such person shall be entitled to further relief only once in relation to.
other assessment year of years at any time after the making of such an order.".

Amendmentof 68. In section 279 of the Income-tax Act,—

tion 279,
etry (a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, with effect from the 1st day of
October, 1991, namely:

(1) A person shall not be proceeded against for an offence under section 275A, section 276,
‘section 276A, section 2768, section 27688, section 2760, section 27600, section 2760, section
277 or section 278 except with the previous sanction of the Commissioner or Commissioner
(Appeals) or the appropriate authority:

Provided that the Chief Commissioner or, as the case may be, Director General may issue such
instructions or directions tothe aforesaid income-tax authorities as he may deemfit for institution
of proceedings under this sub-section.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “appropriate authority” shall have the same
meaning as in clause (c) of section 269UA.’;

(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, with effect from the 1st day of

25

35

40

50

55


23
October, 1991, namely:—

120 Any offence under this Chapter may, either before or after the institution of proceedings, be
compounded by the Board or a Chief Commissioner or a Director General":

(¢) after sub-section (3), the following Explanation shalllbe inserted and shall be deemed always to.
5 have been inserted, name!

“Explanation — For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the power of the Board to
issue orders, instructions or directions under this Act shall include and shall be deemed always to
have included the power to issue instructions or directions (including instructions or directions to
obtain the previous approval of the Board) to other income-tax authorities for the proper

10 composition of offences under this section.”.
69, After the Elevanth Schedule to the Income-tax Act, the following Schedule shall be inserted, Insertion o
namely:— Twolth
“THE TWELFTH SCHEDULE चर
[See section 80HHC (2)(b)(ii) |
15 PROCESSED MINERALS AND ORES

@ Pulverised or micronised —barytes, calcite, steatite, pyrophylite, wollastonite, zircon,
bentonite, red or yellow oxide, red or yellow ochre, talc, quartz, feldspar, silica powder, garnet,
ireclay, ballclay, managanese dioxide ore.

(i) Processed or activated— bentonite, diatomious earth, fullers earth.
2 (ii) Processed—kaolin (china clay), whiting, calcium carbonate.

{W) Beneticated— chromite, flourspar, graphite, vermiculite, ilminite, brown ilminite (lencoxene)
tutile, monazite and other mineral concentrates.

(४2 Mica blocks, mica splittings, mica condenser films, mica powder, micanité, silvered mica,
Punched mica, mica paper, mica tapes, mica flakes.

Ss (vi) Extoliated—vermiculite, calcined kyanite, magnesite, calcined magnesite, calcined
alumina.

(vi) Sized iron ore processed by mechanical crushing and screening through dry process or
mechanical crushing, screening, washing and classification through wet process.

(wil) \ron ore concentrates processed through crushing, grinding or magnetic separation.
30 (&) Agglomerated iron ore.
() Cut and polished minerals and rocks.

Explanation— For the purposes of this Schedule, “processed”, in relationto any mineralorore,
means—

(a) dressing through mechanical means to obtain concentrates after removal of gangue
35 ee erected deleterous substances or through other means without altering the minerological

(0) pulverisation, calcination or micronisation;

(00 agglomeration from fines;

170 cutting and polishing;
x (2) washing and levigation;

() benefication by mechanical crushing and screening through dry process;

(9) sizing by crushing, screening, washing and classification through wet process;

(h) other upgrading techniques such as removal of impurities through chemical treatment,

fefining by gravity separation, bleaching, floatation or filtration’,

45 70. The following amendments (being amendments of a consequent
Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1992, namely:

{7 in section 54, in sub-section (2), in the Explanation to the proviso, in clause (a), for the words ents.
“ten thousand rupees", the words “fifteen thousand rupees" shall be substituted;

19 in section 548, in sub-section (2), in the Explanation to the proviso, for the words "ten thousand
50 rupees’, the words “fi'een thousand rupees” shall be substituted;
(ii) in section 54D, in sub-section (2), in the Explanation to the proviso, for the words "ten
thousand rupees", the words “fitteen thousand rupees” shall be substituted;

(@v) in section 546, in the Explanation, for the words “ten thousand rupees", the words “teen
thousand rupees" shall be substituted;

nature) shall be made in the Consequen-



24

(४) in section 54G, in sub-section (2), in the Explanation to the proviso, for the words “ten thousand
rupees”, the words “fifteen thousand rupees” shall be substituted.

Wealth-tax

Amendmentof 71. In section 5 of the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as the Wealth-tax Act), in sub-
section 5. section (1),—

(a) for clause (xvila), the following clause shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been
substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1984, namely —
"(xvila) the amount standing to the credit of—
(a) an individual; or
(b) a Hindu undivided family; or
(c) an association of persons or body of individuals consisting, in either case, only of husband

and wife governed by the system of community of property in force in the State of Goa and the
Union territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu,

in any provident fund set up by the Central Government and notified by it in this behait in the Official
Gazette;*;
(b) in clause (xxvb), for the words “the National Savings Scheme referred to in”, the words, brackets
and figures “any scheme referred to in clause (i) of sub-section (1) of” shall be substituted with effect
from the 1st day of October, 1991.
Sneeinetot 72. In section 16 of the Wealth-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991,—
(a) in sub-section (2), for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:
"Provided that no notice under this sub-section shall be served on the assessee after the expiry of
twelve months from the end of the month in which the return is furnished.”;
(b) the following Explanation shall be inserted at the end, namely:—
“Explanation —An intimation sent to the assessee under sub-section (1) or sub-section (1B)
shall be deemed to be an order for the purposes of sub-section (1) of section 25.

Amendment of 73. In section 17A of the Wealth-tax Act, in Explanation 1, the following proviso shall be inserted at the
‘section 17A. end, namely:—

“Provided that where immediately atter the exclusion of the aforesaid time or period, the period of
limitation referred to in sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) available to the Assessing Officer for making an
order of assessment or reassessment, as the case may be, is less than sixty days, such remaining
Period shall be extended to sixty days and the aforesaid period of limitation shall be deemed to be
extended accordingly.”.

Amendment of 74. In section 188 of the Wealth-tax Act, in sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be inserted at the
section 188. ond, namely:-—

"Provided that where an order has been made in favour of any person under sub-section (1) on or
before the 24th day of July, 1991, such person shall be entitled to further relief only once in relation to
other assessment year or years at any time after the making of such an order.”.

Amendment of 75. In section 2288 of the Wealth-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991,—
(a) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
354) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, the
Chairman may, forthe disposal of any particularcase, constitute a Special Bench consisting of more
than three Members.”;
(0) in sub-section (6), the following shall be inserted at the end, namely:—
‘and the Special Bench shall sit at a place to be fixed by the Chairman out of the places specified in
relation to other Benches”.
Amendment of 76. In section 22D of the Waalth-tax Act, —
(a) in sub-section (1), after the first proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided further that the Commissioner shall furnish the report within a period of six months of
the receipt of communication from the Settlement Commission in case of all applications made
under section 220 on or after the date on which the Finance (No. 2) Bill, 1991 receives the
assent of the President and if the Commissioner fails to furnish the report within the said period, the
Settlement Commission may make the order without such report.”;

(0) sub-section (1A) shall be omitted.

5

5

27 of 1957.


25

77. In section 27 of the Wealth tax Ac, n sub-section (1), after the word and figures “section 26%, the Arnendment

words, brackets, letter and figures “or clause (०) of sub-section (1) of section 35" shall be inserted. $I

78. In section 348 of the Wealth-tax Act, in sub-section (4B), in clause (a), the words “and a hal shall Amendmentot
be omitted with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991. Cage no

5. 79. In section 35-1 of the Wealth-tax Act— Amendmentof

(०) for sub-sections (1)and (2), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, with effect from the 35-1.
1st day of October, 1991, namely:—

(1) A person shall not be proceeded against for an offence under this Act except with the
Previous sanction of the Commissioner or Commissioner (Appeals):
10 Provided that the Chief Commissioner or, as the case may be, Director General may issue such
instructions or directions to the aforesaid wealth-tax authorities as he may deom fitfor institution of
proceedings under this sub-section.

(2) Any such offence may, either before or after the institution of proceedings, be compounded
by the Board or a Chief Commissioner or a Diractor General.";

15 (b) after sub-section (2) as so substituted, the following Explanation shall be inserted and shall be
deemed always to have been inserted, namely:—

"Explanation. — For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the power of the Board to
issue orders, instructions or directions under this Act shall include and shall be deemed always to
have included the power to issue instructions or directions (including instructions or directions to

2 obtain the previous approval of the Board) to other wealth-tax authorities forthe Proper composition
of offences under this section.”.

80. In section 37A of the Wealth-tax Act, in sub-section (6A), for the words "Chief Commissioner or 7८०“: 7 घर
Commissioner”, wherever they occur, the words "Director or, as the case may be, Commissioner" shall ®°cton37A.
be substituted with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991.

2% 81. In Schedule Ill to the Wealth-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1992,— ainenerentot

(a) in rule 9A, after the words “at the option of the assessee,”, the words “being an individual or a
Hindu undivided family,” shall be inserted;

(b)in rule 12,—
() after sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall.be inserted, namely:—

30 19170 the purposes of sub-rule (2), the value of an asset disclosed in the balance-sheet of
the company shall be taken to be its value determined in accordance with the rules as applicable
to that particular asset and, in the absence of any such rule, the value of such asset shall be its
value as determined under rule 20.";

(ii) after sub-rule (4), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:—

s १15) For the purpose of facilitating the valuation of unquoted equity shares under this rule and
rule 13,the company concerned shall have such valuation made by its auditors appointed under
section 224 of the Companies Act, 1956, and acertificate of the auditors relating to such valuation
in the prescribed form shall be furnished to the Assessing Officer and the shareholders of the
‘company; and the valuation made by the auditors shall be taken into accountin the assessment of

40 the shareholders of the company.”.

Gittax

82. In section 4 of the Gift-tax Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as the Gift-tax Act), in sub-section (1), Amendmentof
inclause (a), for the words "market value of the property at the date of the transfer”, the words and figures
“value of the property as on the date of the transfer and determined inthe manner laid down in Schedule Il,”

45 shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1992.

. i he Gifts in sub-section (1), i ite) — ‘Amendmentot
83. In section 5 of the Gift-tax Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (fe), Amendme

(a) for the portion beginning with the words “to any relative” and ending with the words "Provided
further that", the following shall be substituted, namely:—

“of property in the form of the bonds specified under sub-clause (ii) of clause (15) of section 10 of
50 the Income-tax Act:

Provided that”;
(0)॥ the Explanation, clause (a) shall be omitted.


26
Amendmentof 84. In section 15 of the Gift-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991,—

section 15.
(a) in sub-section (2), for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:—

Provided that no notice under this sub-section shall be served onthe assessee after the expiry of
twelve months from the end of the month in which the return is furnished.";

(b) the following Explanation shall be inserted at the end, namely:—

"Explanation—An intimation sent to the assessee under sub-section (1) or sub-section (18) shall
be deemed to be an order for the purposes of sub-section (1)of section 24.".

‘Amendmentot 85. Insection 16A of the Gift-tax Act, in Explanation 1, the following proviso shalllbe inserted at the end,
section 6A. namely:—

“Provided that where immediately after the exclusion of the aforesaid time or period, the period of
limitation referred to in sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) available to the Assessing Officer for making an
order of assessment or reassessment, as the case may be, is less than sixty days, such remaining
period shall be extended to sixty days and the aforesaid period of limitation shall be deemed to be
extended accordingly.”.

‘Amendmentot 86. In section 26 of the Gift-tax Act, in sub-section (1), after the word and figures “section 25°, the
section26. —_ words, brackets, letter and figures "or clause (०) of sub-section (1) of section 34” shall be inserted.

‘Amendmentof 87. In section 33A of the Gift-tax Act, in sub-section (4B), in clause (a), the words “and a half" shall be
section33A. omitted with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991.

Amendmentot 88. In section 35 of the Gift-tax Act, —

कल ey: (a) for sub-sections (3) and (4), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, with effect from the
4st day of October, 1991, namaly:—

(3) A person shall not be proceeded against for an offence under this Act except with the
previous sanction of the Commissioner or Commissioner (Appeals):

Provided that the Chief Commissioner or, as the case may be, Director General may issue such
instructions or directions to the aforesaid gift-tax authorities as he may deem fit for institution of
proceedings under this sub-section.

(4) Any such offence may, either before or after the institution of proceedings, be compounded
by the Board or a Chief Commissioner or a Director General.”;

(0) the existing Explanation shall be renumbered as Explanation 1 and after Explanation 1 as so
renumbered, the following Explanation shall be inserted and shall be deemed always to have been
inserted, namely—

"Explanation 2.—For the removal of doubts, itis hereby declared that the power of the Board to
issue orders, instructions or directions under this Act shall include and shall be deemed always to
have included the power to issue instructions or directions (including instructions or directions to
obtain the previous approval of the Board) to other git-tax authorities for the proper composition of
offences under this section.

Interest-tax

Amendment gg. inthe Interest-tax Act, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as the Interest-tax Act), in section 2, with effect
of section 2. from the 1st day of October, 1991,—
(a) after clause (5), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
(6A) “credit institution" means, —
(9 abanking company to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, applies (including any bank
‘or banking institution referred to in section 51 of that Act) or a co-operative society engaged in
carrying on the business of banking (including a co-operative land mortgage bank or 8 co-
operative land development bank);
(i) a public financial institution as defined in section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956;
(ii) a State financial corporation established under section 3 or section 3A or an institution
notified under section 46 of the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951; and
(iv) any other financial company;
(68) “financial company” means a company, other than a company referred to in sub-clause (i),
(0० (i) of clause (5A), being—
() 3 hire-purchase finance company, that is to say, a company which carries on, as its
principal business, hire-purchase transactions or the financing of such transactions;

(i) an investment company, that is to say, a company which carries on, as its principal
business, the acquisition of shares, stock, bonds, debentures, debenture stock, or securities
issued by the Government or a local authority, or other marketable securities of a like nature;

(ii) a housing finance company, that is to say, a company which carries on, as its principal
business, the business of financing of acquisition or construction of houses, including acquisition
or development of land in connection therewith;

45 of 1974.

10 of 1949
4

1 of 1956.

63 of 1951


&

27

(iv) aloan company, that is to say, acompany [not being a company referred toin sub-clauses
(i) to (iii) which carries on, as its principal business, the business of providing finance, whether
by making loans or advances or otherwise;

(v) a mutual benefit finance company, that is to say, a company which carries on, as its
principal business, the business of acceptance of deposits from its members and which
declared by the Central Government under section 620A of the Companies Act, 1956, to be a
Nidhi ot Mutual Benefit Society; or

(vi) a miscellaneous finance company, that is to say, a company which carries on exclusively,
or almost exclusively, two or more classes of business referred to in the preceding sub-
clauses;';

(0) for clause (7), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘@) “interest” means interest on loans and advances made in India and includes —

(a) commitment charges on unutilised portion of any credit sanctioned for being availed of in
India; and

(b) discount on promissory notes and bills of exchange drawn or made in India,
but does not include —
(i) interest referred to in sub-section (/B) of section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act,

(i) discount on treasury bills;’;
(c) clause (9) shall be omitted,

90. In section 3 of the Interest-tax Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be
substituted, with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991, namely:

*(1) The income-tax authorities specified in section 116 of the Income-tax Act shall be the interest-
tax authorities for the purposes of this Act.

(1A) Every such authority shall exercise the powers and perform the functions of an interest-tax
authority under this Act in respect of any person within his jurisdiction.

(1B) The jurisdiction of an interest-tax authority under this Act shallbe the same as he has under the
Income-tax Act by virtue of orders or directions issued under section 120 of that Act (including orders or
directions assigning the concurrent jurisdiction) or under any other provision of that Act,

(10) The interest-tax authority having jurisdiction in relation to a credit institution which has no
income assessable to income-tax under the Income-tax Act shall be the interest-tax authority having

jurisdiction in respect of the area in which that institution carries on its business or has its principal place
of business.

(1D) Section 118 of the Income-tax Act and any notification issued thereunder shall apply inrelation
to the control of interest-tax authorities as they apply in relation to the control of the corresponding
income-tax authorities, except to the extent to which the Board may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, otherwise direct in respect of any interest-tax authority.”.

91. Section 4 of the Interest-tax Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and after sub-
‘section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, with effect from the 1st day of
October, 1991, namely :—

"(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) but subject to the other provisions of
this Act, there shall be charged on avery credit institution for every assessment year commencing on
and rom the 1stday of April, 1992, interest-tax in respect ofits chargeable interest of the previous year
at the rate of thrae per cent. of such chargeable interest.”.

92. For section 5 of the Interest-tax Act, the following section shall be substituted, with effect from the
1st day of October, 1991, namely:—

Subject to the provisions of this Act, the chargeable interest of any previous year of a credit
institution shall be the total amountof interest (other than interest on loans and advances made to other
credit institutions) accruing or arising to the credit institution in that previous year.”.

93. In section 6 of the Interest-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991,—

(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “scheduled banks", the words "credit institutions” shall be
substituted;

(0) in sub-section (2), for the words, figures and letters “after the 31st day of March, 1985", the
words, figures and letters " during the period commencing on the 1st day of April, 1985 and ending with
the 30th day of September, 1991" shall be substituted,

94. In section 7 of the Interest-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991,—

Amendment
of section 3.

‘Amendment
of section 4.

‘Substitution
of new
‘section for
section 5.
Sieh
Interest.

‘Amendment
of section 6,

Amendment
‘of section 7.


‘Amendmentot
section,

‘Substitution of

28
(a) for sub-sections (1) and (2), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—

"(1) In the case of every credit institution, its principal officer, or where in the case of a non-
resident credit institution any person has been treated as its agent under section 163 of the Income-
tax Act, such person, shall furnish a return of the chargeable interest of the credit institution of the
Previous year in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner and setting forth such
other particulars as may be prescribed, before the 31st day of December of the assessment
year,

(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Assessing Officer may, before the
end of the relevant assessment year, serve a notice upon the principal officer of any credit institution,
or where in the case of a non-resident credit institution any Person has been treated as its agent
under section 163 of the Income-tax Act, upon such person, requiring himto furnish within thirty days.
from the date of service of the notice a return of the chargeable interest of the credit institution of the
Previous year in the prescribed form and veritied in the prescribed manner and ‘setting forth such
other particulars as may be prescribed.”;

(®) in sub-section (3), for the words "before the assessment is made”, the words "before the expiry
of one year from the end of the relevant assessment year or before the completion of the assessment,
whichever is earlier” shall be substituted.

95. In section 8 of the Interest-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991,—

(a) for the words "income-tax Officer”, wherever they occur, the words “Assessing Officer” shall be
‘substituted;

(0) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(3) Many person —
(8) falls to make a return as required under sub-section (1) of section 7 and has not made a
return or a revised return under sub-section (3) of that section, or
(®) fails to comply with all the terms of notice under sub-section (1) of that section,
the Assessing Officer shall, after taking into account all the relevant material which he has gathered
and after giving the assessee an opportunity of being heard, make the assessment of the total

interest to the best of his judgment and determine the sum payable by the assessee on the basis of
‘such assessment:

Provided that such opportunity shalllbe given by the Assessing Otficer by serving a notice calling
upon the assessee to show cause, on a date and time to be specifed in the notice, why the
assessment should not be completed to the best of his judgment:

Provided further that it shall not be necessary to give such opportunity in 3०३७७ where a notice
under sub-section (1) has been issued prior to the making of an assessment under this
section.";

96. For section 9 of the Interest-tax Act, the following section shall be ‘substituted, with effect from the

new section for 1st day of October, 1991, namely:—
9,

‘Amandmentof
section 10.

Insertion of
new

102.

Time limit tor
‘completion of
assessmonts
andreassess-
ments.

B.,(4) Where interest-tax is payable on the basis of any return required to be furnished under
Section 7 or section 10, after taking into account the amount of interest-tax, if any, already paid under
any provision of this Act, the assessee shall be liable to pay such interest-tax, together with interest
Payable under any provision of this Act for any delay in furnishing the return or any default or delay in
Payment of advance interest-tax, before furnishing the return and the return shall be accompanied by
proof of payment of such interest-tax and interest.

Explanation— Where the amount paid by the assessee under this sub-section falls short of the
aggregate of the interest-tax and interest as aforesaid, the amount so paid shall first be adjusted
towards the interest payable as aforesaid and the balance, it any, shall be adjusted towards the
interast-tax payable,

(2) After the assessment under section 8 has been made, any amount paid under sub-section (1)
shall be deemed to have been paid towards such assessment,

(9) ॥ any assessee fails to pay the whole or any part of interest-tax or interest or both in accordance
with the provisions of sub-section (1), he shall, without prejudice to any other consequences which he
may incur, be deemed to be an assessee in default in respect of the interest-tax or interest or both
remaining unpaid, and all the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly.”.

97. In section 10 of the Interest-tax Act, for the words "Income-tax Officer”, wherever they occur, the
‘words " Assessing Officer” shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991,

98. After section 10 of the Interest-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted with effect from the
1st day of October, 1991, namely:—

“10A. (1) No order of assessment shall be made under section 8 at any time after the expiry of two
years from the end of the assessment year in which the interest was first assessable,

(2) Noorderot assessment or reassessment shallbe made under section 10 alterthe expiry of two
years from the end of the financial year in which the notice under that section was served.



29

) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), an order of frash assessment
in pursuance of an order passed under section 15, section 16, section 190rsection 20, setting aside or
Fancelling an assessment, may be made at any time before the expiry oftwo years from the end of the
financial year in which the order under section 15 or section 1615 teceived by the Commissioner or, as
the case may be, the order under section 19 or section 20 is passed by the Commissioner,

(१ the time taken in reopening the whole or any part of the proceeding; or पु

0 tha period during which the assessment proceeding is stayed by an order or injunction of any
court,

shall be excluded.

Explanation 2. — Where, by an order reterred to in sub-section (4), any interest is excluded from
the chargeable interest for an assessment year in respect of an assesses, then, an assessment of
Such interest for another assessment year shall for the purposes of section 10 and this section, be
deemed to be one made in consequence of, oro give etfectto, any finding or direction contained in the
said order.".

99. For sections 11 to 13 of the Interest-tax ‘Act, the following sections shall be Substituted, with effect
from the 1st day of October, 1991, namely:—

'11. (1) Interest-tax shall be payable in advance ducing the financial yaar in respect of the
Chargeable interest for the assessment year immediately following that financial year in accordance
with the provision of this section.

(2) Interest-tax shall be payable in advance in three instalments during each financial year, the due
date of, and the amount payable in, each such instalment being as specified in the following Table:

“Due date of Instaknent तप |
Due date of instalment “Ono before the 18th September ——— Nass rar moun Bara
in or before the lember Not Tess than twenty per cent, of such Interest-
tax payable in advance.
On or before the 15th December Not less than fifty per cent. of such interest-tax

payable in advance, as reduced by the
amount, if any, paid in the earlier instalment.

On or before the 15th March The whole amount of such interest-tax Payable
in advance as reduced by the amount or
amounts, if any, paid in the earlier instalment
Suided thal aay ea ann se कि कक

Provided that any amount paid by way of interest-tax Payable in advance on or before the 31st day of
March shall also be treated as. interest-tax paid in advance during the financial year ending on that day for
all the purposes of this Act.

12. (1) Where the return of chargeable interest for any assessment year under sub-section (1) of
Section 7, or in response to a notice under sub-section (2), is furnished after the due date, or is not
furnished, the assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of two percent. for every month or
Part of a month comprised in the period commencing on the date immediately following the due date,
and,—

(a) where the return is furnished after the due date, ending on the date of the furnishing of the
return; or

(©) where no return has been furnished, ending on the date of completion of assessment under
sub-section (3) of section 8,
‘on the amount of the interest-tax on the: chargeable interest as determined under sub-section (2) or sub-
Section (3) of section 8 as reduced by the interest-tax paid in advance.
Explanation 1.-- In this section, "due date" means the 31st day of December of the relevant
Sssessment year or, as the case may be, the date on which return in response to 8 notice under sub-
Section (2) of section 7 is due to be filed.

Explanation 2.— Where in relation to an assessment year, an assessment is made for the first time
Under section 10, the assessment so made shallbe regarded as assessment made under sub-section
(2), or, as the case may be, sub-section (3) of section 8.

‘Substitution
of

tions for sec-
tions 11 to 13.

Paymentof
tax,


30

Explanation 3.— For the purposes of computing the interest payable under section 9, interest-tax
on the chargeable interest declared in the return shall be deemed to be the interest-tax on total
chargeable interest determined under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 8,

(2) The interest payable under sub-section (1) shall be reduced by the interest, if any, paid under
section 9 towards the interast chargeable under this section.

(3) Where the raturn of chargeable interest for any assessment year, required by a notice under
section 10 issued after the completion of assessment under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of
section 8 or section 10 is furnished after the expiry of the time allowed under such notice or is not
furnished, the assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of two percent. for every month
or part of a month comprised in the period commencing on the date immediately following the expiry of
time allowed as aforesaid, and,—

(a) where the return is furnished after the expiry of the time aforesaid, ending on the date of
furnishing the return; or

(0) where no return has been furnished, ending on the day of completion of the reassessment
under section 10,

onthe amount by which the interest-tax on the chargeable interest as determined on the basis of such re-
assessment exceeds the interest-tax on chargeable interest on the basis of earlier assessment
aforesaid.

(4) Where, as a result of an order under section 15 or section 17 of this Act or section 254 0 section
260 or section 262 of the Income-tax Act, as applicable to this Act by virtue of section 21 of this Act, the
amount on which interest was payable under sub-section (7) or sub-section (3) has been increased or
reduced, as the case may be, the interest shall be increased or reduced accordingly, and—

(i) inacase where the interest is increased, the Assessing Officer shall serve on the assessee a
notice of demand in the prescribed form specifying the sum payable and such notice of demand shall
be deemed tobe anotice under section 156 of the Income-tax Actas applicable tothis Act by virtue of
section 21, and the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly;

(ii) in a case where the int
refunded,

(5) The provisions of this section shall apply in respect of assessments for the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1992 and subsequent years.

Interest for 124. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this section, where in any financial year, an assessee,

default in who is liable to pay interest-tax in advance under section 11 has failed to pay such tax, or where the

paymentof . interest-tax paid in advance by such assessee is less than ninety percent. of the assessed interest-tax,

vreceexiaxin the assessoe shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of twoper cent. for every month or partof a
month comprised in the period from the 1st day of April next following such financial year to the date of
determination of chargeable interest under sub-section (2)or, as the case may 0७, sub-section (3) of
section 8 on an amount equal to the assessed interest-tax or, as the case may be, on the amount by
which the interest-tax payable in advance falls short of the assessed interest-tax.

Explanation 1.—In this section, "assessed interest-tax” means—

(a) for the purpose of computing the interest payable under section 9, the interest-tax on the
chargeable interest as declared in the return referred to in that section;

(b) in any other case, interest-tax on chargeable interest as determined under sub-section (2)
or, as the case may be, sub-section (3) of section 8.

tis reduced, the excess interest paid, if any, shall be

Explanation 2.— Where, in relation to an assessment year, an assessment is made for the first time
under section 10, the assessment so made shall be regarded as assessment made under sub-section
(2) or, as the case may be, sub-section (3) of section 8.

(2) Where, before the date of completion of assessment under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3)
of section 8, interest-tax is paid by the assessee under section 9 or otherwise,—

() interest shall be calculated in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this section up to
the date on which the taxis 30 paid, and reduced by the interest, ifany, paid under section 9 towards
the interest chargeable under this section;

(ii) thereafter, interest shall be calculated at the rate aforesaid on the amount by which the tax so
paid together with interest-tax paid in advance falls short of the assessed interest-tax.

(3) Where, as a result of an order of reassessment under section 10, the amount on which the
interest was payable under sub-section (1) is increased, the assessee shall be liable to pay simple
interest at the rate of two per cent. for every month or part of a month comprised in the period
‘commencing on the day following the completion of the assessment under sub-section (2) or, as the
case may be, sub-section (3) of section 8 referred to in sub-section (1) and ending on the date of
reassessment under section 10, on the amount by which the interest-tax on the basis of the
Teassessment exceeds the: interest-tax on the chargeable interest dotermined on the basis of
assessment under sub-section (2) or, as the case may be, sub-section (3) of section 8.

10

55


“5

31

(4) Where, as a result of an order under section 15 or section 17 of this Actor section 254 or section
260 or section 262 of the Income-tax Act as applicable to this Act by virtue of section 21 of this, Act, the
amount on which interest was payable under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) has been increased
or reduced, as the case may be, the interest shall be increased or reduced accordingly, and —

()) in acase where the interest is increased, the Assessing Officer shall serve on the assessee a
Notice of demand in the prescribed form specifying the sum payable and such notice of demand
shall be deemed to be a notice under section 156 of the Income-tax Act as applicable to this Act by
virtue of section 21 of this Act, and provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly;

(ii) in a case where the interest is reduced, the excess interest paid, if any, shall be
refunded.

(5) The provisions of this section shall apply in respect of assessments for the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1992 and subsequent assessment years.

12B. (1) Where in any financial year, the assessee who is liable to pay interest-tax in advance under
section 11 has failed to pay the interest-tax and where such tax paid by the assessee on his chargeable

interest on or before the 15th day of September is less than twenty per cent. of the interast-tax due on teres!
the returned chargeable interest or the amount of such interest-tax paid on or before the 15th day of advan

December is less than fifty per cent. of the tax due on the returned chargeable interest, then, the
assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of one and one-half percent. per monthof the
shortfall for a period of three months on the amount of shortfall from twenty per cent. or, asthe case may
be, fifty per cent. of the interest-tax due on the returned chargeable interest.

(2) The provisions of this section shall apply in respect of assessments for the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1992 and subsequent assessment years,

13. the Assessing Officer or the Commissioner (Appeals) in the course of any proceeding under
this Act, is satisfied that any person has concealed the particulars of chargeable interest or has
furnished inaccurate particulars of such interest, he may direct that such person shall pay by way of
Penalty, in addition to any interest-tax payable by him, a sum which shall not be less than, but shalll not
#xceed three times, the amount of interest-tax sought to be evaded by reason of the concealment of
Particulars of his chargeable interest or the furnishing of inaccurate particulars of such chargeable
interest.’

100, In section 15 of the Interest-tax Act, for the words “Income-tax Officer", wherever they occur, the
words "Assessing Oificer” shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991.

101, Section 158 of the Interest-tax Act shall be omitted with effect from the 1st day of
October,1991.

102. In section 16 of the Interest-tax Act, for the words “Income-tax Officer", wherever ‘they occur, the
words “Assessing Officer” shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991.

103. In section 17 of the Interest-tax Act, for the words "Income-tax Officer", wherever they occur, the
words " Assessing Officer” shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day of October, 199 1.

104. For section 18 of the Interest-tax Act, the following section shall be substituted, with effect from
the 1st day of October, 1991, namely:

“18. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, in computing the income of acredit
institution chargeable to income-tax under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession" or
Under the head "Income from other sources", the interest-tax payable by the credit institution for any
assessment year shall be deductible from the income, under the respective heads, of the credit
institution assessable for that assessment year.’

105. In section 19 of the Interest-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991,—
(a) in sub-section (1)—
9 for the words "Income-tax Officer’, the words “Assessing Officer” shall be substituted;
(ii) tor the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be substituted, namely:—
“Explanation —For the removal of doubts, itis hereby declared that, for the purposes of this
sub-section, —

(a) “record” shall include and shall be deemed always to have included all records relating
to any proceeding under this Act available at the time of examination by the
Commissioner;

(b) where any order referred to in this sub-section is the Subject matter of any appeal, the
power of the Commissioner under this sub-section shall extend to all such matters.as had not
been considered and decided in such appeal.’ ;

(b) in sub-section (3), in the Explanation, after the word, brackets and figure "sub-section (2)", the
Words and figures "the time taken in giving an opportunity to the assessee to be reheard under the
Proviso to section 129 of the Income-tax Act, as applicable to this Act by virtue of section 21 of this Act,
and" shall be inserted.

Interest for

Penalty for
‘concealment

Amendment
of section 15,

Omissionof
section 15A,

Amendment
of section 16.

Amendment
‘of section 17.

Substitution
ofnew
section for
section 18,

Interest-tax
deductible in

fotalincome
line
under the In-
‘come-tax Act.

Amendment
of section 19.


32
-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991,—

(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "Income-tax Officer’, the words "Assessing Officer” shall be
‘substituted;

(20) for the words and brackets “to the Commissioner (Appeals)*, wherever they occur, the words
and brackets "to the Commissioner (Appeals) or to the Appeliate Tribunal” shall be substituted.

‘Amendmentof 107. In section 21 of the Interest-tax Act, for the portion beginning with "2 (438) and (44)* and ending
section 21. with “the Third Schedule”, the following shall be substituted, with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991,
namely:—

"2(44), 129, 131, 132, 132A, 1328, 13310 136 (both inclusive), 138, 140, 145, 156, 160,161, 162, 163,
166, 167, 170, 173, 175, 176, 178, 179, 220 to 227 (both inclusive), 228A, 229, 232, 237 to 245 (both
inclusive), 254 to 262 (both inclusive), 265, 266, 268, 269, 281, 2818, 282, 284, 287, 288, 288A, 2888,
289 to 293 (both inclusi the Second Schedule and the Third Schedule.”,

Substitution of 108. For sections 23 to 26, the following sections shall be substituted, with effect from the 1st day of

‘new sections i
for sectona 2$ October, 1991, name!

‘Amendmentot ic
ane, 106. In section 20 of the Inter

1026.

Failure to "23. Hany person fails, without reasonable cause, to produce or cause to be produced, any accounts

‘comply with or documents required to be produced under section 8, he shall pay by way ol penalty, a sum which

notices, shall notbe less than one thousand rupees, but which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees, for
each such failure,

०००४ अर 24, a person makes 8 statement in any verification under this Actor any rule made thereunder, or

delivers an account or statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or
does not believe to be true, he shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for aterm which shall
not be less than three months but which may extend to seven years and with fine.

Wilful attempt 25. If @ person wilfully attempts in any manner whatsoever to evade any interest-tax, penalty or
to evade tax, interest chargeable or imposable under this Act, he shall, without prejudice to any penalty that may be
imposable on him under any other provision of this Act, be punishable with rigorous imprisonmentfora
term which shall not be less than three months but which may extend to seven years and with fine.

Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, a wilful attempt to evade any interest-tax, ponalty
or interest chargeable or imposable under this Act or the payment thereof shall include a case where
any person—

(0 has in his possession or control any books of account or other documents (being books of
account or other documents relevant to any proceeding under this Act) containing a false entry or
ment; or

(i) makes or causes to be made any false entry or statement in such books of account or other
documents; or

(iil) wilfully omits or causes to be omitted any relevant entry or statement in such books of
account or other documents; or

(iv) causes any other circumstances to exist which will have the effect of enabling such person to
ide

evade any interest-tax, penalty or interest chargeable or imposable under this Act or the payment
thereot.

Abotment of 26, itaperson abets or induces in any manner another person to make and deliver any account ora

false Fetus, statementor declaration relating to any chargeable interest whichis false and which he either knows or
believes to be false or does not believe to be true or to commit an offence under section 25, he shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three months but which
may extend to seven years and with fine.

Offences by 26A. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a credit institution, every person

edit who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the credit

institutions, institution for the conduct of the business of the credit institution as well as the credit institution shallbe
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under this Act has
been committed by a credit institution and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the credit institution, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall
also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.

0


33

Explanation — For the purposes of this section, “director, in relation to a co-operative society,
means any member controlling the affairs thereo!,

26B. (1) Aperson shall not be proceeded against for any offence under section 24 or section 2 or
Section 26 or for any offence under the Indian Penal Code, except with the previous sanction of the
5 Commissioner or Commissioner (Appeals):

Providad that the Chief Commissioner or, as the case may be, Director General may issue such
instructions or directions to the aforesaid interest-tax authorities as he may deem fit for institution of
proceedings under this sub-section.

(2) Any offence under the sections referred to in sub-section (1) may, either before or after the
10 _ institution of proceedings, be compounded by the Board or a Chief Commissioner or a Director
General.

Explanation — For the removal ot doubts, itis hereby declared that the power of the Board to issue
orders, instructions or directions under this Act shall include the power to issue instructions or
directions (Including instructions or ditections to obtain the previous approval of the Board) to other

1S interest-tax authorities for the proper composition of offences under this section.”

109. In section 28 of the Interest-tax Act, forthe words “any scheduled bank or any class of scheduled
banks", the words “any credit institution or any class of credit institutions or any intereston any category of
loans or advances” shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991.

110. Section 29 of the Interest-tax Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof and after sub-
20 section (1), as so renumbered, the following sub-sections shall be inserted, with effect from the Istday of
October, 1991, namely:—

12) Wany difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions ofthis Act, as amended by the Finance
(No.2) Act, 1991, the Central Government may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with euch
Provisions for the purpose of removing the difficulty:

gg icvided that no such order shallbe made after the expiry of two years from the Yet day of October,
1991.

(3) Every order made under sub-section (2) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.*,
Expenditure-tax

111. In the long title to the Expenditure-tax Act, 1987 (hereinalter referred to as the Expenditure-tax
% Act), after the words “in certain hotels", the words “or restaurants and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto" shall be inserted with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991

112. In section 2 of the Expenditure-tax Act, after clause (9), the following clause shall be inserted,
with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991, namely:—

‘(9A) “restaurant” means any premises, not being a restaurant situated in a hotel referred to in
% clause (1) of section 3, in which the business of sale of food or drink to the publics carriedon and such
Premises, at the beginning of any month, have the approval of the Union Department of Tourism or

have any of the following three facilities, namely:—

(7 they are equipped with, or have access to, facilities for air-conditioning;
(i) they have at least two separate cloak rooms fitted with modern sanitary fittings;
40 (ii) they have a telephone installed therein;
(iv) they are equipped with, or have access 10, cold storage or deep-freezing facility;

115. For sections 3 to 5 of the Expenditure-tax Act, the following sections shall be substituted, with
effect from the 1st day of October, 1991, namely:—

13. This Act shall apply in relation to any chargeable expenditure—

45 (7) incurred ina hotel wherein the room charges for any unit of residential accommodation at the
time of incurring of such expenditure are four hundred rupees 07 more per day per individual ang
where, —

(a) a composite charge is payable in respect of such unit and ood, the room charges included
therein shall be determined in the prescribed manner:
50 (000 acomposite charge is payable in respect of such unit, jood, drinks and other services, or
any of them, and the case is not covered by the provisions of sub-clause (a), or
(i) appears to the Assessing Otficer that the charges for such unit, food, drinks or other

Services are so arranged that the room. charges are understated and the other charges are
overstated,

4
56. 100 Assessing 0109 shall, for the purposes of this clause Uterine the room ला्पू४ ०1 ‘such
reasonable basis as he may deem fit; and

(2) incurred in a restaurant.

Institution of

cfotioncos.

of section 28.

‘Amendment
of section 29.

Amendment
of long tit,

of section 2.

‘Substitution
‘ofnew sec-
tions for sec-
tions 3 to 5.

Application of
[225५


Charge ot
expenditure
tax.

Meaning of
chargeable
expenditure.

‘Substitution
ofnew
section for
section 7

Collection
and recovery

expenditure-
tax,

34
4, Subject to the provisions of this Act, there shall be charged on and from-—

(a) the commencement of this Act, a tax at the rate of twenty per cent. of the chargeable
expenditure incurred in a hotel referred to in clause (1) of section 3:

Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply in the case of a hotel referred to in clause (ii) of
sub-section (5)of section 80-18 of the Income-tax Act during the period baginning on the 1st day of
April, 1991 and ending on the 31st day of March, 2001;

(b) the 1st day of October, 1991, a tax at the rate of fifteen per cent. of the chargeable
‘expenditure incurred in a restaurant referred to in clause (2)of section 3.

5, For the purposes of this Act, chargeable expenditure, —

(1) in relationtoa hotel referred to in clause (1) of section 3, means any expenditure incurred
in, or payments made to, the hotel in connection with the provision of—

(a) any accommodation, residential or otherwise; or

(b)tood or drink by the hotel, whether at the hotel or outside, or by any other person at the
hotel; or

(c) any accommodation in such hotel on hire or lease; or

(d) any other services at the hotel, either by the hotel or by any other person, by way of beauty
parlour, health club, swimming pool or other services,

‘but does not include—

(i) any expenditure which is incurred, or the payment for which is made, in foreign
exchange;

(i) any expenditure incurred by persons within the purview of the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations, 1961 or the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations, 1963;

i) any expenditure incurred in any shop or in any office which is not owned or managed by
the person who carries on the business of a hotel;

(iv) any expenditure by way of any tax, including tax ७७५७ this Act.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, —

(a) expenditure incurred or any payments made in Indian currency obtained by conversion of
foreign exchange into Indian currency shall in such cases and in such circumstances as may be
prescribed be deemed to have been incurred or, as the case may be, made in foreign exchange;
and

(0) Yoreign exchange” and “Indian currency’ shall have the meanings respectively assigned
to them in clauses (h) and (k) of section 2 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973;
(2) in relation to a restaurant referred to in clause (2) of section 3, means any expenditure

incurred in, or payments made to, a restaurant in connection with the provision of food or drink by the
restaurant, whether at the restaurantor outside, or by any other person in the restaurant, but does
not include any expenditure referred to in sub-clauses (ii)and (iv) of clause (1).

114. For section 7 of the Expenditure-tax Act, the following section shall be substituted, with effect from

the 1st day of October, 1991, namely —

"7. (1) Where any chargeable expenditure is incurred in a hotel referred to in clause (1) of section

(a) if such expenditure relates to any of the services, specified in sub-clauses (a) to (d) of
clause (1) of section 5, provided by the hotel, the person who carries on the business of such hotel;
and

(0) if such expenditure relates to any of the services, specified in sub-clause (b) or sub-clause

(d) of clause (1) of section 5, provided by the other person referred to therein, such other
person,

shall collect the expenditure-tax at the rate specified in clause (a) of section 4.

(2) Where any chargeable expenditure is incurred in a restaurant referred to in clause (2) of
section 3 in relation to any services specified in clause (2) of section 5 and where such services
are,—

(a) provided by the restaurant, the person who carries on the business of such restaurant;
and

(0) provided by the other person, such other person,
shall collect the expenditure-tax at the rate specified in clause (b) of section 4.

3) The tax collected during any calendar month in accordance with the provisions of sub-section
(1) and (2) shall be paid to the credit of the Central Government by the 10th ofthe month immediately
following the said calendar month.

50

46 of 1973.


35

(4) Any person responsible for collecting the tax, who fails to collect the tax in accordance with the
provisions of sub-sections (1)and (2) shall, notwithstanding such failure, be liable to pay the tax 10
the credit of the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3).

115. For section 15 of the Expenditure-tax Act, the following section shall be substituted, with effect
5 from the 1st day of October, 1991, namely:—

"15. Any person responsible for collecting expenditure-tax in accordance with the provisions of sub-
section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 7, who —

(a) fails to collect such tax: or
(10) having collected the tax, fails to pay such tax to the credit of the Central Government in
10 accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3)of that section,
shall pay, —
(i) inthe case referred to in clause (a), in addition to paying tax in accordance with the provisions

of sub-section (4) of that section, by way of penalty, a sum equal to the amount of tax that he failed to
collect; and

18 (ii) in the case relerred to in clause (0) , in addition to paying interest in accordance with the
provisions of section 14, by way of penalty, a sum which shall notbe less than one hundrad rupees
but which may extend to two hundred rupees for every day during which the failura continues, so,
however, that the penalty under this clause shall not exceed the amount of tax that he failed to
pay.”

20. 116. In section 24 of the Expenditure-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of October, 1991, —

(a) for the figures and letter “140, 1446", the figures and letters “139A, 140, 144A, 145" shall be
‘substituted;

(b) after the figuras "188,", the figures and letter "188A" shall be inserted;
(c) after the figures and letter “278E,", the figures and letter "2798" shall be inserted.

2% 117. Insection31 ofthe Expenditure-tax Act, in sub-section (2), with effect trom the 1st day of October,
1991,—

(i) in clause (a), for the words, brackets and figures “sub-section (2) of section 3", the words,
brackets, letter and figures “sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of section 3" shall be substituted;

(ii) in clause (6), for the word and figure "section 5”, the words, brackets and figures “clause (1) of
30 section 5° shall be substituted.

CHAPTER IV
INDIRECT TAXES
Customs

118. Inthe Customs Act, 1962 (hereinafter referred to as the Customs Act),—

5 (1) in section 75,—
(8) in sub-section (1), the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:-—

"Provided that no drawback shall be allowed under this sub-section in respect of any of the
aforesaid goods which the Central Government may, by rules made under sub-section (2),
specify, if the export value of such goods or class of goods is less than the value of the imported
materials used in the manufacture of such goods or class of goods, or is not more than such
percentage of the value of the imported materials used in the manufacture of such gocds or
class of goods as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in
this behalf:

Provided further that where any drawback has been allowed on any goods under this sub-
45 section and the sale proceeds in respect of such goods are not received by or on behalf of the
exporter in India within the time allowed under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973, such
drawback shall be deemed never to have been allowed and the Central Government may, by
1008 made under sub-section (2), specify the procedure for the recovery or adjustment of the

amount of such drawback,";

© (0) in sub-section (2), after clause (a), the following clauses shall be inserted, namel
* (aa) {or specifying the goods in respect of which no drawback shall be allowed; *

(ab) tor specifying the procedure for recovery or adjustment of the amount of any drawback
which had been allowad under sub-section (1); ";

Substitution

‘section for
section 15.
cea

of pay
‘expenditure-
tax,

Amendment
of section 24,

Amendment
jon 31.

Amendment
of Act 52 of
1962.


Amendmentot
Act 51 of 1975.

Amendmentot
Act5 0f 1986. ७७

Amendmentot
Act §8 of 1957. ag

36
(2) in section 113, after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“@) any goods entered for exportation under claim for drawback which do not correspond in any
material particular with any information furnished by the exporter or manufacturer under this Actin
relation to the fixation of rate of drawback under section 75:";

(3) in section 142, in sub-section (1), for the words “demanded from any person’, the words
“demanded from any person or any amount of drawback to be recovered from any person* shallbe sub-
stituted,

119. The Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (hereinafter referred to as the Customs Tariff Act), —
(a) shall be amended in the manner ‘specified in the Second Schedule; and

(0) shall, with effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint , be also amended in the manner specified in the Third Schedule.

Excise
120. The Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as the Central Excise Tariff Act), shall
amended in the manner specified in the Fourth Schedule.

121. The Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 (hereinafter referredto
the Additional Duties of Excise Act), shall be amended in tha manner specified in the Fifth

Schedule,

Omission ot

CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS

122. Inthe Industrial Development Bank of india Act, 1964, section 35 shallbe omitted with affect from

section 35 of i
1०188, the 1st day of April, 1992.

Act 18 of

Amendmentot
section 40 ०
Acti of
1983.

Repeal
en:

123. In section 40 of the Finance Act, 1983, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1992, —
(a) in sub-section (3)—

() in clause (v), in the proviso, after the words “for industrial purposes", the words “or for
construction of a hotel!” shall be inserted;

(i) in clause (vib), in the Explanation, for the words, brackets, letters and figures "in clause (४)
of Explanation 1 to section 807, the words and figures "in Explanation 1 to section 13" shall be
substituted;

(0) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-—

\(4), The value of any asset specified in sub-section (3) shall be either its value as on the
valuation date determined in the manner laid down in Schedule lllto the Wealth-tax Act orits value,
disclosed in the balance sheet of the company, an the valuation date, whichever is higher.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, "balance sheet", as drawn up on the
valuation date, shall have the same meaning as in rule 11 of Schedule ॥| to the Wealth-tax Act:":

{c) in sub-section (5), in clause (a), the words, brackets, letter and figures *, clause (a) of sub-
section (2) of section 7 * shall be omitted,

124, Section 2 of the Finance Act, 1991 is hereby repealed and shall be deemed never to have been
acted.

Declaration under the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931
Itis hereby declared that itis expedientin the public interest that the provisions of clause 119

[except sub-clause(b) thereof] and clauses 120 and 121 of this Bill shall have immediate

eff

fect under the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931.

18 of 1991

16 of 1931


THE FIRST SCHEDULE
(See section 2)
PART |
INCOME-TAX
5 Paragraph A
‘Sub-Paragraph |

In the case of every individual or Hindu undivided family or

unragistered firm or other association of persons or body of

individuals, whether incorporated or not, or every artificial juridical person referred to in sub-clause (vii) of clause (31) of section 2
of the Income-tax Act, not being a case to which Sub-Paragraph ॥ of this Paragraph or any other Paragraph of this Part

10 applies —

Rates of income-tax

(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 22,000

(2) where the total income excseds Rs. 22,000 but does not
exceed Rs. 30,000

(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 30,000 but does not
exceed Rs. 50,000

(4) where the total income exceeds Rs.50,000 but does not
exceed Rs.1,00,000

(5) where the total incoma exceeds Rs. 1,00,000
20

Nil;
20 per cent. of the amount by which the total income exceeds
Rs. 22,000;

Rs. 1,600 plus 30 per cent. of the amount by which the total
income exceeds Rs. 30,000;

Rs. 7,600 plus 40 per cent. of the amount by which the total
income exceeds Rs. 50,000;

Rs. 27,600 plus 50 per cent. of the amount by which ॥
Income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000.

total

Surcharge on income-tax
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall, —

() inthe case of every individual, Hindu undivided family or association of persons or body of individuals referred to in sections
88 and BBA having a total income exceeding seventy-five thousand rupees, be reduced by the amount of rebate of income-tax
calculated under Chapter VIII-A, and the income-tax as so reduced;

(ii). in the case of every person, other than those mentioned in item (i), having a total income exceeding seventy-five thousand

rupees,

be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of twelve per cent. of such income-tax:
Provided that no such surcharge shall be payable by a non-resident.

Sub-Paragraph II
In the case of every Hindu undivided family which at any time during the previous year has at least one member whose

total income of the previous year relevantto the assessment
Rs. 22,000,—

year commencing on the tst day of Apri, 1991 exceeds

Rates of income-tax

(1) where the total income does not excaed 95.12,000
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 12,000 but does
not exceed Rs. 20,000

(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 20,000 but does
not exceed Rs. 40,000

(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 40,000 but does
not exceed Rs. 60,000

(5) where the total income exceeds Rs. 60,000 but does
not exesed Rs. 1,00,000

(6) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000

40

Nil;
25 per cent. of the amount by which the total income exceeds
Rs, 12,000;

Rs, 2,000 plus 30 per cent. of the amount by which the total
income exceeds Rs. 20,000; हु

Rs. 8,000 plus 40 per cent. of the amount by which the total
income exceeds Rs. 40,000;
Rs. 16,000 plus 50 per cent. of the amount by which the total
income exceeds Rs. 60,000;

Rs. 36,000 plus 55 per cent. of the amount by which the total
income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000.

Surcharge on income-tax

The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall, in the case ot
45 every parson having a total income exceeding seventy-five thousand rupees, be reduced by the amount of rebate of income-tax
calculated under Chapter VIII-A and the income-tax as so reduced be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Unior

calculated at the rate of twelve per cent. of such income-tax:

Provided that no such surcharge shall be payable by a non-resident.

In the case of every co-operative society —

(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 10,000

(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does
not exceed Rs. 20,000

(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 20,000

37

Paragraph B

Rates of income-tax

10 per cent. of the total income;

Rs. 1,000 plus 20 per cent. of the amount by which the total
income exceeds Rs. 10,000;

Rs. 3,000 plus 35 per cent. of the amount by which the total
income exceeds Rs. 20,000.


38
Surcharge on income-tax

The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Paragraph shall, in the case of every

Person having @ total income exceeding seventy-five thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union
calculated at the rate of twelve per cent. of such income-tax.

In the case of every registered firm, not being

Paragraph C
Sub-Paragraph I
@ case to which Sub-Paragraph Il of this Paragraph applies, —

Rates of income-tax

(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 15,000 Nil;

|
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 15,000 but does not ‘6 per cent. of the amount by which the total income exceeds

exceed Rs. 50,000

Rs. 15,000;

(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does not ‘AS. 2,100 plus 12 per cent. of the amount by which the total

exceed Rs. 1,00,000

income exceeds Rs. 50,000;

(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 Rs. 8,100 plus 18 per cent. of the amount by which the total 15

income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000.

Surcharge on income-tax

The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the Preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall, in the case of

every person having a total income exceeding se
Union calculated at the rate of twelve por cent. of

venty-five thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the 20
such income-tax.

Sub-Paragraph I

{In the case of every registered firm whose total income includes income derived from a profession carried on by it and the income
uch total income,— =

89 included is not less than fifty-one per cent. of st

(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs.

(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 15,000 but does not

exceed Rs. 50,000

(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does not

exceed Rs. 1.00,000

(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000

Rates of income-tax 25
15,000 Nit;

5 per cent. of the amount by which the total income exceeds
Rs, 15,000;

Rs. 1,750 plus 10 per cant. of the amount by which the total 20
income exceeds Rs. 50,000;

Rs. 6,750 plus 15 per cent. of the amount by which the total
income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000,

Surcharge on income-tax 35

The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the Preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall, in the case of

every person having a total income exceeding seventy-five thousand rupees, ७७ increased
Union calculated at the rate of twelve per cent. of such income-tax.

Explanation.--For the purposes of this Paragraph,
under clause (0) of section 183 of the Income-tax

In the case of every local authority —

On the whole of the total income.

by a surcharge for purposes of the

“registered firm” includes an unragistered firm assessed as a registered firm
Act.

40
Paragraph D
Rate of income-tax
50 percent.
Surcharge on income-tax 45

‘The amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbetore specified shall in the case of every person having a total income
exceeding seventy-five thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union caloulated at the rate of twelve

er cant. of such income-tax.

4


39

Paragraph E
In the case of a company,—

Rates of income-tax
|, In the case of a domestic company,—

(5 (1) where the company is a company in which the public are substantially 40 per cant. of the total
interested income;

(2) where the company is not a company in which the public are substantially interested—

(i) in the case of a trading company or an investment company 50 per cent. of the total
wae: income;
10 (ii) in any other case 45 per cent. of the total
1. In the case of a company other than a domestic company, — income.
E (i) on so much of the total income as consists of—
(a) royalties received from Government or an Indian concern in pursuance of an
15 agreement made by it with the Government or the Indian concern after the 31st day of March,
1961 but before the 1st day of April, 1976, or
(b) fees for rendering technical services received from Government or an Indian concern
in pursuance of an agreement made by it with the Government or the Indian concer after the
29th day of February, 1964 but before the 1st day of April, 1976,
20 and where such agreement has, in either case, been approved by the Central Government 50 per cent.;
(ii) on the balance, if any, of the total income 65 per cent.

Surcharge on income-tax

The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the provisions of item | of this Paragraph shall, in the case of every
son having a total income excaeding seventy-live thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge calculated at the rate of

25 fifteen per cent. of such income-tax.
PART ॥
RATES FOR DEDUCTION OF TAX AT SOURCE IN CERTAIN CASES
In every case in which under the provisions of sections 193, 194, 194A, 1948, 19488, 194D and 195 of the Income-tax Act, taxi
to be deducted at the rates in force, deduction shall be made from the income subject to deduction at the following rate:
30 7 Rate of income-tax
1. In the case of a person other than a company—
(a) where the person is resident in India—
(i) onincome by way of interest other than “Interest on securities” 10 per can
(ii) on income by way of winnings from lotteries and crossword puzzles 40 per cent.;
35 (iii) on income by way of winnings from horse races 40 per cent.;
wR (iv) on income by way of insurance commission 10 per cent.;
(५) on income by way of interest payable on— 10 par cent.;
(A) any security, other than a tax-free security, of the Central or a State
Government;
40 (B) any debentures or other securities for money issued by or on behalf of any local
authority or a corporation established by a Central, State or Provincial Act;
(C) any debentures issued by a company where such debentures are listed on a
recognised stock exchange in India in accordance with the Securities
Contracts (Regulation) Act,1956 and any rules made thereunder;
45 (vi) on any other income (excluding interest payable on a tax-free security) 20 per cent;

(8) where the person is not resident in India—
(i) in the case of a non-resident Indian— है
(A) on investment income and long-term capital gains 20 par cent.;

(B) on income by way of interest payable on a tax-free security
50 (C) on income by way of winnings from lotteries and crossword puzzles 40 per cent.;



40
(D) on income by way of winnings from horse races
(E) on the whole of other income

(ii) inthe case of any other person—
(A) on income by way of interest payable on a tax-free security
(B) on income by way of winnings from lotteries and crossword puzzles
(C) on income by way of winnings trom horse races
(D) on the whole of the other income

2. In the case of a company—

(a) where the company is a domestic company—
(i) on income by way of interest other than “Interest on securities”
(ii) on income by way of winnings from lotteries and crossword puzzles
(iii) on income by way ot winnings from horse races
(iv) on any other income (excluding interest payable on tax-free security)
(b) where the company is not a domestic company—
(i) on income by way of dividends payable by any domestic company
(ii) on income by way of winnings from lotteries and crossword puzzles
(iii) on income by way of winnings from horse races

(iv) on income by way of interest payable by Government or an Indian concern on moneys
borrowed or dabt incurred by Government or the Indian concern in foreign currency

(¥) on income by way of royalty payable by Government or an Indian concern in
pursuance of an agreement made by it with the Government or the Indian concern
after the 31st day of March, 1976, where such royalty is in consideration for the
transfer of all or any rights (including the granting of a licence) in respect of copyright
in any book on a subject referred to in the proviso to sub-section (14) of section 115A
of the Income-tax Act, to the Indian concern

(vi) on income by way of royalty [not being royalty of the nature referred to in sub-item
(6)(v)] payable by Government or an Indian concern in pursuance of an agreement
made by it with the Government or the Indian concer and which has been approved by
the Central Government—

(A) whore the agreement is made after the 31st day of March, 1961 but before the 1st
day of April, 1976

(B) where the agreement is made after the 31st day of March, 1976

(vii) on income by way of fees for technical services payable by Government or an Indian
‘concen in pursuance of an agreement made by it with the Government or the Indian
concern and which has been approved by the Central Government—

(A) where the agreement is made after the 29th day of February, 1964 but before
the 1st day of April, 1976

40 per cant;

income-tax at 30 per
cent. of the amount of
income

or
income-tax in respect of
the income at the rates
prescribed in Sub-Para-
graph | of Paragraph A of
Part Ill of this Schedule,
if such income had been
the total income,

whichever is higher;

15 per cent.; "

40 per cent.;

40 per cent.

income-tax at 30 per
cant. of the amount of
income

or
income-tax in respect of
the income at the rates
prescribed in Sub-Para-
graph | of Paragraph A of 2!
Par Ill of this Schedule, if
such income had been the
total income,

whichever is higher.

2
20 per cent.;
40 per cent.;
40 per cent.;
21.5 per cent.; 35
25 per cent;
40 per cent.;
40 per cent.;
25 per cent.; 40
30 per cent.;
45
50
50 per cant
30 per cent.;
55
50 per cent.;


4
(B) where the agreement is made after the 31st day of March, 1976
(viii) on income by way of interest payable on a tax-free security
(ix) on any other income

Explanation.-For the purposes of this Part, "investment income", “long-term capital gains” and “non-resident Indian* shail
have the meanings assigned to them in Chapter XII-A of the Income-tax Act.

Surcharge on income-tax
‘The amount of income-tax deducted In accordance with the provisions of—

(a) sub-item (a) of item 1 of this Part shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of
twelve per cent. of such income-tax, and

(6) sub-item (a) of item 2 of this Part shall be increased by a surcharge, calculated at the rate of fifteen per cent. of such
income-tax.

PART Ill

RATES FOR CALCULATING OR CHARGING INCOME-TAX IN CERTAIN CASES, DEDUCTING INCOME-TAX FROM INCOME
CHARGEABLE UNDER THE HEAD "SALARIES" AND COMPUTING “ADVANCE TAX”

In cases in which income-tax has to be calculated under the first proviso to sub-section (5) of section 132 of the Income-tax Act

or charged under sub-section (4) of section 172 or sub-section (2) of section 174 or section 175 or sub-section (2) of section 178

of the said Act or deducted under section 192 of the said Act from income chargeable under the head "Salaries" or in which the

{agvanes tax” payable under Chapter XVII-C of the said Act has to be computed at the rate or rates in force, such income-taX or, 28

0 (859 may be, ‘advance tax” [not being “advance tax” in respect of any income chargeable to tax under Chapter Xil or Chapter

2018 or sub-saction (1) of section 161 or section 164 or section 164A or section 1678 of the Income-tax Act at the tatec oe

20 specified in that Chapter or section or surcharge on such “advance tax” in respect of any income chargeable to fax under eectin,
1158], shall be calculated, charged, deducted or computed at the following rate or rates:

Paragraph A
Sub-Paragraph I

in the case of every individual or Hindu undivided tamily or unregistered firm or other association of persons ar body of

25 individuals, whether incorporated or not, or avery artificial juridical person referred to in sub-clause (vi) of clause (31) of

Section 2 of the Income-tax Act, not being a case to which Sub-Paragraph Il of this Paragraph or any other Paragraph of this Part
applies —

Rates of income-tax
(1) whare the total income does not exceed Rs. 22,000 Ni

| 30 (2) Where the total income exceeds Rs. 22,000 but does net 20 Per cent. of the amount by which the total income exceeds
exceed Rs. 30,000 Rs. 22,006

(3) whore the total income exceeds Rs, 30,000 but does not Ris. 1,600 plus 30 per cent. of the amount by which the total
exceed Rs. 50,000 income exceeds Rs, 30,000;
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does not Rs. 7,600 plus 40 per cent. of the amount by which the total

| 35 exceed Rs. 1,00,000
(5) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000

income exceeds Rs. 50,000;

Rs. 27,600 plus 50 per cent. of the amount by which the total
income exceeds Rs, 1,00,000,

Surcharge on income-tax
' The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall, —
(in the case of every individual, Hindu undivided tamily or association of persons or body of individuals referred to in sections

88 and BBA having a total income exceeding seventy-five thousand’ rupees, be reduced by the amount of rebate of income tnx
calculated under Chapter Vill-A, and the income-tax as ‘so reduced,

{iin the case of every person, other than those mentioned in item (), having a total income exceeding seventy-five thousand
rupee:

45 be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of twelve per cent. of such income-tax:
Provided that no such surcharge shall be payable by a non-resident.

Sub-Paragraph वी

In the case ot every Hindu undivided family which at any time during the previous year has at least one member whose total income
of the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1992 exceeds Rs. 22,000,—

50 Rates of income-tax

t (1) Where the total income does not exceed Rs. 12,000 _—Nil:
2) the total income exceeds Rs. 12,000 but 008. 25 per cent. of the amount by which the total income exceeds
not exceed Rs, 20,000 Rs, 12,000;
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs, 20,000 but does Rs. 2,000 plus 30 per cent. of the amount by which the total
55 not exceed Rs, 40,000 income exceeds Rs. 20,000;

{4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 40,000 but does
not exceed Rs. 60,000

Rs, 8,000 plus 40 per cent. of the amount by which the total
income exceeds Rs. 40,000;


42
(5) where the total income exceeds Rs. 60,000 but does 70. 95. 16,000 plus 50 per cent. of the amount by which the total
exceed Rs. 1,00,000 income exceeds Rs. 60,000;

(6) _ where the total income exceeds Rs, 1,00,000 Rs. 36,000 plus 55 per cent. of the amount by which the total
income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000.

Surcharge on income-tax

The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall, in the case of
every person having a total income exceeding seventy-five thousand rupees, be reduced by the amourt of rebate of icone tax
calculated under Ch ‘apter VIII-A and the income-tax as so reduced be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union
calculated at the rate of twelve per cent. of such income-tax :

Provided that no such surcharge shall be payable by a non-resident.
Paragraph B

In the case of every co-operative society,—
Rates of income-tax
(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 10,000 10 per cent. of the total income;
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does Rs. 1,000 plus 20 per cent. of the amount by which the total
net exceed Rs. 20,000 income exceeds As. 10,000;
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 20,000 Rs. 3,000 plus 35 per cent. of the amount by which the total

income exceeds Rs. 20,000.
‘Surcharge on income-tax

‘The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Paragraph shall, in the case of every
Person having a total income exceeding seventy-five thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union
calculated at the rate of twelve per cent. of such income-tax.

Paragraph C
Sub-Paragraph I

In the case of every registered firm, not being a case to which Sub-Paragraph ॥ of this Paragraph applies, —

Rates of income-tax

(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 15,000 Nil;

(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 15,000 but does 6 per cent. of the amount by which the total income exceeds
not exceed Rs. 50,000 Rs. 15,000;

(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does Rs. 2,100 plus 12 per cent. of the amount by which the total
not exceed Rs. 1,00,000 income exceeds Rs. 50,000;

(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 Rs. 8,100 plus 18 per cent. of the amount by which the total

income exceeds Rs.1,00,000.

Surcharge on income-tax
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this ‘Sub-Paragraph shall, in the case of

every person having a total income exceeding seventy-five thousand rupges, be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the
Union calculated at the rate of twelve per cent. of such income-tax.

Sub-Paragraph II

In the case of every registered firm whose total income includes income derived from a profession carried on by it and the income
80 included is not less than fifty-one per cent. of such total income, —

Rates of income-tax
(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 15,000 Nil;
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 15,000 but does 5 _per_cant. of the amount by which the total income exceeds
not exceed Rs. 50,000 Rs, 15,000;
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does Rs. 1,750 plus 10 per cent. of the amount by which the total
not exceed Rs. 1,00,000 income exceeds Rs. 50,000;
(4) where the total income excaeds Rs. 1,00,000 Rs. 6,750 plus 15 per cent. of the amount by which the total

income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000.

5

20

25

40


43

Surcharge on income-tax

The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall, in the case of
every person having a total income exceeding seventy-five thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the
Union calculated at the rate of twelve per cent. of such income-tax. है

5 Explanation. For the purposes of this Paragraph, “registered firm” includes an unregistered firm assessed as a registered firm
under clause (b) of section 183 of the Income-tax Act.

Paragraph D
In the case of every local authority —
Rate of income-tax

10 On the whole of the total income 50 per cent.

Surcharge on income-tax

The amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore specified shall, in the case of every person having a total income
exceeding seventy-five thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of twelve
per cent. of such income-tax.

15 Paragraph E
In the case of a company,—
Rates of income-tax
|. In the case of a domestic company,—
(1) where the company is a company in which the public are substantially interested 45 per cent. of the total
income;

(2) where the company is not a company in which the public are substantially interested 50 per cent. of the total
income.

20

Il. In the case of a company other than a domestic company,—
25 (i) on so much of the total income as consists of—

(a) royalties received from Government or an Indian concern in pursuance of an
agreement made by it with the Government or the Indian concern after the 31st day of March,
1961 but before the 1st day of April, 1976, or
(b) fees for rendering technical services received from Government or an Indian concern
in pursuance of an agreement made by it with the Government or the Indian concern after the
30 29th day of February, 1964 but before the ist day of April, 1976,

and where such agreement has, in either case, been approved by the Central Government 50 per cent.;

(ii) on the balance, if any, of the total income 65 per cent.

Surcharge on income-tax

35 116 amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the provisions of item | of this Paragraph shall, in the case of every

person having a total income exceeding seventy-tive thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge calculzted at the rate of
fifteen per cent. of such income-tax.

PART IV
[See section 2 (9) (e)]
RULES FOR COMPUTATION OF NET AGRICULTURAL INCOME

Rule 1— Agricultural income of the nature referred to in sub-clause (a) of clause (7A) of s2ction 2 of the Income-tax Act shall
be computed as if it were income chargeable to income-tax under that Act under the head "Income Irom other sources” and the
provisions of sections 57 to 59 of that Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly:

Provided that sub-section (2) of section 58 shall apply subject to the modification that the reference to section 40A therein shall
be construed as not including a reference to sub-sections (3) and (4) of section 40A.

Rule 2.—-Agricultural income of the nature referred to in sub-clause (b) or sub-clause (c) of clause (1A) of section 2of the
Income-tax Act [other than income derived from any building required as a dwelling house by the receiver of the rent orrevenue or
the cultivator or the receiver of rent-in- kind referred to in the said sub-clause (c)] shall be computed as if it were income

10 income-tax under that Act under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” and the provisions of sections 30, 31, 32,
36, 37, 38, 40, 40A other than sub-sections (3) and (4) thereof], 41, 43, 438, 438 and 430 of the Income-tax Act shall, so far as
may be, apply accordingly.


44

Rule 3.— Aaticutural income of the nature referred to in sub-clause (o) of clause (1A) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, being
income derived from any building required as a dwelling house by the receiver of the Tent or revenus or the cultivator or the receiver of
rent-in-kind referred to in the said sub-clause (c) shall be computed as if it ware income chargeable to income-tax under that Act
under the head "Income from house property" and the provisions of sections 23 to 27 of they ae shall, so far as may be, apply
accordingly.

Rule 4.—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of these rules, in a case where the assessee derives
income from sale of tea grown and manufactured by him in India, such income shall be computed in accordance with rule 8 of the
Income-tax Rules, 1962, and sixty per cent. of such income shall be regarded as the agricultural income of the assessee.

Rule 5.—Where the assessae is a partner ofa registered firm or an unragistered firm assessed as a registered firm under clause
{©) of section 183 of the Income-tax Act, which in the previous year has any agricultural income, or is a partner of an unregistered
{inn Which has not been assessed as a registered firm under clause (0) of the said section 183 ane which in the previous year has
either no income chargeable to tax under the Income-tax Act or has total income not exceeding ti
Chargeable to tax in the case of an unragistared firm but has any agricultural income, then,
गधा ain accordance with thse rules and his share inthe agricultural income or ess ofthe frm shell oem
manner laid down in sub-section (1), sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) of section 67 of the Income-tax Act and the share so
computed shall be regarded as the agricultural income or loss of the assassee,

Rule 6.— Where the assessee i

Rule 7— Where the result of the computation for the previous year in respect of any source of agricultural income is a loss,
Such loss shall be set off against the income of the assessee, if any, for thal previous year from any other source of agricultural
income :

Provided that where the assessee is a partner of an unregistered firm which has not been assessed as a registered firm under
clause (b) of section eons income-tax Act ors a member of an association of persons or a body ० 03.25 2 व का 0,
the assessee in the agricutural income of the firm, association or body. as the case may be, is a loss, such loss shall not be set off
against any income of the assessee from any other source of agricultural Income.

Rule 8 Any sum payable by the assessee on account of any tax lavied by the State Government on the agricultural income
shall be deducted in computing the agricultural income.

Rule @—(1) Where the assessee has, in the previous year rolevant 10 the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of
April, 1991, any agricutural income and the net result of the computation of the agricultural income of the assessee for any one or
more of the previous years ralevant to the assessment years commencing an the 1st day of April, 1983 or the 1st day of April, 1984
orthe 1st day of Apri, 1985 or the 1st day of Apri, 1986 0 the 18 day of Agri, 1987 or the 1st day of April, 1988 or the ist day of April,
1989 or the 1st day of Apri, 1990, is a loss, then, for the purposes of sub-section (2) of section 2 of this Act, —

हद less 80 computed forthe previous year rlevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1983 to
the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income fer are Previous year relevant to the
argoscment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1984 or the 1st day of Apri 1985 or the 1st day of April, 1986 or the 1st day
of April, 1987 or the 1st day of April, 1988 or the ist day of April, 1989 or the 1st day of April, 1990,

Li) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1984,
12 the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income 0 tho Previous year relevant to the
Say ot an yearcommencing on the 1st day of April, 1985 or the 1st day of April 1986 or the 1st day of April, 1987 or the ist
day of April, 1988 or the 1st day of April, 1989 or the 1st day of April, 1990,

(ii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1985,
10 the extent, if any, such loss has not 0991 set off against the agricultural income torte previous year relevant to the
Soy of ae Year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1986 or the 1st day of April, 1987 or the 1st day of April, 1988, or the 1st
day of April, 1989 or the 1st day of April, 1990,

(is) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the ist day of Apri, 1986,

loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous your woleser te the
areessment year commencing on the 1st day of Apri, 1987 or the tst day of Apri, 1988 or the 1st day of April, 1989 or the 1st day
of April, 1990,

60) the loss $0 computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on tha 1st day of April, 1987,
to the extant, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income fer the previous year relevant to the
&ssessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1988 or the ist day of April, 1989 or the 1st day of April, 1990,

{i she ss so computed for the previous year relevant 10 the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April,
1989, to the extent, if any, such Joss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relovan torres
assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1990, and

50

55


45
(viii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April,
f

shall be set off against the agricultural income of the assessee for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing
on the 1st day of April, 1991.

(2) Where the assessee has, in the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1992 or,
if by virtue of any provision of the Income-tax Act, income-tax is to be charged in respect of the income of a period other than that
previous year. in such other period. any agricultural income and the net result of tha computation of the agricultural income of the.
assessee for any one or more of the previous years relevant to the assessment years commencing on the 1st day of April, 1984 or
the 1st day of April, 1985 or the ‘st day of April, 1986 or the {st day of Apri, 1987 or the 1st day of April, 1988 or tha 1st day of Apri,
1289 or the 1st day of Apri, 1990 orthe tst day of Apri, 1991, 8 31058, then forthe purposes of sub-section (8) of section 2of this

०,

(i) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1984,
to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the
assessment year commencing on the 1st day of Apri, 1985 or the 1st day of April, 1986 or the 1st day of April, 1987 or the 1st day
15 OF April, 1988 or the 1st day of April, 1989 or the 1st day of April, 1990 or the 1st day of April, 1991,

(ii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1985,
to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the
assessment year commencing on the ist day of April, 1986 or the 1st day of April, 1987 or the ist day of April, 1988 or the 1st day
of April, 1989 oF the 1st day of April, 1990 or the 1st day of April, 1991,

(iii) the loss ३० computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1986,
to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to tho
assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1987 or the 1st day of April, 1988 or the 1st day of April, 1989 or the 1st day
of April, 1990 or the 1st day of April, 1991,

(iy) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1987,

25 to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the
assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1988 or the 1st day of April, 1989 or the 1st day of April, 1990 or the 1st
day of April, 1991,

.(v) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1988,
to the if any, such Joss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the
20. @88essment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1989 or the 1st day of April, 1990 or the 1st day of Apri, 1991,

(vi) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1989,
to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the
assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1990 or the 1st day of April, 1991,

(vit) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1990,
35 to the extent, if any, such loss has not been sot off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the
assessment year commencing on the ist day of April, 1991, and

(viii) the loss so computed for the pravious yaar ralavant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April,

20

shall be set off against the agricultural income of the assessee for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing
on the 1st day of April, 1992.

(3) Where a change has occurred in the constitution of a firm, nothing in sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2) shail entitle the firm to set
off so much of the loss proportionate to the share of a retired or deceased partner computed in the manner laid down in sub-section
(1), sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) of section 67 of the Income-tax Act as exceeds his share of profits, if any, of the previous.

year in the firm, or entitle any partner to the benefit of any portion of the said loss (computed in the manner aforesaid) which is not
45. apportionable to him.

(4) Where any person deriving any agricultural income from any source has been succeeded in such capacity by another
person, otherwise than by inheritance, nothing in sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2) shall entitle any person, other than the person

न incurring the loss, to have it set off under sub-rule (1) or, as the case may be, sub-rule (2).
11 of 1980 (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this rule, no loss which has not been determined by the Assessing 0109
50 2.9 joes, Under the provisions of these rules or the rules contained in Part IV of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1983, or of the
za 1986. First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1984, or of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1985, or of the First Schedule to the
‘1011987, Finance Act, 1986, or of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1987, or of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1988 oro
“aaiee, the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1989 or of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1990, shall be set off under sub
veo 1900. rule (1) or, as the case may be, sub-rule (2).

Rule 10.— Where the net result of the computation made in accordance with these rules is a loss, the loss so computed shall be
ignored and the net agricultural income shall be deemed to be nil,

Rule 11.—The provisions of the Income-tax Act relating to procedure for assessment (including the provisions of section 288/
telating to rounding off of income) shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the computation of the net agricultura
incoma of the assessee as they apply in relation to the assessment of the total income.

60

Rule 12.—For the purposes of computing the net agricultural income of the assessee, the Assessing Officer shall have tht
‘Same powers as he has under the Income-tax Act for the purposes of assessment of the total income.


In the First

THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See section 119/a)]

‘Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act—

(a) in Chapter 78, in ‘sub-heading Nos, 7801.10, 7801. -91, 7801.99, 7802.00, 7803.00, 7804.1 1, 7804.19, 7804.20, 7805.00 |
7806.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry "100% plus Rs.10,000 Per tonne” shall be substituted;

(0) in Chapter 99,—
(? heading Nos, 99.01, 99.02, 99.03 andthe entries relating thereto shall be omitted and heading Nos. 99.04 to 99.15 and
Sub-heading Nos. 9904.00 to 991

'5.00 shail be renumbered as heading Nos. 99.01 to 99.12 and ‘sub-heading Nos. 9901.00to

9912.00 respectively;

(ii) heading No. chal a enties relating thereto shallbe omitted and heading Nos. 99.17, 99.18 and sub-heading Nos.
9917.00, 9918.00 shall be renumbered as heading Nos. 99.13, 99.14 and ‘Sub-heading Nos. 9913.00 and 9914.00


20

25

30

35

—————
8

THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See section 119 (b)]
PART |
In the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act—
(1) in Chapter 3-—

(i) existing NOTE shall be renumbered as NOTE 1 and after NOTE 1 as so renumbered, the following NOTE shall be inserted,
namely:—

‘2, Inthis Chapter, the term “pellets” means products which have been agglomerated either directly by compression orby
the addition of a small quantity of binder.’

(ii) in heading No. 03.05, in column (3), for the words * FisH MEAL”, the words "FLOURS, MEALS AND PELLETS, OF FISH," shall be
‘substituted;

(ii) in'sub-heading No. 0305.10, in column (3), forthe words "Fish Meal”, the words "Flours, meals and, pellets,of fish,” shall
be substituted;

(iv) in heading No. 03.06, in the entry in column (3), the following shall be inserted at the end, namely:—
", FLOURS, MEALS AND PELLETS, OF (CRUSTACEANS, FIT FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION";
(v) in sub-heading No. 0306.19, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—

*-- Other, including flours, meals and pellets, of crustaceans, fit for human consumption”;
(0) in sub-heading No. 0306.29, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—

*-~ Other, including flours, meals and pellets, of crustaceans, fit for human consumption”;
(vii) in heading No. 03.07, in the entry in column (3), the following shall be inserted at the end, namely:—
"/FLOURS, MEALS AND PELLETS, OF AQUATIC INVERTEBRATES OTHER THAN CRUSTACEANS, FIT FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION";

(vill in the portion occurring immediately after sub-heading No. 0307.60, for the entry in column (3), the entry *- Other,

including flours, meals and pellets, of aquatic invertebrates other than crustaceans, fit for human consumption:” shall be
‘substituted;

(2) in Chapter 4,—
(after NoTE 2, the following NOTE and SuB-HEADING NOTE shall be inserted, namaly:—
"3. This Chapter does not cover :

(8) products obtained from whey, containing by weight more than 95% lactose, expressed as anhydrous lactose
calculated on the dry matter (heading No. 17.02); or

(0) albumins (including concentrates of two or more whey proteins, containing by weight more than 80% whey proteins,
calculated on the dry matter) (heading No. 35.02) or globulins (heading No. 35.04).

‘SUB-HEADING NOTE

For the purpose of sub-heading No. 0404.10, the expression “modified whey" means products consisting of whey
constituents, i.e., whey from which all or part of the lactose, proteins or minerals have been removed, whey to which natural
whey constituents have been added, and products obtained by mixing natural whey constituents.”;

(i) in sub-heading No. 0404.10, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
*- Whey and modified whey, whether or not concentrated or containing added sugar or other sweetening matter’;

(fi) in sub-heading No, 0406.10, for the entry in column (3). the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
"Fresh (unripened or uncured) cheese, including whey cheese, and curd *:

(3) in Chapter 8, —
(i) after NoTE 2, the following Nore shall be inserted, name!
“3. Dried fruit or dried nuts of this Chapter may be partially rehydrated, or treated for the following purposes:

(a) for additional preservation or stabilisation (e.g., by moderate heat treatment, sulphuring, the addition of sorbic acid
‘or potassium sorbate);

47


48

{b) to improve or maintain their appearance (@.g., by the addition of vegetable oll or small quantities of glucose syrup),
Provided that they retain the character of dried fruit or dried nuts.";

(ii)in heading No. 08.12, in the entry in column (3),for the word “NUTS *, the word “NUTS,” shall be substituted;

(4) in Chapter 9, in heading No. 09.02, for the ‘entry in column (3), the following entry shall be ‘substituted, namely:—
“TEA, WHETHER OR NOT FLAVOURED":

(5) in Chapter 11,—

(i) in heading No, 11.05, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted. namely:—
"FLOUR, MEAL, FLAKES, GRANULES AND PELLETS, OF POTATOES":

(1) In sub-heading No, 1108.20, for the entry in column (3), the following enty shall be substituted, namely:—
*- Flakes, granules and pellets”,
(6) in Chapter 15,—
() in Nore 3, for the words. “or their fractions", the words “or their fractions,” shall be substituted;

(i) inthe portion occurring immediately after heading No. 15.19, in column (3), forthe words "- Industrial monocarboxylic fatty
acids“, the words *- Industrial monocarboxylic fatty acids; Acid oils from refining: shall be substituted;

(ii) Sub-heading No. 1519.20 and the entries relating there‘o shall be omitted; 1

(iv) sub-heading No, 1519.30 shall be renumbered as ‘sub-heading No. 1519.20;

(7) in Chapter 18, in sub-heading No. 1806.20, in column, (3), forthe words "blocks or slabs", the words "blocks, slabs or bars”
shall be substituted;

(8) # Chapter 19, for NoTE 2, the following Nove shall be substituted, namely:—
'2. For the purposes of heading No. 19.01, the terms “flour” and "meal" mean: ५४
(a) Cereal flour and meal of Chapter 11, and

(6) Flout, meal and powder of vagetable origin of any Chapter, other than flour, meal or powder of dried vegetables
(heading No, 07.12), of potatoes (heading No.11.05) or of dried leguminous vegetables (heading No. 17.08).

(9) in Chapter 21, in NoTE 1, clauses (c) to (6) shall be renumbered as clauses (0)10 (h) respectively and belore clause (jas
80 renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 25

"(e)lavoured tea (heading No. 09.02);";
(10) in Chapter 22,—

(i) in Nove 1, clauses (a) 10 (8) shall be renumbered as clauses (0) to (f) respectively and betore clause (0) as so
fenumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“(@) products falling thereunder (other than those of heading No. 22.09) prepared for culinary purposes and thereby 30
rendered unsuitable tor consumption as beverages (generally heading No. 21.03);":

(i) in heading No. 22.06, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—

“OTHER FERMENTED BEVERAGES (FOR EXAMPLE, CIDER, PERRY. MEAD); MIXTURES OF FERMENTED BEVERAGES AND MIXTURES.
OF FERMENTED BEVERAGES AND NON-ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES NOT ELSEWHERE SPECIFIED OR INCLUDED";

(11) in Chapter 25,— 35
19 in heading No. 25.01, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
“SALT (INCLUDING TABLE SALT AND DENATURED SALT) AND PURE SODIUM CHLORIDE, WHETHER OR NOT IN AQUEOUS SOLUTION 08
CONTAINING ADDED ANTI-CAKING OR FREE FLOWING AGENTS; SEA WATER",
(i) In sub-heading No, 2528.10, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—

“- Natural sodium borates and concentrates thereot (whether or not calcined) 40
(72) in Chapter 26, in heading No. 26,20, for the. words "METALLIC COMPOUNDS", the Words “METAL COMPOUNDS" shall be
substituted;
(13) in Chapter 28,—
(in Note 2, in clause (e), for the words “metallic derivatives”, the words “metal derivatives” shall be substituted:
(ii)in NOTE 4, for the words "a metallic acid”, the words ‘a metal acid” shall be substituted; 45

(ii) in NOTE 5, for the word “metallic”, the word "metal" shall be ‘substituted;

(82 in Nore 6, in clause (0) for the figures andwords”0,002 micto-curie pergram:*, the figures and letters
*74Bq/a(0.002uci/g);* shall be substituted;


5

10

15

(20

45

50

49
(v)in heading No. 28.18, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
“ARTIFICIAL CORUNDUM, WHETHER OR NOT CHEMICALLY DEFINED; ALUMINIUM OXIDE; ALUMINIUM HYDROXIDE™;
(vi)in sub-heading No. 2818.10, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
*- Antiticial corundum, whether or not chemically defined”;
(vii)in sub-heading No. 2818.20, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
~- Aluminium oxide, other than artificial corundum";
(vil) in heading No. 28.50, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-—

“HYDRIDES, NITRIDES, AZIDES, SILICIDES AND BORIDES, WHETHER OR NOT CHEMICALLY DEFINED, OTHER THAN COMPOUNDS WHICH
ARE ALSO CARBIDES OF HEADING NO. 28,49";

(1A) in Chapter 29, in NoTE 7, for the words "and imides of polybasic acids”, the words ", or imides of polybasic acids” shall be
substituted;

(15) in Chapter 32, in Note 3, for the words "colouring matters”, the words “colouring matter” shall be substituted;
(16) in Chapter 34, in NoTE 5, in clause (6), for the word “coloured”, the words “refined or coloured” shall be substituted;
(17) in Chapter 35, in heading No. 35.02, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:

"ALBUMINS (INCLUDING CONCENTRATES OF TWO OR MORE WHEY PROTEINS, CONTAINING BY WEIGHT MORE THAN 80% WHEY
PROTEINS, CALCULATED ON THE DRY MATTER), ALBUMINATES AND OTHER ALBUMIN DERIVATIVES";

(18) in Chapter 37, in sub-heading No, 3707.10, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:~
*- Sensitising emulsions";

(19) in Chapter 38, in sub-heading No, 3806.10, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be
substituted, namely

"- Rosin and resin acids";
(20) in Chapter 39, in NoTE 10, for the words "when so cut,”, the words "when so cut” shall be substituted;

(21) in Chapter 42, in heading No. 42.02, in column (3), forthe words "WITH SUCH MATERIALS”, the words "WITH SUCH MATERIALS
OR WITH PAPER shall be substitut

(22)in Chapter 44,—

(i) in sub-heading No. 4403.91, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
*-- Of oak (Quercus spp.)";

(ii) in sub-heading No. 4403.92, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
*-- Of beech (Fagus 397.)

(iin sub-heading No. 4407.91, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
*- - Of oak (Quercus spp.)";

{ivjin sub-heading No. 4407.92, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
>- - Of beech (Fagus spp.)";

(23) in Chapter 48, in sub-heading No. 4820.30, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted,
namely:—
*- Binders (other than book covers), folders and file covers";
(24) in Chapter 49, —

(i) in heading No. 49.05, in column (3), for the words "ALL KINDS INCLUDING, the words “ALL KINDS, INCLUDING” shall be
‘substituted;

(ii)in sub:

ding No. 4905.91, in column (3), forthe words “book-torm”, the words “book form” shall be substituted;

(iii) in heading No. 49.07, in column (3), forthe words "CHEQUE FORMS; BANKNOTES,” the words "BANKNOTES ;CHEQUE FORMS,"
shall be substituted;

(25) in Section X1,—
(i) in clause (A)of Note 2, the following shall be inserted at the end, namely:—
*When noone textile material predominates by weight, the goods are to be classified asf consisting wholly of thatonetextile

material which is covered by the heading which occurs last in numerical order among those which equally merit
consideration."; v 4

(ii)in clause (c) of Nore 7, for the words “fabrics, the”, the words “fabrics the” shall be substituted;
(26) in Chapter 51,—

(i) inthe portion occurring immediate!
“or of fine animal hair” shall be substitut

jer heading No. 51,11, incolumn (3), for the words “or fine animal hair’, the words



50

(ii) in the portion occurring immediately after heading No. 51.12, in column (3), for the words “or fine animal hair’, the words
“or of fine animal hair" shall be substituted;

(27) in Chapter 54, in sub-heading No. 5407.10, in column (3), for the words "polyamides, or of", the words “polyamides or of*
shall be substituted;

(26) in Chapter 55, in sub-heading No. 5504.10, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted,
namely:—
"Ot viscose rayon";
(29) in Chapter 56,—
(0 in clause (c) of NoTE 3, for the word “strips”, the word “strip” shall be substituted;
(ii) in heading No. 56.07, in column (3), for the word “ROPE”, the word "ROPES" shall be substituted;
(30) in Chapter 58, in Note 3, for the word “purpose”, the word “purposes” shall be substituted;
(37)in Chapter 59, in NoTE 7, in clause (a), in sub-clause (iv), for the word “fabric", the word “fabrics” shall be substituted;
(32) in Chapter 61, for Note 8, the following Note shall be substituted, namely:—

“8. Garments of this Chapter designed for left over, right closure at the front shall be regarded as men’s or boys'garments,and
those designed for rightover left closure at the front as women’sor giris'garments. These provisions donot apply wherethe cut of 15
the garment clearly indicates that it is designed for one or other of the sexes.

Garments which cannot be identified as either men's or boys’ garments or as women's or girls’ garments are to be classified in
the headings covering women's or girls' garments.”;

(33)in Chapter 62, for NOTE 8, the following NoTE shall be substituted, namely:—

“2. Garments of this Chapter designed for let over right closure at the front shall be regarded as men's or boys' garments, and 2¢
those designed for right over left closure at the frontas women’s or gitls' garments. These provisions do not apply wherethe cut
of the garment clearly indicates that it is designed for one orother of the sexes.

Garments which cannot be identified as either men’s or ‘boys’ garments or as women’s or girls’: garments are to be classified in
the headings covering women's or girls’ garments.";

(34) in Chapter 63, in heading No. 63.06, in column (3), for the words SA BOATS", the word “SAILBOARDS" shall be 25
substituted;

(35) in Chapter 64, in heading No. 64.06, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—

“PARTS OF FOOTWEAR (INCLUDING UPPERS WHETHER OR NOT ATTACHED TO SOLES OTHER THAN OUTER SOLES); REMOVABLE
IN-SOLES, HEEL CUSHIONS AND SIMILAR ARTICLES; GAITERS, LEGGINGS AND SIMILAR ARTICLES, AND PARTS THEREOF”,

(36) in Chapter 70, in Note 1, in clause (८), for the brackets, words and. figures "(heading No. 85.47)", the words and figures“of 3)
heading No. 85.47" shall be substituted;

(37) in Chapter 71,—

(in Note 3,—
(a)in clause (c), for the words “Articles of", the words "Goods of” shall be substituted;
17) clause (n), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 35

“(n) Articles classified in Chapter 96 by virtue of NOTE 4 to that Chapter; or";
60 in NOTE 10, for the words “and hairpins”, the words “or hairpin” shall be substituted;

(38)in Chapter 72, in Note 1, in clause (k), inthe last paragraph, for the words “of any size”, the words “of any size.” shallbe
‘substituted;

(39) in Chapter 73,— 40
(in sub-heading No. 7304.20, in column (3), the word “the shall be omitted:
(ii)in sub-heading No. 7305.20, in column (3), the word "the" shall be omitted;
(ii) in sub-heading No. 7306.20, in column (3), the word “the” shall be omitted;
(iv)in sub-heading No. 7208.40, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
+- Equipment for scaffolding, shuttering, propping or pit-propping”; 45
(¥) in sub-heading No.7314.30, in column (3), for the words “inter-section”, the word “intersection” shall be substituted;
(vi) in sub-heading No. 7321.81, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
~ - For gas fuel orfor both gas and other fuels”;
(40) in Chapter 74, in Note 1, in clause (6) , for the words “of any size", the words “of any size,” shall be substituted;
(41) in Chapter 75, in the Note, in clause (०) , for the words “of any size", the words “of any size,” shall be substituted; 50
(42) in Chapter 76, in the Note, in clause (d) , for the words “of any size", the words “of any size," shall be substituted;



S1
(43) in Chapter 78, inthe Nore, in clause (d), for the words “ol any size", the words “ot any size" shall be substituted:
(44) in Chapter 79, in the Nore, in clause (d), for the words “of any size", the words “ol any siz” shall be substituted;
(45) in Chapter 80, inthe Nore, in clause (0) forthe words “of any size, the words “of any size,” shall be substituted;
(46) in Chapter 82, in sub-heading No. 6211.91, in column (3), for the word "Tables", the word “Table” shall be substituied;
(47) in Chapter 84.—

(0 in heading No. 84.26, in column (3), for the word "DERRICKS", the words “SHIPS: DERRICKS" shall be substituted;
(ii) in heading No. 84.70, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—

“CALCULATING MACHINES; ACCOUNTING MACHINES, POSTAGE-FRANKING MACHINES, TICKET-ISSUING MACHINES AND SIMILAR
MACHINES, INCORPORATING A CALCULATING DEVICE; CASH REGISTERS":

0 (48) in Chapter 85,—
(ie Nore 5, in clause (8), in sub-clause (c), for the words “and passive’, the words “and passive,” shall be substituted:
(010 heading No. 85.21, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
"VIDEO RECORDING OR REPRODUCING APPARATUS, WHETHER OR NOT INCORPORATING A VIDEO TUNER";
{ii) in heading No. 85.28, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely—

5 “TELEVISION RECEIVERS (INCLUDING VIDEO MONITORS AND VIDEO PROJECTORS), WHETHER OR NOT INCORPORATING RADIG
BROADCAST RECEIVERS OR SOUND OR VIDEO RECORDING OR REPRODUCING APPARATUS";

(iv) in sub-heading No. 8532.10, in column (3), for the letters “kVar", the letters "var" shall be substituted;
(49) in Chapter 87,—

(i) NoTE 3 shall be omitted;
(i) the existing Notes 4 and 5 shall be renumbered as NOTES 3 and 4 respectively;

(ii) \o heading No. 87.02, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
"MOTOR VEHICLES FOR THE TRANSPORT OF TEN OR MORE PERSONS, INCLUDING THE DRIVER";
(iv) in heading No. 87.05, in column (3), for the words -WORK-SHOPS", the word WORKSHOPS" shall be substituted;

(50) in Chapter 89, in heading No. 89.07, in column (3), for the words-LANDING STAGES", the Words “LANDING-STAGES" shall by
कु ‘substituted;

(51) in Chapter 90,—

(60 in Nore 1, clauses (8) to (1) shall be renumbered as clauses (c) to (m) respectively and before clause (c) as st
tenumbered, (0७ following ciause shall be inserted, namely—

१10) Supporting belts or other support articles of textile material, whose intended effect on the organ to be supported or helt
0 derives solely from their elasticity (for example, maternity belts, thoracic support bandages, abdominal support bandages
supports for joints or muscles) (Section XI);":

t (ii) in heading No. 90.11, in column (3), for the words "MICROPHOTOGRAPHY, MICROCINEMATOGRAPHY*, the word:
"PHOTOMICROGRAPHY, CINEPHOTOMICROGRAPHY" shalll be substituted;

ue (ii) in the portion occurring immediately after heading No. 90.25, in column (3), for the word "Thermometers,*, the word:
: and pyrometers,” shall be substituted;

(iv) in sub-heading Nos. 9025.11 and 9025.19, for the entry in column (4), the entry "60%" shall be substituted;
1४)॥ heading No. 90.29, in column (3), for the figures "90.15", the figures and word "90.14 or 90.15" shall be substituted;
(52) in Chapter 92, in Nore 1,—

(a) for clauses (०) and (७) , the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
*(d) Brushes for cleaning musical instruments (heading No. 96.03); or
(e) Collectors’ pieces or antiques (heading No. 97.05 or 97.06)
(0) clause (f) shall be omitted; m

_ (53) in Chapter 94, in sub-heading No .9405.10, in column (3), for the word “thorough-fares”, the word "thoroughfares" shallbe
substituted

(64) io Chapter 95,—
____ (iin Note 1, in clause (0), for the words “Walking sticks", the word "Walking-sticks” shall be ‘substituted;


52

(ii)in heading No. 95.06, for the entry in column (3), the followir.y entry shall be substituted, namely:—
"ARTICLES AND EQUIPMENT FOR GENERAL PHYSICAL EXERCISE, GYMNASTICS, ATHLETICS,OTHER SPORTS (INCLUDING TABLE-TENNIS),
OR OUT-DOOR GAMES, NOT SPECIFIED OR INCLUDED ELSEWHERE IN THIS CHAPTER; SWIMMING POOLS AND PADDLING POOLS";

(ii)in sub-heading No, 9506.91, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
*-- Articles and equipment for general physical exercise, gymnastics or athletics”,

(55) in Chapter 96, in sub-heading No. 9603.21, for the entry in column (3), the following entry shall be substituted, d
"++ Tooth brushes, including dental-plate brushes";

(56) in Chapter 97, in Note 5,—

(a) for the words “are to be treated as forming part of”, the words “are to be classified with” shall be substituted;
(6) the following shall be inserted at the end, namely:—

1
"Frames which are not of a kind or of a value normal to the articles referred to in this Note are to be classified 1

separately.”.
PART It
Heading ‘Sub-heading Description of article __RateofDuty | mn
No. No. ‘Standard Preferential 15
Areas
1) (2) (3) (0) (5)

Inthe Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, in heading No. 38.09, for ‘sub-heading Nos. 3809.10, 3809.91, 3809.92 and 3809.99 and
the entries relating thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely:—

-3809.10 - With a basis of amylaceous substances 100% plus था 2
Rs. 25 per Kg.
- Other
3809.91 -- Of akind used in the textile or 100% plus
like industries Rs. 25 per Kg.
3809.92 ~~ Of a kind used in the paper 100% plus S 25
or like industries Rs. .25 per Kg.
3809.93 ~- Of akind used in the leather 100% plus
or like industries Re. .25 per Kg.
3809.99 -- Other 100% plus a

Rs. .25 per Kg. 30



45

|

THE FOURTH SCHED!'LE
(See section 120)
PART |
Inthe Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act—

(1) in Chapter 24, in sub-heading Nos. 2404.31 and 2404.39, forthe entry in column (4), the entry "Rs. 7.50 per thousand” shall
be substituted;

(2)in Chapter 28, in sub-heading No. 2808.10, for the entry in column (4), the entry “15%" shall be substituted;
(3)in Chapter 38, after NoTE 2, the following NoTE shall be inserted, namely:—
3. This Chapter does not cover products containing alcohol, opium, Indian hemp or other narcotic drugs.

For the purposes of this NoTE, “Alcohol”, "Opium", “Indian Hemp" .” Narcotic drugs” and "Narcotics " have the meanings
assigned to them in section 2 of the Medicinal and Toilet Preparations (Excise Duties) Act, 1955 (16 of 1955)

(4) in Chapter 39, in sub-heading Nos. 3923.19, 3923.90 and 3926.90, for the ‘entry in column (4), the entry "40%" shall be
substituted;

(5)in Chapter 44,—
(2)in NOTE 6, for the words “, laminated wood or densified wood”, the words “or laminated wood" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-heading No. 4410.10, forthe entry in column (3), the entry “Flush Doors, Panel Doors and similar 00018" shallbe

(6) in Chapter 48, in sub-heading No. 4805.20, for th ‘entry in column (4), the entry "15%" shall be substituted;

(7) in Chapter 50, in sub-heading No. 5002.00, for the intry in column (3), the entry “RAW SILK (NOT THROWN); SILK
WASTE (INCLUDING YARN WASTE AND GARNETTED. STOCK); OTHER SILK YARN INCLUDING WASTE YARN (HARD.
WASTE); SILK WORM GUT" shall be substituted;

(8) in Chapter 52, in sub-heading Nos. $204.21 and 5204.29, for the entry in column (4), the entry "15.15 per kilogram” shallbe
substituted;

(9) in Chapter 53, in sub-heading Nos. 5303.32 and 5303.39, forthe ‘entty in column (4), the entry "Rs. 15 perkilogram” shall
be substituted;

(10) in Chapter 54, in sub-heading Nos. 5404.00, 5405.00, 5406.11, 5406.12 and 5407.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry
"Rs. 50 per kilogram” shall be substituted:
(11) in Chapter 55,--

(a)in sub-heading Nos. 5501.10, 5501.20, 5501.30 and5501.90, forthe entry in column (4), the entry "Rs.50 per kilogram”
shall be substituted;

(0) in sub-heading No. 5504.10, for the entry in column (4), the entry "15.15 per kilogram” shall be substituted;

(c) in the portion occurring immediately after sub-heading No. 5504.10, for the entry in column (3), the entry. "- Yarn of
polyester staple fibre” shall be substituted;

(०) in sub-heading Nos. 5504.21 and 5504.22, for the ‘entry in column (4), the entry "15.15 per kilogram” shall be
‘substituted;

(6) inthe portion occurring immediately after sub-heading No, 5504.29, forthe entry in column (3), the entry *- Yarn of acrylic
or modacrylic staple fibre” shall be substituted;

(1) in sub-heading Nos. 5505.00, 5506.21 and 5506.29, for the entry in column (4), the entry "15.15 per kilogram” shall be.
‘substituted;

(12) in Chapter 69. —
(a) ॥ sub-heading No. 6901.00, in column (3), for the words “CONSTRUCTIONAL GOODS,", the words
“CONSTRUCTIONAL GOODS AND OTHER REFRACTORY CERAMIC GOODS SUCH AS” shall be substituted;

(0) in sub-heading No. 6908.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "15%" shall be substituted;
(13) in Chapter 74, existing NoTE shall be renumbered as NOTE 1 and after NOTE 1 as so renumbered, the following NoTE shall
be inserted, namely:—
"2. In relation to products of heading No. 74.12, the process of drawing or redrawing shall amount to ‘manufacture’.";
(14) in Chapter 76, in heading No. 76.06, in column (3), for the words “STRIP OF", the words "STRIP, OF* shall ७७
‘Substituted;

(15) in Chapter 85,—
(a) in sub-heading No. 8523.11, for the entry in column (4), the entry "25% plus Rs. 8 per square metre” shall be
‘substituted;

(©) in sub-heading No. 8523.13, for the entry in column (4), the entry "25% plus Rs. 18 per square metre" shall be
‘substituted;

(60 in sub-heading No. 8524.21, for the entry in column (4), the entry "30% plus Rs. 8 per square metre" shall be
‘substituted;

53


54

(00 in sub-heading No. 8524.23, for the entry in column (4),
substituted;

(2) in sub-heading No. 8528.00, for the entry in column (4),
{in sub-heading No. 8540.11, for the entry in column (4),

the entry "30% plus Rs. 18 per ‘square metre” shall

the entry "50% plus Ris. 800 per set” shall be |
the entry "Rs. 2,000 per tube" shall be ‘substituted;
(G)in su-heading No. 8540.12, for the entry in column (4), the entry * Rs. 500 per tube" shall be substituted;
(16) in Chapter 87,—
(4) for Note 4, the following NOTES shall be substituted, namely:-—

“4. For the purposes of heading Nos. 87.01 to 87.05, the activity of body buildin
Structures or equipment on the chassis shall amount to ‘manufacture’ of a motor ५

5. Heading No.87.06 shall include chassis, whether or not fitted with a cab.”;
(0) existing Nore 5 shall be renumbered as NOTE 6;

19 ० fabrication or mounting or fitting
ehicle.

(6) in subheading No, 8703.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry "60%" shall be substituted;
(@) in sub-heading No. 8706.30, for the entry in column (4), the entry "60%" shall be substituted,

PART I
Heading No. Sub-heading "Description of goods Rate of duty
No,
कि! ७ ५, @) @

In the Schedule tothe Central Excise Tarif Ac Act —
(1) in Chapter 32,—
(a) for sub-heading Nos. 3206.11 and 3206.19 andthe word *-Pigments:" occurring immediately before sub-heading20
No. 3206.11, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
"3206.10 - Pigments 10%";
1, namely :--
>3212.20 + Aluminium paste 15%";
(2) in Chapter 55, for heading No. 55.02 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely:— 25

"55.02 5502.00 ARTIFICIAL STAPLE FIBRES AND TOW, INCLUDING
TOPS THEREOF

(®) after sub-heading No. 3212.10 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be inserte

Rs. 25 per kilogram".



THE FIFTH SCHEDULE >
(See section 121) =

Part | “=n
In the First Schedule to the Additional Duties of Excise Act,—

(1) sub-heading No. 1701.20 and the entries ‘relating thereto shall be omitted;

(2) in sub-heading Nos. 2404.31 and 2404.9, for the entry in column (4),
101७0.

the entry “Rs. 2.50 per thousand” shall be
substi

PARTI

Heading No. Sub-heading
No.

Description of goods Rate of additional
yg
(1) (2) (3) (4)
“nthe First Schedule to the Additonal Duties of Excise act Additional Duties of Excise Act,—

18) for heading Nos. 54.10 and 54.11 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely:—

"34.10 $410.00 FABRICS OF MAN-MADE FILAMENT YARN (INCLUDING FABRICS 20% plus Rs. 5
5 OBTAINED FROM MATERIALS OF HEADING NOS, 54,06 AND 54.07 BUT per square metre
EXCLUDING FABRICS COVERED UNDER HEADING NO, 54.12), —

(a) WOVEN ON LOOMS OTHER THAN HANDLOOMS, AND.

(®) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING, DYEING,
PRINTING, SHRINK-PROOFING, TENTERING, HEAT-SETTING,
CREASE RESISTANT PROCESSING OR ANY OTHER PRO.
CESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES,
WITHOUT THE AID OF POWER OR STEAM
54.11 411,00 FABRICS OF MAN-MADE FILAMENT YARN (INCLUDING FABRICS

OBTAINED FROM MATERIALS OF HEADING NOS. 54.06 AND 54.07 BUT 20% plus Rs, ९
EXCLUDING FABRICS COVERED UNDER HEADING NO, 54,12)— Peraquareiiatas;

(a) WOVEN ON HANDLOOMS, AND

(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING, DYEING,
PRINTING, SHRINK-PROOFING, TENTERING, HEAT-SETTING,
CREASE RESISTANT PROCESSING OR ANY OTHER

fd PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES,

10) for heading Nos. 55.09 and 55.10 and the entries relating thereto, the follo

wing shall be substituted, namoly:—
| "55.09 5509.00 FABRICS OF MAN-MADE STAPLE FIBRES (EXCLUDING FABRICS 20% plus Rs. 5
COVERED UNDER HEADING NOS. 55.11 AND 55,12), — per square metre
(a) WOVEN ON LOOMS OTHER THAN HANDLOOMS, AND

0) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING, DYEING,
PRINTING, SHRINK-PROOFING, TENTERING, HEAT-SETTING,
CREASE RESISTANT PROCESSING OR ANY OTHER PRO-
CESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES,
WITHOUT THE AID OF POWER OR STEAM

15 55.10 5510.00 FABRICS OF MAN-MADE STAPLE FIBRES (EXCLUDING FABRICS 20% plus Rs. 5
COVERED UNDER HEADING NOS. 55.11 AND 55,12), — Persquare metre".

(a) WOVEN ON HANDLOOMS, AND

(0) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING, DYEING,

कु SHRINK-PROOFING, TENTERING, HEAT-
SETTING, CREASE RESISTANT PROCESSING OR ANY OTHER
PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES

55


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The object of the Bill is to give effect to the financial proposals of the
Central Government for the financial year 1991-92. The notes onclauses
explain the various provisions contained in the Bill.

New DELHI; MANMOHAN SINGH.
The 24th July, 1991.

PRESIDENTS RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 274 OF THE
ConsTITUTION OF INDIA

[Copy of letter No.F.3(1)-B(D)/91, dated the 24th July, 1991 from
Shri Manmohan Singh, Minister of Finance, to the Secretary-
General, Lok Sabha.}

The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the proposed
Bill, recommends under clauses (1) and (3) of article 117, read with clause (1) of
article 274, of the Constitution of India, the introduction of the Finance (No. 2)
Bill, 1991 to the Lok Sabha and also recommends to the Lok Sabha the
consideration of the Bill.

2. The Bill will be introduced in the Lok Sabha immediately after the
Presentation of the Budget on the 24th July, 1991.


(Clause 2, read with the First Schedule to the Bil seeks to
शिव, rates at which income-tax (including surcharge
thereon) is to be levied on income chargeable to tax for the

- Further, it lays down the rates at which

and the rates at which
calculated and
1991-92,

Rates of income-tax for the assessment year 1991-92

Part | of the First Schedule to the Bill Specifies the rates of
income-tax on incomes liable to tax for the assessment year
1991-92. These rates are the same as those Specified in Part iil of
the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1990, for the purposes of
deduction of tax at source from"Salaries and for computation of
‘advance tax" payable during the financial year 1990-91 as
“modified by the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1991.

As provided by the Fina

"advance tax"
charged in special

॥008 Act, 1990, the amount of income-tax
fang led in accordance with the provisions of this Pant cron the
fous vey Petson having income exceeding seventy-five
thousand rupees be increased, —

(in the case of every person, being a resident, not being an
Indian company, by a surcharge calculated at the won of 12
Per cent. for purposes of the Union,

(i)in the case of an Indian company, by a surcharge, calculated
al the rate of 15 per cent, of such incomo-tax,

ates for deduction of tax at source during the financial
year 1991-92 from income other than "Salaries"

Part ॥ of the First Schedule to
income-tax is to be deducted at
1991-92 from incomes other than “Salarios™ These rates are the
same as those specified in Part | of the First Schedule to the
Finance Act, 1990 for the Purposes of dedu

during the financial year 1990-91. The amountof tax: So deducted at
_, Source shall be increased, —

(i) inthe case where the Paymentis made to aperson, other than
@ company, resident in India, by a surcharge calculated atthe
rate of 12 per cent, for purposes of the Union,

(i)in the case of persons being a domestic cor

surcharge calculated at the
income-tax,

Rates for deduction of tax at source from 4
computation of ‘advance tax" and charging of income tax in special
cases during the financial year 1991-92,

Part Ill of the First Schedule to the Bill specifies the rates at which
joome-tax is to be d ‘ource from "Salaries" and also
istobe paid and income-tax is to
Special cases for the financial year

the Bill specifies the rate at which
Source during the financial year

mpany, by a
Fate of 15 per cent. of such

ipeSltd-Paragraph lof Paragraph A ofthis Part Specifies the rates of
jincome-tax in the. ‘case of every individual or Hindu undivided family

‘Such cases, bot
tax will continue to be the
d for assessment year 1991-92,

Paragraph lof Paragraph C of this Part specifies the rates of
\ ax in the case of every registered firm, not being acase to
ch Sub-Paragraph ॥ of this Paragraph applies. In such cases,
he exer limit and the rates of tax will continue to be the

I Prescribed for assessment year 1991-92.

same as those

87

Notes on clauses

Sub-Paragraph llof Paragraph Cof this Pant
income-tax in the case of every registered firm whose total.
includes income derived from a profe: itam
income so included is not less than fifty-one Per cent. of such
income. In such cases, both the exemption limit and the rateo
will continue to be the same as those Prescribed for assessr
year 1991-92.

Paragraph E of this Part 5;
case of accompany. The
company in which the public
increased from 40
tax of 50 percent,

pecifies the rates of income-tax in
ate of income-tax in the case
are substantially interested has b
Percent, to 45 percent. A unifo
18 proposed in the case ‘of a company not belt
ly interested, In ot

Inthe case of
family, firm, associat

tax shall be increased by a surcharge
calculated at the rate
‘case of domestic

ह Cent. of such incom:
the case of individuals, Hindu undivided tamil
i ies of individuals, entitle
hapter VIII-A, the surcharge will be caloulate

‘on the amount of income-tax as reduced by the amount of suc
rebate.

tax. However, in
and certain a:

Clause 3 seeks
definitions.

Sub-clause (a) seeks to amend Clause (290) of section 2, Th
Proposed amendment is consequential to the omission 6

'o amend section 2 of the Income-tax Act elatingt

Sub-clause (b)(i) seeks to omit reference to section 195 in sub-
Clauise 6) of clause (37A). This is consequential te th mendment
Proposed under sub-clause (b)iii),

Sub-clause (b)(ii) seeks to insert ७ 0०७ sub-clause (iii) in clause
(374). Under the new sub-clause, deduction of tax at source from
Payments to ‘non-residents will be made at the rate or rates of

i 'SAorthe rate or rates specified in
the annual Finance Act as may be applicable.

These amendments will tak Hect from 1st October, 1991.

Clause 4 seoks to amend section 9.

‘of the Income-t:
to income di

lax Act relating
the proposed

im payment made by a 1. who
of all or any rights (including the
of computer software supplied by a
sor cecident manufacturer along with computer hardwere under
&21 ११ approved under the Policy on Computer Softwar
Export, Software Development. and Training, 1986 of the
Government of india, shall 70 be deemed to accrue or ai in
India.

of royalty as consists of lump-sui
is व resident, for the transter

This amendment will take effect retrospectively from ‘st April,
1991,


Clause 5 seeks to amend section 10 of the Income-tax Act.

Sub-clause (a) seeks to amend clause (3) of section 10 relating
to-non:inclusion of casual and non-recurring receipts up to five
‘thousand rupees in the total income.

‘The amendment provides that the said benefit will not be
available in respect of winnings from races including horse
races

This amendment will take effect from 1st October, 1991.

Sub-clause (b) seeks to substitute sub-clause (ii) of clause (4)
of section 10.

Under the

oer ioe ‘any income by way of interest
‘on money standing to the credit of a person in a Non-Resident
(External) Account in any bank in India in accordance with the
Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 and the rules made
thereunder will be exempt in case such person has been permitted
by the Reserve Bank of India to maintain the said Account. The
proposed exemption will be in addition to the exemption already
available to individuals who are resident outside India and who are
maintaining such Account.

si amendment will take effect retrospectively from 1st April,
1991.

‘Sub-clause (८) seeks to insert new clauses (8A)and (88) in
‘section 10, Under the proposed clause (8A), any remuneration or
fee received by a consultant, directly or indirectly, out of the funds
made available to an international organisation (hereinafter
referred to as the agency) under a technical assistance grant
agreement between that agency and the Government of a foreign
State is proposed to be exempted from income-tax. The
expression “consultant” has been defined for the purposes of this
clause fo mean any individual who is either not a citizen of Indiaor,
being acitizen of India, is not ordinarily resident in India or any other
person who is 8 non-resident and is engaged by the agency for
rendering technical services in India in accordance with an
agreement entered inta by the Central Government and the said
agency and the agreement relating to the engagement of the
consultant is approved by the prescribed authority.

Under the proposed clause (88), the remuneration received by
an employee of the consultant referred to in clause (BA) is proposed
to be exempted trom income-tax, provided such employee is either
not a citizen of India or, being a citizen of India, is not ordinarily
resident in India and the contract of his service is approved by the
prescribed authority before the commencement of his service:

Sub-clause (0) proposes to amend clause (9) of section 10 to
exempt the income of any member of the family of any such
individual as is referred to in new clauses (BA) and (88)
accompanying him to India, which accrues or arises outside India,
and is nol deemed to accrue or arise in India, in respect of which
such member is required to pay any income or social security tax to
the country of origin of such member.

These amendments will take effect retrospectively from 1st April,
1991

Sub-clause (e) seeks to insert new clause (10D) in section 10.

The proposed amendment seeks toclarify that any sum received
under a life insurance policy, including the sum allocated by way of
bonus on such policy, shall not be included in the total income of a
person

This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 1st April,
1962.

‘Sub-clause (f) seeks to amend clause (15) of section 10.

item (i) of sub-clause (f) seeks to amend item (0) of sub-clause
{iv)ot clause (15) soas to provide that interest on moneys borrowed
by the National Housing Bank from sources outside India will not
form part of the total income of the lender to the extent it does not
exceed the amount of interest caiculated at the rate approved by the
Central Government in this behalt having regard to the terms of the
loan and its repayment.

hem (ii) of sub-clause (f) seeks to insert item (fa) in sub-clause
(iv)of clause (15) so asto provide thatthe interest on deposits witha

58
scheduled bank in foreign currency will not form part of the
income of the assessee where the acceptance of such depositst
the bank is approved by the Reserve Bank ol India.

Item (ili) of sub-clause (1) seeks to make a consequer
amendment in item (9).

Item (४) of sub-clause (1) seeks to define “industrial undertaki
for the purposes of sub-clause (iv) of clause (15) of the ,
Act, as an undertaking which is engaged in the manufacture
processing of goods or in the business of generation or distributi
of electricity or any other form of power or in mining or in t
construction of ships or in the operation of ships or aircrafts

These amendments will take effect retrospectively from 1st A
1991.

Sub-clause (g) and item (ii) of sub-clause (h) of this cla
provides that incase of a scientific research association orin case’
an association or institution established for the control, supervisio
atc., of games or sports, as the case may be, exemption shall not
denied in relation to voluntary contribution other than the voluntar
contribution in cash or voluntary contribution of the nature raferr
to in clause (b) of the first proviso to clause (21) subject to th
condition that such valuntary contribution is not held by the scientit
research association or the aforesaid association or institution,
otherwise than in any one or more of the forms or modes specified in|
sub-section (5) of section 11, after the expiry of one year from the
end of the previous year in which such asset is acquired or the 31st
day of March, 1992, whichever is later.

tem (i) of sub-clause (h) seeks to amend the fourth proviso to
clause (23) so as to provide further time up to the 30th day of March,
1992 for investing the funds by the trust or institution in any one or
more of the farms ता modes specified in sub-section (5) of section
1".

These amendments will take effect retrospectively from 1st April
1990.

Sub-clause (i) seeks to amend clause (230) of section 10.

\tem (a) of this sub-clause seeks to amend the fourth proviso so
as to provide further time up to the 30th day of March, 1992, for
investing the funds by the trust or institution in any one or more of the
forms or modes specified in sub-section (5) of section 11.

tem (0) of this sub-clause seeks to insert a new proviso after the
fourth proviso so as to provide that in case of an association of
institution referred to in sub-clauses (iv) and (v) of clause (23C),
exemption shall not be denied in relation to voluntary contribution,
other than the voluntary contribution in cash or voluntary
contribution of the nature referred to in clause (b) of the first proviso
to clause (23C) subject to the condition that such voluntary
contribution is not held by the association or institution, otherwise
than in any one or more of the forms or modes specified in sub-
section (5) of section 11, after the expiry of one year from the end ot
the previous year in which such asset is acquired or the 31st day ०
March, 1992, whichever is later.

These amendments will take effect retrospectively from 1st Api
1990.

Clause 6 seeks to substitute sub-section (4A) of section 11 of the
Income-tax Act.

Under the existing provisions, the exemption under section 11
shall be denied where a business, other than the business of
Printing and publication of books by a trust wholly for publicrreligious
purposes is carried on and in case of an institution, for charitable
purposes, the business is mainly carried on by the beneficiaries of
the institution. The proposed amendment seeks 10 provide that
income of a trust or an institution being profits and gains of business
or profession incidental to the objectives of the trustor the institution
shall be exempled from tax under section 11 of the Act.

This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1992.

Clause 7 seeks ta amend section 12A of the Income-tax Act
relating to registration of trusts or institutions.

Under the existing provisions contained in clause (a) of section
12A, a person in receipt of income of any trust or institution is
required to file an application for registration before the expiry of one


59
year trom the date of creation of the trust or establishment of the
institution, In the proviso to aforesaid clause (a), the Chiet
Commissioner or Commissioner may in his discretion condone the
delay for filing an application for registration. The proposed
| ‘amendmentseeks to limit the discration of the Chief Commissioner
‘or Commissioner to entertain tha application of registration before
the period of three years from the creation of trust or establishment
‘of the institution.

This amendment will take effect from 1st October, 1991.

Clause 8 seeks to amend section 13 of the Income-tax Act
relating to certain cases in which the exemption under section 11 is
not admissible.

Sub-clause (a) seeks to insert clause (iia) inthe proviso to clause
[7] of sub-section (1) of that section so as to provide that where an
assel, other than an investment or deposit mentioned in sub-
section (5) of section 11, isheld by thatrust orinstitution, such asset
ig required to be disinvested after the expiry of one year from the
‘endo the previous year in which such asset is acquired or the 31st
day of March, 1992, whichever is later.

Sub-clause (b) seeks to insert a new sub-section (5) so as to
provide that where the debentures of an Indian company are
acquired by the trust or institution after the 28th day of
February, 1983 but before the 25th day of July, 1991, the exemption
from tax under section 11 or section 12 shall not be denied in
respect of any other income, except the income whichis invested or
deposited for acquiring debentures of the company. It is further
provided that the investment in debentures shall cease to be so
invested after the 31st day of March, 1992.

These amendments will take effect retrospectively from

1st April, 1983.

Clause 9 seeks to amend clause (2) of section 17 af the Incame-
tax Act relating to definitions of “Salary”."perquisite” and “profits in
lieu of salary"

The amendment provides that the value of any medical
treatment received by the employee or any member of his family in
any hospital maintained by the employer, or in any hospital
maintained by Government or any local authority or any other
hospital approved by the Government for the purposes of medical
treatment of its employees, or any premium paid by the employerto
effect or keep in force an insurance on the health of the employee or
any sum paid by the employer in respect of any such premium paid
by the emplayee or any sum paid by the employer in respect of any
expenditure actually incurred by the employee on his medical
treatment or treatment of any member of his family to the extent of
five thousand rupees in the case of the employee and ten thousand
rupees in the case of the employee and his family together, or any
expenditure incurred by the employer on medical treatment of the
employee or any member of the family of such employee outside
India, the travel or stay abroad of such employee or any member of
Ihe family of such employee or the travel or stay abroad of an
attendant who accompanies stich employee or member ol the
Jamily, will not be included in the "perquisite” of the employee. The
facility of travel will not be included in the perquisite only in the case
of an employee whose gross total income, as computed before
including the said amount in perquisites, does not exceed seventy-
five thousand rupees. Further conditions and limits in relation to
such expenditure can be laid down by the Board, having regard to
guidelines, if any, issued by the Reserve Bank of India.

This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 1st April,
1991,

Clause 10 seeks to amend section 29 of the Income-tax Actsoas
10 substitute the reference of section 43C by section 43D in that
section, The proposed amendment is consequential to the
insertion of new section 43D vide clause 15.

This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1992.and will,
accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1992-93 and
subsequent years.

Clause 11 seeks to amend section 32 of the Income-tax Act
1elating to deduction in respect of depreciation in computing income
under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”

The second proviso to section 32(1)0) provides that n
deduction for depreciation willbe allowed in respect of any motorce
manufactured outside India, where such motor car is acquired b
the assessee after 28th February, 1975. An exception is made
such foreign car is used in a business of running it on hire fc
tourists. It is proposed to amend this proviso to make anothe
exception in the case of a foreign motor car used outside India in
business or profession carried on by the assessee in anothe
country, so that depreciation thereon will also be allowed.

Itis also proposed to insert a new proviso in section 32 (1)(i) 1
provide that where any asset is acquired by the assessee duringth
previous year and is put to use for the purposes of business ¢
profession for a period of less than 180 days, depreciation therec
shall be allowed at 50% of the depreciation allowable according 1
the percentage prescribed under that clause in respect of the bloc
of assets comprising such asset.

These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1992.and wi
accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1992-93 ar
subsequent years.

Clause 12 seeks to substitute clause (ii) of sub-section (1)
section 35 of the Income-tax Act relating 10 deduction allowed,
‘computing income from business, in respect of contributions mat
to an approved university, college or institution to be used f
research in social science or statistical research related tothe cla
of business carried on by the assessee.

The amendment proposed will have the effect af omitting tI
condition that the research in social science or statistical resean
should be telated to class of business carried on by tl
assessee.

This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1992 and w
accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1992-93 a
subsequent years.

Clause 13 seeks to insert a new section 35AC in the Income-t
Act.

Under the proposed section, deduction will be allowed
computing profits of business or profession chargeable to tax,
respect of the expenditure incurred for an eligible project orschet
for promoting social and economic welfare or uplit of the public
may be specified by the Central Government on 1
recommendations of the National Committee. For this purpo:
‘National Committee’ will be the committee constituted by 1
Central Government from amongst persons of eminence input
ite.

The deduction under the proposed new section will be allowac
cases where the qualifying expenditure is either incurred by way
payment to a public sector company, 8 local authority or to
approved association or institution for carrying out any eligi
project or scheme. Companies will, however, be allowed !
deduction also in cases where the expenditure is incurred by th
directly on an eligible project or scheme. It is proposed to prov
that the claim for deduction under the proposed new section sho
be supported by an audit certificate obtained from the public sec
company, local authority or approved association or institution
from the Chartered Accountant in cases where the claim is
respect of expenditure directly incurred by a company on aneligi
project or scheme.

This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1992 and y
accordingly, apply in relation to assessment year 1992-93 4
subsequent years.

Clause 14 seeks to amend section 36 of the Income-tax Ac

Under the proposed amendment to clause (viia) of sub-sec!
(1), a public financial institution, a State financial corporation an
State industrial investment corporation will be entitled tc
deduction, in computing the taxable income, in respect of provis
for bad and doubtful debt made out of the profits. The maxim
amount to be allowed as a deduction will be limited to tive perc
of its gross total income before making any deduction in respec
the provision for bad and doubtful debt or under the provision
Chapter VI-A. The definitions of the expressions “public finan
institution", “State financial corporation” and “State indus
investment corporation" are being incorporated in


Explanation to the said clause (viia),

This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1992 and will,

accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1992-93 and
subsequent years.

Sub-clause (ji) seeks to substitute the Explanation under clause
(vill) of sub-section (1) of the said section to include therein a
definition of “financial corporation” so as to include a public
company within the said definition,

This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 1st Apri,
1987 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year
1987-88 and subsequent years.

Clause 15 seeks to insert anew ‘section 43D in the Income-tax
Act to provide that in the case of a public financial institution or a
scheduled bank or a State financial corporation or a State industrial
investment corporation, income by way of interest on such
Categories of bad and doubtful debts as may be prescribed having
10980 to the quidelines issued by the Reserve Bank of India in
relationto such debts, shalllbe chargeable to tax inthe previous year
in which it is credited to the profit and loss account by the said
institutions for that year or in the previous year in which itis actually
teceived by them, whichever is earlier. The Explanation to.the said
Section defines: the expressions: “public financial institution",
“scheduled bank’, "State financial corporation” and "State industrial
investment corporation”,

This amendment will take effect from 1७1 Apri, 1992 and will,
accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1992-93 and
subsequent years,

Clause 16 seeks to amend section 44D of the Income-tax Act
relating to special provisions for computing income by way of
royalties, etc,, in the case of foreign companies.

The proposed amendment seeks to insert a new clause (d) to
Provide that in computing the income of a foreign company from
Units of @ mutual fund referred to in clause (23D) of section 10, no
deduction shall be allowed in respect of any expenditure or
allowance under sections 28 to 440.

This amendment will take elfect retrospectively from 1st April,
1989.

Clause 17 seeks to amend section 45 of the Income-tax Act.

Sub-clause (a) seeksto include the reference of new section 54H
1 sub-section (1) of section 45.

This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 1st April,
1991.

Sub-clause (0) 52०७७ to provide that where the Capital gain
arises from the transfer of a capital asset by way of compulsory
tequisition under any law, then, such capital gain shall be
‘hargeable as income under the head "Capital gain’ of the previous
‘ear in which the compensation is first received.

This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 181 April,
988.

Clause 18 seeks to amend section 47 of the Income-tax Act
3lating to transactions not regarded as transfer.

Under the proposed amendment, any transler, by way of
onversion of debenturas, debenture-stock, or deposit certificates
any form, of a company into shares or debentures of that
dmpany will ot be treatad as transfer within the meaning of clause
17) of section 2 of that Act.

This amendment will take affect retrospectively from 1st April,
362.

Clause 19 seeks to amend section 48 of the Income-tax Act
lating to mode of computation and. ‘deductions in relation to capital
ains, Under the proposed amendment, the deduction available
309 sub-section (2) of section 48, is being increased from ten
ousand rupees to fifteen thousand rupees.

This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1992 and will,
‘cordingly, apply in relation to assessment year 1992-93 and
ibsequent years.

60

Clause 20 seeks to amend section 49 of the Income-tax:
relating to cost with reference to certain modes of 4

'tis proposed to insert a new sub-section (2A) in section
provide that where the capital asset, being a share or a debenture
@ company became the property ol the assessee in consideration
a transter referred to in clause (x) of section 47, the cost
acquisition of the asset to the assessee shall be deemed to be t
Part of the cost of debenture, debenture-stock or depo
Certilicates in relation 10 which ‘such asset is acquired by
assessee.

This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 1st
1962.

Clause 21 seeks to insert anew: ‘section 54H relating to extension
Oftime for acquiring new asset or depositing or investing the amount
of capital gain in certain cases.

The proposed amendment seeks to provide that where the
transfer of the original asset is by way of compulsory acquisition
Under any law and the amount of compensation awarded for such
acquisition is not received by the assessee on the date of such _
transfer, the period of acquiring the new asset by the assessee or |
the period for depositing or investing the amountof capital gain shall
bbe extended in relation to such amount of compensation as is not
Tecsived on the date of transfer. The extended period shall be
reckoned from the date of receipt of the amount of
compensation.

‘The proviso to this section provides that where the compensation
in respect of transter of the original asset by way of compulsory
acquisition under any law is received before the 1st day of April,
1991, the period or periods aforesaid, if expired, shall extend up to
31st day of December, 1991.

This amendment will take effect from 1st October, 1991.

Clause 22 seeks to amend section 57 of the Income-tax Act
felating to deductions trom ‘income from other sources.

The proposed amendment seeks to substitute the existing
Provi.o to provide thal incomputing the income referred to in clause
(a) or clause (aa) or clause (ab) of sub-section (1) of section 115A of
a foreign company, no deduction shall be allowed in respect of
expenditure referred to in clauses (i) and (ii) of section 57.

This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 1st April,
1989.

Clause 23 seeks to substitute a new section for section 71 of the
Income-tax Act relating to set off of loss from one head against
income from another.

Under the existing provision, lass under one head can be set off
against income from any other head of income. This provision
Permits set off of capital loss (both short-term and long-term)
against income under any other head of income.

(both short-term and long-term) against any other head of

The proposed new section seeks to disallow set off of capital loss
a“ 4

This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1992 and will,
accordingly, apply in relation to assessment year 1992-93 and
subsequent years.

Clause 24 seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 74 of the
Income-tax Act relating to losses under the head “Capital gains.

The proposed amendment is consequential{o the substitution of
new section for section 71 vide clause 23.

This amendment will take effect from 151 April, 1992 and will,
accordingly, apply in relation to assessment year 1992-93 and
subsequent years.

Clause 25 seeks to amend section 80CCA of the Income-tax Act
felating to deduction in respect of deposits under the National
Savings Scheme or payment to a deferred annuity plan,

The proposed amendments seek to omit references to the
National Savings Scheme from the section with a view to facilitate
the notification of any other saving scheme which may be floated in
future.


These amendments will take effect from 1st October, 1991.

Clause 26 seeks to amend section 80G of the Income-tax Act
felating to deductions in respect of donations to cartain funds,
charitable institutions, etc.

Under the proposed amendment by sub-clause (b) (i), a person
making donations to the Africa (Public Contributions—India) Fund
will be allowed deduction, in the computation of his total income, of
the entire amount so donated.

This amendment will take effect retrospectively {rom ist April,
1991.

Under the proposed amendment by sub-clause (७) (i), the Rajiv
Gandhi Foundation will be included in the list of funds and
institutions donations to which are eligible for the deduction under
that section, in computing the income of the donor chargeable totax
under this Act, 10 the extent of fifty per cent. of the amount so
donated.

This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1992 and will,
accordingly, apply in relation to assessment year 1992-93 and
subsequent years,

The proposed amendment by sub-clause (c) seeks to insert
new clause (vi) in sub-section (5) of section 80G of the Act so as to
provide that the institution or fund is required to be approved by the
Commissioner. However, such approval shall have effect for such
number of assessment years 101 exceeding three assessment
years, as may be specified in the approval.

This amendment will take effect {rom 1st October, 1991.

Clause 27 seeks to amend section 80GGA of the Income-tax Act
relating to deductions allowable to an assesses, in computing his
income from sources other than business or profession, in respect
of donations for scientific research or rural davelopment.

ltis proposed to insert by sub-clause () anew clause (aa) in sub-
section (2) of the said section, to provide that donations made to a
university, collage or other institution to be used for research in
social science or statistical research will also qualify for deduction
under that section provided such university, college or institution is
approved for the purposes of section 35 (1) (ii).

Under the proposed amendment by sub-clause (i), the
deduction under section B0GGA will also be allowed in relation to
the amounts paid to a public sector company, local authority or an
approved association or institution for carrying out any eligible
project or scheme, referred to in the new section 35AC proposed to
be inserted vide clause 13.

These amendments will take effact from 1st April, 1992 and will,
accordingly, apply in relation to assessment year 1992-93 and
subsequent years,

Clause 28 seeks to amend section 80HHC of the Income-tax Act
telating to deduction in respect of profits retained for ‘export
business.

Sub-clauea
B0HHC,

Item (i) of sub-clause (a) seeks to extend the benefit of deduction
under section 8OHHC to profits derived from ‘export of processed
minerals and ores specified in the Twelfth Schedule Proposed tobe
inserted vide clause 69.

(०) seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section

ltem (ii) of sub-clause (a) seeks to insert two Explanations below
sub-section (2).

Explanation 1 seeks to clarity that sale proceeds of any export
credited to a separate account maintained by the assessee with
any bank outside India with the approval of the Reserve Bank of
India will be deemed to have been received in India,

Explanation 2 seeks to clarify that where any goods or
merchandise are transferred by an assessae to a branch, office,
warehouse, etc., outside India and such goods or merchandise are
sold from such branch, office, warehouse, etc, in that situation the
transter to branch, will be regarded as export of goods and
merchandise out of India. The sale proceeds of such exports willbe
taken at the value declared in the Shipping bill or bill of export in

61
respect of such goods or merchandise.
Sub-clause (b) seeks to substitute sub-section (3) by anew su
section.

Under the proposed sub-section (3), the profits from th
business of export of any goods or merchandise willbe computed
the following manner :--

(a) where the export is of goods or merchandise manufacture
by the assessee, by applying tothe profits of he business {z
datined in the Explanation to the proposed sub-section (3.
the ratio of export turnover to the total turnover;

(b) where the export aut of Indias of goods not manufactured ६
the assessee, by deducting trom the sale proceeds the dire
costs and indirect costs attributable to the export;

(©) where the export out of India is of goods or merchandic
manufactured by the assessee as also of goods m
manufactured by him, the aggregate of the amount compute
by applying to the adjusted profit of business the ratio «
adjusted export turnover to the adjusted total turnover and tr
amount of profits from export of goods not manutactured t
the assessee computed in the manner specified in clause (|
of sub-section (3).

In the Explanation to the new sub-section (3), the expressic
“adjusted export turnover" will mean the export turnover as reduce
by the export turnover of the trading goods. The adjusted profits
the business will mean the profits of the business as reduced by tt
profits derived from the business of export of trading goods <
computed in accordance with clause (b) of sub-section (3).

The adjusted total turnover will mean the total turnover of tr
business as reduced by the export turnover in respact of tradir
goods and direct costs will mean costs directly attributable to th
trading goods exported out of India including the purchase pric
thereof whereas indirect costs will mean costs, other than dires
Costs, allocated in tha ratio of the export turnover of the tradin
goods to total turnover ० such goods. The trading goods will mea
goods which are not manufactured by the assessee.

‘Sub-clauses (c) and (d) seek to amend sub-sections (3A) an
(4).

The amendments proposed under these sub-clauses ar
consequential to the amendment proposed under sub-clause (०)

Sub-clause (७) seeks to amend Explanation to sectio
80##0.

ttem (i) of sub-clause (७) seeks to clarify that sale or any othe
similar transaction in a shop, emporium or other establishment i
India which does not involve customs clearance will not be regarde.
as export out of India of any goods or merchandise.

Sub-item (1) of item (ji) of sub-clause (७) seeks to modify th:
definition of the expression total turnover for the purposes of sectio:
80HHC. Under the proposed modification, “total tumover" will ne
include freight or insurance attributable to transport of goods ०
merchandise beyond the customs station,

Sub-item (2) of item (ii) of sub-clause (७) seeks to detine the
expression “profits of the business". Under the proposed definition
profits of the business will be determined by deducting from the
Profits as computed underthe head "Profits and gains of business o
profession” the following,-

(9) 90 per cent. of receipts by way of brokerage, commission
interest, rent, etc., included in the profit, and

(©) profits of any foreign branch, office, warehouse, etc.

ttem (iil) of sub-clause (७) seeks to omit clause (bb) of the
Explanation relating to definition of “total tumover", This
amendment is consequential to the amendment proposed under
sub-clause (०) (i) (1) relating 10 new definition of this expression.

The amendments proposed under item (i) of sub-clause (a) and
item (il) of sub-clause (@) will take effect from 1st April, 1991. The
amendment proposed under item (i) of sub-clause (०) will take
effect from 1st April, 1986, The amendment under sub-item (1) of
item (ii) of sub-clause (e) will take effect from 1st April, 1987. The
amendments proposed under item (ii) of sub-clause (a), sub-



19089 (b), sub-clause (०), sub-clause (0) and sub-item (2) ol Item
1) of clause (8) will take effect from 1st April, 1992 and will
ccordingly, apply in ralation to assessment year 1992-93 and
ubsequent years,

Clause 29 seeks to amend section 80HHD of the Income-tax Act
‘lating to deduction in respect of earnings in convertible foreign
xchange.

‘Sub-clause (a) seeks to insert a Proviso in sub-section (1) so 85
‘clarity that a hotel or a tour operator approved by the proscribed
1१ 000 after 30th November, 1989 and before 1st October,
391, shall be deemed to have been approved by that authority for
© purposes of the section in relation to the assessment year
)mmencingon 1st April, 1989 or 1st April, 1990or, asthecasemay
3, 191 April, 1991 if the assessee is engaged in the business of
ich hotel or as such tour operator during the previous year relevant

any of the said assessment years,

This amendment will take effect from 1st October, 1991.

‘Sub-clause (0) soaks to insert an Explanation at the end of sub-

<tion (2) to clarity that payment received by an assessee in Indian
trency obtained by conversion of foreign exchange into
tia through an authorised dealer, from a tour operator or a travel
ent on behaff of foreign tourists, shall be deemed to have been
ceived by the assessee in convertible foreign exchange, if the
1801 making tk '@ payment furnishes to the assessee a certificate
ecified in the proposed new sub-section. (2A).

‘Sub-clause (c) seeks to insert a new sub-section (2A) to provide
॥ every person making payment to an assessoe out of Indian
‘rency obtained by conversion of foreign exchange from ot on
halfot foreign tourists shall furnish to that assessee acertiticata in
| Prescnbed form indicating the amount received in foreign
shange. its conversion into Indian currency and such other
ticulars as may be prescribed,

Sub-clause (d) seeks to insert a Proviso in sub-section (3) to
vide that where the assesses in receipt of convertible foreign
‘hange from or on behalt of foreign tourists makes any payment
nother assessee in providing services to such foreign touris

1 the profit derived trom services provided to foreign tourists in
case of the first: mentioned assessee shall be the amount which
irs to the profits of the business of the first-mentioned asessee
same proportion as the receipts specified in sub-section (2), as
eed by such payment, bear to the total receipts of the business
ied on by the first-mantioned assessee,

‘ub-clause (e) seeks to amend sub-section (6) in order to
tide that for claiming deduction, the report of Chartered
untant, certifying the correctness of the deduction, shall be on
basis of the aggregate of the amount of convertible foreign
ange received by the assessee for services provided by him to
ign tourists and the payments received by him in Indian
ency 35 referred to in Explanation to sub-section (2), as
1060 by the payments made by him to the other assessee 35
‘ted to in the proviso to sub-section (3).

Ub-clause 0) seeks to inset a new clause (d) in the
‘aration to the section to incorporate definitions of “authorised
®r", “foreign exchange" and “Indian currancy”,

1839 amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1992 and will,
‘ingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1992-93 and
‘equent years,

‘use 30 seeks to insert a new section 80HHE: inthe Income-tax

'e proposed section seeks to provide that where an assessee,
an Indian company or a person (other than a company)
nt in Indiais engaged in the business of export out of India of
vuter software Or its transmission from India to a place outside
by any means or in providing technical services outside India
nection with the development or production of computer
are, he shall be allowed a deduction in the computation of his
income of the profits derived by him in respect of such
Uter software on the condition that the consideration in

+h computer software is received in, or brought into, India in
intiblo foreign exchange within a period of six months fromthe
af the previous year or such extended period as the

62

Commissioner may allow in this behalf. Profits derived from
aforesaid business shall be the amount which bears to the. profits:

the business the same proportion as the export turnover! =

total turnover of the business carried on by tho assesses. Furthor

the expression “Profits

computed under the head “Profits

of the busing

* mei
9

the profits a
IS OF profession” as

reduced by 90 per cent. of receipt by way brokerage, commission,
interest, rent, efc., included in such profit and further reduced by the
Profits of any foreign branch, office, warehouse, etc. The deduction
under this section will be allowed only if the assessee furnishes a
reportof Chartared Accountant inthe prescribed form certitying thal
the deduction has been, correctly claimed. Export turnover and: total
turnover, for the purposes of this section, will exclude {reight,
telecommunication charges or insurance attributable to the delivery
ofthe computer software autside India or expenses, i any, incurred

i ॥ exchange in Providing the technical services outside

in fore’
India. expression “
mean any computer pr
perforated media or othe

1991 and will apply in re
1992-93 and 1993.94.

Clause 31 seeks to a

‘computer software" has beon dafined to
fogramme, recorded on any disc, tape,

information storage device and includes.)
any Such programme which is transmitted from india to @ place
outside India by any means.

This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 1st April,

lation to he assessment years 1991-92,

and sub-sections (1A), (2), (3), (4) and (5)

‘of section 80-Iof the Income-tax Act relating to deduction in respect
of profits and gains from industrial undertaking, etc., after a certain

date,

The proposed amendments seek to limit the deduction

admissible under this section in respect of industrial undertaking,
etc., referred to in sub-section (1A), up to the 21st day of March,

1991. The benefit avail

lable under this section in respect of an

industrial undertaking, a ship or a hotel will naw be availpbla al the
ew rates specified in the proposed new section 80-10 proposed to
be inserted vide clause 32.

These amendments wi
1991.

॥॥1३९७ effect retrospectively from 1st April,

Clause 32 seeks to insert a new saction 80-IA In the Income-tax

Act 1

ting to deductioy

nin respect of profits and gains from

industrial undertakings, etc., in certain cases.

The proposed section seeks to provide that deduction at the
rates specitied in sub-section (1) of section 80-lforallcategories of
taxpayers shall be admissible in the case of industrial undertaking,
cold storage or ship or the business of a hotel where the business
stants functioning after the 31st March,1931, The amount of
deduction, however, shall be fifty per cent. of the profits and gains

derived from business in

rural area or applace al pilg

case of a hotel located in a hilly area of a
image, etc. The number of assessment

years for which the deduction under this section will be admissible in
the casaol an assessae being aco-operative society shallbe twelve
years where the profits and gains are derived from an industrial

undertaking. In the case
ten assescment years.

of any other assessee, this period will be

The conditions referred to in sub-sections (2), (3), (4), (6), (7), (8),
(9) and (10) subject to which the deduction Is available under
Section 80-1 of the Income-tax Act will also apply in caso of
deduction available under this section, However, in case of a hotel
located in a hilly area, etc., and claiming deduction at the rate of So
Pet cent. itis provided that such hotel is approved by the prescribed

authority in accordance

the rules made under this Act. Where a

hotel is approved before 31st March 1992, itis further provided that
such hotel shall be deemed to have been approved by the
Prescribed authotity in relation to the assessment year 1991.92

also.

In the Explanation to this section, the expressions *hilly area”,
“industrial undertaking’, “places of pilgrimage” and “rural area”

have been defined.

This amendment will take effect ratrospectively from 1st April,
1991.

Clause 33 seeks to amend section 80-0 of the Income-tax Act

relating to deduction in res

pect of royalties, atc, fromcertain foreign


enterprises. Under the existing Provision, deduction under this
‘section is restricted to Indian companies only. The proposed
amendment seeks to extend the scope of deduction also toa person
{other than a company) who is resident in India.

This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1992 and will,
accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1992-93 and
subsequent years.

Clause 34 seeks to insert a new section 800 in the Income-tax
‘Act so.as to provide for deduction in respect of profits and gains trom
the business of publication of books.

Sub-section (1) seeks to provide that where the gross total
Income of an assessee includes. any profits and gains from the
business of printing and publication of books or publication of
books, there shail be allowed, in computing the total income, a
deduction of an amount equal to 20% of tha profits and gains from
SUch business in respectof the income of the previous yearrelevant
tothe assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1992 or
10 any one of the four assessment years next following that
assessment year, Sub-section (2) seaks to provide that the amount
0 deduction referred to in sub-section (1) shall be reduced by the
amount of deduction, if any, admissible to the assassee under
sections BOHH, BOHHA, BOHHC, 80-1, 80-18, 80५ or 80P. Sub-
Section (3) defines the expression "books" as not including
Newspapers, journals, magazines, diaries, brochures, tracts,
Pamphlets and other publications of similar nature.

This amendment will take effect trom 191 April, 1992 and will,
accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1992-93 and
subsequent years.

Clause 35 seeks to amend section 80QQA of the Income-tax Act
relating to deduction in respect of professional income of authors of
1096 books in Indian languages.

Under the existing provision, authors of standard text books
Prescribed for a degree or post-graduate course of a University in
any language specified in the Eighth Schedule tothe Constitution or
in any other language as the Central Government may notity,
having regard to the need for promotion of publication of such text
books in that language, were entitled to a deduction, in the
computation of the total income, of an amount equal to twenty-five
per cent. of the income from such books included in the gross total
income. This provision ceased to be operative with effect from the
assessment year 1930-91. The proposed amendment seeks to
revive the deduction trom the assessment year 1992-93 fora period
of five years,

This amendment will take effect from 150 April, 1992 and will,
accordingly, apply up to the assessment year 1996-97.

Clause 36 seeks to substitute anew section forsection 80U of the
Incoma-tax Act relating to deduction in the case of totally blind or
physically handicapped resident persons.

Under the existing provision, resident individuals suffering from
total blindness or other physical disability of a permanent nature or
memal retardation are allowed deduction of Rs.15,000 in
computing their taxable income. For the purposes of claiming this
deduction, the permanent physical disability (other than blindness)
‘or mental retardation shall be such as may be specified in the rules
made by the Central Board of Direct Taxes. The person claiming
deduction is also required to furnish a certificate in fespect of first
assessment year for which deduction is claimed in ‘support of
blindness, other physical disability or mental retardation The
Certiicate regarding total blindness should be from a registered
medical practitioner being oculist. Certificate as. regards permanent
Physical disablity other than blindness may be furnished from any
registered medical practitioner. Certificate as to mental retardation
should be from a psychiatrist working in a Government hospital.

Under the new section, deduction will also be available to
individuals suffering {rom partial blindness which has the effect of
reducing considerably the individual's capacity for normal work or
engaging in @ gainful employment or occupation. The amount of
deduction is bsing increased from Rs. 15,000 to Rs. 20,000 in
computing the taxable income. The cerliicate as regards
Permanent physical disability (including, blindness) or mental
fetardation will have to be obtained froma physician, asurgeon, an

63

oculist or a psychiatrist working in a Government hospit
However, this requirement will not apply in the case of individue
who have already produced a certificate before the Assessi:
Officer under the provisions of this section as they sto
immediately before the 1st day of April, 1992.

This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1992 and wi
accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1992-93 ar
subsequent years.

Clause 37 seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 88 of th
Income-tax Act relating to rebate on life insurance premi:
contribution to provident fund, etc.

Sub-clause (a) seeks to insert a new clause (xiva) in sub-sectio.
(2) s0 as to include in the list of savings qualifying for the tax rebat
under section 88, subscription to such schemes of the public sect.
companies which are engaged in providing long-term finance fc
construction or purchase of houses in India or residential purposet
not being schemes the interest whereunder qualifies for tax rebat
under section 80L, as the Central Government may notify,

Sub-clause (0) seeks to amend clause (xv) of sub-section (2
Under the proposed amendment tax rebate will now also b
available on payment of instalments, or repayment of loan, etc,,i
Connection with purchase or construction of residential hous
Property where its construction was completed before 1s1 Apri
1987. Further, payments made towards the cost of land fc
construction of a residential house property will also qualify for th
tax rebate under section 88.

These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1992 and wil
accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1992-93 an
subsequent years,

Clause 38 seeks to amend section 90 of the Income-tax Act
relating to agreement with foreign countries.

The proposed amendment seeks to clarify that when the Gentra
Government has entered into an agreement with any foreigr
Government for granting relief of tax or for avoidance of double
taxation the provisions of the Income-tax Act, in relation to any
assessee fo whom the provisions of the agreement apply, will apply
only to the extent these are more beneficial 10 the assessee.

This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 1st April,
1972,

Clause 39 seeks to amend sub-section (1A) of section 115A of
the Income-tax Act relating to tax on dividends, royalty and
technical service fees in the case of foreign companies,

Under the existin, isions of section 115A, income by way of
royalty or 908 forfochnical services, in the case of toreign
companies, is charged to income-tax at the rate of thirty percent. of
‘such income if the royalty or fee is received from Government or an
Indian concern in pursuance of an agreement approved by the
Central Government. The proposed amendment seeks to remove
the condition of the agreement being approved by the Central
Government in cases where the royalty is in respect of computer
software permitted to be imported into India under an Open General
Licence,

This amendment will take शीट retrospectively from 1st April,
1991,

Clause 40 seekstoinserta New section 115AB in the Income-tax
Act relating to tax on income from units purchased in foreign
currency or capital gains arising from their transfer in the case of
overseas financial organisations (hereinatter referred 10 as off-
shore funds).

Subsection (1) of the new section seeks to provide that in the
case of an off-shore fund, the income-tax payable shall be the
aggregate of () ten per cent. of the income in respect of units
purchased in foreign currency, if any, (ii) ton percent. of the income
by way of long-term capital gains arising from the transter of units
purchased in foreign currency, if any, and (1) the amounto! income.
tax on the total income as reduced by the income from units and
income by way of long-term capital gains arising from the translerol
units,

Sub-section (2) of the new section seeks to provide that in the


case of an off-shore fund, no deduction shall be allowed under
Sections 28 to 440 or sub-section (2) of section 48 or clause (i) or
clause (i) of section 57 or under Chapter VI-A where the gross total
income consists only of income from units or income by way of ong-
term capital gains arising from the transfor of units, or both.
However, where the gross total income includes income from units
or income by way of long-term capital gains arising from the transfer
of units, or both, the deduction under Chapter VI-A shall be allowed
as if the gross total income does not include the income from units
and long-tarm capital gains on such units,

The Explanation to the saction seeks to detine various terms.
{The term “overseas financial organisation” is defined to mean any
fund, institution, association or body whether incorporated or not,
established under the laws of a country outside India, which hae
entered into an arrangement for investment in India with any public
Sector bank or public financial institution or a mutual fund specified
under clause (230) of section 10 and such arrangement is
approved by the Central Government for this purpose.

The term “unit” is defined to mean the units of a Mutual Fund
Specified under clause (23D) of section 10 or of the Unit Trust of
[104 The term “foreign currency” shall have the meaning as in the
Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973, The term “public sector
bank” and “public financial institution” shall have the meanings
assigned to them in clause (23D) of section 10. and section 4A of tre
Companies Act, respectively. The term *Unit Trust of India" fe
defined to mean the Unit Trust of India established under the Unit
Trust of India Act, 1963,

This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1992 and wil,
accordingly, apply in relation to assessment year 1992-93 and
subsequent years,

Clause 41 seeks to amend section 119 of the Income-tax Act,
relating to instructions to subordinate authorities.

Under the existing provisions of clause (a) of sub-section (2) of
thal section, the Board is empowered to relax the provisions of
certain sections of the Act relating to assessment and collection of
Tevenue in respect of any class of incames or class of cases,

The proposed amendment by sub-clause (i) seeksto incorporate
feferances of sub-section (1A) of saction 201 and sections 211 and
234C also in the said clause (a).

qhis amendment will tke effect retrospectivaly from 1st April,
1991.

(2) thereof. The proposed amendment seeks
2 provide thatthe Board may, ifitconsiders desirable or expedient
00 do for avoiding genuine hardship in any case or class or cases,
2y general or special order for reasons to be specified therein, relax
Any requirement contained in any of the provisions of Chapter IV or
2hapter V-A of the Act, in cases where the assesses has failed to
comply with any requirement specified in such provision for
jaiming deduction thereunder. The said order can be made by the
Joard subject to the conditions that the default has been due to
ircumstances beyond the control of the assessee and the
'ssessee has complied with the requirement before the completion
{ assessment in relation to the previous year in which such
eduction is claimed. Acopy ofthe order issued under the proposed
ew clause will hava to be laid before each House of Parliamant

This amendment will take effect from Ast October, 1991.

Clause 42 seeks to amend sub-section (8A) of section 132 of the
scome-tax Act relating to the extension of the operation of the
‘ohibitory order made under section 132 (3) by the authorised
‘ficer with the approval of the Commmissioner.

The proposed amendment seeks to provide that the said order
आ also be extended with the approval of the Director.

This amendment will take effect from Ist October, 1991.

This amendment will take effect retrospectively from Ist)
April, 1991 and will, accordingly, apply in relation tothe assessment,
year 1991-92 and subsequent years.

Clause 44 seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 140 Af the
Income-tax Act relating to self-assessment,

The proposed amendment seeks to include within the ambit of
the existing sub-section the returns furnished under section 142 of
the Act.

This amendment will take effect from the date on which this Bill
receives the assent of the President.

Clause 45 seeks to amend section 143 of the Income-tax Act
relating to assessment, by substituting the proviso to sub-section
(2) thereot.

Under the existing provisions of the proviso, no notice under sub-
section (2) of section 143 can be served on the assessee after the
expity of the financial year in which the retum is furnished or the
expiry of six months from the end of the month in which the return is.
furnished, whichever is latar

The proposed amendment by sub-clause (a) seeks to provide
that. no notice under ‘Sub-section (2) of section 143 shall be ‘served
on the assessee after the expiry of twelve months from the end of
the month in which the return is furnished,

Sub-clause (b) seeks to insert an Explanation at the end of the
ection.

64

This Explanation provides that an intimation sent under sub-
section (1) or sub-saction (1B) of that section shall be deemed tobe
an order for the purposes of section 264 which empowers the
Commissioner of Income-tax to exercise his revisional
jurisdiction,

These amendments will take effect from Ist October, 1991,

Clause 46 seeks to amend Section 153 of the Income-tax Act
relating to time limit for completion of assessments and re-
assessments. The proposed proviso in Explanation 1, seeks to
provide that where immediately after the exclusion of the time or
Period mentioned in the Explanation, the period of limitation
Teferred to in sub-sections (1), (2) and (2A) of the said section
available to the Assessing Officer for making orders under those
sub-sections is less than sixty days, the temalning period shall be
extended to sixty days and the aforesaid period of limitation shall be
deemed to be extended accordingly.

This amendment will take effect from the date ‘on which this Bill
receives the assent of the President,

Clause 47 seeks to amend section 155 of the Income-tax Act
relating to amendment of completed assessmer 3

The proposed amendment seeks to insert new sub-sections
(11) and (12) in section 155 of the Act, Under the new sub-section
(11), where an assessment has been complatad and after thal the
assessee has fulfilled the requirements laid down in new section
54H proposed to be inserted vide clause 21, the Assessing Officer
shall amend the order of assessment so as to include the amount of
Capital gain not chargeable to tax under: any of the sections referred
10 in section 54H and the provisions of section 154 relating to
rectification of mistake shall apply subject to the modification that
the period of four years specified in sub-section (7) of section 154 be
reckoned from the end of the previous year in which the
compensation was received by the assessee.

The new sub-section (12) seeks to provide that where in relation
10 the assessment year 1987-88 or any earlier assessment year,
deduction under section 80-0 has been denied only on the ground
that income otherwise qualifying for deduction had. not been
received in, or brought into, Indiain convertible foreign exchange by
oF on behalf of the assessee in accordance with the law regulating
dealings in foreign exchange and such income is so raceived in, oF
brought into, India ata subsequent date, the Assessing Officer shall
amend the order of assessment at any time within a period of four
years from the end of the previous year in which the qualifying
amount is received in, or brought into, India in convertible foreign
exchange so as to allow deduction under section 80-O in respect of
Such amaunt. For computing the period of four years, the period


65
1988 to 30th September, 1991 shall be excluded .

ese amendments will take effect from 1st October, 1991,
Clause 48 seeks to amend section 161 of the income-tax Act

This amendment will take effect restrospectively from 1st April,
1991.

Clause 49 seeks to amend section 193 of the Income-tax Act
lating to interest on securities.

The proposed amendment by sub-clause (a) seeks to provide

that in the case of a scheduled bank, if the Central Government is

| satistied that the total income of the bank justifies deduction of
income-tax at a lower rate, it may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specity the rate at which deduction of income-tax is to be
made in raspectot such bank. The notification issued by the Central
Government shail, atany one time, have effect for such assessment
year ज years, not exceeding three assessment years, as may be
specified in the notification.

Sub-clasue (b) seeks to insert Explanation 2 which defines the
expression "scheduled bank" for the purposes of this section.

These amendments will take affect from 1st October, 1991.

Clause 50 seeks to amend section 194 of the Income-tax Act
relating to deduction of tax at source from dividends.

Under the proposed amendment the requirement of deducting
lax at source {rom dividends will apply only to resident shareholders
of a company.

The amendment is consequential to the amendment of section
195 of the Income-tax Act vide clause 55.

The proposed amendment will take effect from 1st October,
1991,

Clause 51 seeks to amend section 194A relating to deduction of |
income-tax at source on income by way of interest other than
Aintarast on securities, by omitting clause (vil) of sub-section (3)
thereof.

‘The said clause provides thatthe provisions regarding deduction
of income-tax at source shall not apply to the income credited or
paid in respect of deposits with a banking company to which the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies (including any bank or
banking institutions referred to in section 51 of that Act) or with aco-
operative society engaged in carrying on the business of banking
(including a co-operative land mortgage bank or a.co-operative land
development bank).

‘As a 1095७) of omission of that clause, income-tax will be
deducted at source on income by way of interest on such deposits
where it exceeds two thousand five hundred rupees.

This amendment will take effect from 1st October, 1991.
Clause 52 seeks to amend section 194BB of the Income-tax Act

relating to tax deduction at source out of winnings from horse
races.

The proposed amendment provides tor omission of the monetary
limit of five thousand rupees so that deduction of tax at source is
made in respect of ail winnings trom horse races.

This amendment will take effect from 1st October, 1991.

Clause 53 seeks to insert a new section 194EE inthe Income-tax
Act relating to deduction of tax at source. Under the proposed
section, the person responsible for paying any amount referred{o in
clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 80CCA shall deduct income-
tax thereon at the rate of twenty per cant. However, no such
deduction shall be made where the amount of payment or the
aggregate amount of payments in a financial year is lass than two
thousand five hundred rupees.

The provisions of this section shall not apply to tho paymenis
made to the heirs of the assessee.

This amendment will take effect from ist October, 1991.

Clause 54 seeks to insert new sections 194G and 194H in the
Income-tax Act relating to deduction of tax at source.

Under the proposed new section 194G, the person responsible
for paying any income by way of commission, remuneration or
reward (by whatever name called) on lottery tickets shall deduct
income-tax thereon at the rate of ten per cent.

Under the proposed new section 194H, the person responsible
for paying any income by way of commission or brokerage for
services rendered (not being professional services) or for any
services in the course of buying or selling of goods, etc., shalldeduct
income-tax thereon at the rate of ten per cent, However, no such
deduction shall be made where the amount of payment or the
aggregate amount of payments, in a financial year, does not exceed
two thousand five hundred rupees. The new section will not apply
when payments are made by individuals or Hindu undivided
families. The expressions “commission or brokerage” and
"professional services" are being defined in the Explanation to the
Proposed section.

These amendments will take effect from 1st October, 1991,

Clause 55 seeks to amend section 195 of the Income-tax Act
relating to deduction of tax at source from payments made to non-
residents.

‘Sub-clause (i) seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 195.
Under the proposed amendmenttax will be deducted at source from
payments of dividends to a non-resident assessee.

Sub-ciause (ii) seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 195.

ttem (a) of sub-clause (ji) seeks to provide that parson
responsible for paying any dividend to a non-resident assessee, if
he considers that the whole of dividend will not be chargeable to tax
inIndia, willbe entitledto apply tothe Assessing Officertodetermine
the appropriate proportion of dividend chargeable to tax.

tom (b) of sub-clause (ii) seeks to omit proviso to sub-section (2)
of section 195. Under the proposed amendment persons
responsible for paying any sum to a foreign company by way of


interest, royalty or foes for technical services will also be entitled to
apply to the Assessing Otticer to determine the appropriate
Proportion of such sums chargeable to tax.

These amendments will take effect from ‘Ist October, 1991,

Clause 56 seeks to amend the Income-tax Act to insert anew
Section 1 96B relating to deduction of tax at source from incometrom
units purchased in foreign currency.

The proposed amendment seeks to provide that any person
responsible for making any payment in the nature of income from
‘such Units shall deduct tax at the rate of 10 percent. of such income.
The deduction is required to be made either at the time of credit of
Such income to the account of the payee or at the time of payment
{hereo! in cash or atthe time of issue of a cheque or draft or by any
other mode, whichever is earlier,

This amendment will take effect from 1st October, 1991.

Clause $7 seeks to amend section 197Aol the Income-tax Actso
as to provide that no deduction of Income-tax shall be made from
Payments in respect of deposits under the National Savings
Scheme in the case of a resident individual if he fumishés a
declaration in writing in duplicate in the prescribed form and verified
inthe prescribed manner, tothe payer of such income to the effect
that the tax on his estimated total income of the Previous year in

which such income is to be included in computing his total income
willbe il.

This amendment will take effect from ‘Ist October, 1991.

Clause 58 seeks to amend sections 198,199, 200, 202, 203,
203A and 20S of the Income-tax Act relating to provisions in respect
"tax deduction at source. These amendments are consequential
othe insertion of new sections 1S4EE, 1945, 194H and 196Binthe
\ct vide clauses 83,54 and 56 and the insertion of section 194F by
ne Finance Act,1990.

These amendments will take effect from 1st October, 1991,

Clause 59 seeks to amend section 204 of the Income-tax Act
efining "person responsible for paying",

‘The proposed amendment by sub-clause (a) seeks to insert the
erences of new Sections 194EE, 194G and 194H Proposed tobe
Serted vide clauses 53 and 54 and reference of section 194F
serted by the Finance Act 1990.

The proposed amendment made by sub-clause (b) is to clarity
at the provisions of clause (ii) of section 204 will not apply in the
189 of payments made by or on behalf of the Central Government

the Government of a State.

These amendments will take effect from ‘Ist October, 1991.

Clause 60 seeks to amend section 206 of the Income-tax Act in

der to clarity that the returns under that section ara to be prepared
\ddeliveredto the prescribed income-tax. authority within the time
\it specified in the rules made under the Act.

This amendment will take effect from the date on which this Bill
seives the assent of the President.

Clause 61 seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 2340 of the

66

Income-tax Act relating to interest for deferment of advance

The proposed amendment seeks to clarify that the :

sub-section (1) shall apply even in cases where no advance tax ha
been paid by the assesse who is liable to pay such tax during t

financial year.

This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 1st
1989,

Clause 62 seeks 10 amend section 244A of the Income-tax Act
relating to interest on refunds.

‘The proposed amendment seeks to reduce the rate of interest
Payable by the Government on refunds from one and one-half per
Cent. to one per cent. for every month or part of a month comprised
in the period of delay in the grant of refund out of any tax or
penalty.

This amendment will take effect from ist October, 1991.

Clause 63 seeks to amend section 245BA of the Income-tax Act
regarding jurisdiction and powers of Settlement Commission by
inserting sub-section (5A) in the aforesaid section. This sub-section
Provides that the Chairman of the Income tax Settlement
Commission may, for the disposal of any particular case, constitute
a Special Bench consisting of more than three Members,

This amendment will take effect from 1st October, 1991.

Clause 64 seeks to amend section 2450 of the Income-tax Act
felating to procedure on receipt of an application under section
2450 by the Settlement Commission,

Sub-clause (a) seeks to insert a new proviso after the existing
Proviso to sub-section (1) of section 245D. It seeks to provide that
the Commissioner shall furnish the report within a period of six
months of the receipt of communication from the Settlement
Commission in case of all applications made under section 2450 an
orafter the date on which the Finance (No. 2) Bill, 1991 receivesthe
assent of the President and i the Commissioner {ails to furnish the
report within tha said period, the Settlement Commission may make
the order without such report

Sub-clause (0) seeks to omit sub-section (1A) of section 2450
relating fo filing of objection by the Commissioner against
Proceeding with the application made under section 245C.

These amendments will take effect from the date on which this
Bill receives the assent of the President,

Clause 65 seeks to amend sub-section (3) of section 254 of the
Income-tax Act relating to sending copies of orders of Appellate
Tribunal to the Chief Commissioner or Commissioner.

It is proposed that the Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of
any order passed by it under the said section only to the
Commissioner.

This amendment will take effect from the date on which this Bill
receives the assent of the President.

Clause 66 seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 272A ol the
$ncome-tax Act relating to penalty for failure to furnish information,
returns or certificates, etc,


: (a) and (b) propose to amend clauses (c) and (g) of
section (2) to provide for penalty for failure to furnish returns
certificates under section 2060 of the Income-tax Act.

proviso soas to specify the outer

Sub-clause (c) seeks to in:

67

These amendments will take effect from 1st October, 1991.

Clause 67 seoks to amend sub-section (3) of section 273A of the
Income-tax Act relating to power to reduce or waive penalty, etc., in
tain cases.

Under the existing provisions of sub-section (3), where an order
has been made under sub-section (1) in favour of any person,
whether such order relates to one or more assessment years, he
shall not be entitled to any relief under the said section in relation to
any other assessment year at any time after the making of such
order.

It is now proposed 10 insert proviso to sub-section (3) which
provides that a person in whose favour an order has been made
under sub-section (1) on or before the 24th day of July, 1991 shall
be entitled to further relief only once under this section in relation to
other assessment year or years at any time after the making of such
order.

This amendment will take effect from the date on which this Bill
receives the assent of the President.

Clause 68 seeks to amend section 279 of the Income-tax Act
relating to the powers of the Chief Commissioner or Commissioner
for prosecuting any person for certain offences and for
compounding such offences.

Under the existing provisions of sub-section (1), the prosecution
in respect of the offences under various sections mentioned in the
sub-section is tobe launched with the previous sanction of the Chiat
Commissioner or Director General or Commissioner. However, no
such sanction is required if the prosecution is at the instance of the
Commissioner (Appeals) or the appropriate authority.

Sub-clause (a) seeks to substitute a new sub-section (1) to
“provide that the prosecution shall be launched with the previous
sanction of the Commissioner or Commissioner (Appeals) or
appropriate authority. However, the Chie! Commissioner or
Director General may issue such instructions or directions to the
said authorities as he may deem fitfor institution of the proceedings
under that sub-section.

Under the existing provisions of sub-section (2), any offence,
under Chapter 2001, either before or after the institution of
proceedings, may be compounded by -

the Board or a Chief Commissioner or a Diractor General
authorised by the Board in this behalf in acase where the
prosecution would lie at the instance of the Commissioner
(Appeals) or the appropriate authority, and

Chiet Commissioner or Director
Commissioner, in any other case.

0}

General or

‘Sub-clause (b) seeks to substitute a new sub-section (2) to
provide for the compounding of all the offences under Chapter XXII
by the Board or a Chief Commissioner or a Director General.

‘The said amendments will take effect from 1st October, 1991.

Sub-clause (०) seeks to insert an Explanation after sub-section
(3) for the removal of doubts with reference to the powers of the
Board to issue orders, instructions or directions to other income-tax
authorities. it provides that the aforesaid power of the Board shall
include and shall be deemed always to have included the power to.
issue instructions or directions (including instructions or directions
to obtain the previous approval of the Board) to other income-tax
authorities for the proper composition of offences under section
279.

This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 1st April,
1962, that is to say, the date of commencement of the Income-tax
Act, 1961.

Clause 69 seeks to insert Twelfth Schedule in the Incom
in order to specify the processed minerals and ores eligit
deduction under section 80HHC. (The Explanation contained inthe
Schedule defines the expression “processed”).

This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 1st April,
1991 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year
1991-92 and subsequent years.

Clause 70 seeks to make certain amendments of consequential
nature in the Income-tax Act.

Clause 71 s@eks to amend sub-section (1) of section 5 of the
Wealth-tax Act.

The proposed amendment by sub-clause (a) seeks to provide
that where the assessee is an individual or a Hindu undivided family
or where the assessee is an association of persons or a body of
individuals consisting, in either case, only of husband and wife
governed by the system of community of property in force in the
State of Goa and the Union territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli
and Daman and Diu, any amount standing to the credit of such
persons in any provident fund set up by the Central Government and
Aotitied by itin this behalf inthe Official Gazette shall not be included
in their net wealth subject to the other provisions of the Wealth-tax
Aa.

This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 1st April,
1984.

Sub-clause (0) seeks to amend clause (xxvb) of that sub-section
relating to exemption in respect of deposits made under the
National Savings Scheme referred to in section BOCCA of the
Income-tax Act.

The proposed amendment seeks to omit reference 10 the
National Savings Scheme from the aforesaid clause with a view to
facilitate the notification of any other savings scheme which may be
floated in future.

This amendment will take effect from 1st October, 1991.

Clause 72 seeks to amend section 16 of the Wealth-tax Act
relating 10 assessment.


The proposed amendment by sub-clause (a) is on the lines of the
amendment made in section 143(2) of the Income-tax Act vide
clause 45,

Sub-clause (0) seeks to insert 8 new Explanation at the end of
the Section, The proposed amendment is on the lines of
amendment made in section 143 of the Income-tax Act vide
clause 45.

These amendments will take effect from 1st October, 1991.

Clause 73 seeks to amend section 17A of the Wealth-tax Act
relating to time limit for completion of assessment and Te-
assessment. The proposed amendment is on the lines of the
amendment made in section 153 of the Income-tax Act vide
clause 46.

This amendment will take effect from the date on which this Bill
receives the assent of the President.

Clause 74 seeks to amend sub-section (3) of section 18B of the
Wealth-tax Act relating to power to reduce or waive penalty, etc., in
certain cases.

The proposed amendmentis on lines of the amendment made in
sub-section (3) of section 273A of the Income-tax Act vide clause
67.

This amendment will take effect trom the date on which this Bill
receives the assent of the Prosident.

Clause 75 seeks to amend section 2284 of the Wealth-tax Act
regarding jurisdiction and powers of Settlement Commission by
inserting sub-section (5A) in the aforesaid section. This sub-section
Provides that the Chairman of the Wealth Tax Settlement
Commission may, for the disposal of any particular case, constitute
@ Special Bench consisting of more than three Members,

This amendment will take effect from 1st October, 1991.

Clause 76 seeks to amend section 22D of the Wealth-tax Act
‘elating to procedure on receipt of application under section 22C by
the Settlement Commission. Sub-clause (a) seeks to insert a new
Proviso after the existing proviso to sub-section (1) of section 22D
on the lings of the new proviso inserted in section 2450 of the
Income-tax Act.

Sub-clause (b) seeks to omit sub-section (1A) of section 22 D
‘slating to filing of objection by the Commissioner against
receding with the application made under section 220.

These amendments will take effect from the date on which this
Jill receives the assent of the President,

Clause 77 seeks to amend section 27 of the Wealth-tax Act
slating to reference to High Court.

The proposed amendment seeks to include within the ambit of
1 said section orders passed by the Appellate Tribunal under
बला 35(1)(e) of the Act far recttying any mistake apparent from
19 record,

This amendment will take effect from the date on which this Bill
sceives the assent of the President,

Clause 78 seeks to amend sub-section (4B) of section 34A of the

68
Wealth-tax Act relating to interest on refunds.

‘The proposed amendment is on the lines of the amendm
made in section 244A of the Income-tax Act vide clause 62.

This amendment will take effect from Ast October, 1991,

Clause 79 seeks to amend section 35-1 of the Wealth-tax
relating to giving powers to certain wealth-tax authorities
prosecuting any person for certain offences and for 2
Such offences. The proposed amendments are on the lines ol
amendments made in section 279 of the Income-tax Act vide
clause 68. |

Clause 80 seeks to amend sub-section (8A) of section 37A of the
Wealth-tax Act relating to the extension of the operation of the
Prohibitory order made under section 374(38) by the authorised
officer with the approval of the Chie! Commissioner or
Commissioner.

The proposed amendment seeks to Provide that the said order
can now be extended with the approval of the Director or, as the
case may be, Commissioner.

This amendment will take effect from 1st October, 1991,

Clause 81 seeks to amend Schedule Il to the Wealth-tax Act
Felating to rules for determining the value of assets,

Sub-clasue (a) seeks to amend rule 9A relating to valuation of
quoted shares of companies so as to restrict tho benefit of that rule
to an individual or a Hindu undivided family.

Sub-clause (b) seeks to amend rule 12 so asto restore sub-rules
(3) and (5) therein which were earlier omitted by the Direct Tax Laws
(Second Amendment) Act, 1989,

These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1992 and will,
accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1992-93 and
subsequent years.

Clause 82 seeks to amend section 4 of the Gitt-tax Act relating to
deemed gitts.

Under the existing provisions of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of
the said section, where a property is transferred otherwise than for
adequate consideration, the amount by which the market value of
the property on the date of the transfer exceeds the value of the
Consideration shall be deemed to be a gift made by the
transferor,

The proposed amendment seeks to substitute the method of
Valuation of asset where a property is transtarred otherwise than for
adquate consideration from the market value of the asset to the
method of valuation provided under Schedule ॥ to the said Act,

This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1992 and will,
accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1992-93 and
subsequent years.

Clause 83 seeks to amend clause (ie) of sub-section (1) of
section 5 of the Gift-tax Act relating to exemption from gift-tax in
respect of NRI Bonds specified in section 10(15)(iid) of the Income-
tax Act.

Under the existing provisions of the said clause (iii), gift of such


69
is made by the non-resident Indian is exempt fromgitt-tax only i
toa relative and if it is made after a period of three years

im the date of their purchase. Itis proposed to amend this clause
‘omit both these conditions. The definition of the term “relative” in
Explanation at the end of the aforesaid clause is also proposed

be omitted.

These amendments will take effect retrospectively from 1st
April, 1991.

Clause 84 seeks to amend section 15 of the Gift-tax Act relating
toassessment.

The proposed amendments by sub-clauses (a) and (b) are on
the lines of the amendments made in section 143 of the Income-tax
Act vide clause 45.

These amendments will take effect from 1st October,1991.

Clause 85 seeks to amend section 16A of the Gift-tax Act relating
10 time limit for completion of assessment and reassessment. The
proposed amendment is on the lines of the amendment made in
section 153 of the Income-tax Act vide clause 46,

This amendment will take effect from the date on which this Bill
receives the assent of the President.

Clause 86 secks to amend section 26 of the Gift-tax Act relating
to reference to High Court.

~~ The proposed amendment seeks to include within the ambit of

the said section orders passed by the Appellate Tribunal under
section 34(1)(e) of the Act for rectitying any mistake apparent from
the record.

This amendment will take effect trom the date on which this Bill
receives the assent of the President.

Clause 87 seeks to amend sub-section (4B) of section 33A of the
Gift-tax Act relating to interest on refunds.

The proposed amendment is on the lines of the amendment
made in section 244A of the Income-tax Act vide clause 62.

This amendment will take effect from 1st October, 1991,

Clause 88 seeks to amend section 35 of the Gift-tax Act relating

to giving powers to certain Gift-tax authorities for prosecuting any

~ person for certain offences and tor compounding such offences.

The proposed amendments are on the lines of the amendments
made in section 279 of the Income-tax Act vide clause 68.

Clauses 89 to 110 seek to provide for the revival of the Interest-
tax Act, 1974 with such modifications in the procedural provisions
85 are necessary for the administration of the Act.

The Interest-tax Act, 1974, in its original form, provided for the
levy of atax on chargeable interest accruing or arising to scheduled
banks during the previous year. The rate of tax was seven per cent.
The Act was suspended in relation to interest accruing or arising to
scheduled banks after 28th February, 1978 by the Finance Act,
1978. Subsequently, the Finance (No, 2) Act, 1980 amended the
Interest-tax Act, 1974 to extend the scope of the Interest-tax Act to
some selected public financial institutions also. In the Finance Act,
1983, the rate of tax was reduced to three and half per cent. The

Finance Act, 1985 suspended the operation of the Act from
‘assessment year 1986-87.

The proposed amendments seek to revive the operation of the
‘Act. It now provides that tax is to be levied at the rate of three per
cent. onchargeable interest accruing or arisingto a credit institution
during the previous year. However, during the previous year
relevant to the assessment year 1992-93, only the chargeable
interest accruing or arising to a credit institution on or after 1st
October, 1991 will be charged to tax.

Credit institution has been defined to mean a banking company
to which the Banking Regulation Act applies including a cradit co-
operative society, public financial institution, state financial
corporation and other financial companies.

These amendments will take effect from 1st October, 1991

Clauses 111 to 117 seek to amend various provisions of the
Expenditure-tax Act, 1987.

Under the proposed amendments any expenditure incurred ina
restaurant in connection with the provision of food or drink shall be
chargeable totax at the rate of 15 percent. of such expenditure. Itis
proposed to define a restaurant as any premises in which the
business of sale of food or drink to the public is carried on and such
premises have the approval of the Department of Tourism or have
any three of these facilities, namely, that they are equipped with or
have access to facilities for air-conditioning, such premises have at
least two separate cloak rooms fitted with modern sanitary fittings,
they have a telephone installed therein or such premises are
equipped with or have access to cold storage or deep-freezing
facility. The restaurant situated in a hotel referred to in clause (1) of
section 3 of the Act is not included in the above definition of
restaurant. The tax on restaurants will take effect trom 1st
October, 1991. The tax shall be collected, as inthe case of hotels, by
the person who carries on the business of restaurant or by the
person providing any service therein. The tax collected during a
month shall be deposited tothe credit of the Central Government by
the 10thof the following month, The provisions relating to the liability
forcollection of tax and penalty for failure to collect or pay the tax are
similar to those in respect of hotels.

tis also proposed that expenditure-tax will not be charged for a
period of 10 years commencing on tst April, 1991 in respect of any
expenditure incurred in a hotel in a hilly area or rural area ora
place of pilgrimage as referred to in clause (ii) of sub-section (5) of
section 80-IA of the Income-tax Act proposed to be inserted
vide clause 32.

These amendments will take effect from 1st October, 1991.
Clause 118 seeks to amend the Customs Act, 1962.

Sub-clause (1) seeks to amend section 75 relating to drawback
‘on imported materials used in the manutacture of goods which are
exported, so as to insert two provisos whereby no drawback shall
be allowed in case the export value of such goods, is less than the
value of the imported materials used in such goods or such value is
not more than the percentage specified by the Central Government
by notification or where the sale proceeds in respect of the exported
goods are not received within the time stipulated under the Foreign


70
Exchange Regulation Act, The sub-clause also seeks to give the
powers to the Government to make rules for determining the goods
in respect of which no drawback shall be allowed and for specitying
the procedure for recovery or adjustment of drawback which has
been allowed.

‘Sub-clause (2) seeks to amend section 113 relating to
Confiscation of goods attempted to be improperly exported so as to
'ncorporate a provision relating to any goods entered {for exportation
under claim for drawback which do not correspond to the
information furnished by the exporter in ration tofixation of the rate
of drawback.

Sub-clause (3) seeks to amend secti
of sums due to Government, so as to i
recovery of drawback within its scope.

ion 142 relating to recovery
include demands relating to

These amendments will take ‘effect from the date on which this
Bill receives the assent of the President.

Clause 119 seeks to amend the Customs Tariff Act, 1975.

Sub-clause (a) of this clause, read with
‘sPeks to amend the First Schedule to the C
to—

the Second Schedule,
‘ustoms Tariff Act, 1975,

(8) raise the basic customs di
lead;

luty rates on lead and articles of

() omit the headings relati
cardiovascular drugs, sera a
exceeding Rs. 200 in value
‘excluding alcoholic drinks, fro

ing to specified, anti cancer drugs,
ind vaccines; and bonafide gifts not
imported by post or as air freight
m Chapter 99,

‘Sub-clause (b) of this clause, read with the Third Schedule, also
seeks to amend the said First Schedule 80 as to incorporate some
editorial amendments approved by the Customs Co-operation
Council in the legal text of the Harmonised Commodity Description
and Coding System (Harmonised System) in order that the First
Schedule is in line with the Harmonised System. Asaconsequence,
italso seeks to amend the rate of basic customs duty in respect of
sertain measuring instruments of heading No, 90.25 and also
amend the tariff description and the rate of basic customs duty in
espect of finishing agents, dye stutts, ete., of heading No. 38.09.

The amendments, made by sub-clause (b) will come into force
om a date to be notified by the Central Government.

Clause 120, read with the Fourth Schedule, seeks to amend the
Sentral Excise Tariff Act, 1985 to—

(a) increase the statutory rate of basic excise duty on
(1) biris;
(2)
(3

nitric acid;

articles of plastics for conv
other articles of plastics;

/eyance or packing of goods and

(4)
(5)

base filter paper;

cotton yarn containing synthetic staple fibre manulactured
with the aid of power;

(6) rami yarn containing polyester staple fibre manufactured

with the aid of power;

(y

artificial filament yarn and sewing
monofilament, of hi
Polypropylene; artificial

synthetic staple fibres and tow;
Polypropylene yarn of synthetic staple fibre;

yarn of polyester staple fibre containing cotton:
ntaining synthetic |

thread; syn
igh density polyethylene,
monofilament;

(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)

yarn of artificial staple fibre not cor
fibre;

yarn of artificial stapie
fibre manufactured with

|
fibre containing synthetic staple
the aid of power:

(12)

(13) sanitary fixtures, other than those of porcelain and:

china;

(14) unrecorded audiowvideo t

Pancakes, etc;

‘apes in the form of jumbo rolls,

(15)
(16)
(17)

Tecorded audio/video tapes in any form:
television receivers;

cathode ray television picture tubes (colour and black and
white)

(19) motor cars for transport of persons and chassis fitted with
engines of such motor cars :

(b) change the tariff descriy
respect of —

(1) pigments;

(2) artificial staple fibres and tow;

iption and restructure the duty rates in

(०) change the tariff description so as to make amendment in
respect of —

1)
(2)

specitied wooden doors;

Taw silk, silk waste, etc;

(3) yarn of polyester staple fibre:

(4) yarn of acrylic or modacrylic staple fibre;

(5) refractory ceramic goods and other ceramic con-
structional goods;

(6) aluminium sheets and plates;

(0. change Chapter Notes in raspect of —

(1) Chapter 38, so as to exclude products containing alcohol,
opium, Indian hemp or other narcotic drugs from the
scope of the Chapter;

(2) Chapter 44, 50 as to omit densified wood from Note 6;

(3) Chapter 74, so as to introduce a new Chapter Note to
define ‘manufacture’ for the purposes of heading No.
74.125

(4) Chapter 87, so as to introduce a new Chapter Note to

define ‘manufacture’ for the
87.01 to 87.05;

Clause 121, read with the Fifth Schedule, seeks to amend the
First Schedule to the Additional Duties of Excise Act to—

purposes of heading Nos.

(a) omit sub-heading 1701.20 relating fo khandsari sugar;


या
(©) increase the rate of additional excise duty in respect of

(०) change the tariff description and restructure the duty rates
inrespectof certain fabrics of manmade filamentyarn or of
mah made staple fibre.

Clause 122 seeks to omit section 35 of the Industrial
Development Bank of India Act, 1964.

Section 35 of the said Act provides that the profits and gains of
he Industrial Development Bank of India will not be charged to tax
inder the Income-tax Act, 1961, the Super Profits Tax Act, 1963 or
any other law forthe time being i force relating to levy of income-
ax, super-tax or super profits tax. The proposed omission of section
35 will make the said Bank liable to income-tax or any other tax in
‘espect of the income, profits or gains accruing or arising to it.

This amendment will take effect from ist April, 1992.

Clause 123 seeks to amend section 40 of the Finance Act, 1983,
telating to levy of wealth-tax on certain assets held by closely-held
companies.

The proviso to clause (v) of sub-section (3) of the said sectior
provides that the unused land held by the assessee for industria
purposes shall not be taken to be part of the assets for the purpose:
of levy of wealth-tax for a period of two years from the date of it:
acquisition. Under the proposed amendment by sub-clause (a) (i)
unused land held by a closely-held company for construction of «
hotel will be exempted from the levy of wealth-tax fora period of twe
years from the date of its acquisition. :

‘The proposed amendment by sub-clause (b) seeks to providt
that for the purpose of levy of wealth-tax in the case of closely-helt
companies, the value of any asset subjected to wealth-tax shall b:
eithor its value as determined in the manner laid down in Schedul
Ill to the Wealth-tax Act or its book value, whichever is higher.

The proposed amendments by sub-clause (a) (i) andsub-claus
‘(c) are of consequential nature.

These amendments will take effect from 1st April,1992 and wi
accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1992-93 an
subsequent years.

Clause 124 seeks to repeal section 2 of the Finance Act, 199


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

‘Sub-clause (०) of clause 5 of the Bill seeks to insert clauses
(8A) and (8B) in section 100f the Income-tax Act alating toincomes
not to be included in the total income. The new clauses provide that
the agreement relating to engagement of consultant or service

S9reement of individual shall be approved by the prescribed
authority.

Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to insert a proviso to clause (2) of
section 17 of the Income-tax Act, In ru.pact of medical treatment
abroad, item (vi) of the Proviso empowers the Board to make rules,
having regard tothe guidelines, i any, ofthe Reserve Banko India,
'aying down the conditions and limits subject to which the
®xpenditure on medical treatment abroad will not be taxable as
perquisi

Claus2s 12 and 27 of the Bill seek to substitute clause (ii) of
Sub-section (1) of section 35 and insert a new clause (aa) in sub-
Section (2) of section BOGGA of the Income-tax Act. The new
clauses provide thatthe university, college, etc.,to which donations
are made for research in social science or statistical research, are
approved by the prescribed authority,

Clause 13 ofthe Bill seeks to insert a new section 35AC. relating
‘© expenditure on eligible projects or schemes. Under the new
section, the assesseeis required to furnish acertificate from apublic
3ector company or a local authority or an association or institution
as the case may be, from a Chartered Accountant in such form,
nanner and containing such particulars as may be prescribed. The
‘ew Section also empowers the Central Government to Specify the
letails of eligible Project or scheme for Promoting the social and
‘conomic welfare of the People on tha recommendation of the
lational Committee.

Clause 15 of the Bill seeks to insert anew section 43D relating
special provision in case of income of public financial institution,
'c., whereunder the Board may prescribe the categories of bad
nd doubtful debts having ragard to the guidelines of the Reserve
ank of India,

Clause 26 of the Bill seeks to amend section 80G relating to
sduction in respect: ‘ofdonation,etc. Under the New clause (vi) in
'b-section (5), rules are to be made by the Board in accordance
th which Commissioner may grant approval to a fund or
stitution,

Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to amend section 8OHHD of the
4. Underthe new sub-section (2A), the Board may prescribe form

72

in which certificate is to be given by the person making pay
the assessee regarding the amount of foreign exchange
matters,

Clause 30 of the Bill seeks to inserta new section 8OHHE in‘
Act. Sub-section (4) of new section empowers the Board
Prescribe form in which the certificate from the Accountant that
deduction under this section has been claimed correctly is to
furnished.

Clause 32 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 80-18. Under
the new section, the hotels which are eligible for deductions at the
fate of 50 percent, are required to be approved by the prescribed
authority in accordance with the tules made under the Income-tax
Act.

Clause 37 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section
88 of the Income-tax Act. The new clause (xiva) empowers the
Central Government 10 notty in the Otfcial Gazette, the deposi
‘scheme under which the Subscription made is eligible for rebate
under section 88.

Clause 41 (i) seeks toinsert a new clause (c) in section 119(2)
of the Income-tax Act to empower the Board to relax any of the
conditions specified in relation to claiming deductions under
Chapter IV or Chapter VI-A of the Act, if the Board considers it
desirable or expedient so to door avoiding genuine hardship in any
case or class ol cases. The new clause contains safeguards forthe
exercise of this power by the Board including the requirement that
the order made by the Board should mention the reasons on the
Pasis of which relaxation is being made and that the said order will
have to be laid before each House of Parliament.

Clause 49 of the Bill seeks to amend ‘section 193 of the Income-
tax Act. Under the new Proviso, the Central Government is
empowered to notify in the Official Gazette the lower rate of
income-tax for the deduction of tax at source in the case of
‘scheduled bank.

Clause 81 of the Bill seeks to amend rule 12 of Schedule Ill to
the Wealth-tax Act, Under new sub-rule (5), the certificate of the
auditor relating to valuation of unquoted equity shares 10 be
{urnished to the Assessing Officer and the shareholder shall be ie,
the prescribed form,

The matters in respect of which notifications or orders or rules
may be made in accordance with the aforesaid provisions are
matters of administrative detail or procedure and itis not practicable
10 provide for them in the Bill itsell. The delegation of legislative
Power is, therefore, of a normal character


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to give effect to the financial Proposals of the Central Government
for the financial year 1991-92.

(Shri Manmohan Singh ,
Minister of Finance. i