As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
Bill No. 7S of 1976 
THE LAXMIRATTAN AND ATHERTON WEST COTTON 
MILLS (TAKING OVER OF MANAGEMENT, BILL, 1976 
A 
BILL 
to pTovide 101' the ~ing over, in the public interest, of the management 
of the u.ndertakings of certain companies, pending fl4tionalisation of 
su.ch u.ndertakings, with a view to ensuring the su.pply of certain 
va.rieties of cloth needed by the weaker sections of the community 
as ouo by the Defence Department and for matters connected there-
with or incidental thereto. 
WHEREAS Laxmirattan Cotton Mills Company Limited were engaged 
in the production (besides coarse and medium varieties of cloth needed 
by the weaker sections of the community) of canvas and dO'Suti which 
is needed by the Defence Department; 
.AND WHEREAS the closure of the Laxmirattan Cotton Mills Company 
5 Limited has prejudicially affected the supply of canvas and dosuti to 
the Defence Department; 
.AND WHEREAS the Atherton West and Company Limited were mainly 
engaged in the production of coarse and medium varieties of cloth needed 
10 by the weaker sections of the community; 

AND WHEREAS as a result of mismanagcm -:'1t the Atherton West and 
Company Limited has suffered losses exec -d;llg the value of its available 
assets and has been closed down; 
AND WHEREAS, in view of the adverse financial position of the Atherton 
West and Company Limited, some members of the Board of Directors of S 
that company had, for some time, absconded; 
AND WHEREAS it is necessary in the interests of the general public 
that the undertakings of the two companies aforesaid should be re-
started, so that the production of the needed varieties of cloth may be 
continued; 10 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty"",eventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
SborUltle 1. (1) This Act may be called the Laxmirattan and Atherton West IS 
and com· Cotton Mills (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1976. 
menc:e-
ment. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 19th day of 
Jw,~ 1~8. 
Deftnl- 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
tiODl. 
(a) "appointed day" means the 19th day of July, 1976; 20 
(b) "Custodian" means the person, appointed under section 4, to 
take over the management of the undertakings of the two cMIlpanies; 
(e) "notification" means the notification published in the Offtcial 
Gazette; 
(If) "two companies" means- 2S 
(i) the Atherton West and Company Limited, a company 
within the meaning of the Companies Act, 1956, and having its 1 of 1951. 
regia_ed oftlee at Anwarganj, Kanpur, in the State of Uttar 
Prac:lesh, &Ad 
(ti) the Laxmirattan Cotton Mills Company Limited, a com-
pany withi1l the meaning of the Companies Act, 1958, ad haVing 30 1 of 19M. 
its registered oftlce at Behari Niwas, Kanpur, in the State of 
Uttar Pradesh. 

r-
CHAPTER II 
TAKING OVER OF 'l'HE MANAr.,BMDn: OF '£RE VNDEBTAJWfG$ OF THI: I'WO 
t:OMPAlmCS 
3.( 1) On and from the appointed day, the managemen.t of the under-
5 taitlings of the two companies shan vest in the Central Government. 
(2) The undertakings of each of the two companies shall be deemed 
to include all assets, rights, leaseholds, powers, authorities and privileges, 
and all property, movable and immovable, including lands, buildings, 
works, workshops, projects, stores, spares, instruments, machinery, equip-
10 ment, automobiles and other vehicles, cash balances, reserve fund, in-
vestments and book debts aud all other rights and: interests arising out 
of such property as were, immediately before the appointed day, in the 
ownership, possession. power or "Centrol of 'the eenceme4 company,whe-
ther within or without Imiia, and all book>s of account, !'egistIer8, IIIld aU 
IS other documeRts of whatever nature relating thereto. 
(3) Any contract, whether express or implied, or other arrangement, 
in so far as it relates to the management of the business and affairs of 
either of the tWQ companies in relation to its undertakings, and in force 
immediately before the appointed day, shaU be deemed to have terminat-
20 ed on tbeappointed day. 
(4) All persons in charge of themanagem.ent, including persol'lS hold-
ing offices as directors, managers or any other managerial personnel of 
eifherpf the two companies, inun.ediately before the .appointed.day, shall 
be ,deemed to have vacated their dces as suman ,the ~ day. 
25 (5) Notwithstanding anything e<mtai.aed in any other law for the time 
being in force, no person in reipeCt of whom any contract of manaaemen~ 
or other arrangement is terminated by reasqn of the provisions contained 
in aub-section '3), or who ceases to hold any-office by reason of t8e provi-
sions oontained in sub-section (4), shall be entitled to claim anyco:ql-
30 pensationfor the premature termination of the oontract of management 
or other alTangement or 10r the loss of office, as the cue may be. 
(&) Notwiibstanding any judgment, decree or onter of aftiy court, 
triBunal Qr other -authority or anything contained in any other. law (other 
than 'this Act) for the time being in fOll'Ce, fNfIry Receiver or ,other 
3S person in whose possession or custody or under whose control any under-
taking of either of the two companies or any part thereof may be im-
mediately before the appointed day, shall, on the commencement of this 
cAct, 4eliver possession of the said undertaking or .. uehpart there-
of,as the case maybe. to the Custodian, where no Custodian has been 
40 :appointed, to such other personas the Central Government may d4rect. 
:(7) For the ll"emoval of doubts, it is hereby declared that any liability 
inann;ed by eUher of the two companies in relation to its undertakings 
befere the appointed day shall be enforceable against the concerned 
company and not against the Central Government or the CUstodian. 
Manage-
mentot 
the under-
taking. of 
two com-
panies to 
vest in the 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 

Custodian 
of the two 
companies. 
.. 
C. (1) The Central Government may, as soon as it is convenieht 
administratively so to do, appoint any pel"Son or body of persons 
(including a Government company, whether in existence at the com-
mencement of this Act or incorporated thereafter) as the Custodian 
of the undertakings of either, or both, of the two companies for the S 
purpose of carrying on the management of such undertakings and the 
Custodian so appointed. shall carryon the management of the undertakings 
of the two companies for and on behalf of the Central Government. 
(2) On the appointment of the Custodian under sub-section (1), the 
management of the undertakings of the two companies shall vest in such 10 
Custodian and all persons in cherge of the management of such under-
takings inunediately before such appointment shall cease to be in charge 
of such management and bhaU be bound to deliver such management 
to the Custodian. 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, authorise the Custo- IS 
dian to appoint any per~on (~ncluding a Government company, whether 
in existence at the commencement of this Act or incorporated there-
after) as the Additional Custodian of the undertakings of either, or 
both, of the two companies. 
(4) The Additional Custodian shall assist the Custodian in the 20 
exercise of his or its powers and duties under this Act and shall 
function under the direction, supervision and control of the Custodianj 
and the Custodian may delegate to the AdditJional Custodian aU or such of 
his or its powers as he or it may think fit. 
(5). Subject to any general or special direction given or condition im- 25 
posed by the Custodian, . any peISon authorised by the Custodian to ex-
ercise any power may exercise that power in the same manner and with 
the same .eifed as if it had been conferred on that person directly by 
~his Act and not by way of authorisation. 
. (6) The Central Government may issue such directions (including 0 
directions as to initiating, defending or continuing any legal proceedings 3 
before any court, tribunal or other authority) to the Custodian as to his 
or its powers and duties as the Central Government deems to be desir-
able in the circumstances of the case, and the Custodian may also apply 
to the Ce~tral Government at any time for instructions as to the manner 
in wl)ich he or it shall conduct the management of the undertakings of 3S 
either, or both, of the two companies or in relation to any other matter 
ariSing in the course of such management. 
(7) SUbect to the other provisions of this Act ahd the control 
of the Central Government, the Custodian shall be entitled notwith- 40 
standi~g _ anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956,. to ~xereise all 1 of 1956 
the powers of the Board of. directors of the two companies (including . 
the power to dispose of any properties or assets of the two companies) 
whether such powers are derived from the Companies Act, 1956, or from 
the memorandum and articles of association of the concerned company or 45 
from any other source. . 

ta) Every person having possession, custody or control of any prO-
perty forming part of any undertaking of either of tha two companies 
shall deliver forthwith such property to the Custodian or to any officer 
or other employee o£ the Central Government or the Custodian, as may 
S be authorised by the Central Government in this behalf. 
(9) Any person who, on the appointed day, has in his possession or 
under his control any books, papers or other documents relating to the 
undertakings of either, or both, of the two companies, including the 
minutes books containing the resolutions of the persons in charge of 
10 t.he management thereof before the appointed day, the current cheque 
books relating to the undertakings of such company, any letters, memo-
randa, notes or other communications between him and such company 
shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, be liable to account for the books, papers and other docu-
IS ments (including such minutes books, cheque books, letters, memoranda, 
notes or other communications) to the Custodian and shall deliver them 
up to the Custodian or to any such person (being an officer or other em-
ployee of the Central Government or the Custodian) as may be authoris-
ed by the Central Government in this behalf. 
20 (10) Every person in charge o£ the management of the undertakings 
of either of the two companies immediately before 'the appointed day 
shall, within ten days from that day or within such further period as thZ! 
Central Government may allow in this behalf, furnish to the Custodian 
a complete mventory of all the properties and assets (including parti-
2S culars of book debts and investments and belongings) forming part of 
the undertakings of such company immediately before the appointed day 
and of a11 the liabilities and obligations of such company in relation to its 
undertakings, subsisting immediately before that day, and also of all 
agreements entered into by such company in relation to its undertakings 
30 and in force immediately before that day. 
(11) The Custodian and the Additional Custodian shall receive from 
the funds of the undertakings of each of the two companies such re-
muneration as the Central Government may fix. 
5. (1) Each of the two companies shall be given by ,the Central Gov- Payment 
3S ernment IlD amount, in cash, and at the rate specified in sub-section (2), of amount. 
for the vesting in it, under section 3, of the management of the under-
takings of each such company. 
(2) For e\lery month during which the IMnagement of the under-
takings of each of the two companies remains vested 10 the Central Gov-
40 ernment under this Act, the amount, referred to in sub-seciion (1), shall 
be computed at the rate of-
4S 
(a) rUpP.es ten thousand per annum in the case of Laxmirattan 
Cotton Mills Company Limited; and 
(b) rupees eicht thousand per annum in the case of Atherton 
West and Company Limited. 

Power of 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
make 
certain 
declara-
tions in 
relation 
to certain 
under-
takings. 
• 
CHAPTER III 
POWER TO PROVIDE RELIEF TO ANY UNDERTAKING OR TO THE UNDERrAJWlQS 
OF &lTlII!lR OF THE TWO COMPANIES 
6. (1) The Central Government may, if satisfied, in relation to any 
undertaking of either of -the two companies or any part thereof, the S 
management of which has vested in it under this Act, that it is 
necessary so to do in the interests of the general public with a view to 
preventing any £,all in the volume of production of such undertaking, by 
notification, declare that-
(0) all or any of the enactments specified in the Schedule shall 10 
not apply or shall apply with such adaptations, whether by way of 
modification, addition or omission (which does not, however, affect 
the policy of the said enactments) to such undertaking as may be 
specified in such notification, or 
(b) the operation of all or any of the contracts, assuranCe6 of IS 
property. agreements, settlements, awards, standing orders or other 
instruments in force (to which such undertaking or the company 
owning such undertaking is a party or which may be applicable to 
such undertaking or company) immediately before the date of issue 
of the notification shall remain suspended or that all or any of the 20 
rights, privileges, obligations and liabilities accruing or arising there-
under before the said date, shall remain suspended or shall be en-
forceable with such adaptations and in such manner as may be 
specified in the notification. 
(2)' The notification made under sub-section (1) shall remain in force, 2S 
in the first iastance. for a period of one year but the duration of such 
notification may be extended from time to time by a further notification 
by a period not exceeding one year at a time: 
Provided that no such notification shall, in any case, remain in force 
after the expiry of three years from the commencement 01 this 30 
Act. 
(3) Any notification made under sub-section (1) shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law. 
agreement or instrument or any d.ecree or order of 'a COIlrt, tribunal, ofticer 
or other authority or of any submission, settlement or standing ol'lder. 3S 
(4) Any remedy for the enforcement of any right,privilege, obli-
gation or liability referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) and sus-
pended or modified and all proceedings relating thereto pending before 
ar.y court, tribunal, officer or other authority shall accordingly remain 
stayed or be continued subject to such adaptations; so, however, .that 40 
on the notification ceasing to have effect-
(a) any right, privilege, obligation or liability so remaining 
suspended or modified shall become revived and enforceable as if 
the notification had never been made; 
(b) any proceeding so remaining stayed. shall be 'Proceed~d 4S 
with subject to the provisions of any law WhICh may be then 10 
force, from the stage which had been reached when the proceeding 
became stayed. 

, 
(5) In computing the period of limitation for the enforcement of 
any right, privilege, obligation or liability referred to in dause (b) of 
sub-section (1), the period during which it or the remedy' for the 
enforcement thereof remained suspended shall be excluded. 
CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
7. The provisions of this Act O!" any notification, order or rule 
made thereunder, shall have effect notwithstanding anything ineonsis-
tent therewith contained in any law (other than this Act) or in any 
10 instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this 
Act or in any decree or order of any court. 
8. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 
1956, or in the Jr.E'morandum Or articles of association of either of the 
two companies, so long as the management of the undertakings of the two 
IS companies remains vested in the Central Government,-
(a) it shall not be lawful for the shareholders of either of the 
two companies or any other person to nominate or appoint any 
person to be a director of such company; 
'(b) no resolution passed at any meeting of the shareholders 
20 of either of the two companies on Or after the appointed day shall 
by given effect to unless Mpproved by the Central Government; 
(c) no proceeding for the winding up of either of the two 
companies or for the appointment of a liquidator or receiver in 
respect thereof shall lie in any comt except with the consent of the 
Central Government. 
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), and to 
the other provisions contained in this Act and subject to such 
other exceptions, restrictions and limitations, if any, as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, the Companies 
1 of 1958. 30 Act, 1956, shall continue to apply to the two companies in the same 
manner as it applied, thereto before the appointed day. 
9. In computing the period of limitation prescribed by any law for the 
time being in force for any suit or application against any person by 
either of the two companies in respect of any matter arising out of any 
3S transaction in relation to the undertaking of any of the two companies, 
the time during which this Act remains in force shall be excluded. 
10. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the Custodian, Additional Custodian or any officer or other employee 
of the Central Government or the Custodian for anything which is ~n 
40 good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
Government or the Custodian or the Additional Custodian or any of the 
oftlcera or other employees of the Central Government or the Custodian 
for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in 
45 good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
Act to 
have 
over_ 
riding 
effect. 
Applica-
tion of 
Act 1 of 
19~6. 
Exclusion 
of period 
ofOPera-
tion 
of this 
Act 
from limi_ 
tation. 
Protection 
of action 
taken in 
good 
faith. 

Contracts, 
etc., 
in bad 
faith may 
be can-
celled or 
varied. 
Avoid-
anceof 
volun-
tary 
transfers. 
Power to 
termi-
nate 
contracts 
of em-
ployment. 
Penal-
ties. 
8 
11. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied, after such inquiry 
as it may think proper, that any contract or agreement entered into at 
any time within three years immediately preceding the appointed day 
between either of the two companies or managing or other director of 
any such: company and any other person in relation to any service, S 
sale or supply to, or by, the undertakings of either of the two companies, 
and in force immediately before the appointed day, has been entered 
into in bad faith, or is detrimental to the interests of the undertaking 
of the concerned company, it may make, within one hundred and eighty 
days from the appointed day, an order cancelling or varying (either 10 
unconditionally or subject to such conditions as it may think fit to 
impose) 'Such contract or agreement and thereafter the contract or 
agreement shall have effect accordingly: 
Provided that no contract or agreement shall be cancelled or varied 
except after giving to the parties to the contract or agreement a reason- IS 
able opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order made under sub-section (1) 
may make an application to the prindpal civil court of original juris-
diction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the registered office 
of the concerned company is situated for the variation or reversal of 20 
such order and thereupon such court may confirm, modify or reverse 
such order. 
12. Any transfer of property, movable or immovable, or any deMvery 
of goods made by or on behalf of either of the two companies (not being 
a transfer or delivery made in the ordinary course of its business or in 2S 
favour of a purchaser for valuable consideration and in good faith), 
if made within a period of six months immediately preceding the 
appointed day, shall be void against the Central Government or the 
Custodian, as the case may be. 
13. If the Custodian is of opinion that any contract of employment 30 
entered into by either of the two companies or any managing agent or 
managing or other director of either of the two companies at any time 
hefore the appointed day is unduly onerous, he or it may, by giving to 
the employee one month's notice in writing or salary Or wages for one 
month in lieu thereof, terminate such contract of employment. 35 
14. (1) Any person, who-
(a) having in his possession or custody or under his control any 
property forming part of any undertaking of either of the two com-
panies, wrongfully withholds such property from the Custodian or 0 
any person authorised under this Act, or 4 
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of any such property, or 
(c) wilfully retains any property forming pgrt of any undert.ak-
ing of either of the two companies or removes or destroys it, or 
(d) wilfully withholds from., or fails to deliver to, the Custodian 
or any person authorised under this Act. any bookls, papers or 45 
other documents relatin~ to any undertaking of either of the two 
companies, which may be in his posseSSion, power or custody or 
under his control, or 

• 
(e) fails, without any reasonable excuse, to furnish information 
or particulars as provided in sub-6ection (8) of section 4, 
shall be. punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
5 to two years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or 
with both. 
(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under 
this section except with the previous sanction of the Central Govern-
ment or an officer authorised by that Government in this behalf. 
15. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a Oft'encea 
10 company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, by 
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct companies. 
of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge 01' that he had exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
20 an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or con-
nivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, 
manager, secretary or other oftlcer of the company, such director, mana-
ger, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence 
25 and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Expla.nation.-For the purposes of .this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate ana includes a firm 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
30 16. (1) The Central Government may. by notification, make rules for Power to 
carrying out the provisions of this Act make 
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament while it is in session for a total period 01. thirty days which 
35 may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessiOllS, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately foUowing the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not 
be made, the rule shall thereafter have eftect only in such modified form 
40 or be of no effect, as the case may! be; so, however, that any such modi-
ftcation or annulment shan be without prejudice to the validity ot any-
thing previously done under that rule. 
rulea. 

Repeal 
and 
saving. 
1tT 
17. (1) The Laxmirattan and Atherton West Cotton Mills (Taking 
Over of Management) Ordinance, 1976·, is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the Ordinance so repealed shall be deemed to have been done 
11 of 1978. 
or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. S 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 6) 
]. The Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946. 
2. The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. 
3. The Minimum Wages Act, 1948. 
20 of 1948. 
14 of 194'1. 
10 11 of1948. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS' AND REASONS 
Due to mismanagement, the undertakings of the Laxmirattan Cotton 
Mills Company Limited and Atherton West and Company Limited, two 
large-sized mills at Kanpur, which were engaged in the m8l1ufacture of 
certain varieties of cloth needed by the weaker sections of the community 
and also by the Defence Department, were lying closed since May, 1975. 
The closure had resulted in the unemployment of over five thousand 
workers. 
2. Various avenues of re-opening the mills were explOl'ed by the 
Central Government in consultation with the Government of Uttar Pra-
desh and the bankers of the two companies. It was found that liabilities 
of the two companies had exoeeded their respective assets and a sum of 
BAl. 4.90 crores was needed fO!l' renovation and modernisation before the 
Mills of these companies could re-start. The Government of Uttar Pra-
desh pleaded its inability to shoulder the responsibility. The bankers 
were also reluctant to advance finance to the existing managements of 
the two Companies. In the circumstances, there was no alternative other 
than the nati<>nalisation of the undertakings of the two Companies. The 
valuation of the undertakings crt the two Companies was necessary to 
determine the amount to be paid for the acquisition crt the undertakings. 
Such valuation would require some time. In the meantime, there wall 
an apprehension that there might be large-scale frittering away of asaets 
which may prove detrimental to, the public interest. In the circums-
tances, the Laxmirattan and Atherton West Cotton Mills (Taking Over 
of Management) Ordinance, 1976, was promulgated by the President on 
19th July, 1976. 
2. The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 12th August, 1976. 
Sd/- D. P. CHATTOPADHYAYA, 
Minister of Commerce. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 10/13j76-Tex I, dated the 16th August, 1976 from 
Prof. D. P. Chattopadhyaya, Minister of Co,mmerce to the Secretary-
Gen.eral, Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter ()f the Lax-
mirattan and Atherton West Cotton Mills (Taking Over of Management) 
Bill, 19'76, to provide for the taking over, in the public interest, of the 
management of the undertakings of certain companies, pending nationn-
lisation of such undertakings, with a view to ensuring the supply of cer-
tain varieties of cloth needed by the weaker sections of the community 
as also by the Defence Department and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto, recommends under clause (1) of article 117 ()f the 
Constitution of India the introduction of the said Bill in Lok Sabha and 
also recommends under clause (3) of the same article 117, the considera-
tion of the Bill by Lok Sabha. 
II 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 5 of the Bill provid~ that for every month during which the 
management of the undertakings of the two companies rem_ains vested 
in the Central Government, the two companies shall be paid in cash 
an amount at the rate of Rs. lJ(),OOO per annum in the case of Laxmi-
rattan Cotton Mills Limited and Rs. 8,000 per annum in the case of 
Atherton West and Company Limited The expenditure on this account 
is likely to be of the order of Rs. 12.,000 during the remaining period of 
the current financial year. 
2. Money will also have to be provided by the Central Government 
for the working capital as well as modernisation of the mills Of the twa 
companies. Expenditure on modernisation is necessary to make the 
mills finanCially viable. The total requirements of margin money for 
working capital for these two mills have been estimated at Rs. 184 lakhs. 
The requirements on account of modernisation have been estimated at 
about Rs. 366 lakhs. During the current financial year, it is estimated 
that an amount of a'bout ru~e9' two crores will be required on account 
of working capital and modernisation. This expenditure will be met 
from the budget grant of the Ministry of Commerce. 
3. The Bill, if enacted, is not likely to involve any other recurriDC 
or non-recurring expenditure. 
12 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 16 .f the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill. 
2. The matters in respect of which such rules may be made would 
relate to matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not 
practicable to provide them in the Bill itself. The delegated legislation 
is, therefore, of a normal character. 
, . 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
10 provide for the taking over, in the public interest, of the management 
of the undertakings of certain companies, pending nationalisation 
of such undertakings, with a view to ensuring the supply of certain 
varieties of cloth needed by the weaker sectipns of the community 
as also by the Defence Department and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Prof. D. P. Chattopadhyaya, Minister of Commerce). 