33 of 1956. 
As INTRODUCKD IN LoK SABHA ON 
.. ;,. 
;'1 
j . 
. ' ' 
., 
Bill No. 75 of 1980 
THE INTER-STATE WATER DISPUTES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1980 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Inter-State Water Disputes (Amend- Short 
ment) Act, 1980. title. 
5 2. In the Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred Inler-
tion of 
new 
lection 
6A. 
10 
15 
to as the principal Act), after section 6, the fonowing section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"6A. (1) WIthout prejudice to the provisions of section 6, the 
Central Gttvernment may, by notifkatioft in the OfIIdalGazette, 
frame a scheme or schemes whereby provision may be made for all 
.. ten neceuary to give ~ffect 'to the d~ision of • Tribunal. 
(2) A scheme framed under subo;section (.1) l'ml'Y prome for-
(a) the establ!shment of, any authority (whether described 
as such or as a committee or other body) for the implementation 
of tbe decision or directions of the TrIbunal; 
(b) the coIn;>osition, jurisdiction, powers and functions of 
the authority, the tt!l'1Il of office and other conditions of service 
of, the procedure to· be followed by, and the manner of ftlllng 
vacancies among, the mcmi E'rs of the a\.lthority~ 
Power 
to make 
schemes 
toimple-
meat 
declaion 
ofTrl-
bunal. 

(c) the holding of a minimum number of meetings of the 
authority every year, the quorum for such meetings and the pro. 
cedure thereat; 
(d) the appointment of any standing, ad hoc or other com. 
mittees by the authority; 5 
(e) the employment of a Secretary and other staff by the 
authority, the pay and allowances and other conditions of service 
of such staff; 
(1) the constitution of a fund by the authority, the amounts 
that may be credited to such fund and the elCpenses to Which the I g 
fund may be applied; 
(g) the form and the manner in which accounts shall be 
kept by the authority; 
(h) the submission of an annual report by the authority of 
its activities; 15 
(i) the decisions of the authority which shall be subject to 
review; 
(j) the constitution of a committee for makinr such review 
and the procedure to be followed by such committee; and 
(k) any other matter which may be necessary or ~roper for 20 
the effective implementation of the decision or directions 01. the 
Tribunal. 
(3) In making provision in any scheme framed under sub-section 
(1) for the establishment of an authority for giving effect to the 
decision of a Tril7unal, the Central Government may, having regard 25 
to the nature of the jurisdiction, powers and functions required to 
be vested in such authority in accordance with such decision and all 
other relevant circumstances, declare in the· s;id ,scheme that· such 
authority shall, under the name specified in the saId scheme, have 
capaeity to aequire, hold 8Jld cUspbse of property, entel' into contracts, 30 
sue and be sued and do all such acts as may be neoes~ary for the· pro .. 
per exercise and discharge of its jurisdIction, powers and functions. 
I 
(4) A soheme may empower the authority to make! with the 
I?revious approval of the Central Government, reaulations for giving 
effect to the purposes of the scheme. 35 
(5)' The Central Go\IernmeD't may, by n8tiflcatioIf· in the Official 
Gasettlj add-te, a!menCl; or vary. any soheme·fl'ameQ~urxlir"SlIb-section 
(I}~ 
(lI) Elv'ery scheme fram.ed U11d~r tblS seret!mr sh1m i Me effect 
notwithstanding anythiDg. contained in an~ law for the time being 40 
in force (other than this Act) or any instrument having effect by 
virtue of' any law other tha1l this Aet. 
(7) Every scheme and every r.egulation.. made. u.n_r a scheme 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made. befQre each House 
of Parliament; while it is in CJe88ion ft:1r" a ttlt!1' peribd of thirty days 45 
which may be comprised in one _on or in two or ritbte succeSl!live 
sessions, and' if, before the' e-"piry Of I the se!!ion' irtttn'edtltely 'follow-
ing the session 01' the .u«"e~i\ff: ~s$iQl\S .to~ta; l:Jbth Houses agree 

J 
in making any modification in the scheme or the regulation or both 
Houses agree that the scheme or the regulation should not be made, 
the scheme 'or the regulation ·shall thereafter ·have -effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case maybe; ItO, hQwever, 
5 that any such modification or annulment shall be with9ut p.r~j~d:ife 
to the validity of anything previously done under that ~~e or 
regulation:". 
3. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words 
which may be comprised in one session or in .~wo ~W;:C6!Slive ... ~jons. 
10 and if before the expiry of the sessipn.in which it issoJ,id ortl:1e~n 
illlll1ediately following", the words "which may be c:o~prHi~ in !~Ile 
,Be6iSion or in two or more sllccessive sessions, and ;if, beforetb,e expipy 
of the session immediately following the session or the suc~li!Siv8.1!8ssi~ 
.. aforesaid" shall be .substituted. 
Amend· 
mentor 
aection 
13. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956, provides for the constitu-
tion of Tribunals for the adjudication of disputes relating to waters of 
inter-State rivers and river vnlleys. Section 6 of the Act provides 
that the decision of a Tribunal shall be final and binding on the parties 
to the dispute and shall be given effect to by them. 
2. The decision of the Narmada Water Disputes Tribunal constituted 
by the Central Government under the said Act for the adjudication of the 
water dispute relating to the river Narmada and the river valley thereof 
has revealed that the implementation of the decision of a Tribunal under 
the Act may involve the setting up ofa machinery for the 
purpose. The decision of the Narmada Water Di9:.>utes Tribunal envi-
sages inter aHa the setting up of an inter-State administrative authority, 
to be called the "Narmada Control Authority", for the purpose of secur-
Ing compliance with the deciSIon and for the constitution of a Review 
Committee with powers to review decisions of the said Authority with 
respect to certain matters. For the effective functioning of the said Nar-
mada Control Authority, it would be necessary to ensure that it can 
function as a distinct legal entity. 
3. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Act to include therein suit-
able provisions to enable the Central Government to frame a scheme or 
schemes to maKe provisions for all matters necessary to give effect to the 
decision of a Tribunal constituted 'Under the Act. 
4. It is also proposed to amend section 13 of the Act to change the 
provision therein as to laying of rules so as to bring it into conformity 
with the standard provision as recommend(!d by the Committees on 
Subordinate Legislation. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 20th March, 1980. A. B. GHANI KHAN CHAUDHURY. 
4 
$ 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
,.' l:iub-section (1) of new section 6A which clause 2 of the Bill seeks to 
~nsert in the Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956, is for empowering the 
Central Government to frame a scheme or schemes whereby provision 
may be made for all matters necessary to give effE.'Ct to the deci&ion 01 
a Tribunal under the Act. Such provisions would include the setting up 
of an authority or a committee, the employment of a Secretary and other 
staff by such authority, etc. The intention is that all the expenses in-
volved in the implementation of the decision of a Tribunal under the Act 
should be borne by the State Cklvernments who have to give efiect to 
such decision under section 6 of the Act. However, as in the case of the 
Review Committee recommended by the Narmada Water Disput~ 
Tribunal, some of the Union Ministers and some of the officers of the 
Central Government would be associated with the implementation of 
the decision of the Tribunal under the Act and such persons may be mem-
bers of the authorities or other committees constituted under sub-section 
(1) of the said new section 6A. The expenditure 011 the travelling and 
daily allowances of such Union Ministers and officers of the Central Gov-
ernment w.i1l De borne by the Central Government 40m out of the Con-
solidated Fund of India. It is not possi~le to precisely estimate the 
expenditure that will be incurred on this account as that will depend on 
the number of. such Ministers and officers who will be associated and 
the number of occasions and the periods of time for which they may be 
so assooiated. However, it is anticipated that the expenditure on this 
account which will be of a recurring nature, is not likely to exceed rupees 
ten thousand per annum. The Bill will not involve any other expenditure 
of a recurring or non-recurring nature. 
s 

MEMORANDUM ltmARDlNG DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 20f the Biil seeks to insert a 'new section 6A'in the 1nter~'State 
Water Disputes Act, 1956, 'so as to enable the Central Government to 
frame a scheme or S(:hemes whereby Qfovision may be made for all mat-
ters necessary to give effect to the decision of a Tribunal constituted 
tm'dertbe Act. 
2. -Sub~tion (2) of this new section 6A enumerates the matters in 
respect of 'which a scheme may be framed by the Central Government. 
Such matters, inter alia, relate to the establishment o~ an Authority for 
the implementation of the decision or diredions of the -Tribunal, the com-
position, jurisdiction, powers and functions of such authority, the holding 
of a minimum number of meetings of the authority every year, the quo-
ft1m . for such m~etings, the employment of a Secretary and other natl 
by the authority, the pay and allowances and other conditions of· service 
of SU'Chstatf and other necessary and incidental matters. Sub-section (3) 
of the 'new section 6A seeks to empower the Central Government to make 
provisions in a scheme framed under sub-section (1) of that section for 
empowering an authority established under the scheme to 'have, under 
the name of that authority as spcified in the scheme, capacity to acquire, 
hold and dispose of :?roperty, enter into contracts, sue and be sued and 
do all such acts as may be necessary for the proper exercise and discharge 
of its jurisdiction, powers Bnd functions. Sub-section' (4) of' the new 
section 6A empowers an authority established under a scheme' framf!d 
under sub.:section (1) of that section to make, with the previous appro-
val of the Central Government, flegulations for giving effect to' the 
purposes of that scheme. 
3. The matters referred to in sub-section (2) of the new section 6A 
and the matters in respect of which regulations may be made under sub-
section (4) of the said new section 6A are matters of procedure or detail. 
The delegation of legislative power under these prOVisions is thus of a 
normal character. The conferment, under sub-section (3) of the new 
section 6A, of the capacity to acquire, hold and dispose of property, enter 
into contracts, etc., on an authority established under a scheme framed 
under sub-section (1) is necessary for the effective functioning of such 
8uthority. The guidelines which have to be borne in mind by the Central 
Government before conferring such authority have been ~elt out in the 
said sub-section (3) and the Central Government will have to, in confer-
ring any such capacity on an authority, take into account the jurisdiction, 
powers and 1unctions required to be vested in such authority in accord-
ance with the decision of the Tribunal concerned. In the circumstances, 
the delegation of legislative power under sub-section (3) is also of, a nor· 
mal character. 
4. It may also be mentioned that sub-section (7) of the new section 
6A provides for the laying of the schemes and regulations framed under 
the said section before Parliament for 8crutiny. 
6 

Power 
to make 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE INTER-STATE WATER DISPUTES ACT, 1956 
(33 OF 1956) 
• 
13. (1) • • • • • • • • 
oj! 
rules. (3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session 
for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session 
or in two successive sessions, and if. before the expiry of the session in 
which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validIty of anything previously done under that rule. 
7 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956. 
(Shri A. B. A. Ghani Khan Cha.uclhury, Minister C1j Energy and Irrigation 
and Coal.) .. . 
J 