As Intropucep In Lok Sapa

BPE 1999

Bill No. 75 of 1999

THE TERRORIST AND DISRUPTIVE ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION)
(WITHDRAWAL OF LEGAL PROCEEDINGS) BILL, 1999

By
Suri G.M. Banarwatta, M.P.

A

| le for withdrawal and prevention of all legal proceedings under the Terrorist and
Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 which expired on 23 May, 1995 and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (4) This Act may be called the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention)
wal of Legal Proceedings) Act, 1999.

(2) It shall come into force at once.

2. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities
vention) Act, 1987, (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),—

(@) all investigations and legal proceedings pending or continuing and all orders
‘made under such pending or continuing proceedings in accordance with the provisions
of the principal Act shall be deemed to have lapsed or abated or been withdrawn on
the date of coming into force of this Act;

(6) no investigation, prosecution or legal proceeding, whether pertaining to the

1
i
i

BILL .

Short title and
commencement.

Withdrawal and
prevention of
legal proceed-
ings.


Abolition of
» designated
courts.

Act to have
over-riding
effect,

2

previous operation of the principal Act or otherwise shall be instituted on al
the date of commencement of this Act; and

(०) alll the accused facing prosecution and legal proceedings under the prin
Act shall stand discharged on the date of commencement of this Act.

3. All designated courts constituted under the principal Act shall be deemed to h
been abolished and such courts shall cease to function on and from the da
commencement of this Act.

4. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsi
therewith contained in any other enactment or in any instrument having effect by vit
any other enactment.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS:

Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 lapsed on
1995. The Act had been widely criticised as violative of all democratic and

There was gross misuse and abuse of the Act leading to limitless sufferings
number of people. . ‘

Though the obnoxious Act has lapsed, still thousands of legal proceedings continue

(4) of section 1 of the undemocratic TADA Act, is a serious anachronism
e of great suffering to the victims.

Bill seeks to provide for the withdrawal of all legal proceedings under the

G.M. BANATWALLA,


LOK SABHA

A

BILL

to provide for withdrawal and prevention of all legal proceedings under the Tei
and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 which expired on 23 May,
and for matiers connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri G.M. Banatwalla, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1689LS—11.11.1999.