rHE ItAJGHAT SAMADHI (AMEND-
MENT) BILL, 1958 · 
(As INTROBUCED IN ~ SABRA) 

Bill No. ,$ or 1258 
TIlE RAJGHAT SAMADHI (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Rajghat Samadhi Act, 1951. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rajghat Samadhi (Amend- Short title 
ment) Act, 1958. ~:nce~~~;. 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In section 4 of the Rajghat Samadhi Act, 1951 (hereinafter Amendment 
rreferred to as the principal Act),- or o~'1ion 4· 
\. 
(a) in sub-section (1),-
10 (i) for clause (a), the following clause shall be sub-
stituted, namely:-
"(a) the Mayor of the Municipal Corporation of 
Delhi, ex-otJicio;"; 
(ii) for clauses (c) and (d), the following clauses shall 
15 be substituted, namely:-
.. (c) four non-officials nominated by the Central 
Government; 
I 

Membus of 
ParUameDt 
AOmluated 
to the Com-
mittet by 
the Speaker 
to c:e/&lle to 
bold oftl~e. 
i 
2 
(d) three members of Parliament of whom two 
.ball be elected from among themselves by members of 
the House of the People and one from among themselves 
by members of the Council of States."; 
(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be ~ 
inserted, namely:-
.' (4) The term of office of a member elected under 
clause (d) of sub-section (1) shall come to an end as soon as 
he ceases to be a member of the House from which be was 
elected.". 
3. Any member of Parliament nominated by the Speaker under 
clause (d) of sub-section (/) of section 4 of the principal Act and 
holding office as a member of the Rejghat Samadhi Committee 
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to 
IO 
hold the said office on such c:ommencernent. 15 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
With a view to ensuring proper maintenance, preservation and 
administration of the Rajghat Samadhi, built in the memory of 
Mahatma Gandhi, the Rajghat Samadhi Act, 1951 (41 of 1951) was 
passed by Parliament, and a Committee, consisting of three officials. 
three non-officials, two members of Parliament, and the President, 
New Delhi Municipal Committee as an ex officio member, was 
constituted under this Act. ' 
Section 4(1) (d) of the Act provides that there shall be on the 
Committee two members of Parliament to be nominated by the 
Speoaker. It is desirable that the representatives of Parliament, 
instead of being nominated, should be elected by the two 
Houses. In order to conform to the existing convention of 
parliamentary representation on statutory Committees in the ratio 
of 2: 1 for the House of the People and the Council of States, the 
number of representatives of Parliament on the Committee is pro. 
posed to be increased from two to three. As this would raise the 
strength of the Committee to an even number (ten), it is proposed 
to increase the non-official representation also by one. 
The existing Act contains no provision for determining the 
tenure of members of Parliament serving on the Committee. It is, 
therefore, proposed to specify that the members of Parliament, 
elected on this Committee, shall serve on i:1e Committee only 1:;0 
long as they continue to be members of Parliament. 
Upon the establishment of the Corporation of Delhi, the Samadhi 
has been transferred from the jurisdiction of the New Delhi Muni-
cipal Committee to that of the Corporation. It is, therefore, pro-
posed that the ex-officio member of the Committee shall be the 
Mayor of the Corporation instead of the President of the New Delhi 
Municipal Committee, as at present. 
It is proposed to amend sect.ion 4 of the Rajghat Samadhi Act, 
1951 (41 of 1951) accordingly. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 2nd May, 1958. 
K. C. REDDY. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE RAJGHAT SAMADHI ACT, 1951 (41 OF 1951) 
• • • • • 
4. (1) The Committee shall consist of the following members Compo5ition 
namely:- ~i~~/:Om-
(a) the president of the municipal committee within the local 
limits of whose jurisdiction the Samadhi is situated, ex-otJicio; 
(b) three officials nominated by the Central Government; 
(c) three non-officials nominated by the Central Govern-
ment; 
(d) two members of Parliament nominated by the Speaker. 
(2) The Central Government may appoint any person referred 
to in subo-section (J) or any other person to be the Chairman of the 
Committee, and if any other person is so appointed, he shall be 
deemed to be a member of the Committee within the meaning of 
sub-section (1). 
• • • • • 
(3)' All persons nominated by the Central Government to be 
members of the Committee shall hold office during the pleasure of 
the Central Government. 

.. . 
tOK S ABHA 
'n __ r 
A 
BiLL 
• 
, 
to amend the Rajghat Samadhi Act, I95t . 
t _ 
(Shri K. C. Reddy, Minister of Works, Housi1tf ana SUPP~'Y.~\ 