1
Short title and
commencement.
THE SUPREME COURT AND THE HIGH COURTS (USE OF OFFICIAL
LANGUAGES AND OTHER PROVISIONS) BILL,  2019
By
SHRI AJAY MISRA 'TENI',  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the use of official language in the proceedings of the Supreme Court and
the High Courts and certain other provisions and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Supreme Court and the High  Courts (Use of Official
Languages and Other Provisions) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by a  notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appointed day" means the date as may be notified by the appropriate
Government for the purposes of this Act;
Definitions.
Bill  No. 75 of  2019
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "appropriate Government" means—
(i) in relation to the Supreme Court  and High Court of NCT of Delhi, the
Central Government; and
(ii) in relation to the High Court of a State, the Government of that State;
(c) "document" means document as defined in section 3 of the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872;
(d) "High Court" means any Court as defined in clause (14) of article 366, or
established under article 231 of the Constitution and includes its benches;
(e) "official language" means the official language of the Union under article 343
of the Constitution and includes the language in use for official purposes in any State
in which the High Court for that State is located;
(f) "party" includes any person authorized by the party to the matter or an
advocate for the party;
(g) "proceedings" includes pleadings, petition, application, appeal, reference,
revision, review, affidavit, counter affidavit, other documents filed or received during
course of conduct of the matter, appearance, leading of arguments, during hearing in
any matter,  judgment, decree or order and such other matters as may be prescribed by
the Supreme Court or a High Court, as the case may be; and
(h) "Supreme Court" means the Supreme Court of India.
3. (1) From the appointed day, any party to the proceedings before the Supreme Court
and a High Court shall have the right to prefer the official language in conduct of such
proceedings in the Supreme Court or a High Court, as the case may be.
(2) The party to the proceedings shall make an application to the Supreme Court or a
High Court for the conduct of the proceedings in the official language in such manner as may
be laid down by the Supreme Court or a High Court, as the case may be, under section 4.
4. (1) Where any party to the proceedings has made preference for the conduct of
proceedings in official language, the Supreme Court or a High Court, as the case may be,
shall conduct proceedings before it in the official language.
(2) The Supreme Court or a High Court, as the case may be, may lay down by rules the
procedure for conduct of proceedings in the official language:
Provided that such procedure shall not entail any additional expense on any
party to the case for conducting such proceedings in the official language.
5. The appropriate Government shall,—
(a) bear the fees of advocates, as may be determined by it, from time to time, for
such parties to the proceedings who are below poverty line;
(b) fix the maximum fees to be charged by senior advocates in the Supreme
Court and the High Court;
(c) bear the expenses of translation of proceedings from other languages in
English language; and
(d) ensure availability of requisite infrastructure in the Supreme Court and
the concerned High Court within its jurisdiction for conduct of proceedings in the
official language in the Supreme Court or a High Court, as the case may be, from the
appointed day.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, requisite infrastructure
includes appropriate translation and typing facility in the official language and such
other facilities as may be necessary for conduct of the proceedings in the official
languages.
Right of the
Party to
prefer official
language
during the
course of
proceedings.
Conduct of
proceedings in
the Supreme
Court and a
High Court.
Measures by
appropriate
Government.
1 of 1872
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
For effective working of democracy, different types of responsibilities have been
assigned to Legislature, Executive and Judiciary. The responsibility of protection of honour,
property and constitutional rights and their periodic review lies with the Judiciary. But
common people face a lot of difficulties for obtaining justice from the Supreme Court and the
High Courts due to hindrances viz. language, translation fees of language and ineffective
performance of prosecution.
For easy delivery of justice to common people and for removing difficulties of financial
expenses and other such issues, concerned parties should be given right to submit affidavit,
debates and writs in Hindi or in other local languages. Also the expenses of translation from
English language into other language in the Courts must be incurred by the Courts and the
Government. Maximum limit of the fees charged by senior advocates must be fixed. Entire
expenses regarding the proceedings and fees of advocates appearing in the cases and
appeals in High Court and the Supreme Court on behalf of people living below poverty line
should be incurred by the Government.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; AJAY MISRA 'TENI'
June  10, 2019.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall take such measures
as may be necessary including bearing of the fees of advocates for any party to the
proceedings who are below poverty line, as may be determined by it and ensuring availability
of requisite infrastructure to the Supreme Court or a High Court within its jurisdiction for
conduct of proceedings in the official language in the Supreme Court or a High Court, as the
case may be, from the appointed day. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this stage, it is not possible to quantify the exact
amount of recurring and non-recurring expenditure likely to be involved.
4

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the use of official language in the proceedings of the Supreme Court and
the High Courts and certain other provisions and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Ajay Misra 'Teni', M.P .)
MGIPMRND—453LS(S3)—18-06-2019.