AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Bill No. 75  of 2025 
THE PREVENTION OF MONEY LAUNDERING (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2025  
BY 
SHRI ARVIND GANPAT SAWANT, M.P. 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Money Laundering
(Amendment) Act, 2025. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement. 

                                                                 
                                             -2- 
 
2. In section 49 of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002, 
(hereinafter known as the principal Act), after sub-section (3), the following 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
"(3A) The Director, while exercising powers under this Act, shall 
ensure that such powers are exercised in a transparent, just and 
accountable manner, without infringing upon the rights and dignity of 
individuals or entities under inquiry." . 
 
Amendment of section 49. 
3. For section 52 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely,-  
 
“52. The Central Government may, from time to time, issue such 
administrative orders, instructions and directions to the authorities as it 
may deem fit for the proper administration of this Act and such 
authorities and all other persons employed in execution of this Act shall 
observe and follow such orders, instructions and directions of the 
Central Government:  
 
Provided that no such orders, instructions or directions shall be issued so as 
to—  
(a) require any authority to decide a particular case in a particular 
manner; or  
(b) interfere with the discretion of the Adjudicating Authority in exercise 
of his functions; or  
(c) cause any political or extraneous influence on the authorities.”.  
 
Substitution of new section 
for section 52. 
 
Power of Central 
Government to issue 
directions, etc. 
4. After Chapter VIII of the Principal Act, the following new Chapter and 
sections thereunder shall be inserted:  
 
    “CHAPTER VIIIA 
OVERSIGHT and ACCOUNTABILITY 
  
      54A. (1) There shall be established an Oversight and Accountability 
Committee (hereinafter referred to as OAC), consisting of eminent legal 
experts, retired judges, and senior bureaucrats, to oversee the conduct of 
investigations and actions taken by the Authority under this Act to be 
appointed by the Central Vigilance Commission, in consultation with the 
Central Government, in such manner as may be prescribed.  
 
 
Insertion of new Chapter 
VIIIA. 
 
 
 
 
Oversight and 
Accountability Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
-3- 
 
(2) The OAC shall have the authority to review cases and actions taken 
by the authorities to ensure that they adhere to principles of justice, 
transparency and fairness.  
(3) The OAC shall also investigate complaints related to any 
malpractices, abuse of power, inquiry beyond jurisdiction and the like by 
the authorities.  
(4) The OAC shall submit an annual report to the Central Government 
which shall cause it to be laid before each House of Parliament, outlining 
its findings and recommendations.  
(5) The authorities shall cooperate with and provide necessary 
information to the OAC to facilitate its oversight functions.  
 
Explanation.- For the purposes of this section, the term “abuse of power” shall 
mean to include any action or practice by the Authority that contravenes the 
principles of justice, rule of law, and transparency, with the intent of 
harassing, intimidating, or creating undue influence over individuals or 
entities. 
 
 54B. The OAC shall be established by the Central Vigilance Commission 
for a period of three years.  
 
54C. The OAC shall have powers and administrative functions as 
prescribed by the Central Vigilance Commission, from time to time.”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appointment of the OAC. 
 
 
Powers of the OAC. 
 
5. After section 62 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely,- 
 
“62A. (1) Any authority or an officer found guilty of abuse of power, 
as per the provisions of this Act, shall be subject to disciplinary action 
and/or prosecution under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 or any 
other relevant law for the time being in force.   
(2) Where the OAC finds the authority or any of its officer guilty of 
exercising its powers beyond its jurisdiction or abusing its powers, then in 
accordance with the findings of the OAC and the damage incurred by 
individuals or entities as a result of the actions of the authority, the Central 
Government shall bear responsibility of providing compensation to address 
the damage relating to the individual’s reputation, public image, and 
potential future employment or occupational opportunities.”.  
 
Insertion of new section 
62A. 
 
Punishment for Offences. 
 
 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 
 The Enforcement Directorate (ED) was established in 1956 as an "Enforcement Unit" to 
investigate violations of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947, under the Department of 
Economic Affairs. Subsequently, it was renamed the "Enforcement Directorate" and its 
administrative oversight shifted to the Department of Revenue in 1960. In 1973, the Act was 
replaced, leading to a shift to the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms. In 1977, 
it returned to the Department of Revenue. In 1999, the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 
1999, replaced the earlier legislation. The ED's role expanded with the introduction of the 
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002, and the Fugitive Economic Offenders Act, 2018, 
adding to existing foreign exchange laws, and it gained the authority to initiate cases of 
preventive detention under Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling 
Activities Act, 1974 (COFEPOSA). Except for the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002, 
which is criminal, the other laws are civil in nature.  
 At present, the Enforcement Directorate administers five enactments, with the Prevention 
of Money Laundering Act, 2002, being the most frequently utilized as it has stringent bail 
conditions. This Act empowers the ED to attach properties and assets of the accused, and it 
further makes the statements of an accused recorded before an investigating officer of the ED 
admissible in a court of law which otherwise is not the case with a police officer. 
 The government has introduced changes to the Prevention Of Money Laundering 
(Maintenance Of Records) Amendment Rules, 2023, mandating that banks and financial 
institutions must now document financial transactions of politically exposed persons (PEPs) 
under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act. PEPs are defined as individuals with significant 
public roles in foreign countries, such as heads of state, senior politicians, government and 
military officials, state-owned corporation executives, and key political party officials.  
 Despite the expansion of the Enforcement Directorate's powers in regulating politically 
exposed individuals, there remains a significant gap in establishing a regulatory framework for 
the Enforcement Directorate itself. Notably, the existing legal framework under the Prevention of 
Money Laundering Act, 2002, does not explicitly define penalties or disciplinary actions for 
officers of the Enforcement Directorate in cases of the misuse of their powers.  
  

-2- 
 In light of these concerns and allegations, it is essential to introduce safeguards and 
criteria that prevent misuse of powers and ensure that the enforcement agency operates 
transparently, fairly, and in accordance with principles of justice. Therefore, this Bill seeks to 
amend the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002, to establish an Oversight and 
Accountability Committee (OAC) to oversee the Enforcement Directorate's actions and 
investigations under the Act. Additionally, the Bill introduces punishment for any authority 
officer found guilty of abusing their power.  
 The aim is to bring about accountability, transparency, and fairness in the functioning of 
the Enforcement Directorate, and to prevent its misuse for political purposes or harassment. It is 
imperative that enforcement agencies operate within the boundaries of the law and uphold the 
principles of justice and individual rights. 
 Hence this Bill. 
 
  NEW DELHI;                        ARVIND GANPAT SAWANT 
 
    March 18, 2025.  
  

 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 
 Clause 4 of the Bill provides the constitution of the Oversight and Accountability 
Committee to oversee the task of reviewing the functioning of authorities under the Prevention of 
Money Laundering Act, 2002. The members of the Committee shall be appointed by the Central 
Vigilance Commission. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to be involved expenditure from 
the Consolidated Fund of India. At this point, it is not possible to assess the actual financial 
expenditure likely to be incurred.  
 
 
  

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE PREVENTION OF MONEY LAUNDERING ACT, 2002 
(ACT NO. 15 of 2003) 
 
         *             *      *     *      *      *        *            *     
52. The Central Government may, from time to time, issue 
such orders, instructions and directions to the authorities as 
it may deem fit for the proper administration of this Act and 
such authorities and all other persons employed in execution 
of this Act shall observe and follow such orders, instructions 
and directions of the Central Government:  
 Provided that no such orders, instructions or 
directions shall be issued so as to—  
 (a) require any authority to decide a particular case 
 in a particular manner; or  
 (b) interfere with the discretion of the Adjudicating 
 Authority in exercise of his functions. 
*              *               *           *               *            *            * 
Power of Central 
Government to issue 
directions, etc. 
    *              *               *              *               *             *     *  
 
   
  

 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
---------- 
 
 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
further to amend the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--------- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant, M.P.) 