1
THE PUBLIC PREMISES (EVICTION OF UNAUTHORISED
OCCUPANTS) AMENDMENT BILL, 2011
A
BILL
further to amend the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants)
Amendment Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 75 of  2011
5

2
2.    In section 2 of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act,
1971,—
(a) in clause (e),—
(i) in sub-clause ( 2), after item (i), the following item shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(ia) any company, as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act,
1956,—
(A) in which not less than fifty-one per cent. of the paid-up
share capital is held partly by the Central Government and partly by
one or more State Governments and includes a company which is a
subsidiary (within the meaning of that Act) of the first-mentioned
company; and
(B) which carries on business of metro railway.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this item, the expression “metro
railway” has the same meaning assigned to it in clause (i) of sub-section
(1) of section 2 of the Delhi Metro Railway (Operation and Maintenance)
Act, 2002;”;
(ii) in sub-clause (3), in item (i), for the words “Municipal Corporation”,
the words, brackets and figures “Council as defined in clause (9) of section 2 of
the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994 or Municipal Corporation” shall be
substituted;
(b) in clause (fa),—
(A) in sub-clause (ii), for the words, brackets and figure “in item (i)”, the
words, brackets, figures and letter “in items (i) and (ia)” shall be substituted;
(B) in sub-clause ( v), for the word “Corporation”, the words “Council,
Corporation” shall be substituted.
1 of 1956.
60 of 2002.
44 of 1994.
Amendment
of Act 40 of
1971.
5
10
15
20
25

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 was enacted
to provide for speedy machinery for the eviction of unauthorised occupants from public
premises, including the premises of Government companies and those of corporations
established by or under any Central Act.
2. The Delhi Metro Railway Corporation has requested that metro properties be
declared as public premises by amending the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised
Occupants) Act, 1971 and to confer powers of an Estate Officer under the said Act, to
the officers of the Delhi Metro Railway Corporation to be appointed by the Central
Government for dealing with the problem of eviction in a more expenditious manner.
3. Clause (e) of section 2 of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised
Occupants) Act, 1971 contains the definition of public premises. Item (i) of sub-clause
(2) of clause (e) of section 2 of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occuptants)
Act,  1971 provides that any premises belonging to, or taken on lease by, or on behalf
of, any company as defined in section 3 of the Comapnies Act, 1956, in which not less
than fifty-one per cent. of the paid-up share capital is held by the Central Government
or any company which is a subsidiary (within the meaning of that Act) of the first-
mentioned company as public premises. The paid-up share capital held by one or more
State Governments is not included under this item.
4. It is, therefore, proposed to include within the meaning of public premises any
premises belonging to, or taken on lease by, or on behalf of, any company as defined in
section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956 in which not less than fifty-one per cent. of the
paid-up share capital is held partly by the Central Government and partly by one or
more State Governments and includes a company which is a subsidiary (within the
meaning of that Act) of the first-mentioned company and which carries on business of
metro railway.
5. The public premises, in relation to the National Capital Territory of Delhi means,
any premises belonging to the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, or any Municipal
Committee or notified area committee under the provisions as contained in item (i) of
sub-clause (3) of clause (e) of section 2 of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised
Occuptants) Act, 1971. An issue was raised in one of the cases before the Hon’ble High
Court of Delhi in a civil writ petition No. 9664/2007 as to whether the expression
‘’Municipal Committee’’ or ‘’notified area committee’’ in the National Capital Territory
of Delhi would include the Municipal Council as defined in clause (e) of section 2 of the
Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971. The Hon’ble High
Court held that there is no question of any ambiguity in the expression ‘’any Municipal
Committee or notified area committee’’ used in relation to any premises held by them
and dismissed the writ petition.
6. To avoid reoccurrence of any litigation in future and to remove any doubts, it is
proposed to bring Municipal Council within the purview of public premises by amending
section 2 of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971.
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; KAMAL NATH,
The 29th August, 2011.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PUBLIC PREMISES (EVICTION OF UNAUTHORISED OCCUPANTS) ACT, 1971
(40 OF 1971)
* * * * *
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(e) “public premises” means—
* * * * *
(2) any premises belonging to, or taken on lease by, or on behalf of,—
* * * * *
(3) in relation to the National Capital Territory of Delhi,—
(i) any premises belonging to the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, or
any municipal committee or notified area committee,
* * * * *
(fa) “statutory authority”, in relation to the public premises referred to in clause
(e) of this section, means,—
* * * * *
(ii) in respect of the public premises referred to in item (i) of sub-clause (2)
of that clause, the company or the subsidiary company, as the case may be,
referred to therein,
* * * * *
(v) in respect of the public premises referred to in sub-clause ( 3) of that
clause, the Corporation, committee or Authority, as the case may be, referred to
in that sub-clause;
* * * * *
Definitions.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971.
————
(Shri Kamal Nath, Minister of  Urban Development)
GMGIPMRND—1809LS(S3)—05-09-2011.