1
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI BAIJAYANT PANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called  Representation of People (Amendment)  Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  75  of 2015
Short title
and
commencement.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. For section 70 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
"70. If a person is elected to more than one seat in either House of Parliament or
in the House or in either House of the Legislature of a State, then,—
(a) if he, within the prescribed time, does not resign from all, except one of
the seats, by writing under his hand addressed to the Speaker or Chairman, as
the case may be, or to such authority or officer as may be prescribed, his election
to all the seats shall be deemed to be void and, in such a situation, the Election
Commission shall declare the runner-up candidates to be elected from such
seats; and
(b) if he, within the prescribed time, resigns from all, except one seat, by
writing under his hand addressed to the Speaker or Chairman, as the case may
be, or to such authority or officer as may be prescribed, the Election Commission
shall declare the runner-up candidates of such resigned seats, to be elected’’.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 70.
Election to
more than one
seat in either
House of
Parliament or
in the House
or either
House of the
Legislature of
a State.
5
10
43 of 1951.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Representation of the People Act, 1951 provides for the conduct of elections to
the Houses of Parliament and to the Houses of Legislature of each State. Section 33 of the
Act allows candidates to contest elections from up to two seats in either House of Parliament
and either House of the State Legislature. Section 70 of the Act provides that in the event
that a candidate is declared elected from both seats in either House of Parliament and/or
either House of the Legislature of a State, he or she has to resign from all except one seat,
which in effect triggers bye-elections.
This provision is often used as safety-net to ensure electoral success. More often
than not, election of a candidate from more than one seat necessitates bye-elections. The
exchequer has to bear additional cost of conducting these bye-elections. More importantly,
the resignation of the elected candidate from all but one seat significantly affects the public
morale.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Representation of People Act, 1951 with a view
to provide that if a candidate is elected to  more than one seat in either House of Parliament
or in the House or either House of Legislature of a State and resigns from all, except one seat,
the candidates securing the second highest number of votes from such resigned seats shall
be declared elected. In the event, he does not resign from any of the elected seats, his
election to all the elected seats shall be void and the candidates securing the second highest
votes shall be declared elected from such seats.
The Bill indirectly penalises political parties which use this provision as political
insurance and at the same time seeks to prevent an additional burden on the exchequer by
mitigating resultant bye-elections. In effect, the Bill imposes costs on political parties for
taking undue advantage of the law to their benefit and, as such, is an attempt to dis-incentivise
political parties from manoeuvring the system to their benefit.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BAIJAYANT PANDA
November 11, 2014.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM THE REPRESENTA TION OF THE PEOPLE  ACT, 1951
(ACT NO. 43 OF 1951)
**  * * * *
70. If a person is elected to more than one seat in either House of Parliament or in the
House or either House of the Legislature of a State, then, unless within the prescribed time he
resigns all but one of the seats by writing under his hand addressed to the Speaker or
Chairman, as the case may be, or to such other authority or officer as may be prescribed, all
the seats shall become vacant.
**  * * * *
Eelection to
more than one
seat in either
House of
Parliament or
in the House
or either
House of the
Legislature of
a State.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
————
(Shri Baijayant Panda, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4334LS(S3)—05-03-2015.