\1 0६५70

As mntropucen फ Lox Sasi

Bl No.75 of 2004

THE ADOPTION OF CHILDREN (REGULATION) BILL, 2004

By
Sut 1084 AHMED Sarapcl, M.P.

A

BILL
to regulate the adoption of children and for matters connected therewith.
Be itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (0) This Act may be called the Adoption of Children (Regulation) Act, 2004. Short title,
(2) Itextends to the whole of India. न अशरलजक
(3) 1 shall come into force at once.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — Definitions

(a) “appropriate Government” means the State Government in case of a State
and the Central Government in all other cases; and

(6) “child” means a child irrespective of his sex who has not attained the age of
eighteen years.


No person
shall indulge
in sale or
purchase of a
child,

No
organization
or institution
shall have
dealings in
adoption of
children,

Setting up of
Centres for
welfare,
rehabilitation
and adoption
of children,

Procedure for
adoption of a
child.

Punishment,

Over riding
effect of the
Act.

Power to
make rules,

2

3. No person shall indulge in the sale or purchase of'a child in the country.

4. No organization or institution shall indulge in any activity connected with either the
taking or giving in adoption of children in the country except as provided for in this Act.

5. (1) The appropriate Government shall set up a Centre to be known as the Centre for
welfare, rehabilitation and adoption of children in each district of the State.

(2) The Centre set up under sub-section (1) shall take over all such organizations or
institutions which are working in connection with the welfare, rehabilitation and adoption
children in that district.

6. (1) Any person who desires to adopt a child shall apply in the manner as may be
prescribed by rules made under this Act to a Centre for adoption of such child.

(2) The person who adopts a child shall inform the respective centre about development
and welfare of the adopted child from time to time until such child attains the age of eighteen
years,

7. Any person who violates the provisions of this Act shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six years and with a fine which shall not
be less than one lakh rupees,

8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or any instrument/instruction
having the force of law,

9, The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out provisions of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Recently, several cases of sale of children have been reported in newspapers. A number
of non-governmental organizations and institutions, set up for the purpose of welfare and
rehabilitation of orphans and helpless children have also been reportedly involved in nefarious
dealings in children for monetary gains. There is no system of verifying the antecedents of
persons who seek adoption. The loopholes enable child-trafficking in the name of adoption
of children. At present, there is no law to effectively tackle sale of children.

It is, therefore, necessary to enact a law to regulate adoption of children.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

New Dewi; IQBAL AHMED SARADGI
August 18,2004.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a centre for welfare, rehabilitation and
adoption of children in each district of the State. The Central Government will bear expenditure
incurred in respect of Union territories and the State Governments will bear expenditure
incurred in respect of States from their respective consolidated funds. The Bill, if enacted,
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual
recurring expenditure of about rupees three crore is likely to be involved.

‘A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five lakh is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. These rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character,


LOK SABHA.

A
BILL
to regulate the adoption of children and for matters connected therewith,

(Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi, M.P)

MGIPMRNO—2402LS—24.09.2004,