Short title.
THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDER
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
By
SHRI HANSRAJ GANGARAMJI AHIR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the  Constitution (Scheduled Tribes)  Order (Amendment)
Act, 2007.
(2) In the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, in
Part IX.-Maharashtra, for entry 17, the following entry shall be substituted namely:—
"17. Gamit, Gamta, Gavit, Mavchi, Padvi, Gowari, Gowar, Gowara.".
TO  BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  75 of  2007
Amendment
of the
Schedule.
5C.O. 22

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There has been a long pending demand to include the Gowari tribe of Maharashtra
in the list of scheduled tribes maintained under article 342 of the Constitution. The Gowari
tribe is also known as Gowar or Gowara tribe. This community is plagued by extreme
social, educational and economic  backwardness. The Union Government took cognizance
of the poor condition of this community and brought a Bill in the year 1967 to include
this community in the schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950.
However, the Bill lapsed and the Gowari community could not be added to the list of
Scheduled Tribes of the State of Maharashtra.
The Gowari community made several efforts and launched campaigns in the past
to get their community included in schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order,
1950. As many as 114 people of the community have laid down their lives seeking
inclusion of the Tribes. After considering the demand of the community, on four different
occasions the Government of Maharashtra have recommended the inclusion of the Gowari
community in the schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950. The
condition of this community is deteriorating day by day due to lackadaisical approach of
the Government towards provision of benefits of reservation to the people belonging to
this community.
The Gowari tribe needs the support of the State in the form of reservation in
services under Government and other affirmative action of the Government so that they
can be integrated with the mainstream and become an important part of the social fabric.
To ensure such support to them, it is proposed in the Bill to include the Gowar, Gowara
and Gowari community in Part IX-Maharashtra in the Schedule to the Constitution (Sched-
uled Tribes) Order, 1950.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; HANSRAJ GANGARAMJI AHIR
August 10, 2007
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill seeks to include Gowar, Gowara and Gowari community in the list of
Scheduled Tribes in respect of the State of Maharashtra by way of amending the
Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950. The Bill, if enacted, would involve recurring
and non-recurring expenditure on account of the benefits to be given under the schemes
and programmes of the Government meant for social, educational and economic development
of the scheduled tribes. At this stage, it is not possible to mention the exact amount which
may be incurred on this account. However, it is estimated that a sum of approximately
rupees one hundred crore is likely to be involved as a recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
3
\\SERVER5\BILL_2007/LOK SABHA/4131LS

ANNEXURE
Extract from the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950
C.O. 22
* * * * * * * *
(PART I-Rules and Orders under the Constitution)
* * * * * * * *
Part IX- Maharashtra
* * * * * * * *
17. Gamit, Gamta, Gavit, Mavchi, Padvi
* * * * * * * *
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950.
————
(Shri Hansraj Gangaramji Ahir, M.P. )
MGIPMRND—4131LS(S5)—30-10-2007.