     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
   Bill No. 75 of 2022
THE UNLAWFUL  ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) REPEAL  BILL, 2022
By
DR. SHASHI THAROOR, M.P.
A
BILL
to repeal the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:–
1. This Act may be called  the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Repeal
Act, 2022.
2. The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 is hereby repealed.
3. This Act shall not affect the validity, invalidity, effect or consequences of
anything already done or suffered, or any right, title, obligation or liability already
acquired, accrued or incurred, or any remedy or proceeding in respect thereof, or any
release or discharge of or from any debt, penalty, obligation, liability, claim or demand,
or any indemnity already granted, or the proof of any past act or thing.
.
Short title.
5 Repeal of Act
No. 37 of 1967.
Savings.
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (UAPA) has opened the door
to a gross abuse of power that is in contravention of the standards set by article
21 of the Constitution of India and international counter-terrorism legislation. As
per the 2019 amendment to the UAPA, the state now commands the power to
designate individuals as “terrorists”, which was previously restricted to naming
groups as “terrorist organisations”. Interfering with the privacy and liberty of
individuals, the UAPA contravenes constitutionally mandated provisions which
protect against arbitrary or unlawful interference with a person’s privacy. The Act
also allows for searches, seizures, and arrests based on the “personal knowledge”
of the police without written validation from a superior judicial authority.
Further, it turns the presumption of innocence on its head, giving the Government
unfettered power to declare any individual a terrorist. The UAPA also violates several
fundamental rights along with their various extensions, namely, the right to dissent,
the right to reputation, and the right to access the internet. In the leading case of
Nikesh Tarachand Shah v. Union of India, the Hon’ble Supreme Court has cautioned
that laws which “make drastic inroads into the fundamental right of personal liberty
guaranteed by Article 21” should only be applied when there is “compelling state
interest for tackling serious crimes”. However, there exists an evident lack of such
discrimination in UAPA.
The United Nations has also emphasised the importance of preserving and
protecting human rights and the rule of law while countering terrorism. In 2020, eight
UN special rapporteurs had raised concerns following the 2019 amendment of the
UAPA. They found the Act to be incompatible with global standards of human rights
legislation, including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. As per international law, to call an offence a
“terrorist act”, three elements must be cumulatively present: the means used must be
deadly; the intent behind the act must be to cause fear among the population or to
compel a government or an international organisation to do or refrain from doing
something; and the aim must be to further an ideological goal. They noted that the
UAPA provided no precise and unambiguous definition of what constitutes a “terrorist
threat” which allowed the Government to apply the Act widely and indiscriminately,
often to the detriment of human rights. The UAPA allows the Government to take
action against individuals for acts that are “likely to threaten” or “likely to strike
terror in people”, and it is this notion of ‘potential terrorism’ that violates the principle
of proportionality in punishment and encourages misuse.
The death of Father Stanislaus Lourduswamy, a prominent tribal rights activist
known for his decades-long service, in judicial custody after being repeatedly denied
bail , and the prolonged indefinite detention of journalist Siddique Kappan, highlights
the worrying implications of this regime.
The UAPA has also been criticised for making the process itself a punishment.
For example, according to the National Crime Records Bureau, between 2014 and 2016,
over 75% of cases under the UAPA ended either in acquittal or discharge. Data also
suggests that each year between 2014 and 2020, an average of 985 cases under UAPA
were registered, of which the number of pending cases rose by 14.38% annually. Over
2

3
the last 7 years, though around 10,552 Indians have been arrested under UAPA, only
253 have been convicted, making the conviction rate a meagre 2.4%. During the same
period, merely 40.58% of the cases taken up for investigation were sent to trial, of
which trial was completed in a scarce 4.5% of the cases. These statistics are
representative of the grave miscarriages of justice that the UAPA enables and too
often entails.
Several noted Supreme Court judges, such as Justice DY Chandrachud, Justice
Madan B. Lokur, Justice Deepak Gupta, Justice Aftab Aslam, Justice Gopala Gowda,
and Justice RF Nariman, have expressed concern over the UAPA and its potential for
misuse and wrongful incarceration. Similarly, senior advocates and civil society leaders
alike have criticised the Act, noting its liability for abuse, and suggested that its
powers be curtailed or struck down entirely. Over the years, UAPA has become a tool
of repression—a weapon to keep people entangled in the legal system and place
people in jails for as long as the state wants. The state owes a duty of care to its
citizens and the fear of dissent and criticism is no excuse to violate fundamental rights
and impinge on natural freedoms. Behind the facts, figures, and analysis lie the human
cost at the heart of a draconian and unjust act, such as the UAPA.
Such a law, which is a weapon of misuse and abuse, has no place in a democracy.
It is, therefore, important to repeal this legislation.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;            SHASHI THAROOR
17 February, 2022

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
  to repeal the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.
————
(Dr . Shashi Tharoor, M.P .)