THE ENEMY PROPERTY (AMENDMENT AND V ALIDATION)
BILL, 2010
A
BILL
further to amend the Enemy Property Act, 1968 and the Public Premises (Eviction of
Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Enemy Property  (Amendment and Validation)  Act, 2010.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 2nd day of July, 2010.
2. On and from the date of commencement of the Enemy Property Act, 1968 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in section 5, after sub-section ( 2), the following shall be
inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted, namely:—
‘(3) The enemy property vested in the Custodian shall, notwithstanding that the
enemy or the enemy subject or the enemy firm has ceased to be an enemy due to death,
extinction, winding up of  business or change of nationality or that the legal heir and
successor is a citizen of India or the citizen of a country which is not an enemy,
continue to remain vested in the Custodian till it is divested by the Central Government.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of section 5.
34 of 1968.
Bill No. 75 of 2010
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, “enemy property vested in the
Custodian” shall include all titles, rights and interest in, or any benefit arising out of,
such property vested in him under the Act.’.
3.  After section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“5A. The Custodian may, after making such inquiry as he deems necessary, by
order, declare that the property of the enemy or the enemy subject or the enemy firm
described in the order, vests in him under the Act and issue a certificate to this effect
and such certificate shall be the evidence of the facts stated therein.”.
4. On and from the date of commencement of the principal Act, in section 6, the
following Explanation shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted, namely:—
“Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that, for the
purposes of this section, the transfer of any enemy property shall not include any
transfer or any claim of transfer made,—
(a) through oral will or oral gift; or
(b) by concealment of enemy nationality; or
(c) in case the transfer of such property requires the permission of the Reserve
Bank of India or any other competent authority, without such permission; or
(d) without the permission of the Custodian.”.
5.  In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(a) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ia) fix and collect the rent, standard rent, lease rent, licence fee or usage
charges, as the case may be, in respect of enemy property;”;
(b) after clause (iv), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(iva) secure vacant possession of the enemy property by evicting from
the unauthorised or illegal occupant or trespasser and remove unauthorised or
illegal constructions, if any;”.
6. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“10A. (1) Where the Custodian proposes to sell any enemy immovable property
vested in him, as referred to in section 8, to any person, he may on receipt of the sale
proceeds of such property, issue a certificate of sale in favour of such person and such
certificate of sale shall, notwithstanding the fact that the original title deeds of the
property have not been handed over to the transferee, be valid and conclusive proof
of ownership of such property by such person.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force,
the certificate of sale, referred to in sub-section (1), issued by the Custodian shall be a
valid instrument for the registration of the property in favour of the transferee and the
registration in respect of enemy property for which such certificate of sale had been
issued by the Custodian, shall not be refused on the ground of lack of original title
deeds in respect of such property or for any such other reason.”.
7. In section 11 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3) The Custodian, Deputy Custodian or Assistant Custodian shall have, for
the purposes of exercising powers or discharging his functions under this Act, the
Insertion of
new section
5A.
Issue of
certificate by
Custodian.
Amendment
of section 6.
Amendment
of section 8.
Insertion of
new section
10A.
Transfer of
immovable
property
belonging to
enemy.
Amendment of
section 11.

3
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
while dealing with any case under this Act, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) requiring the discovery and inspection of documents;
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person, including any officer dealing
with land, revenue and registration matters, banking officer or officer of a company
and examining him on oath;
(c) compelling, the production of books, documents and other records;
and
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.”.
8. In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words “two per centum”,
at both the places where they occur, the words "five per centum" shall be substituted.
9. On and from the date of commencement of the principal Act, after section 18, the
following section shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted, namely:—
“18A. Any income received in respect of the enemy property by the Custodian
shall not, notwithstanding that such property had been divested or transferred to any
other person, be returned or liable to be returned to such person or any other person
unless so directed by order, by the Central Government.”.
10.  After section 18A of the principal Act, [as so inserted by section 9 of  this Act], the
following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“18B. No court shall have jurisdiction to order divestment from the Custodian of
enemy property vested in him under this Act or direct the Central Government  to
divest such property from the Custodian.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the courts
shall have jurisdiction to adjudicate whether the property  claimed to be vested in the
Custodian is an enemy property or not.
18C. The Central Government may, by general or special order, direct that any or
all enemy property vested  in the Custodian under this Act shall be sold or disposed
off in such manner as may be prescribed.”.
11. In section 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words "five hundred
rupees", the words "ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
12. In section 23 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (d), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(da) the manner of sale or disposal of the enemy property vested in the Custodian
under section 18C;”.
13.  After section 25 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“26. Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of
any court, tribunal or other authority,—
(a) the provisions of this Act, as amended by the Enemy Property
(Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010, shall have and shall be deemed always
to have effect for all purposes as if the provisions of this Act, as amended by the
said Act, had been in force at all material times;
Amendment of
section 17.
Insertion of
new section
18A.
Income not
liable to be
returned.
Insertion of
new sections
18B and 18C.
Bar of
jurisdiction of
courts in
matters of
divesting.
Disposal of
enemy
property
vested in
Custodian by
Central
Government.
Amendment of
section 20.
Amendment of
section 23.
Insertion of
new section
26.
Validation.
5 of 1908.

4
(b) any enemy property divested from the Custodian to any person
under the provisions of this Act, as it stood immediately before the
commencement of the Enemy Property (Amendment and V alidation) Act, 2010,
shall stand transferred to and vest or continue to vest, free from all
encumbrances, in the Custodian in the same manner as it was vested in the
Custodian before such divesting of enemy property under the provisions of
this Act, as if the provisions of this Act, as amended by the aforesaid Act, were
in force at all material times;
(c) no suit or other proceedings shall, without prejudice to the generality
of the foregoing provisions, be maintained or continued in any court or tribunal
or authority for the enforcement of any decree or order or direction given by
such court or tribunal or authority directing divestment of enemy property from
the Custodian vested in him under section 5 of this Act, as it stood before the
commencement of the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010,
and such enemy property shall continue to vest in the Custodian under section
5 of this Act, as amended by the aforesaid Act, as the said section, as amended
by the aforesaid Act, was in force at all material times;
(d) any transfer of any enemy property, vested in the Custodian, by virtue
of any order of attachment, seizure or sale in execution of decree of a civil court
or orders of any tribunal or other authority in respect of enemy property vested
in the Custodian which is contrary to the provisions of this Act, as amended by
the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010, shall be deemed to
be null and void and notwithstanding such transfer, continue to vest in the
Custodian under this Act.”.
14. In the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971,—
(a) in section 2, in clause (e), after sub-clause (3), the following sub-clause shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(4) any premises of the enemy property as defined in clause (c) of section
2 of the Enemy Property Act, 1968;";
(b) in section 3, in clause (a),—
(i) in the second proviso, the word “and” shall be omitted;
(ii) after the second proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Provided also that the Custodian, Deputy Custodian and Assistant
Custodian of the enemy property appointed under section 3 of the Enemy
Property Act, 1968 shall be deemed to have been appointed as the Estate
Officer in respect of those enemy property, being the public premises,
referred to in sub-clause (4) of clause (e) of section 2 of this Act for which
they had been appointed as the Custodian, Deputy Custodian and
Assistant Custodian under section 3  of the Enemy Property Act, 1968.”.
15. (1) The Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 2010 is hereby
repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Enemy
Property Act, 1968 or the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised  Occupants) Act, 1971 as
amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the
corresponding provisions of those Acts as amended by this Act.
Amendment
of Act 40 of
1971.
Repeal and
savings.
Ord. 4 of 2010.
34 of 1968.
34 of 1968.
34 of 1968.
40 of 1971.

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Enemy Property Act, 1968 was enacted on the 20th August, 1968 to, inter alia,
provide for the continued vesting of enemy property vested in the Custodian of Enemy
Property for India under the Defence of India Rules, 1962 and for matters connected therewith.
2. Of late, there have been various judgments by various courts that have adversely
affected the powers of the Custodian and the Government of India as provided under the
Enemy Property Act, 1968. In view of such interpretation by various courts, the Custodian
has finding it difficult to sustain his actions under the Enemy Property Act, 1968.
3. In the above circumstances, it has become necessary to amend the Enemy Property
Act, 1968, inter alia, to clarify the legislative intention with retrospective effect providing—
(a) that the enemy property shall continue to vest in the Custodian till it is
divested by the Central Government, even if the enemy subject or enemy firm ceases to
be enemy due to death, extinction, winding up of business or change of nationality or
that the legal heir or successor is a citizen of India or a citizen of a country which is not
an enemy;
(b) to authorise the Custodian, after making such enquiry as he deems necessary,
to declare that the property of the enemy, or the enemy subject, or the enemy firm vest
in him under the aforesaid Act and issue a certificate to that effect which would be
evidence of facts stated therein;
(c) that the transfer of any enemy property shall not include any transfer or any
claim of transfer made through oral will or oral gift or by concealment of enemy nationality
or, in case the transfer of such property require the permission of the Reserve Bank of
India or any other competent authority, any transfer without such permission or without
the permission of the Custodian;
(d)  that no court shall have jurisdiction to order divestment from the Custodian
of enemy property vested in him under the aforesaid Act or direct the Central Government
to divest such property from the Custodian, but the court shall have jurisdiction to
adjudicate whether the property claimed to be vested in the custodian is an enemy
property or not;
(e)  to authorise the Central Government to direct that any or all enemy property
vested in the Custodian under the aforesaid Act shall be sold or disposed of in such
manner as may be prescribed;
(f)  that any transfer or any other action taken  contrary to the provisions of the
aforesaid Act, as amended by the proposed legislation, would be null and void.
4. In order to have speedy and effective eviction of unauthaorised occupants from the
enemy property under the Custodian, it is proposed to amend the Public Premises (Eviction
of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 so as to declare the Custodian, Deputy Custodian
and Assistant Custodian of Enemy Property appointed under the Enemy Property Act, 1968
as “Estate Officer” in respect of the enemy properties.
5. As Parliament was not in session and an urgent legislation was required to be made,
the President promulgated the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance,
2010   on the 2nd July, 2010.
6. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid   Ordinance.
P. CHIDAMBARAM.
N
EW DELHI;
The 22nd July, 2010.

6
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE ENEMY PROPERTY ACT, 1968
(34 OF 1968)
* * * * *
8. * * * * *
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Custodian or
such person as may be specifically authorised by him in this behalf, may, for the said purpose,—
* * * * *
17. (1) There shall be levied by the Custodian fees equal to two per centum of—
(a) the amount of moneys paid to him;
(b) the proceeds of the sale or transfer of any property which has been vested in
him under this Act; and
(c) the value of the residual property, if any, at the time of its transfer to the
original owner or other person specified by the Central Government under section 18:
Provided that in the case of an enemy whose property is allowed by the Custodian
to be managed by some person specially authorised in that behalf, there shall be levied
a fee of two per centum of the gross income of the enemy or such less fee as may be
specifically fixed by the Central Government after taking into consideration the cost of
direct management incurred by that Government, the cost of superior supervision and
any risks that may be incurred by that Government in respect of the management:
Provided further that the Central Government may, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, reduce or remit the fees leviable under this sub-section in any special case or
class of cases.
Explanation—In this sub-section “gross income of the enemy” means income
derived out of the properties of the enemy vested in the Custodian under this Act.
* * * * *
20.  (1)* * * * *
(3) If any person fails to comply with a requisition made by the Custodian under sub-
section (1) or sub-section ( 2) of section 11, he shall be punishable with fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees.
* * * * *
23. (1) * * * * *
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide
for—
* * * * *
————
E
XTRACT FROM THE PUBLIC PREMISES (EVICTION OF UNAUTHORISED OCCUPANTS) ACT, 1971
(40 OF 1971)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
Levy of fees.
Penalty.
Power of
Custodian In
respect of
enemy
property
vested to him.
Power to make
rules.
Definitions.

7
(e) “public premises” means—
* * * * *
3. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,—
(a) appoint such persons, being gazetted officers of Government or of the
Government of any Union territory or officers of equivalent rank of the statutory
authority, as it thinks fit, to be estate officers for the purposes of this Act:
Provided that no officer of the Secretariat of the Rajya Sabha shall be so appointed
except after consultation with the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha and no officer of the
Secretariat of the Lok Sabha shall be so appointed except after consultation with the
Speaker of the Lok Sabha:
Provided further that an officer of a statutory authority shall only be appointed
as an estate officer in respect of the public premises controlled by that authority; and
* * * * *
Appointment
of estate
officers.

LOK  SABHA
————————
A
BILL
further to amend the Enemy Property Act, 1968 and the Public Premises (Eviction of
Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971.
————
(Shri P. Chidambaram, Minister of Home Affairs)
GMGIPMRND—3218LS(S4)—27-07-2010.