1
THE HOUSING FACILITY FOR DESTITUTE SENIOR
CITIZENS, WIDOWS AND ORPHAN
CHILDREN BILL, 2018
By
SHRI DHANANJAY  B. M AHADIK , M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for housing facility to destitute senior citizens, widows and
orphan children and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Housing Facility for Destitute Senior Citizens, Widows
and Orphan Children Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 75 of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “destitute senior citizen” means any person who has attained the age of sixty
years and has no facility for shelter or has no relative to take care of and provide
shelter to him;
(c) “Fund” means the Destitute Senior Citizens, Widows and Orphan Children
Welfare Fund constituted under section 9;
(d) “orphan” means a child who is below fourteen years of age and has no
parents or willing and capable legal or natural guardian or other relatives to take care of
him;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) “widow” means any woman who has not remarried after the death of her
husband and who does not have any facility for shelter.
3. The Central Government shall, as soon as possible, by notification in the Official
Gazette, frame a national policy for providing housing facilities to the destitute senior citizens,
widows and orphans.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish residential centres for the destitute
senior citizens, widows and orphans.
(2) Every residential centre shall have the capacity of minimum eighty and maximum
two hundred persons to live in at a time.
(3) Every residential centre shall be arranged in such a way to accommodate two
orphans, one senior citizen and one widow in one unit.
5. The appropriate Government shall—
(a) provide housing, food, water, medicine, security and the minimum resources
necessary to lead a balanced and healthy life in every residential centre;
(b) ensure utilization of Government schemes running in the area for necessary
resources, education, health and food in every residential centre;
(c) ensure easy access to every eligible person to reside in the residential centre;
(d) make efforts to develop mutually dependent relation for residents living in
residential centre to lead a mutually humanitarian, emotional, safe and happy life;
and
(e) formulate policy for setting up domestic production unit for employment
generation in every residential centre.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazzette,
constitute a Managing Committee to monitor, supervise and coordinate the functioning of
the residential centres established under section 4.
(2) The Management Committee shall consist of—
(i) the Chairperson of the local body, ex-officio, Chairperson;
(ii) a public servant, ex-officio member;
(iii) a senior-most senior citizen from the residential centre, member;
Definitions.
National
Policy for
housing for
destitute
senior citizens,
widows and
orphans.
Establishment
of residential
centres.
Residential
centres to
have proper
facilities for
the
beneficiaries.
Constitution
of
Management
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(iv) an oldest widow from the residential centre, member; and
(v) an eminent social worker, member;
to be nominated by the appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The appropriate Government shall appoint such number of staff to the residential
centres as may be prescribed, from time to time.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other term and conditions of service of
Chairperson, members other than ex-officio and staff of the Managing Committee and the
procedure to be followed in the discharge of its functions shall be such as may be prescribed.
7. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the national policy
formulated under section 3.
8. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute a Fund to be known as the Destitute Senior Citizens, Widows and
Orphan Children Welfare Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) The Fund shall be utilized for providing facilities to the residents of residential
centres.
9. The appropriate Government shall review the quality and progress of residential
centres established under section 4 in such manner as may be prescribed.
10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds for the implementation of the provisions of the Act.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
12. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Implementation
of the policy
by the
appropriate
Government.
Constitution
of Destitute
Senior
Citizens,
Widows and
Orphan
Children
Welfare Fund.
Appropriate
Government
to review the
quality and
progress of
residential
centres.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite funds.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
During the last one decade the old age population in India has risen by 39.3 per cent.
This segment of population is expected to rise by 45-50 per cent. in the coming decades.
Because of continuous replacing of joint families by nuclear families due to ongoing trend
and continuous migration the old aged persons have to suffer from several problems
including loneliness. There are more than a thousand old age homes but their situations
and problems could not be improved and sorted out permanently. In similar ways, there are
a large number of widows in the country who face discrimination not only on family front
but on social front also. In a number of cases, they do not have shelter and other necessary
assistance to lead a dignified life. Now-a-days there is a need to create a total and conducive
environment whereby they could spend rest of their life in a productive and happy manner.
In addition to this, there is a large section of population of orphan kids who do not have
any shelter and are living a destitute life. Most of these kids are engaged as child labour or
have fallen prey to drug addiction, some are addicted to drugs, some are involved in flesh
trade or illegal trafficking.
There is need to provide an integrated provision in this regard so that these three
socially neglected classes could be brought under one roof where these three can line as one
family. Widow shall play role of mother to orphan kids and neglected old age person play a
role of guardian to these two. By this, a familial environment will be provided for these three
classes.
The Bill seeks to establish residential centres for destitute senior citizens, widows and
orphans along with shelter, food, clothes and other basic facilities of life to lead a dignified
humanitarian, emotional,safe and happy life based on mutually supported relation. The most
important objective behind the establishment of the centre is that the widow house, senior
citizen house and orphanage established with different methods in the country shall be
brought under one roof.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DHANANJAY  B.  MAHADIK
February 8, 2018.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for establishment of the residential centres all over the
country for use of the destitute senior citizens, widows and orphans. Clause 5 provides that
appropriate Government shall ensure residential centres to have proper basic facilities to the
beneficiaries. Clause 6 provides for constitution of Management Committee to monitor,
supervise and coordinate the functioning of the residential centres. Clause 8 provides for
constitution of a Destitute Senior Citizens, Widows and Orphan Children Welfare Fund.
Clause 10 provides that Central Government shall provide adequate funds for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five hundred crore may
involve as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

MGIPMRND—4215LS(S3)—05-03-2018.
LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for housing facility to destitute senior citizens, widows and
orphan children and for matters connected therewith.
—————
(Shri Dhananjay B. Mahadik, M.P.)