                  A S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 75 of 2021
THE FEMALE FARMERS’ ENTITLEMENTS BILL, 2021
By
SHRIMATI RAMA DEVI, M.P.
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
 1. Short title, extent and commencement.
 2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
CERTIFICATION OF FEMALE FARMER
 3. Certification of Female Farmer.
 4. Acceptance of certificate as evidence.
CHAPTER III
LAND RIGHTS
 5. Equal land rights to female farmers.
CHAPTER IV
WATER RIGHTS
 6. Equal right to water resources.
 7. No discrimination for irrigation purposes.

CLAUSES
CHAPTER V
LEGAL ACCESS TO CREDIT AND OTHER AGRICULTURAL INPUTS
 8. Entitlement of female farmers to get credits, loans and other financial supports.
CHAPTER VI
FUND FOR SUPPORT SERVICES TO FEMALE FARMERS
 9. Establishment of Fund.
10. Female farmer friendly technology.
11. Market facilities.
12. Training and capacity building.
CHAPTER VII
IMPLEMENTA TION AND MONITORING AUTHORITIES, THEIR RESPONSIBILITIES
13. Responsibilities of Central Government.
14. Responsibilities of State Governments.
15. Responsibilities of local authorities.
16. Female farmers’ Entitlement Board.
17. District Vigilance Committees.
18. Redressal of grievances.
CHAPTER VIII
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURES
19. Penalty for non-compliance of provisions of this Act.
20. Cognizance of offences.
21. Actions in good faith.
CHAPTER IX
MISCELLANEOUS
22. Overriding effect.
23. Power to give directions.
24. Power of State Government to restrict the application of the Act to certain
areas.
25. Power to remove difficulties.
26. Power to make Rules.

Bill No. 75 of 2021
THE FEMALE FARMERS’ ENTITLEMENTS BILL, 2021
By
SHRIMATI RAMA DEVI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the gender specific needs of female farmers, to protect their
legitimate needs and entitlements and to empower them with rights over
agricultural land, water resources and other related rights and for
functions relating thereto and for matters connected therewith.
WHEREAS female constitutes more than fifty per cent. of Indian farmers and
about sixty per cent. of the workforce in the farming sector; and in view of the
increasing  feminisation of agriculture as a result of out-migration of men,
entitlements for female farmers are essential for the future growth and health of
agriculture, as well as protection of food security in an era of climate change;
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to recognize and protect the gender specific
needs and rights of the female farmers by empowering and entitling them with
enforceable rights over agricultural land, water resources, credit and other related
rights;
AND WHEREAS the Married W omen’ s Property Act, 1874 recognised the wages,
earnings and other property acquired by a married woman in any employment,
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
3 of 1874

occupation or trade carried on by her in her individual capacity as her separate
property; the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 entitles the daughter of a
Joint Hindu family governed by the Mitakshara law, to become a coparcener in her
own right in the same manner as the son and clothes her with the same rights and
liabilities in the coparcenary property as if she had been a son; the Scheduled Tribes
and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006
recognised the rights of forest-dwelling communities to the forest land and other
forest resources;
AND WHEREAS the Government of India has recognized the special needs of
female farmers by initiating a “Mahila Kisan Shashaktikaran Pariyojana”
programme under the National Rural Livelihood Mission;
AND WHEREAS India is a party to the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), 1979 which calls for elimination
of all forms of discrimination of women by ensuring equal access to agricultural
credit and loans, marketing facilities, appropriate technology and equal treatment
in land and agrarian reform as well as in land resettlement schemes;
AND WHEREAS the Fourth World Conference on women in September , 1995,
in which India participated, called for legislative and administrative reforms to give
women equal rights with men to economic resources, including access to ownership
and control over land and other properties, credit, inheritance, natural resources,
and appropriate new technology, etc. as embodied in the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action;
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to implement the decisions in so far
as they relate to the female farmers’ entitlements under article 253 of the Constitution
of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Female Farmers’ Entitlements   Act, 2021.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “agriculture” includes all activities related to cultivation of crops, animal
husbandary, poultry, livestock rearing, apiculture, gardening, fishing, aquaculture,
sericulture, vermiculture, horticulture, floriculture, agro-forestry, or any other
farming activity carried out through self-employment, tenurial cultivation, share
cropping, or other types of cultivation including shifting cultivation, collection, use
and sale of minor or non-timber forest produce by virtue of ownership rights or
usufructuary rights;
(b) “agricultural activity” means any activity related to agriculture;
(c) “farmer” means any person who is, individually or jointly with any other
person,—
(i) engaged in agriculture directly or through the supervision of others;
or
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
2
39 of 2005
2 of 2007
5
10
15
20

(ii)    contributes to conservation or preservation of agriculture related
varieties or seeds or breeds of farm animals; or
(iii)   contributes through traditional knowledge to any type of innovation,
conservation or to propagation of new agricultural varieties or to
agricultural cultivation methods or practices or to the practice of
crop-livestock integrated farming system; or
(iv)   promotes agro-processing and value-addition to primary products.
Explanation.—(i) The term “farmer”  includes, but not limited to, agricultural
operational holders, landless cultivators, agricultural labourers, planting labourers,
pastoralists, sharecroppers and tenants but does not include the corporate entities
operated by or involving farmers.
(ii) In case of landless farmers migrating or moving from one State to
another, if anyone stays in a State for at least six months, such person shall
be considered as a farmer in that particular State;
(d) “guidelines” means the guidelines framed by the Authority under
this Act with the previous approval of the Central Government by
notification in the Official Gazette.
(e) “land” includes any land or water body utilised for the purpose of
agriculture.
(f) “female farmer” means, any woman, irrespective of marital status
or ownership of land, who is a farmer as defined in sub-section (c) of
section 2 and includes—
(i) any woman living in rural area and primarily engaged in agricultural
activity, though occasionally engaged in non-agricultural activity; or
(ii) any woman living in urban or semi-urban areas and engaged in
agriculture; or
(iii) any tribal woman directly or indirectly engaged in agriculture or
shifting cultivation or in the collection, use and sale of minor or non-timber
forest produce by virtue of usufructuary rights.
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
CHAPTER II
CERTIFICATION OF FEMALE FARMER
3. (1) A Female Farmer Certificate issued by the Gram Panchayat, after the
approval of the Gram Sabha and authenticated by the Village Administrative Officer
or an authorized officer of the Gram Panchayat, as may be prescribed, shall be the
conclusive proof of declaring a person as a female farmer.
(2) For urban or peri-urban areas, the certificate shall be issued by the urban
local body with the approval of any corresponding authority as notified under the
rules:
Provided that a group of  female farmers may obtain the Group Female Farmers’
Certificate in the same process as may be prescribed.
4. The certificate issued under section 3 shall be accepted as evidence for the
purposes of establishing the status of a person as a female farmer under this Act
including in all administrative and judicial proceedings.
Certification of
Female Farmer.
Acceptance of
certificate as
evidence.
3
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

CHAPTER III
LAND RIGHTS
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, every female farmer shall have equal ownership and inheritance rights over
her husband’s self acquired agricultural land, or his share of family property, or his
share of land transferred by the Government under land reform or resettlement scheme:
Provided that concurrence of both the spouses shall be necessary in the case of
land transfer or acquisition as per the provision of the provided land acquisition and
rehabilitation law.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, a female farmer shall be
deemed to have ownership and possession of equal and proportional share of
agricultural property in her husband’s property even, if, it is not mentioned in any of
the relevant documents and the fact that she is the wife of a particular person is the
conclusive proof to claim ownership and possession of her share of property and to
have effective control over such share of property.
CHAPTER IV
WATER RIGHTS
6. A female farmer shall have equal right, as enjoyed by male farmers, to all
water resources connected with the agricultural land to which she is the owner, share
holder, possessor or uses for farming activity and shall have access to water, water
resources and irrigation facilities for carrying out agricultural activities as defined in
this Act.
7. No female farmer shall be discriminated on the grounds of marital status,
religion, caste, ownership or possession of agricultural land while accessing water
resources for irrigation purposes.
CHAPTER V
LEGAL ACCESS TO CREDIT AND OTHER AGRICULTURAL INPUTS
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force and subject to the provisions of this Act,—
(i) every female farmer or group of female farmers who have a certificate of
Female Farmer from the appropriate Authority shall be entitled to Kisan Credit Card
which as of now is available mainly to male farmers.
(ii) a female farmer or group of female farmers shall be entitled to borrow
money and other financial support for agricultural activity either in her own capacity
or as a member of a female farmer group, as may be prescribed in the rules without
any discrimination on the grounds of marital status, place of residence, caste, religion,
or absence of collateral security.
CHAPTER VI
FUND FOR SUPPORT SERVICES TO FEMALE FARMERS
9. (1)  The Central Government shall set up a Central Agricultural
Development Fund for Female Farmers (CADFFF) under this Act, which shall
be used to empower female farmers and provide facilities such as incentives for
development of female farmer friendly technologies, training and capacity
building, creation of market facilities, organization of crèches and day care
centres, social security for female farmers, old age pensions and other related
issues as may be prescribed.
Equal land rights
to female farmer.
Equal right to
water
resources.
No
discrimination
for irrigation
purposes.
Entitlement of
female farmers
to get credits,
loans and other
financial
supports.
Establishment
of Fund.
4
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

(2) The Fund shall operate at the Central, State and District levels.
(3) The Fund shall be administered under the guidance of an appropriate
Authority to be appointed by the Central Government at the Central level and
offices of the Authority shall be set up, in consultation with the State Government,
at the State and District level in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The Fund shall receive contributions and grants from the Central and
State Governments, user fees as specified under the rules and guidelines framed
under this Act.
(5) The Authority shall support to individual female farmer and groups of
female farmers organized in the form of registered female’s cooperatives or Mahila
Kisan Kendras as per the guidelines framed under the Act.
(6) The appropriate Authority shall frame guidelines with the previous approval
of the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette, for distribution and
utilization of the Fund.
(7) The Central Government shall frame a scheme for social security of female
farmers, especially old age pension as may be prescribed.
(8) The appropriate Authority shall also have the power to secure land from the
Government and other sources for re-distribution of land to female farmers as prescribed
under this Act.
10. Any person who wants to develop female-friendly technology, may qualify
for short term and long term loans or grants or subsidies or Financial assistance from
the Fund as per the guidelines framed under the Act.
Explanation.—The term ‘any person’ in this section includes individuals and
small and medium scale industries.
11. The appropriate Authority shall  create and facilitate market facilities
for female farmers with the assistance of group of female farmers or of its own
in different parts of the country including the establishment of godowns in rural
areas.
12. The appropriate Authority shall organise regular and periodical
training and capacity building programmes for female farmers in different parts
of the country to make them aware of the provisions of this Act and to help them
in realising their entitlements and empowerment envisaged under this  Act.
CHAPTER VII
IMPLEMENTA TION AND MONITORING AUTHORITIES, THEIR
RESPONSIBILITIES
13. The Central Government shall be responsible for overall implementation
and monitoring of the Act, except as provided in this Act.
14. (1) The State Governments shall be responsible for implementation and
monitoring of provisions relating to certification of female farmers, realization of
land and water rights, operationalization of the Fund at the State and District levels
and other responsibilities as mentioned in this Act.
(2) The State Government may appoint Authorities for carrying out such
functions.
Female farmer
friendly
technology.
Market
Facilities.
Training and
capacity
building.
Responsibilities
of Central
Government.
Responsibilities
of State
Government.
5
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

(3) The offices of the authority set up in consultation with the State
Government shall ensure that the land rights and water rights of the female farmers
are institutionalized within the state with suitable amendments to the laws and/or
Gazette notification.
15. For implementing different provisions and schemes of this Act, the local
Authorities such as the Panchayati Raj Institutions in rural areas and Urban local
bodies in urban areas shall be responsible for discharging such duties or
responsibilities as may be assigned by notification to them by the concerned State
Government.
16. (1) Each State Government shall set up a Female Farmers’
Entitlement Board at the State level to advice the State Government in
implementation and monitoring of the Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of a practicing female farmer as its
Chairperson and two other members dealing with or experienced in technology,
credit, inputs and marketing.
(3) The tenure of the Board members shall be such as prescribed.
(4) The Board shall follow such procedure in regulating its proceedings as
may be prescribed.
17. (1) For ensuring transparency in functioning of this Act and
accountability of the functionaries, every State Government shall set up a
District Vigilance Committee in every district.
(2) The Composition of the Vigilance Committee shall be such as may
be prescribed.
(3) The Vigilance Committees shall look into effective implementation of all
the provisions of the Act at the district level.
18. For expeditious and effective redressal of grievances of female
farmers, each State Government shall set up effective institutional mechanism
at the taluka or tehsil or block level and an appellate mechanism at the
District level in such manner, as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER VIII
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURES
19. Whoever fails to comply with provisions of this Act, rules or guidelines
made under this Act shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than six months but which may extend to one year and with fine, or with
both.
20. (1) Any person aggrieved by violation of any provision of this Act, rules
or guidelines made under this Act may file a complaint, within ninety days from
the date of such violation, to a Court not inferior to that of a Judicial Magistrate
of the first class or a Metropolitan Magistrate:
Provided that the Court may entertain any complaint after the expiry of the
said period of ninety days if it is satisfied that the complainant was prevented by
sufficient cause from filing the complaint within time.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), person means—
Penalty for
non-
compliance
of
provisions
of this Act.
Cognizance
of offences.
Female
Farmers,
Entitlement
Board.
Responsibilities
of local
authorities.
Redressal of
grievances.
District
Vigilance
Committees.
6
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

(a) any female farmer who is affected;
(b) husband or representative of the female farmer who is affected;
(c) any association of farmers (whether incorporated or not), if it is affected
or on behalf of an affected female farmer;
(d) any local authority within whose local limits the affected female farmer
or association of persons or farmers live.
21. No prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any person
for anything done or intended to be done in good faith.
CHAPTER IX
MISCELLANEOUS
22. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
23. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force but subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, issue
directions in writing to any person, officer or any authority in order to give effect to
the provisions of this Act and such person, officer or authority shall be bound to
comply with such directions.
24. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if the State Government,
after consultation with, or on the recommendation of, the local body or authority, is
of opinion that certain provision or provisions of this Act need not apply to certain
areas of the State, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, restrict the application
of such provision of this Act to such area or areas as may be declared therein and
thereupon such provisions of this Act shall not apply to such area or areas.
25. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act to remove the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two
years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament.
26. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2)  In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) issuance of Female Farmer Certificate under section 3;
(b) facilitating financial support for female farmers under section 8;
(c) utilization of Central Agricultural Development Fund for Female Farmers
(CADFFF) under section 9;
(d) functions and proceedings of the Female Farmers’ Entitlement Board
under sub-section (4) of section 16;
(e) composition of District Vigilance Committee in every district under
section 17;
Protection of
actions taken
in good faith.
Power to
give
directions.
Overriding
effect.
Power of State
Government to
restrict the
application of
the Act to
certain areas.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
7
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

(f) institutional mechanisms for expeditious and effective redressal of
grievances of female farmers under section 18.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
8
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
With a gradual decline in the size of farm holdings, small and marginal
farmer families are in need of multiple sources of income to come out of the
poverty trap. Males in the families in rural area belonging to poor families
increasingly tend to go to towns and cities seeking work and income earning
opportunities. Consequently, there is an increasing feminization of agriculture.
While female farmers are extremely hard working and are also conversant with
sustainable agriculture practices, they suffer from several handicaps such as title to
land, and access to credit, inputs, insurance, technology and market. As early as
1995, the Fourth World Conference on Female held in Beijing urged developing
countries to pay attention to the gender specific needs of female farmers. Legal
entitlements to food can be implemented only by improving the productivity,
profitability and sustainability of small farm holdings, since small and marginal
farmers produce nearly fifty per cent of the foodgrains in the country, as well as
milk and a wide variety of vegetables and fruits. In order to safeguard national
food security, and to strengthen the livelihood security of rural female, a majority
of whom are engaged in crop and animal husbandry, fisheries, agro-forestry and
agro-processing, the Bill is being proposed. It is necessary to implement the
aforesaid decisions under article 253 of the Constitution in so far as they relate to
the female farmers’ entitlements.
Hence, this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;        RAMA DEVI
October 31, 2019.
9

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 9 of the Bill provides for Establishment of a Central Agricultural
Development Fund for Female Farmers. It also provides for appointment of an
appropriate Authority to administer the Fund at Central, State and District level.
Clause 11 empowers the appropriate Authority to create and facilitate market
facilities for female farmers. Clause 12 provides for organising training and
capacity building programmes for female farmers. Clause 16 provides that State
Governments shall set up Female Farmers’ Entitlement Board at State level.
It also provides for appointment of a practicing female farmer as its chairperson.
Clause 17 provides for setting up of District Vigilance Committee. Clause 18
provides for setting institutional mechanisms at taluka or tehsil level for redressal
of grievances. The expenditure relating to States shall be borne out of the
Consolidated funds of the State Government concerned.  However, the expenditure
relating to union territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore
per annum would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is also
likely to involve.
10

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Authority to make guidelines with the
previous approval of the Central Government by notification in the Official
Gazette. Clause 26 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the matters in respect of which rules, guidelines
may be made or framed relate to matters of procedure or administrative detail and
it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself, the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
11

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the gender specific needs of female farmers, to protect their
legitimate needs and entitlements and to empower them with rights over
agricultural  land, water resources and other related right and for other
functions relating thereto and for matters connected therewith.
———
(Shrimati Rama Devi, M.P.)