8ill Ne. '" of I,,, 
THE INDIAN STATISTICAL INSTITUTE 
BILL, 19I6 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoB: SABHA) 

:u of 1160. 
BID No. " of 1956. 
THE INDIAN STATISTICAL INSTITUTE BILL, 1956 
II 
BILL 
to decla1'e the institution known as the Indian Statistical Institute 
in Calcutta to be an institution of national imp01'tance and to 
p1'ovide f01' certain matte1'S connected the1'ewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Repub-
lic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Statistical Institute Short title 
and COID-
Act, 1956. mCDCaDCIlt. 
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Gov-
10 
ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Definitions. 
(a) "bye-law" includes any rule or regulation (by whatever 
name called) which the Institute is competent to make in the 
exercise of the powers conferred on it under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860; 
(b) "Institute" means the Indian Statistical Institute regis-
tered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, declared to be 
of national importance under section 3; 
J$ (c) "memorandum" means the memorandum of association 
of the Institute filed with the Registrar of Joint-stock Companies 
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860. 
I. Whereas the objectS of the. institution knows as the Indian Dec:Iai-atioD . 
Statistical Institute in Calcutta are such as to make it an institution s~!tl:rm 
ao of national importance, it is hereby declared that the Indian Statts- Institute .. 
tical Institute is au institution of national importance. -:f:::~~~ 
importlDc:O. 

Pa,mcntto 
the institute 
Audit. 
1 
4. For the purpose of enabling the Institute to discharge its 
functions efficiently the Central Government may, after due appro-
priation made by Parliament by law in this behaU, pay to thl'! 
Institute in each financial year such sums of money as that Govern-
ment considers necessary by way of grant, loan or otherwise. 
5. (1) The accounts of the Institute shall be audited by auditors 
duly qualified to act as auditors of companies under the Companies 
Act, 1956, and the auditors shall be appointed by the Institute with 
the previous approval of the Central Government. 
5 
(2) Every auditor shall, in the performance of his duties. have 10 
at all reasonable times access to the books, accOunts and other docu-
merits of the Institute. 
(3) The auditors shall submit their report to the Institute and 
forward a copy thereof to the Central Government. , ,.,.'( 
.6. Notwithstanding anything ,contained in the Societies Registra- IS 
1 .f 1956. 
tion Act" 1860, or in the memorandum or bye-laws of the Institute, 21 of 1860. 
the Institute shall not, except with the previous approval of the 
Central Government,-., 
-"t,· (<<) alter, extend or abridge the purpose or purposes for 
1IfJrich it has been established or for which it is being used im- 20 
'iiediately before the commencement of this Act or amalgamate 
either wholly or partially with any other institution or society; 
or 
(b) alter or amend in any manner the memorandum or bye-
laws of the Institute; or 25 
(c) sell or otherwise dispose of any property acquired by 
the Institute with money provided by Government: 
Provided that no such approval shall be necessary in the 
case of ahy such movable property or class of movable property 
as may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf by 30 
general or special order; or 
(d) be dissolved. 
. l 
Ccmstitutim '1. (1) The Central Government may constitute one or more com-
of commit- mittees as and when it considers necessary consisting of such number 
C::i Go- of persons as it thinks fit to be appointed by that Government and 3S 
VemmeDt assign to such committee or committees all or any of the following 
==_ duties, namely:-
mel of wort 
by the Inlti-
bite, etc. (II) the preparation and submission to the Central Govern-
ment, before the commencement of each financial year, of state-
ments skowing programmes of work to be undertaken by the 40 

A 
Institute during that year for which the Central Government 
may provide funds, as' well as financial estimates in respect of 
such work; 
(b) the settlement on broad lines of the pro,rammeofwork 
~ to be undertaken by the Institute and the evaluation of 'the work 
done by the Institute; 
(c) the review and inspection of the work done by the 
institute and the progress made by it, including the inspection of 
its assets and tb.e submission of reports thereon in such manner 
10 as the Central Government may direct. 
(2) The Institute shall be bound to afford all necessary facili-
ties to any committee constituted under sub-section (1) for the 
purpose of enabling it to carry out its duties. 
/', 
8. (1) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that it ia Dinc:deu 
15 necessary so to do in the public interest, issue, for reasons to be re- ~~ Gov-
corded, such directions as it thinks fit to the Institute, and such emmeDt. 
directions may include directions requiring the Institute-
(a) to amend the memorandum or to make or amend any 
bye-law within such period as may be specified in the direction; 
20 (b) to appoint one or more persons nominated in this behalf 
by the Central Government on the governing body or any other 
authority of the Institute_ 
(2) In the discharge of its functions the Institute shall be 
bound to carry out the directions issued under this section. 
as (3) Any directions issued under this section shall have effect, 
notWithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being 
in force or in the memorandum or bye-laws of the Institute. 
9. -If inconsequence of the state of affairs disclosed in any report Power of 
made under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 7, the Central Central Gov-
30 Government thinks it necessary so to do, it may, after giving an =~ 
opportunity to the Institute to be heard in the matter, by order, time of 
appoint any person to exercise, with respect to the whole or any part conuol. 
of the Institute, such functions of control as may be provided by the • 
order, and so long as an order made under this section is in force with 
35 respect to the Institute or any part thereof, the Institute or part 
shall be carried on in accordance with the directions given by the 
person so appointed ip accordance with the provisions of the order, 
and any person having any functions of management in relation to 
the Institute or part shall comply with any such directions. 

···:yt, 
) .. STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Indian Statistical Institute in Calcutta carries out research 
~ theore,tical and applied statistics and provides facilities for profe&-
Sionaftraining at post-graduate level. Since the commencement of 
the First Five Year Plan, there has been a great expansion in the 
activities of the lnatitute which now include inter alia-
(1) the work of designing the periodical rounds of National 
Sample Survey, processing and tabulation of the data and their 
subsequent analysis; 
(2) the maintenance of an Operational Research Unit on 
Planning and Statistical Quality Control Units at Bangalore, 
Bombay and Calcutta; 
(3) the training of satistlcians deputed by the Central and 
State Governments; 
(4) the maintenance of two new units for biometric and 
psychometric researches; and 
(5) the running of an International Statistical Education 
Centre. 
In view of the growing importance of the Institute in "the context 
of the Five Year Plan, it is considered necessary that the Institute 
ahouldbe declared to be an institution of national importance under 
Entry 64.in list I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. The 
Bill makes such a declaration and further provides for the requisite 
financW assistance to be given to the Institute and for suitable powen 
of control being exercised. 
A. C. GUHA. 
NEW Da..m:; 
The 17th November, 1956. 

The Bill contemplates the declaration of the Indian Statistical 
Institute, Calcutta, as an institution of national importance. Finances 
required by the Institute for ~ discharge of its functions shall be 
payable by the Central Government In the shape of grants, loans or 
otherwise each year. At this stage, it is not possible to frame an 
accurate estimate of the funds needed by the Institute for its various 
activities; but, since the development of the Institute will be accord-
ing to the programme approved by the Government, payment of 
funds will be in accordance with the proposals accepted by the Gov-
ermnent ot India and will also depend upon the quantum t£ !tpeQific 
work entrusied by GoV'ernmst to the Institute each year. 
2. The fol1owing budget provision has been made under Demand 
No. "3S-Miscellaneous Departments and other Expenditure under 
the Ministry of Finance" for the Institute during the year 1956-57: 
(1) Recurring . Rs. 17,39,000 
(il) RecurriDs . Rs. 49,OI,~ NSS work.. 
(Ui) Non-recurring Rs. 30,c0,000 
3. Funds to be made available in the subsequent years will vary 
and will be determined from time to time. 
4. All moneys placed at the disposal of the Institute wnl consti-
tute the Fund of the Institute. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to declare the institution known as the Indian Statistical Insti-
tute in Calcutta to be an institution of national importance and 
to provide for certain matters connected therewith. 
,The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of article 
I 17 of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok 
Sabha the introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
Shri A.C. Gupta, Minister of 
Revenue and Defence Expenditure) 
GIPD-LS I-dB .. LS -Z2-II-S6--1770 