ee

AS INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA

10 JUL 1४५७

Bill ४०, 76 ० 1998

THE ABOLITION OF CHILD LABOUR IN HAZARDOUS
EMPLOYMENT BILL, 1998
By
‘Suri Susu Kumar Suinpe, M.P.
A
BILL

| for the abolition of child labour in hazardous employment and for matters
connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
॥४:--

1. (7) This Act may be called the Abolition of Child Labour in Hazardous Emploment
1998.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force immediately.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government" means the Central Government or a State
Government, as the case may be;
(b) "child" means a person who has not completed his fifteenth years of age;
(०) "employer" means the person who engages a child in hazardous job or

employment or who has the ultimate control over the affairs of an establishment
where work hazardous in nature is carried out;

Shorttitle,

extent and

‘commence-
ment.


Abolition of
child labour.

Punishment in
case of not
registering of
cases,

Publication of
list of

Act to bein
addition to and
notin
derogation of
any other law.
Power to make
rules.

2

(४) "hazardous employment" means an employment or a job or ००००
an enterprise or an establishment or any place where the worker is exposed
to life or such exposure which results in accident, chronic diseases, grievous
depravity or degeneration of life including immoral or criminal acts and incl
any other such establishments as specified in the Child Labour (Prohibition
Regulation) Act, 1986.

3. Child labour in any form in a hazardous employment is hereby abolished.

4. Whoever engages a child in any hazardous employment shall be punished
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years or with fine which s}
not be less than rupees twenty five thousand:

Provided that if such child—
(७) isa girl child; or
(6) is a bonded child; or
(c) is engaged—
(0) in jobs involving any moral turpitude;
(it) in jobs having direct impact on the morality of the child; or
(iii) in flesh trade.

such employer shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
than five years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but whi
may extend to rupees one lakh in case of an employer in flesh trade.

5. If any police officer responsible for registering cases for violation of provisions
this Act, refuses to register a case or otherwise aids or abets the commission of an o
under this Act, he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
than two years and with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees,

6. The appropriate Government shall publish a list of hazardous employments withit
its jurisdiction immediately.

7. The provisions of this Act, or the rules made thereunder shall be in addition
and not in derogation of any other law for the time being in force or any rules, order or any
instructions issued thereunder, enacted for the prohibition and regulation of child labour.

8. (4) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, m
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid,
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for:
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or.
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such

modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule. 4


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Article 24 of the Constitution prohibits the employment of children below 14 years of

any factory or mine or engaged in any other hazardous employment. Every child
aright against exploitation. The very fact that the child is kept away from school and
made to work for earning bread itself speaks that the child is being exploited. In a
fare State like ours, it is the duty of the Government to provide education to the
lildren and ensure that they are not exploited in any manner.

Yet the growing population of the country, a high percentage of which, over 35 per cent
continues to live below the poverty line explains the inevitability of huge work force com-
ng of children. The children are sent to work by the parents for earning the livelihood.
‘most of the cases the children are forced to work in jobs and employment which are
zardous in nature. Despite the constitutional provisions prohibiting employment of
hildren in hazardous jobs, millions of children continues to work in fireworks and match
es, glass and bangle factories and carpet factories and mines, etc.

It is a matter of pity that children are forced to beg. by their parents and other persons.
dren are engaged in immoral and illegal activities. Several children are engaged as

ers of drugs by smugglers and others. Reports of minor girls finding their way into
h trade are rampant.

neffort was made in the year 1986 to prohibit and regulate employment of children in
uardous jobs. However, "hazardous employment” has not been defined till date. An
mpt has been made to define hazardous employment as an employment which is
ardous not only physical in nature but also a threat to mental character of children,

The Act in the year 1986 has failed to provide any deterrent punishment for employ-
ant of children in hazardous jobs and as such the number of child workers in various
has continued to increase during the last ten years.

erefore, it is proposed to make stringent provision not only for employment of
in hazardous jobs but also in illegal and immoral activities.

6 Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

SUSHIL KUMAR SHINDE


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for |
the provisions of this Bill. Since the matters for which the rules will be made are
of detail only, the delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA.

A
BILL

to provide for the abolition of child labour in hazardous employment and for mi
connected therewith.

(Shri Sushil Kumar Shinde, M.P) +

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1075LS—02.07-1998 |