As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

: : | ७ 9 ner 1999 -

Bill No. 76_of 1999
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999
By
‘Suri Kiri Somarya, M.P.
A i 2
BILL
further to amend the Consittation of India.

it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
This Act may be cailed the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1999.

In article 58 of the Constitution, in clause (1), in sub-clause (a), for the word
the words “natural born citizen" shall be substituted." —

article 66 of the Constitution, in clause (3), in sub-clause (a), for the word
the words "naturai born citizen" shall be substituted.

4, In article 75 of the Constitution, in clause (1), the following proviso shall be added
id, namely:—

ovided that no person shall be eligible to hold the office of the Prime Minister
s he is a natural born citizen of India."

Short title.

Amendment of
article 58.

Amendment of
article 66.

Amendment of
article 75.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The ongoing process of globalisation of the country's economy ‘has enable
global multinational corporations to establish a powerful presence in India. Some of
corporations have annual turnover which is almost one half of India's Gross Na
Product (GNP). Given the enormous role that money has come to play in the politic
of the country, there will be temptations for these corporations to use the power of tt
money to influence political developments in India,

At the same time foreign print media has begun to make inroads into our co un
Along with western electronic media, it has launched a cultural offensive with a vi
influence the thinking of Indian people.

These developments are fraught with grave consequences for India's 50%
Sooner or later, these foreign economic and cultural interests can be expected t
efforts to influence India's decision makers to formulate policies which may not
national interest.

India's citizenship laws enable foreign born persons to acquire Indian citizensh
The Constitution of India enables any Indian citizen ‘o be the President, the Vice Preside
and the Prime Minister, unless he is otherwise debarred. In the changing global 50९
it will not te beyond the capacity of foreign interests to manipulate a situation to projec
a person who is not a natural born citizen of the country and whose patriotism may be if

doubt.

‘The posts of the President, the Vice President and the Prime Minister are not me
sensitive posts, They hold in their hands decision-making powers which can take th
country to wars or make compromises on the nation's security. Any person whose patriotisn
is untested should not be trusted with the fate of one sixth of humanity. That is why, in the

United States for instance, only a natural born citizen is eligible to be elected as th
President, 2

This Bill seeks to amend the Constitution to make only natural born citizens of
India eligible to be the President, the Vice President and the Prime Minister,

Hence this Bill,

New Devt;  KIRIT SOMAIY)
October 25, 1999


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * *
(J)No Person shall be eligible for election as President unless he— Qualifications
5 ee A ‘for election as
(a) is a citizen of India; President,
@) a ie a * % ‘Election of
Vice President,

3)No Person shall be eligible for election as Vice-President unless he—
(a) is a citizen of India;

* क्र * *

75. (1) The.Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President and the other Other Provi-

shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister, no Min-
is
* * Ey * :

क्र * * कर


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India

a
(Shri Kirit Somaiya, M.P,) ©

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1690LS—11.11.1999,