Zot 1974.

wn

10

15

7 हु हे AS INTRODUCED IN LOK 849त6 ON

AD

Bill No. 76 of 1991

THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1991
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-second Year of the Republic
of India as follows: — i

1. (1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 1991.

(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 2nd day of
May. 1991.

2. Im section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (herein-
after referred to as the Code of Criminal Procedure),—

(@ in sub-section (1), to clause (b), the following proviso shall
be added, namely:—

‘Provided that where the aleged offence was committed by
a person referred to in clause (७) during the period while a Pro-
clamation issued under clause (1) of article 350 of the
Constitution was in force in a State, clause (b) will apply as it
for the expression “State Government” occurring there, the
expression “Central Government” were substituted’;

Short

title

and com:

mence-
ment.

Amend.
meat of
section
197,


Repeal
and
saving.

Ord, 4
of 1991,

2

(०) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be
. dnserted, namely:x— |, ,

यु “(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section

| (3), no court shall take cognizance of any offence, alleged to

। have been committed by any member of the Forces charged 5
with the maintenance of public order in a State while acting
or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty during
the period while a Proclamation issued under clause (1) of
article 356 of the Constitution was in force therein, except with
the previous sanction of the Central Government.”. 10

3. (1) The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance,
1991 is hereby repealed.

(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken
under the Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended by the said Ordinance,
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the Code of Criminal 15
Procedure, as amended by this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 provides for
the previous sanction of the Central Government or, as the case may be,
the State Government before a court took cognizance of an offence
alleged to have been committed by any public servant including a Judge,
Magistrate and member of the Forces while acting in the discharge of
official duty.

2. With a view to providing more adequate safeguards and protec-
tion to public servants employed in connection with the affairs of a
State against frivolous or vexatious prosecution for acts done in this
discharge of official duty during the period when a Proclamation issued
under article 356 of the Constitution was in force in that State, it was
considered necessary to provide for the previous sanction of the Central
Government instead of the sanction of the State Government.

3. In view of the above, an Ordinance was promulgated on the
und May, 1991 to amend section 197 of the said Code.

4. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance.

New DELHI; 8. 8. CHAVAN.
The 20th July, 1991. .


Prosecu-
tion ०
Juages

public

servants,

ANNEXURE
Exrracr rom THE Cove or Proceoure, 19.
(2 of 1974) “,

* * * * *

197. (1) When any person who is or was a Judge or Magistrate or a
public servant not removable from his office save by or with the sanction
०६ the Government is accused of any offence alleged to have been
committed by him while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of
his official duty, no Court shall take cognizance of such offence except
with the previous sanction—

(a) in the case of a persin who is employed or, as the case may
be, was at the time of commission of the alleged offence employ-.
ed, in connection with the affairs of the Union, of the Central
Government;

(०) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case may
be, was at the time of commission of the alleged offence employ-
ed, in connection with the affairs of a State, of the State Gov-
ernment.

. a” * . * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

(Shri S. 8. Chayvan,
Minister of Home Affairs)