of 1950. 
As INTRODVCED IN LolC SABHA ON 
, , JUN '961 
DiU NO.7' of 1,,7 
THE ANDHRA PRADESH AND MYSORE (TRANSFER 
OF TERRITORY) BILL, 1967 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the transfer of certain territory from the State 'of. 
MY80re to the State of AndhrCl Pradesh and fOT matters con.-
nected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Andhra Pradesh and Mysore Short 
(Transfer of Territory) Act, 1967. title. 
5 Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed day" means the 1st day of October, 1967; 
(b) "assembly constituency", "council constituency" and 
"parliamentary constituency" have the same meanings 88 in the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950; 
Detlni. 
tiona. 

Transfer 
of terri-
tory 
from 
Mysore 
to 
Andhra 
Pradesh. 
Amend-
ment of 
'"?irst 
Schedule 
to the 
Constitu_ 
tion. 
Extent of 
parlia-
mentary 
and 
assembly 
constitu-
encies. 
2 
(c) "sitting member", in relation to either House of Parlia-
ment or of the Legislature of a State, means a person who, im-
. ,Ulediate!y be'fore the appointed day, is a member of that House; 
•• > .. ' 
, (d) "transferred territory" means the territory specified in 
the Schedule and transferred from the State of Mysore to the S 
State of Andhra Pradesh by ~ection 3. 
3. (1) As from the appointed day, there shall be added to the 
State of Andhra Pradesh the territory specified in the Schedule 
which shall thereupon cease to form part of the State of Mysore. 
(2) The transferred territory shall be included in, and form part 10 
of, the Hindupur taluk of Anantapur district in the State of Andhra 
Pradesh. 
(3) )lothing in sub-section (2) shall be deemed to affect the 
power of the State Government to alter, after the appOinted day, 
the name, extent or boundaries of any district or taluk in the State IS 
of Andhra Pradesh. 
4. As from the appointed day, in the First Schedule to the Cone-
titution, under the heading "I. THE STATES",-
(a) for the entry against "1. Andhra Pradesh", the follow-
ing shall be substituted, namely: - 20 
"The territories specified in sub-sectidn (1) of st"ction 
3 of the Andhra State Act, 1953, sub-s~ion (1) of section 
3 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, the First Schedule 
to the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boun-
daries) Act, 1959, and the Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh 25 
and Mysore (Transfer of Territory) Act, 1967, but ex-
cluding the territories specified in the Second Schedule to 
the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) 
Act, 1959."; and 
(b) in the entry against "9. Mysore", after the words and 30 
figures "States Reorganisation Act, 1956", the words. brackets 
and figures "but excluding the territory specified in the Sche-
dule to the Andhra Pradesh and Mysore (Transfer of Territory) 
Act. 1967" shall be inserted. 
5. As from the appointed day, the transferred territory shall cease 3S 
to be part of Madhugiri parliamentary constituency and BagepaUi 
assembly constituency in the State of Mysore as delimited in Order 
No. 11 of the Delimitation Commission made under section 10 of the 
Delimitation Commission Act, 1962, and shall fonn part of Hindupur 61 of 1962. 
parliamentary constituency and Hindupur assembly constituency in 40 
the State of Andhra Pradesh as delimited in Order No.3 of theneli-
mitation Commission made under the said, eectieJl. 

3 
G. (1) The sitting members of the House of the People represent- P.rovision 
ing Hindupur parliamentary constituency in the State ,of Andhra ~ ~ 
Pradesh and Madhugid parliamentary /Constituency in the State 8lttlD~ 
of Mysore shall, notwithstanding the alteration in the ext~nt of ;e:arlr:. s those constituencies by virtue of the provisions of this Act, continue ment 
to be members of the House of the People. and 
Legisla. 
(2) The sitting members of the Legislative Assemblies of Andhra tive 
Pradesh and Mysore representing Hindupur assembly constituency ~sem. 
and Bagepalli assembly constituency respectively shall, notwith- bbes. 
10 standing the alteration in the extent of those constituencies Ly 
virtue of the provisions of this Act, continue to be members of the 
said Assemblies. 
7. (1) Any reference in the Delimitation of Council Constituen- Extent of 
cies (Andhra Pradesh) Order, 1957, to Anantapur district shall be CO~Cil 
IS ~construed as including the territory transferred to that district from :~es~u­
the State of Mysore. 
(2) Any reference in the Delimitation of Council Constituencies 
(Mysore) Order, 1951, to Kolar district shall be construed as exclud-
ing the territory transferred from that district to the State of 
20 Andhra Pradesh. 
8. Every sitting member of the Legislative Council of Andhra Sitting 
Pradesh or of Mysore representing a council constituency the ex- membe~s 
tent of which is altered by virtue of section 7 shall, as from the lOft .Leg1S-. DIve 
appomted day, be deemed to have been elected to the said Coun~il Councils. 
2S by that constituency as so altered. 
9. (1) As from the appointed day,- Extension 
(a) the jurisdiction of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh of juris-
shall extend to the transferred territory· and diction of , And:hra 
(b) the High Court of Mysore shall have no )urisdiction in ~adesh 
respect of the said territory. ~~. 
(2) If, immediately before the appointed day, there is any pro-
ceeding relatable to the transferred terrltorypending in the High 
Court of Mysore, then, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (1), such proceeding shall be heard and disposed of by that 
3S High Court. 
(3) Any order made by the High Court of Mysore in any pro-
ceeding with respect to which that High Court exercises jurisdic-
tion by virtue of sub-section (2) shall, for all purposes, have effect, 
not only as an order of the High Court of Mysore but also as an 
40 order made by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh. 

Appro-
priation of 
moneys 
forexpen_ 
diture in 
transfer-
red terri-
tory 
under 
eXiltinr 
Appro_ 
priation 
Acta. 
Assets 
and 
nabill-
tl •. 
Mate 
Financial 
Corpora-
tiona 
and 
State 
Electri. 
city 
Boarda. 
4 
(4) For the purposes of this section,-
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in the High 
Court of Mysore until that Court has disposed of all issues bet-
ween the parties, including any issues with respect to the taxa~ 
tion of the costs of the proceedings and shall include appeals, 5 
applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applica-
tions for review, petitions for revision and petitions for writs; 
(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as in-
cluding references to a Judge or division court thereof, and re-
ferences to an order made by a court or a Judge shall be con- 10 
strued as including references to a sentence, judgment or de-
cree passed or made by that court or Judge. 
10. As from the appointed day, any Act passed by the Legisla-
ture of Andhra Pradesh before that day for the appropriation of 
any money out of the Consolidated Fund of the State to meet any IS 
expenditure in respect of any part of the financial year 1967-68 
shall have effect also in relation to the transferred territory, and it 
shall be lawful for the State Government to spend any amount for 
that territory out of the alJ'lount authorised by such Act to be 
expended for any services in that State. ao 
11. (1) All land and all stores, articles and other goods in the 
transferred territory belonging to the State of Mysore shall, as 
from the appointed day, psss to the State of Andhra Pradesh. 
E:cplanation.-In this sub-section, the expression Uland" includes 
immovable property of every kind and any rights in or over such 25 
property and the expression "goods" does not include coins, bank 
notes and currency notes. 
(2) All rights, liabilities and obligations, whether arising out of 
a contract or otherwise, of the State of Mysore in relation to the 
transferred territory shall, as from the a'ppointed day, be the rights, 30 
lia·bilities and obligations, respectively, of the State of Andhra 
Pradesh. 
12. As from the appointed day,-
(a) the Financial Corporations constituted under the State 83 of 
Financial Corporations Act, 1951, for the States of Mysore and 3S 1951 
Andhra Pradesh, and 

54 of 1948. 
,'C,I 
(b) the State Electricity Boards constituted under the 
Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, for the said States, 
shall be deemed to have been constituted for those States with their 
areas as altered by the provisions of section 3. 
S 13. All laws which, immediately before the appointed day, ex- Extension 
tend to, or are in force in, the Hindupur taluk of Anantapur of laws. 
district in the State of Andhra Pradesh but do not extend to, or 
are not in force, in the transferred territory, shall, as from that 
day, extend to, or as the case may be, come into force in, the trans-
10 ferred territory; and all laws which, immediately before the 
appointed day, are in force in the transferred territory but not in 
the Hindupur taluk of Anantapur district in the State of Andhra 
Pradesh shall, on that day, cease to be in force in the transferred 
territory, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before 
IS that day. 
Explanatwn.-In this section, "Law" includes any enactment, or-
dinance, regulation, order, bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or 
other instrument having the force of law in the whole or in any 
part of the State of Andhra Pradesh or Mysore. 
20 It. Any court, tribunal or authority required or empowered to Power to 
enforce any law extended to the transferred territory by sect~, 13 conatrue 
may, for the p~e of faCilitatJng-i~ appUcation inrelatlon to' ~ 1 .... 
transferred territory, construe thel8W In su<:h mannCtl', withOut 
a1!ecting the Substance, as may' be~ry ~ proper in reprd to 
~S the matter before the court, tribuna1' or authority. 
15. Whf't'e, immediately before the appointed day. the State of Leta! 
Mysore is a party to any legal proceedings with respect to any pc-oceed .. 
property, rights or liabilities transferred to the State of Andhra inp. 
Pradesh under this Act, the State of Andhra Pradesh shall be deem-
30 ed to be substituted for the State of Mysore as a party to those pro-
ceedings, or added as a party thereto, as the case may be, and the 
proceedings may contmue Kccordingly. 
16. (1) Every proceeding pending immediately before the ap- Transfer 
pointed day before any court (other than a High Court), tribunal, of pend-
35 authority or officer in any area which on that day falls within the fill pro-
State of Mysore shall, if it is a proceeding relating exclusively to ceedinp. 
any part of the transferred territory, stand transferred to the cor-
responding court, tribunal, authority or officer in the State of Andhra 
Pradesh. 
40 (2) If any question arises as to whether any proceeding should 
stand transferred under sub-section (1), it shall be referred to the 

6 
:High Court of Mysore and the decision of that High Court shail be 
final. 
(3) In this section,-
(a) "proceeding" includes any suit, case or appeal, and 
(b) "corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer" in S 
the State of Andhra Pradesh means-
(i) the court, tribunal, authority or officer in which, or 
before whom, the proceeding would have lain if the pro-
ceeding had been instituted after the appointed day, or 
(ii) in case of doubt, such court, tribunal, authority or 10 
officer in that State as may be determined after the appoint-
ed day by the Government of Andhra Pradesh, or before 
the appointed day by the Government of Mysore, to be the 
corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer. 
Effect of 11. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding IS 
provisions anyt.hing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law. 
inconsis-
tent with 
other 
lawa. 
Power to 
remove 
difficul-
ties. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
18. 1£ any difficulty arises in giving effect to the prOVISions of 
this Act (including any difficulty in relation to the transition under 
section 13 from one law to another law), the President may by order 
do anything not inconsistent with any such provision which appears 20 
to him to be necessary for the purpose of removing the difficulty. 
19. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Offi-
cial Gazette, make rules to give effect to the prOVisions of this 
Act. 
. (2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as 2S 
may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it 
is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be com-
prised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the 
expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session imme-
diately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in 30 
the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, 
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be, so however that any such modi-
fication or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule. 3S 

THE SCHEDULE 
[See sections 2(d) and 3] 
TERRITORY TRANSFERRED FROM THE STATE OF MYSORE TO THE STATE OF 
ANDIIRA PRADESH. 
S Area comprised in survey number 19 of "Abakavaripalli" village 
of BagepaUi taluk in Kolar district, 
7 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
A part (Survey No. 19) of Abakavaripalli village (about 5 acres 
'in area) in Bagepalli tal uk of Kolar district of the State of Mysore 
forms an enclave in the Anantapur district of the State of Andhra 
Pradesh. This enclave was lost sight of when the exchange of 
such enclaves was effected by the Provinces and States (Absorption 
of Enclaves) Order, 1950, dated the 25th January, 1950 .. When the 
existence of the enclave came to notice, the matter was discussed 
at a meeting of the Southern Zonal Council and the Governments 
of Mysore and Andhra Pradesh agreed that on grounds of adminis-
trative convenience, it should be transferred from the State of 
Mysore to the State of Andhra Pradesh. The Bill seeks to give effect 
to this transfer. 
2. The Bill also makes the necessary supplemental, incidental and 
consequential provisions relating to representation in Parliament and 
the concerned Stnw Legislatures, transfer of jurisdiction to the 
High Court of Andhra Pradesh, authorisation of expenditure, appor-
tionment of assets and liabilities, and certain other matters. 
3. As required by the proviso to article 3 of the Constitution, this 
Bill was referred by the President to the Legislatures of the States 
of Andhra Pradesh and Mysore and has been considered by those 
State Legislatures. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 10th May, 1967. 
Y. B. CHAVAN. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 3 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F.3/2/62-SR(R), dated the 17th May, 1967 
from Shri Y. B. Chavan, Minister of Home Affairs to the Secretary, 
Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Bill to provide for the transfer of certain territory from the State 
of Mysore to the State of Andhra Pradesh and for matters connected 
therewith, recommends the introduction of the Bill in the Lok Sabha 
under proviso to article 3 of the Constitution. 
8 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules generally to give effect to the provisions of the Bill when 
enacted. The rules will be confined to matters of procedure and 
other matters of minor detail relating to the enforcement of the 
provisions regarding the transfer of territory. The delegation of 
legislative power is thus of a normal character. 

• 
Na.me 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
• '" '" • 
FIRST SCHEDULE 
[Articles 1 and 4] 
1. THE STATES 
• • 
Territories 
1. Andhra Pradesh .... The territories specified in sub-section (1) 
of section 3 of the Andhra State Act, 
1953, sub-section (1) of section 3 of the 
States Reorganisation Act, 1956, and the 
First Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh and 
Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 
1959, but excluding the territories speci-
fied in the Second Schedule to the last 
mentioned Act . 
• • '" '" • 
9. Mysore ............ The territories speci:fted in sub-section (1) 
'" • 
of section 7 of the States Reorganisation 
Act. 1956. 
• • • 
10 

LOK SABHA 
-
A 
BILL 
to rrovide for the transfer of cenain territory from the 
State 0 Mysore to the State of Andhra Pradesh and for 
matters connected therewith. 
(Shri Y. B. Chavan, 
Minister of H omt!lAfJairs) 