As tnTropucep In Lox SaBHa

3 DEC 20M

Bill No. 76 of 2004.
_

THE FOREST (CONSERVATION) AMENDMENT. BILL, 2004

By
Suu S.PY. Repoy, M.P.
है A
BILL
Further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.
Be itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-—

1, (/) This Act may be called the Forest (Conservation) Amendment Act, 2004. Short title,
(2) Itextends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. pcan

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
5 inthe Official Gazette, appoint.

2. After section कल Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, the following section shall be Insertion
inserted, namely:— of new
८ Section a
“IM. Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 2 and 3, when a forest Clearance for
land or any part thereof is required for any work relating or ancillary to mining, deforestation
10 Construction of roads to give connectivity to important places or construction of Hey हे
water tanks in rural areas or laying of pipelines for sewer/drinking water connections Sct
or erection of electric poles for transmission and distribution of electricity or 1 ying
telecommunication lines or any other developmental schemes, the clearance for the


2

deforestation may be given by the }
area falls in consultation with the Member of Parliament representing the area:

Provided that a list of ali such cases of deforestation cleared under the provi
of this section shall be furnished to the Union Ministry of Environment and Forests
information and record at the end of the year.” 7



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

construction of fencing, bridges and culverts, dams, waterholes, trench marks, boundary
marks, pipe-line or other like Purposes. But there is no provision in the Act to cover utility
services like construction of public roads, laying of sewer line, construction of water tanks,
construction of electric poles for transmission and distribution of electric supply and laying
telephone lines, etc. All such proposals have to be referred to the Central Government for
approval.

Under section 3 of the Act, the approval in such cases has to be accorded by the
Central Government on the advice of a Committee to be constituted for the purpose. This
causes undue delay in the clearance of projects coming from various parts of the country
which hampers the development of the region. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Act
and make a provision that the proposal for clearance of forest and for some specified utility
services car: be cleared by the District Collector concemed in consultation with the Member
of Parliament representing that area. This will facilitate quick implementation of development
Projects particularly in the backward regions,

Hence this Bill.

New Dewi; SPY. REDDY
August 24,2004,


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE ForEST (CONSERVATION) ACT, 1980,
* * . . . . .

2. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force in
a State, no State Government or other authority shall make, except with the prior approval of
the Central Government, any order directing—

(9 that any reserved forest (within the meaning of the expression “reserved
forest” in any law for the time being in force in that State) or any portion thereof, shall
Cease to be reserved;

(ii) that any forest land or any portion thereof may be used for any non-forest
purpose;

(iii) that any forest land or any portion thereof may be assigned by way of lease
or otherwise to any private person or to any authority, corporation, agency or any
other organisation not owned, managed or controlled by Government;

(iv) that any forest land or any portion thereof may be cleared of trees which
have grown naturally in that land or portion, for the purpose of using it for
reafforestation”;

Explanation—For the purpose of this section “non-forest purpose” means the
breaking up or clearing of any forest land or portion thereof for—

(a) the cultivation of tea, coffee, spices, rubber, palms, oil-bearing plants,
horticultural crops or medicinal plants;

(b) any purpose other than reafforestation;

but does not include any work relating to ancillary to conservation, development
and management of forests and wild life, namely, the establishment of check-posts,
fire lines, wireless communications and construction of fencing, bridges and culverts,
dams, waterholes, trench marks, boundary marks, pipe-lines o other like purposes,

3. The Central Government may constitute a Committee consisting of such number of
persons as it may deem fit to advise that Government with regard to—

(9 the grant of approval under section 2; and

(ii) any other matter connected with the conservation of forests which may be referred
to it by the Central Government.

* . . . . * «

98


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.

(Shri S.P.¥. Reddy, M.P.)

MGIPMRNO—2403LS—24.09.2004.