Short title and
commencement.
THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
A
BILL
further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 2005.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act.
2. In section 17 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (hereinafter referred to
as the principal Act),—
(i) after clause ( 6), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(6A) dealing in derivatives, and, with the approval of the Central
Board, in any other financial instrument.
Amendment of
section 17.
2 of 1934.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 76 of 2005

2
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, “derivative” means an instrument,
to be settled at a future date, whose value is derived from change in one or a combination
of more than one of the following underlyings, namely:—
(a) interest rate,
(b) price of securities of the Central Government or a State Government or
of such securities of a local authority as may be specified in this behalf by the
Central Government,
(c) price of foreign securities,
(d) foreign exchange rate,
(e) index of rates or prices,
(f) credit rating or credit index,
(g) price of gold or silver coins, or gold or silver bullion, or
(h) any other variable of similar nature;
(ii) after clause ( 12A), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(12AA) lending or borrowing of securities of the Central Government
or a State Government or of such securities of a local authority as may be
specified in this behalf by the Central Government or foreign securities;
(12AB) dealing in repo or reverse repo:
Provided that lending or borrowing of funds by way of repo or
reverse repo shall not be subject to any limitation contained in this
section.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause,—
(a) “repo” means an instrument for lending funds by purchasing
securities of the Central Government or a State Government or of such
securities of a local authority as may be specified in this behalf by the Central
Government or foreign securities, with an agreement to resell the said
securities on a mutually agreed future date at an agreed price which includes
interest for the funds lent;
(b) “reverse repo” means an instrument for borrowing funds by selling
securities of the Central Government or a State Government or of such
securities of a local authority as may be specified in this behalf by the Central
Government or foreign securities, with an agreement to repurchase the said
securities on a mutually agreed future date at an agreed price which includes
interest for the funds borrowed;”.
3. In section 42 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1),
(a) for the words, brackets and figure “three per cent. of the total of the
demand and time liabilities in India of such bank as shown in the return referred
to in sub-section (2)”, the words, brackets and figure “such per cent. of the total
of the demand and time liabilities in India of such bank as shown in the return
referred to in sub-section (2), as the Bank may from time to time, having regard
to the needs of securing the monetary stability in the country, notify in the Gazette
of India” shall be substituted;
(b) the proviso shall be omitted;
(ii) sub-sections (1AA) and (1B) shall be omitted.
Amendment of
section 42.

3
4. After Chapter III C of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be inserted,
namely:—
“CHAPTER IIID
REGULA TION OF TRANSACTIONS  IN DERIV ATIVES, MONEY  MARKET  INSTRUMENTS
OR SECURITIES , ETC.
45U. For the purposes of this Chapter,—
(a) “derivative” means an instrument, to be settled at a future date, whose
value is derived from change in interest rate, foreign exchange rate, credit rating
or credit index, price of securities (also called “underlying”), or a combination
of more than one of them and includes interest rate swaps, forward rate agreements,
foreign currency swaps, foreign currency-rupee swaps, foreign currency options,
foreign currency-rupee options or such other instruments as may be specified by
the Bank from time to time;
(b) “money market instruments” include call or notice money, term money,
repo, reverse repo, certificate of deposit, commercial usance bill, commercial
paper and such other debt instrument of original or initial maturity up to one year
as the Bank may specify from time to time;
(c) “repo” means an instrument for lending funds by purchasing securities
with an agreement to resell the securities on a mutually agreed future date at an
agreed price which includes interst for the funds lent;
(d) “reverse repo” means an instrument for borrowing funds by selling
securities with an agreement to repurchase the securities on a mutually agreed
future date at an agreed price which includes interest for the funds borrowed;
(e) “securities” means securities of the Central Government or a State
Government or such securities of a local authority as may be specified in this
behalf by the Central Government and, for the purposes of “repo” or “reverse
repo”, include corporate bonds and debentures.
45V . (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Securities Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1956 or any other law for the time being in force, transactions in
such derivatives, as may be specified by the Bank from time to time, shall be valid, if
at least one of the parties to the transaction is the Bank, a scheduled bank, or such other
agency falling under the regulatory purview of the Bank under the Act, the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949, the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999, or any other Act
or instrument having the force of law, as may be specified by the Bank from  time to
time.
(2) Transactions in such derivaties, as had been specified by the Bank from time
to time, shall be deemed always to have been valid, as if the provisions of sub-section
(1) were in force at all material times.
45W. (1) The Bank may, in public interest, or to regulate the financial system of
the country to its advantage, determine the policy relating to interest rates or interest
rate products and give directions in that behalf to all agencies or any of them, dealing
in securities, money market instruments, foreign exchange, derivatives, or other
instruments of like nature as the Bank may specify from time to time:
Provided that the directions issued under this sub-section shall not relate to the
procedure for execution or settlement of the trades in respect of the transactions
mentioned therein, on the Stock Exchanges recognised under section 4 of the Securities
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956.
(2) The Bank may, for the purpose of enabling it to regulate agencies referred to
in sub-section ( 1), call for any information, statement or other particulars from them,
or cause an inspection of such agencies to be made.
Insertion of new
Chapter III D.
Transactions in
derivatives.
Definitions.
Power to
regulate
transactions in
derivatives,
money market
instruments,
etc.
42 of 1956.
10 of 1949.
42 of 1999.
42 of 1956.

4
45X. It shall be the duty of every director or member or other body for the time
being vested with the management of the affairs of the agencies referred to in section
45W to comply with the directions given by the Bank and to submit the information or
statement or particulars called for under that section.”.
Duty to comply
with directions
and furnish
information.

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Financial sector reforms are marking steady progress in India. The Indian financial
markets now have more products, participants and better liquidity than before. For more
operational flexibility, the Reserve Bank of  India needs to have enabling powers to use a
larger variety of financial instruments than hitherto.
2. The volatility in the influx of foreign exchange and the market conditions in a fast
changing economy, can be expected to continue in future as the financial sector makes more
and more progress. To cope with any unforeseen eventualities in future, such as excess or
lack of liquidity in the banking system and for effective conduct of monetary policy, there is
a need to enable Reserve Bank of India to determine the Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) for
scheduled banks without any floor or ceiling. Globally, many Central Banking authorities
have such powers. Further, in the context of the conduct of monetary policy becoming more
market-based through progressive use of indirect instruments, the Reserve Bank of India
needs more flexibility to set Cash Reserve Ratio, which is one of the two statutory pre-
emptions in respect of the resources of banks.
3. Over-the-counter derivatives play a crucial role in reallocating and mitigating the
risks of corporates, banks and other financial institutions. The ambiguity regarding their
legal validity has inhibited the growth and stability of the market for such derivatives. It has
become essential to provide for clear legal validity of such contracts.
4. At present, under section 29A of  the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956,
the Central Government has delegated to the Reserve Bank of India, by a notification, the
powers exercisable by it under section 16 of that Act, for regulating the transactions in
money market and other instruments. Therefore, more effective regulation of the markets
for interest rate contracts, including Government securities and money-market instruments
as also derivatives, it is necessary to confer specific powers on the Reserve Bank of India,
under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, to lay down policy and to issue directions to
agencies operating in these contracts, securities and derivatives.
5.  It is, therefore, considered necessary to suitably amend the Reserve Bank of India
Act, 1934. The salient features of the Bill which seeks to amend the RBI Act are as follows:—
(a) define the expressions, ‘derivative’, ‘repo’ and ‘reverse repo’ in section 17
of the purposes of the business of  the Bank and differently in new Chapter IIID for the
purposes of  regulatory powers of  the Bank;
(b)  empower the Reserve Bank of  India to deal in derviatives, to lend or borrow
securities and to undertake repo or reverse repo;
(c) remove the lower floor and upper ceiling of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) and
to provide flexibility to RBI to specify CRR;
(d) remove ambiguity regarding the legal validity of derivatives;
(e) empower RBI to lay down policy and issue directions to any agency dealing
in various kinds of contracts in respect of Government securities, money-market
instruments, derivatives, etc., and to inspect such agencies.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; P. CHIDAMBARAM.
The 9th May, 2005.

6
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934
(2 OF 1934)
* * * * *
17. The Bank shall be authorised to carry on and transact the several kinds of business
hereinafter specified, namely:—
* * * * *
42. (1) Every bank included in the Second Schedule shall maintain with the Bank an
average daily balance the amount of which shall not be less than three per cent. of the total
of the demand and time liabilities in India of such bank as shown in the return referred to
in sub-section (2):
Provided that the Bank may, by notification in the Gazette of India, increase the said
rate to such higher rate as may be specified in the notification so however that the rate shall
not be more than twenty per cent. of the total of the demand and time liabilities.
Explanation.—For the purposes of  this section,—
(a) "average daily balance" shall mean the average of the balances held at the
close of business on each day of a fortnight;
(b) "fortnight" shall mean the period from Saturday to the second following
Friday, both days inclusive;
(c) "liabilities" shall not include—
(i) the paid-up capital or the reserves or any credit balance in the profit
and loss account of the Bank;
(ii) the amount of any loan taken from the Bank or from the Exim Bank or
from the Reconstruction Bank or from the National Housing Bank or from the
National Bank or from the Small Industries Bank;
(iii) in the case of a State co-operative bank, also any loan taken by such
bank from a State Government or from the National Co-operative Development
Corporation established under the National Co-operative Development
Corporation Act, 1962 and any deposit of money with such bank representing
the reserve fund or any part thereof maintained with it by any co-operative society
within its area of operation;
(iv) in the case of a State co-operative bank, which has granted an advance
against any balance maintained with it, such balance to the extent of the amount
out-standing in respect of such advance;
(v) in the case of a Regional Rural Bank, also any loan taken by such bank
from its Sponsor Bank;
(d) the aggregate of the "liabilities" of a scheduled bank which is not a State co-
operative bank, to,—
(i) the State Bank;
(ii) a subsidiary bank as defined in section 2 of the State Bank of India
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959;
(iii) a corresponding new bank constituted by section 3 of the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970;
Business which
the Bank may
transact.
Cash reserves
of scheduled
banks to be
kept with the
Bank.
38 of 1959.
26 of 1962.
5 of 1970.

7
(iiia) a corresponding new bank constituted by section 3 of the Banking
Comapnies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980;
(iv) a banking company as defined in clauses (c)  of section 5 of the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949;
(v) a co-operative bank; or
(vi) any other financial institution notified by the Central Government in
this behalf,
shall be reduced by the aggregate of the liabilities of all such banks and institutions to
the scheduled bank;
(e) the aggregate of the “libailities” of a scheduled bank which is a State Co-
operative Bank, to,—
(i) the State Bank;
(ii) a subsidiary bank as defined in section 2 of the State Bank of India
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959;
(iii) a corresponding new bank constituted by section 3 of the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970;
(iiia) a corresponding new bank constituted by section 3 of the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980;
(iv) a banking company as defined in clause (c) of  section 5 of the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949; or
(v) any other financial institution notified by the Central Government in
this behalf,
shall be reduced by the aggregate of the liabilities of all such banks and institutions to
the State co-operative banks.
* * * * *
(1AA) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (1A),
it shall not be necessary for any scheduled bank to maintain with the Bank any balance
which shall be more than twenty per cent. of the total of its demand and time liabilities
as shown in the return referred to in sub-section (2).
(1B) Where any scheduled bank maintains, in pursuance of a notification issued
under the proviso to sub-section (1) or under sub-section (1A), any balance with the
Bank the amount of which is not less than that required to be maintained by such
notification, the Bank may pay to the scheduled bank interest at such rate or rates as
may be determined by the Bank from time to time on the amount by which such balance
actually maintained is in excess of the balance which the scheduled bank would have
to maintain, if no such notification was issued:
Provided that no interest shall be payable on any such amount actually maintained
as is in excess of the balance required to be maintained by or under sub-section (1) or
under sub-section (1A):
Provided further that where the Bank does not, under sub-section (5), demand
the payment of the penalty imposed by sub-section (3), it may pay interest at such rate
or rates as may be determined by the Bank from time to time on the amount actually
maintained with it by the scheduled bank, notwithstanding that such amount is less
than the balance required to be maintained in pursuance of a notification issued under
the proviso to sub-section (1) or under sub-section (1A).
* * * * *
10 of 1949.
38 of 1959.
10 of 1949.
40 of 1980.
5 of 1970.
40 of 1980.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
 ————
(Shri P. Chidambaram, Minister of Finance)
MGIPMRND—1024LS(S3)—11-05-2005.