1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI P.P. CHAUDHARY, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)  Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 12 of the Constitution, after the words "or other Authorities", the words
"or Institution of Self Government" shall be inserted.
Bill No.  5 of  2016
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
article 12.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments passed by Parliament in 1992 introduced
local self-governance throughout the territory of India. The Constitution
(73rd Amendment) Act, 1992 and the Constitution (74th Amendment) Act, 1992 came into
force on 24 April, 1993 and 1 June, 1993, respectively.
These amendments added two new parts to the Constitution, namely:—
(i) Part IX titled "The Panchayats" adding articles 243 to 243O dealing with
Panchayats; and
(ii) Part IXA titled "The Municipalities" adding articles 243P to 243ZG dealing
with Municipality.
Hence fulfilling one of the Directive Principles of State Policy with respect to article 40,
that is, 'Organisation of Village Panchayats' thereby accomplishing the vision and intent of
the framers of our Constitution to ensure self government at the lowest organisational levels
of governance.
Articles 243G and 243W prescribe the powers, authorities and responsibilities, etc. of
Panchayats and Municipalities, respectively. The Eleventh and Twelfth Schedule to the
Constitution define the matters in respect of which schemes for economic development and
social justice are to be implemented by Panchayats with regard to article 243G and by
Municipalities with regard to article 243W, respectively. The Constitution, hence, deals with
Panchayats and Municipalities in a great detail.
The 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments substantially changed the Constitution
and the manner in which representation of the citizens, governance and devolution of powers
in the nation was to be conducted. However, while monumental in themselves, the
amendments failed to change the definition "the State" as mentioned in the Constitution.
Earlier, Panchayat and Municipality were classified under "local or other authorities"
under article 12, but after the 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments came into force, they
were established as "institution of Self Government" under the Constitution.
The definition of Panchayat and Municipality under articles 243 and 243P, respectively
establishes them with respective norms as 'institution (by whatever named called) of self
Government'.
Article 12 has been a part of the Constitution since the original document was framed
and was not amended by the 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments to bring it in line with
the changes made by the amendments.
In view of the above, the proposed amendment Bill seeks to include the Panchayats
and Municipalities within the definition of the 'State' under article 12 of the Constitution.
Hence, It has become expedient to introduce the words "or Institution of Self
Government" in article 12 of the Constitution.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; P.P. CHAUDHARY
November 13, 2015.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * *
12. In this part, unless the context otherwise requires, "The State" includes the
Government and Parliament of India and the Government and the Legislature of each of the
State and all local or other authorities within the territory of India are under the control of the
Government of India.
* * * *
3
Definition.

GMGIPMRND—2816LS(S-3)—22.02.2016.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri P.P . Chaudhary, M.P .)