1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
BY
SHRI ANANTKUMAR HEGDE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2009.
2. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution,—
(i) in List II—State List, entry 21 shall be omitted;
(ii) in List III—Concurrent List, after entry 17B, the following new entries shall
be inserted, namely:—
“17C. Fisheries.
17D. Protection of marine biodiversity.”.
Short title.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 76 of  2009
Amendment
of the Seventh
Schedule.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Fisheries constitute one of the important means of livelihood, especially for those
living in coastal regions. In coastal regions, the occupation of fishery besides being a
constant source of income of the people of the region, also support their daily meal
requirements. But in the present economic scenario, greed has overtaken this sector and
with the entry of trading institutions in the sector, the exploitation of fisheries is now going
on at an alarming rate. The number of fish available is on the decline. Fish are caught even
during breeding season. Some States have banned the operation of trawlers during breeding
season, but it is not uniform. Fisheries being in the State List, all the States have different
laws on the subject. And, at times these laws are made to cater to the interests of companies
operating large trawlers without keeping in mind the overall interests of fisheries. All this
may have a bearing not only on our marine resources but also on the right to livelihood of
small fishermen. Moreover, the technique employed by large trawlers is not sustainable for
maintaining a healthy breeding and catching ratio. It is high time that the country took
positive and concrete steps to protect its fisheries and marine resources. Therefore, the Bill
seeks to transfer the entry relating to fisheries from the State List to the Concurrent List.
Presently, a number of systems exist for the protection of marine resources and marine
environment, but they are not only complex and confusing but are also costly and do not
provide a strategic approach to address the issue.
Inserting a new entry in the concurrent list of the Seventh Schedule to our Constitution
for the protection of marine biodiversity will go a long way in introducing a new system of
marine planning as well as giving the issue the importance it deserves. It will also help
bringing about uniformity in legislation regarding the use of fisheries, marine space and the
interaction between its uses. Therefore, it is necessary that we have a separate entry for
protection of marine biodiversity in our Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ANANTKUMAR HEGDE
July 7, 2009.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
PART XXII
SCHEDULES
SEVENTH  SCHEDULE
LIST II
* * * * * * *
21. Fisheries.
* * * * * * *
LIST III
* * * * * * *
17B. Protection of wild animals and birds.
* * * * * * *
3

GMGIPMRND—3825LS(S5)—26-10-2009.
LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Anantkumar Hegde, M.P.)