Short title and 
commencement.
5
AS introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 76 of 2023
THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND 
CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN ANIMALS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
By
Dr.  Manoj Rajoria, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention and Control of Infectious and Contagious  Diseases in 
Animals  Act, 2009.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention and Control of Infectious and Contagious
Diseases in Animals (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2
5
10
2. After section 19 of the Prevention and Control of Infectious and Contagious Diseases 
in Animals Act, 2009, the following sections shall be inserted, namely,–
“19A. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish a National Board for Prevention and Control of Lumpy Skin Diseases in 
such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The composition of the National Board for Prevention and Control of 
Lumpy Skin Diseases and salary and allowances  payable to and other terms and 
conditions of service of members of the National Board for Prevention and Control 
of Lumpy Skin Disease shall be such as may be prescribed.
19B. The National Board for Prevention and Control of Lumpy Skin Diseases 
established under sub-section (1) shall recommend the measures to be taken by the State 
Government for the prevention and control of lumpy skin disease.”. 
Insertion of new   
sections 19A and 
19B.
27 of 2009.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The problem of Lumpy Skin Disease in the cattle rearing witnessed in various States 
of the country. This Lumpy Skin Disease is an infectious disease which is spreading at a 
rapid pace due to which various animals have died in the States of Rajasthan, Gujarat and 
other States. Out of the animals who have died majority are cows. Lumpy Skin Disease is 
an infectious disease which communicates rapidly in form of virus and affects the immunity 
of animals against the disease.
Lumpy Skin Disease is a serious health hazard for the cattle in India. It is the collective 
responsibility of the Government and all other agencies to prevent and control such infectious 
diseases. 
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                                     M A N O J  R A J O R I A  
February 28, 2023.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed section 19A provides for the establishment of a 
National Board for Prevention and Control of Lumpy Skin Disease. It also provides for 
appointment of members to the National Board for Prevention and Control of Lumpy Skin 
Disease. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five hundred crore per annum may involve 
as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved.

LOK SABHA
__________
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention and Control of Infectious and Contagious Diseases in 
Animals Act, 2009.
_________
(Dr. Manoj Rajoria,  M.P .)