Bill No. 76-F of 2008
THE  UNLAWFUL  ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION)
 AMENDMENT BILL, 2008
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK  SABHA   ON  17TH DECEMBER, 2008
RAJYA  SABHA ON  18TH DECEMBER, 2008)
Assented to on 31st December, 2008
Act No. 35 of 2008

THE UNLAWFUL  ACTIVITIES  (PREVENTION)  AMENDMENT
BILL,  2008
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
further to amend the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Act, 2008.
2. In the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), after long title  and before the enacting formula, the following preamble shall
be inserted, namely:—
“W
HEREAS the Security Council of the United Nations in its 4385th meeting
adopted Resolution 1373 (2001) on 28th September, 2001, under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations requiring all the States to take measures to combat
international terrorism;
Short title.
37 of 1967. Insertion  of
Preamble.
BILL NO. 76-F OF 2008
AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT

2
Amendment
of section 2.
Substitution of
new section
for section 15.
AND WHEREAS Resolutions 1267 (1999), 1333 (2000), 1363 (2001), 1390 (2002), 1455
(2003), 1526 (2004), 1566 (2004), 1617 (2005), 1735 (2006) and 1822 (2008) of the Security
Council of the United Nations require the States to take action against certain terrorists
and terrorist organisations, to freeze the assets and other economic resources, to
prevent the entry into or the transit through their territory, and prevent the direct or
indirect supply, sale or transfer of arms and ammunitions to the individuals or entities
listed in the Schedule;
A
ND WHEREAS the Central Government, in exercise of the powers conferred by
section 2 of the United Nations (Security Council) Act, 1947 has made the Prevention
and Suppression of Terrorism (Implementation of Security Council Resolutions)
Order, 2007;
A
ND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to give effect to the said Resolutions
and the Order and to make special provisions for the prevention of, and for coping
with, terrorist activities and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.”.
3. In  section 2 of the principal Act,—
(i) in clause ( d), the words “and includes a Special Court constituted under
section 11 or under section 21 of the National Investigation Agency Act, 2008;” shall
be inserted at the end;
(ii) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ea) “Order” means the Prevention and Suppression of Terrorism
(Implementation of Security Council Resolutions) Order, 2007, as may be amended
from time to time;’;
(iii) in clause (g), after the words “for the purpose of a terrorist organisation”,
the words “or terrorist gang” shall be inserted at the end;
(iv) for clause (h), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(h) "property" means property and assets of every description whether
corporeal or incorporeal, movable or immovable, tangible or intangible and legal
documents, deeds and instruments in any form including electronic or digital,
evidencing title to, or interest in, such property or assets by means of bank
credits, travellers’ cheques, bank cheques, money orders, shares, securities,
bonds, drafts, letters of credit, cash and bank account including fund, however
acquired;
(ha) “Schedule” means the Schedule to this Act;’.
4. For section 15 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“15. Whoever does any act with intent to threaten or likely to threaten  the unity,
integrity, security or sovereignty of India or with intent  to strike terror or likely to strike
terror in the people or any section of the people in India or in any foreign country,—
(a) by using bombs, dynamite or other explosive substances or inflammable
substances or firearms or other lethal weapons or poisonous or noxious gases
or other chemicals or by any other substances (whether biological radioactive,
nuclear or otherwise) of a hazardous nature or by any other means of whatever
nature to cause or likely to cause—
(i) death of, or injuries to, any person or persons; or
(ii) loss of, or damage to, or destruction of, property; or
(iii) disruption of any supplies or services essential to the life of the
community in India or in any foreign country; or
Terrorist act.
43 of 1947.

3
Insertion of new
section 16A.
Punishment
for making
demands of
radioactive
substances,
nuclear
devices, etc.
Punishment
for raising
funds for
terrorist act.
Substitution of
new section
for section 17.
Amendment of
section 18.
Insertion of
new sections
18A and 18B.
Punishment
for organising
of terrorist
camps.
Punishment
for recruiting
of any person
or persons for
terrorist act.
Amendment of
section 23.
(iv) damage or destruction of any property in India or in a foreign
country used or intended to be used for the defence of India or in
connection with any other purposes of the Government of India, any State
Government or any of their agencies; or
(b) overawes by means of criminal force  or the show of criminal force or
attempts to do so or causes death of any public functionary  or attempts to
cause death of any public functionary; or
(c) detains, kidnaps or abducts any person and threatens to kill or injure
such person or does any other act in order to compel the Government of India,
any State Government or the Government of a foreign country or any other
person to do or abstain from doing any act,
commits a terrorist act.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, public functionary means the
constitutional authorities and any other functionary notified in the Official Gazette by
the Central Government as a public functionary.”.
5.  After section 16 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“16A. Whoever intentionally, by use of force or threat of use of force or by any
other means, demands any bomb, dynamite or other explosive substance or inflammable
substances or fire arms or other lethal weapons or poisonous or noxious or other
chemicals or any biological, radiological, nuclear material or device, with the intention
of aiding, abetting or committing a terrorist act, shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.”.
6. For section 17 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“17. Whoever, in India or in a foreign country, directly or indirectly, raises or
collects funds or provides funds to any person or persons or attempts to provide
funds to any person or persons, knowing that such funds are likely to be used by such
person or persons to commit a terrorist act, notwithstanding whether such funds were
actually used or not for commission of such act, shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment
for life, and shall also be liable to fine.”.
7.  In section 18 of the principal Act, for the words “incites or knowingly facilitates”,
the words “incites, directs or knowingly facilitates” shall be substituted.
8.  After section 18 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
“18A. Whoever organises or causes to be organised any camp or camps for
imparting training in terrorism shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and
shall also be liable to fine.
18B. Whoever recruits or causes to be recruited any person or persons for
commission of a terrorist act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and
shall also be liable to fine.”.
9. In section 23 of the principal Act, —
(a) in sub-section ( 1),  for the words “If any person with intent to aid any
terrorist contravenes”, the words “If any person with intent to aid any terrorist or a
terrorist organisation or a terrorist gang contravenes” shall be substituted.

4
Amendment
of section 24.
Amendment of
section 25.
Insertion of
new sections
43A to 43F.
(b)  in sub-section (2), for the words “Any person who, with the intent to aid any
terrorist”, the words “Any person who with the intent to aid any terrorist, or a terrorist
organisation or a terrorist gang” shall be substituted.
10. In section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the words “proceeds of
terrorism whether held by a terrorist or”, the words “terrorist organisation or terrorist gang
or” shall be inserted.
11. In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 5), in the Explanation, after
clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ca) credit or debit cards or cards that serve a similar purpose;”;
12. After section 43 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘43A. Any officer of the Designated Authority empowered in this behalf, by
general or special order of the Central Government or the State Government, as the
case may be, knowing of a design to commit any offence under this Act or has reason
to believe from personal knowledge or information given by any person and taken in
writing that any person has committed an offence punishable under this Act or from
any document, article or any other thing  which may furnish evidence of the commission
of such offence or from any illegally acquired property or any document or other article
which may furnish evidence of holding any illegally acquired property which is liable
for seizure or freezing or forfeiture under this  Chapter is kept or concealed in any
building, conveyance or place, may authorise any officer subordinate to him to arrest
such a person or search such  building, conveyance or place whether by day or by
night or himself arrest such a person or search a such building, conveyance or place.
 43B. (1) Any officer arresting a person under section 43A shall, as soon as may
be, inform him of the grounds for such arrest.
(2) Every person arrested and article seized under section 43A shall be forwarded
without unnecessary delay to the officer-in-charge of the nearest police station.
(3) The authority or officer to whom any person or article is forwarded under
sub-section (2) shall, with all convenient dispatch, take such measures as may be
necessary in accordance with the provisions of  the Code.
43C.  The provisions of the Code  shall apply, insofar as they are not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act, to all arrests, searches and seizures made under this
Act.
43D. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code or any other law,
every offence punishable under this Act shall be deemed to be a cognizable offence
within the meaning of clause ( c) of section 2 of the Code, and "cognizable case" as
defined in that clause shall be construed accordingly.
(2) Section 167 of the Code shall apply in relation to a case involving an offence
punishable under this Act subject to the modification that in sub-section (2),—
(a) the references to "fifteen days", "ninety days" and "sixty days",
wherever they occur, shall be construed as references to "thirty days", "ninety
days” and “ninety days” respectively; and
(b) after the proviso, the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided further that if it is not possible to complete the
investigation within the said period of ninety days, the Court may if it is
satisfied with the report of the Public Prosecutor indicating the progress
of the investigation and the specific reasons for the detention of the
accused beyond the said period of ninety days,  extend the said period up
to one hundred and eighty days:
Power to
arrest, search,
etc.
Procedure of
arrest, seizure,
etc.
Application of
provisions of
Code.
Modified appli-
cation  of
certain
provisions of
the Code.

5
Presumption
as to offence
under section
15.
Obligation to
furnish
information.
Provided also that if the police officer making the investigation under
this Act, requests, for the purposes of investigation, for police custody
from judicial custody of any person in judicial custody, he shall file an
affidavit stating the reasons for doing so and shall also explain the delay,
if any, for requesting such police custody.".
(3) Section 268 of the Code shall apply in relation to a case involving an offence
punishable under this Act subject to the modification that—
(a) the reference in sub-section (1) thereof—
(i) to "the State Government" shall be construed as a reference to
"the Central Government or the State Government" ;
(ii) to "order of the State Government" shall be construed as a
reference to "order of the Central Government or the State Government, as
the case may be"; and
(b) the reference in sub-section ( 2) thereof, to "the State Government"
shall be construed as a reference to "the Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may be".
(4) Nothing in section 438 of the Code shall apply in relation to any case involving
the arrest of any person accused of having committed an offence punishable under
this Act.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, no person accused of an
offence punishable under Chapters IV and VI of this Act shall, if in custody, be released
on bail or on his own bond unless the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity
of  being heard on the application for such release:
Provided that such accused person shall not be released on bail or on his own
bond if the Court, on a perusal of the case diary or the report made under section 173
of the Code is of the opinion that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the
accusation against such person is prima facie true.
(6) The restrictions on granting of bail specified in sub-section (5) is in addition
to the restrictions under the Code or any other law for the time being in force on
granting of bail.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections ( 5) and ( 6), no bail
shall be granted to a person accused of an offence punishable under this Act, if he is
not an Indian citizen and has entered the country unauthorisedly or illegally except in
very exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in writing.
43E. In a prosecution for an offence under section 15, if it is proved —
(a) that the arms or explosives or any other substances specified in the
said section were recovered from the possession of the accused and there is
reason to believe that such arms or explosives or other substances of a similar
nature were used  in the commission of such offence; or
(b) that by the evidence of the expert the finger-prints of the accused or
any other definitive evidence suggesting the involvement of the accused in the
offence  were found at the site of the offence or on anything including arms and
vehicles used in connection with the commission of such offence,
the  Court shall presume,  unless the contrary is shown, that the accused has committed
such offence.
43F. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, the officer
investigating any offence under this Act, with the  prior approval in writing of an
officer not below the rank of a Superintendent of Police, may require any officer or

6
Amendment of
section 45.
Insertion of new
section 51A.
Certain powers
of the Central
Government.
authority of the Central Government or a State Government or a local authority or
a bank, or a company, or a firm or any other institution, establishment, organisation
or any individual to furnish information in his or its possession in relation to such
offence, on points or matters, where the investigating officer has reason to believe
that such information will be useful for, or relevant to, the purposes of this Act.
(2) The failure to furnish the information called for under sub-section ( 1), or
deliberately furnishing false information shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three years or with fine or with both.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, an offence under sub-
section (2) shall be tried as a summary case and the procedure prescribed in Chapter
XXI of the said Code [except sub-section ( 2) of section 262] shall be applicable
thereto.’.
13. Section 45 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section ( 1) thereof
and after sub-section ( 1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(2) Sanction for prosecution under sub-section (1) shall be given within such
time as may be prescribed only after considering the report of such authority appointed
by the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government which shall
make an independent review of the evidence gathered in the course of investigation
and make a recommendation, within such time as may be prescribed, to the Central
Government or, as the case may be, the State Government.”.
14. After section 51 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“51A. For the prevention of, and for coping with terrorist activities, the Central
Government shall have power to—
(a) freeze, seize or attach funds and other financial assets or economic
resources held by, on behalf of or at the direction of the individuals or entities
listed in the Schedule to the Order, or any other person engaged in or suspected
to be engaged in terrorism;
(b) prohibit any individual or entity from making any funds, financial assets
or economic resources or related services available for the benefit  of the
individuals or entities listed in the Schedule to the Order or any other person
engaged in or suspected to be engaged in terrorism;
(c) prevent the entry into or the transit through India of individuals listed
in the Schedule  to the Order or any other person engaged in or suspected to be
engaged in terrorism.”.
15. In section 52 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (e), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘(ee) the time within which sanction for prosecution and recommendation to the
Central Government shall be given under sub-section (2) of section 45, and’’.
16. Section 53 of the principal Act,  shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof and
after sub-section as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(2) The Order referred to in entry 33 of the Schedule and every amendment
made to that Order  shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each House
of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of 30 days which may be comprised
in one session or in two or more successive sessions.”.
Amendment
of section 53.
Amendment
of section 52.

7
17. In the Schedule to the principal Act after entry 32, the following entry shall be
inserted, namely:—
 “33. Organisations listed in the Schedule to the U.N. Prevention and Suppression
of Terrorism (Implementation of Security Council Resolutions) Order, 2007 made under
section 2 of the United Nations (Security Council) Act, 1947  and amended  from time
to time.”.
Amendment
of Schedule.
43 of 1947.

RAJYA  SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
GMGIPMRND—59RS-(S5)—06.01.2009.