1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE MENSTRUAL HYGIENE MANAGEMENT (AWARENESS AND
AFFORDABLE SANITARY NAPKIN DISTRIBUTION) BILL,  2018
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE,  M.P.
A
BILL
to create awareness among women and adolescent girls regarding menstrual hygiene,
safe usage and disposal of sanitary napkins, easy access of affordable sanitary
napkins to women in villages and remote areas and promotion of use of
biodegradable napkins and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted in the Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Menstrual Hygiene Management (Awareness and
Affordable Sanitary Napkins Distribution) Act, 2018.
(2)  It shall extend to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "adolescent" means a young person in the process of developing from child
into an adult;
Definitions.
Bill  No. 76 of  2018
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "biodegradable" means a substance or object capable of being decomposed
by bacteria or other living organisms and thereby avoiding pollution;
(d) "counselling" means the provision of professional assistance and guidance
in resolving personal or psychological problems;
(e) "educational institution" means a place where persons of different ages gain
education, including pre-schools, childcare, primary or elementary schools, secondary
or high schools and universities;
(f) "event" includes seminars, workshops and awareness compaigns;
(g) "menstrual hygiene management" means women and adolescent girls using
a clean menstrual management material to absorb or collect blood that may be changed
in privacy as often as necessary for the duration of the menstruation period, using
soap and water for washing the body as required, and having access to facilities to
dispose of used menstrual management materials;
(h) "non-biodegradable" means the substance or object not capable of being
broken down by the action of living organisms;
(i) "notification" means notification as published by the Official Gazette;
(j) "prescribed" means as prescribed by the rules under this Act;
(k) "sanitary napkin" means pad of absorbent material used by women during
menstruation period; and
(l) "synthetic napkin" means sanitary napkins made by chemical synthesis,
especially to imitate a natural product.
3. The appropriate Government shall take such steps, as may be necessary, for creating
awareness among the females and adolescent girls about menstrual hygiene management
through the means of mass media and by organising such events as it deem fit in classes,
seminars and counselling sessions in every Government and private educational institution
in the villages and remote areas regarding hygienic menstrual practices to be followed.
4. The appropriate Government shall make available biodegradable sanitary napkins
in the villages at affordable price in schools and college premises designated by the
appropriate Government.
5. The appropriate Government shall provide for sale of sanitary napkins in all
retailers outlet in villages and remote areas at affordable rates for easy access.
6. The appropriate Government shall promote manufacturing and usage of
biodegradable sanitary napkins to counter the effect of non-biodegradable waste generated
by synthetic napkins.
7. The appropriate Government shall ensure construction and availability of toilets
for female in every Government and private educational institutions.
8. The Central Government shall give directions to the State Government regarding
safe disposal of sanitary napkins to avoid their littering in public and residential places and
for the health and safety of public in general.
Creating
awareness
about
menstrual
hygiene
management.
Availability of
sanitary
napkins in
villages at
affordable
price.
Sale of
sanitary
napkins in
villages and
remote areas.
Manufacturing
and usage of
biodegradable
sanitary
napkin.
Construction
of toilets for
female in
educational
institutions.
Central
Government
to issue
direction to
the State
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by the Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds, from time to time, to the State Governments for
the effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
11. (1) The appropriate Governments may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly and the
Legislative Council, as the case may be, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both House agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate fund.
Act not in
derogation of
other law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Only in seven of India's thirty-six States and Union territories did ninety per cent. or
more women in the fifteen to twenty-five age group use hygienic protection during
menstruation, according to the latest national health data. Not even fifty per cent. women
used clean methods of dealing with menstrual hygiene in eight States and Union territories
according to the National Family Health Survey-4 (NFHS), released in 2015-16. This is the
dark reality behind all the talks of women empowerment. Even now, women are considered
"impure" during their period, subjected to social, religious and cultural restrictions. This
shame around menstruation also forces girls to opt  out of school once they reach puberty,
impending the growth of female literacy in India. In rural India, twenty-three per cent. of girls
have listed menstruation as the chief reason for dropping out of school.
Reproductive Tract Infections (RTIs) are extremely common among women that they
are reported to affect one-third of women of reproductive age around the world, according to
a report by the World Health Organization (WHO). Sexually transmitted infections (of which
RTI is a significant contributor) are also classified among the "top five disease categories,"
by WHO. The risk of women contracting RTIs are high in rural India, where, in the absence
of toilets in villages, access to sanitation is till limited. Sanitary pads are either too expensive
or unavailable for women in many parts of India. And unless we provide awareness to
women, remove the stigma, increase accessibility to affordable products; we are not solving
the problem in its entirety.
Non-biodegradable sanitary napkins pose a huge challenge in India, where disposal
system are largely missing in rural areas. According to census 2011 population data, 336
million girls and women in India experience menstruation and it can be safely estimated that
about 121 million girls and women are currently using locally or commercially produced
disposable sanitary napkins. The end result is that a staggering one billion non-compostable
pads are landing up in urban sewers, landfills, as well as in rural fields and water bodies in
India every month which takes years to decompose. The lack of disposal treatment options
may lead to unsafe management of a mammoth volume of menstrual waste, which affects the
health of those living in the areas that the waste is disposed of, as well as negatively
affecting the water cycle in the area.
Menstruation is still a taboo subject in India and the lack of first-hand understanding
of the experience of menstruation by most policy makers means that it has not received the
requisite importance it deserves when it comes to framing policy. There is need to provide
information to women and adolescent girls regarding how frequently one should change
sanitary napkins and what is the proper methods to dispose of them. They need somewhere
private to change sanitary cloths or pads; clean water and soap for washing their hands,
bodies and reusable cloths; and facilities for safely disposing of used materials or a clean
place to dry them if reusable. To avoid staggering amount of non-degradable waste generated
by using synthetic sanitary pads, there is need to promote manufacturing and usage of
biodegradable pads. There is also a need for both men and women to have a greater awareness
of good menstrual hygiene practices.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIYA SULE
February  6, 2018.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for creating awareness regarding menstrual hygiene
management. It also provides for organising seminars and counselling sessions in educational
institutions. Clause 4 provides for availability of affordable sanitary napkins in villages and
remote areas as well as in the schools and colleges Clause 5 provide for sale of sanitary
napkins at retail outlets at affordable price. Clause 6 provides for manufacturing of
biodegradable sanitary napkins. Clause 7 provides for construction of toilets in educational
institutions. Clause 9 provides the Central Government shall provide funds to the State
Governments for the effective implementation of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees
one thousand crore would be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to create awareness among women and adolescent girls regarding menstrual hygiene,
safe usage and disposal of sanitary napkins, easy access of affordable sanitary
napkins to women in villages and remote areas and promotion of use of
biodegradable napkins and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4156LS(S3)—05-03-2018.