THE NUCLEAR SAFETY REGULA TORY AUTHORITY BILL, 2011
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Act not to prejudice national sovereignty, etc.
CHAPTER II
PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN ACTIVITIES WITHOUT CONSENT
4. Prohibition of certain activities without consent.
CHAPTER III
COUNCIL OF NUCLEAR SAFETY
5. Establishment of Council of Nuclear Safety.
6. Meeting of Council.
7. Powers and functions of Council.
CHAPTER IV
ESTABLISHMENT OF NUCLEAR SAFETY REGULATORY AUTHORITY
8. Establishment of Authority.
9. Composition of Authority.
10. Constitution of Search Committees.
11. Term of office and other conditions of service of Chairperson and Members.
12. Financial and administrative powers of Chairperson.
13. Restriction on Chairperson or Members on employment after of cessation of office.
14. Removal of Chairperson and Members.
15. Meetings of Authority.
16. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Authority.
17. Secretary and other officers and employees of Authority.
18. Transfer of assets, liabilities, etc., of Atomic Energy Regulatory Board and saving of
its action, etc.
19. Jurisdiction of Authority.
CHAPTER V
P
OWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF AUTHORITY
20. Functions of Authority.
21. Authority to act in interest of sovereignty and integrity of India.
22. Power of Authority to give directions to owner of radioactive material, etc.
23. Administration of Factories Act, 1948.
24. Delegation of powers.
T
O BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 76 of 2011
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

CHAPTER VI
ESTABLISHMENT OF OTHER REGULATORY BODIES
CLAUSES
25. Establishment of regulatory bodies.
26. Prohibition of disclosure of information.
27. Power of Central Government to carry out certain functions itself.
CHAPTER VII
G
RANT OF CONSENT
28. Procedure for grant of consent for carrying out activities related to nuclear material,
etc.
29. Suspension and cancellation of consent.
30. Responsibilities of grantee of consent.
31. Power of Authority to call for information, conduct investigations, etc.
32. Power of Authority to issue certain directions.
33. Powers of inspection, search and seizure.
34. Review of order of Authority.
CHAPTER VIII
A
PPEAL
35. Appellate Authority.
CHAPTER IX
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
36. Budget.
37. Grants by Central Government.
38. Annual statement of accounts.
39. Furnishing of returns, etc., to Central Government.
CHAPTER X
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
40. Offences and penalties.
41. Offences by Companies, etc.
CHAPTER XI
MISCELLANEOUS
42. Directions by Central Government.
43. Members, officers and employees of Authority to be public servants.
44. Bar of jurisdiction.
45. Obligations as to fidelity and secrecy.
46. Protection of action taken in good faith.
47. Cognizance of offence.
48. Power of Central Government to supersede Authority.
49. Application of other laws not barred.
50. Power to make rules.
51. Power to make regulations.
52. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
53. Amendment of certain enactments.
54. Power to remove difficulties.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
(ii)

1
THE NUCLEAR SAFETY REGULATORY AUTHORITY BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to establish an Authority and such other regulatory bodies for regulation of radiation
safety or nuclear safety and achieving highest standards of such safety based on
scientific approach, operating experience and best practices followed by nuclear
industry and to ensure that the use of radiation and atomic energy in all its
applications is safe for the health of the radiation workers, members of the public
and the environment and also to establisih a Council of Nuclear Safety to oversee
and review the policies relating to radiation safety and nuclear safety and to provide
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS India has excellent record in nuclear safety and radiation safety;
AND WHEREAS the Central Government intends to promote nuclear energy to meet
shortfall in total energy requirement of the country;
AND WHEREAS such excellent safety record in nuclear safety and radiation safety is
required to be sustained for growth in the nuclear energy  sector;
NOW, T HEREFORE , it has been considered necessary and expedient to establish
regulators to ensure continued excellence in nuclear safety and radiation safety in all
applications of radiation and atomic energy on a large scale.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  76  of  2011
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Appellate Authority” means an authority constituted by the Council of
Nuclear Safety under sub-section (1) of section 35;
(b) “Atomic Energy Regulatory Board” means the Board constituted vide
notification of the Government of India in the Department of Atomic Energy number
S.O. 4772, dated the 15th November, 1983;
(c) “Authority” means the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority  established
under sub-section (1) of section 8;
(d) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Authority appointed under
sub-section (1) of section 9;
(e) “consent” means a written permission including a licence, authorisation,
registration or approval of the Authority under this Act;
(f) “Council” means the Council of Nuclear Safety established under section 5;
(g) “Member” means a Member of the Authority appointed under sub-section
(1) of section 9  and includes the Chairperson;
(h) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression “notify” shall be construed accordingly;
(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(j) “radiation worker” means any person who is occupationally exposed to
radiation;
(k) “regulations” means regulations made by the Authority under this Act.
(2) The words and expressions used and not defined in this Act, but defined in the
Atomic Energy Act, 1962 shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that
Act.
3. (1) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as to require or permit any
person to do or to refrain from doing anything which the Central Government may, by
notification, declare to be prejudicial to the national defence and security.
(2) A declaration made under sub-section ( 1) shall be conclusive and not be called
in question before any court of law.
CHAPTER II
P
ROHIBITION OF CERTAIN ACTIVITIES WITHOUT CONSENT
4. No person shall carry out any activity falling within the jurisdiction of the Authority
without obtaining the written consent under section 28.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section and section 28, the term “activity”
includes production, storage, disposal, transport (within India or outside India), transfer
by sale or otherwise, import, export and use of any nuclear material, radioactive material or
any other substance, or equipment used for production or use of radiation or atomic
energy.
Definitions.
33 of 1962.
Act not to
prejudice
national
sovereignty,
etc.
Prohibition
of certain
activities
without
consent.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
CHAPTER III
COUNCIL OF NUCLEAR SAFETY
5. The Central Government shall, by notification, establish a Council to be called the
Council of Nuclear Safety consisting of —
(a) the Prime Minister of India as its Chairperson;
(b) Union Minister In-Charge of the Ministry of Environment and Forest–
Member;
(c) Union Minister In-Charge of the Ministry of External Affairs–Member;
(d) Union Minister In-Charge of the Ministry of Health–Member;
(e) Union Minister In-Charge of the Ministry of Home Affairs–Member;
(f) Union Minister In-Charge of the Ministry of Science and Technology–
Member;
(g) any other Union Minister to be nominated by the Central Government–
Member;
(h) Cabinet Secretary – Member, ex officio;
(i) Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission–Member, ex officio;
(j) such number of eminent experts as may be nominated by the Central
Government–Members.
6.  The Council shall meet at such places and intervals as may be necessary and
shall regulate its own procedure for its meetings.
7. The Council shall oversee and review the policies with respect to radiation safety,
nuclear safety and other matters connected therewith or incidental thereto and for this
purpose, it shall have a Secretary to assist it.
CHAPTER IV
E
STABLISHMENT OF NUCLEAR SAFETY REGULATORY AUTHORITY
8. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish an Authority to be
called as the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority, to exercise the powers conferred on
and perform the functions assigned to  it by or under this Act.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that notwithstanding
anything contained in section 7, the Authority shall be autonomous in the exercise of its
powers and functions under this Act.
(2) The Authority established under sub-section (1) shall be a body corporate having
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or
be sued.
(3) The head office of the Authority shall be at such place as the Central Government
may notify.
(4) The Authority may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, establish
its offices at such other places as may be considered necessary.
9. (1) The Authority shall consist of—
(i) a Chairperson;
(ii) two whole-time Members; and
(iii) part-time Members not exceeding four,
to be appointed by the Central Government on the recommendations of the Search
Committees constituted under section 10 .
Establishment
of Council of
Nuclear
Safety.
Meetings of
Council.
Powers and
functions of
Council.
Establishment
of Authority.
Composition
of Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(2) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Chairperson of the Authority, if
such person—
(a) is a citizen of India;
(b) is of outstanding ability, impeccable integrity and standing and having
distinguished professional record and experience of at least twenty-five years  in
Government, industry, academic institutions or national laboratories and is an expert
in one or more disciplines or areas of nuclear science and technology, nuclear safety
and regulation, operation and design of nuclear power plants and fuel cycle facilities,
radiation safety, nuclear medicine, radiation therapy, radiation applications, industrial
and chemical plant safety, earth science, environmental science and engineering,
power plant engineering or materials science and engineering or such other discipline
or areas which may, in the opinion of the Central Government, be relevant.
(3) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Member of the Authority, if
such person—
(a) is a citizen of India;
(b) is of outstanding ability, impeccable integrity and standing and having
distinguished professional record and experience of at least twenty years  in
Government, industry, academic institutions or national laboratories and is an expert
in one or more disciplines or areas of nuclear science and technology, nuclear safety
and regulation, operation and design of nuclear power plants and fuel cycle facilities,
radiation safety, nuclear medicine, radiation therapy, radiation applications, industrial
and chemical plant safety, earth science, environmental science and engineering,
power plant engineering or materials science and engineering or such other discipline
or areas which may, in the opinion of the Central Government,  be relevant.
10. ( 1) The Council shall constitute a Search Committee for the selection of
Chairperson and another Search Committee for  the selection of Members of the Authority:
Provided that the Chairperson and members of the Search Committee shall be from
amongst persons of eminence having knowledge and experience in the field of science,
engineering and technology:
Provided that the Chairperson of the Authority shall be a Member of the Search
Committee constituted for the appointment of Members.
(2) The Central Government shall, within a period of three months from the date of
occurrence of any vacancy by reason of death, resignation or removal of the Chairperson or
a Member and six months before the superannuation or completion of the term of the
Chairperson or Member, make a reference to the Search Committee for  filling up the vacancy.
(3) No appointment of the Chairperson or Member shall be invalid merely by the
reason of any vacancy in the Search Committees.
(4) The term of the Search Committees and the manner of search of panel of names
for making recommendations for appointment of Chairperson or Member shall be such as
may be specified by the Council.
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections ( 1) to (4), the Search Committee shall
regulate its own procedure.
(6) Before appointing any person as the Chairperson or Member of the Authority,
the Central Government shall satisfy itself that such person does not have any financial or
other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions.
11. (1) The Chairperson and other Members shall hold office for a term of three years
from the date on which they enter upon their offices, and shall be eligible for reappointment
for a further period of three years:
Provided that the Chairperson shall not hold office as such after he has attained the
age of seventy years and a whole-time Member shall not hold office as such after he has
attained the age of sixty-five years.
Constitution
of Search
Committees.
Term of
office and
other
conditions of
service of
Chairperson
and Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

5
(2)  Any person holding any office (whether as an employee or an officer or a director
or managing director or secretary or manager or in any other capacity) under the Central
Government or State Government or in a company (including a Government Company
referred to in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956) or in any other institution,
organisation, society or University or Board, shall, on his selection as the Chairperson or
a whole-time Member, be  required to seek retirement or resign from the services of such
Central or State Government or company or institution or organisation or society or
University or Board, as the case may be, before accepting the employment as such
Chairperson or as the case may be, the Member.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the Chairperson and Members shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that the salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson or a Member shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the Chairperson or
Member may—
(a) relinquish his office by giving in writing to the Central Government a notice
of not less than three months; or
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of section 14.
12. The Chairperson shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Authority and shall
exercise such financial and administrative powers as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Chairperson shall have authority to delegate such of the financial
and administrative powers as he may think fit to any whole-time Member or an officer of
the Authority subject to the condition that such Member or officer shall, while exercising
such delegated powers, continue to act under the direction, control and supervision of the
Chairperson.
13. (1)  The Chairperson or a whole-time Member, ceasing to hold office as such,
shall not accept  any  employment with,—
(a) any person who has been granted consent for any activity under this Act;
or
(b) any  person who has been associated with  the person referred to in clause
(a);  or
(c) any  person who has been connected with the management or administration
of the person referred to in clause (a) or clause  (b).
(2) The Chairperson or a Member, ceasing to hold office as such shall not,—
(a)  act, for or on behalf of any person or organisation in connection with any
specific proceeding or transaction or negotiation or a case to which the Authority is
a party and with respect to which the Chairperson or the Member, before cessation
of his office, had acted for, or provided advice to, the Authority; or
(b) give advice to any person (including his client, business associate or
employer) using information which was obtained in his capacity as the Chairperson
or a Member and being not available or cannot be made available to the public; or
(c) enter into a contract of service with, or accept an appointment to a board
of directors of, or accept an offer of employment with, an entity with which he had
direct and significant official dealings during his term of office as such, without the
approval of the Central Government.
Financial and
administrative
powers of
Chairperson.
Restriction
on
Chairperson
or Members
on
employment
after
cessation of
office.
1 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act or any other law for the time being in
force, the Chairperson and Members shall not communicate during holding of office as
such or thereafter or reveal to any person any matter which has been brought under his
consideration or known to him while acting as such.
14. (1)  Notwithstanding anything contained in section 10, the Central Government
may, by order, remove from office, the Chairperson or any Member, if he—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as Chairperson or
Member; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other interests as is likely to affect
prejudicially his functions; or
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest.
(2) The Chairperson or any Member shall not be removed under clauses ( d) and (e)
of sub-section ( 1) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in
the matter.
15. (1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places, and observe such rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum at
such meeting) as may be specified by regulations.
(2) Where the Chairperson is unable to attend a meeting of the Authority for any
reason, the senior most whole-time Member shall preside at the meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided
by a majority vote of the Members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of
votes, the Chairperson or in his absence, the senior most whole-time Member presiding,
shall have a second or casting vote.
16. No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalidated merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member of the Authority;
or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits
of the case.
17. (1) The Authority may appoint a Secretary and such number of other officers,
employees, consultants or experts, as it considers necessary, for the efficient discharge of
its functions and exercise of its powers under this Act:
Provided that no appointment of officers of employees shall be made unless prior
written approval of the Central Government has been obtained by the Authority for creation
of posts therefor.
Provided further that the Central Government may, on the establishment of the
Authority, provide by order, such number of officers, employees, consultants or experts
till such time the Authority appoints its secretary and such number of other officers,
employees, consultants or experts and such officers, employees, consultants or experts
shall be deemed to be on deputation or short term contract, on such terms and conditions,
as it may specify.
(2) The salaries, allowances and pensions payable to, and other  terms and conditions
of service of the officers, other employees of the Authority, shall be such as may be specified
by the regulations.
Removal of
Chairperson
and Members.
Meetings of
Authority.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings
of Authority.
Secretary and
other officers
and
employees of
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
18. (1) On and from the establishment of the Authority—
(a) the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board shall stand dissolved;
(b) all sums of money due to the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board immediately
before that day shall be deemed to be due to the Authority;
(c) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been
instituted by or against the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board immediately before that
day may be continued or may be instituted by or against the Authority;
(d) anything done or any action taken by the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under corresponding provisions of this
Act.
(2)  The Chairman and Members of the Atomic Energy Regulatory  Board shall be
transferred as such to function as Chairperson and Members under this Act and be deemed
to be the Chairperson and Members of the Authority under this Act until the Chairperson
and Members of the Authority are appointed in accordance with the provisions of this
Act.
(3) On and from the date of the commencement of this Act, every officer and employee
holding a post in the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board before that date, shall hold the
post in the Authority by the same tenure, and upon the same terms and conditions of
service including remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement and other terminal benefits
as he would have held such post as if this Act had not been passed and shall continue to
do so as an officer or employee, as the case may be, of the Authority for a period of three
years from the date of the commencement of this Act, unless he, within the said period of
three years, opts not to be an employee of the Authority or until his tenure, remuneration
or other terms and conditions of service are duly altered by the regulations.
(4) Every person, who opts not to be an employee of the Authority within the period
so specified, shall be governed by the rules and orders as are applicable to the Central
Government officers and employees of equivalent rank.
(5) Subject to the provisions of this section, the tenure, remuneration and other terms
and conditions of service including pension of any employee of the Authority shall not be
altered to his disadvantage without the previous approval of the Central Government.
(6) After the dissolution of the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board under clause (a) of
sub-section ( 1), such of the functions and powers of that Board as are vested in the
Authority under this Act shall be carried out by the Authority after such dissolution.
19. Save as otherwise provided in sections 25 and 27, the jurisdiction of the Authority
shall extend to all areas to which this Act is applicable and activities relating to production,
development or use of atomic energy and radiation in all its applications, or transport (within
India or outside India), transfer by sale or otherwise, import, export or storage or disposal
of nuclear and radioactive material.
CHAPTER V
P
OWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE AUTHORITY
20. (1) The Authority shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules and
regulations made thereunder, take measures, within its jurisdiction, to ensure that the use
of radiation and atomic energy is safe for the health of the radiation workers, members of
the public and the environment.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the functions of
the Authority shall be confined only to ensure the radiation safety and nuclear safety during
activities relating to production, storage, disposal, transport, transfer by sale or otherwise,
Transfer of
assets,
liabilities,
etc., of
Atomic
Energy
Regulatory
Board and
saving of its
action, etc.
Jurisdiction of
Authority.
Functions of
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
import, export and use of any nuclear material, radioactive material or any other substance,
or equipment, and physical security of nuclear material, radioactive material, and radiation
and nuclear facilities, and in no case shall extend to the functions  or any other matter
which the Central Government is required to discharge under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of foregoing provisions, and the measures
referred to in sub-section (1), the Authority shall —
(a)  devise and implement  policies and programmes for radiation safety and
nuclear safety to ensure that use of atomic energy or radiation in all its applications
is safe for, the health of radiation workers and members of public, and the
environment;
(b) ensure high quality of safety management at all places where nuclear and
radiation related activities are carried out;
(c) ensure transparency by systematic public outreach on matters relating to
nuclear safety without disclosing sensitive information and compromising
confidentiality of commercially sensitive information of technology holders.
Explanation .—For the purpose of this clause, the expression “sensitive
information” means information pertaining to—
(i) physical security of nuclear material and facilities, or
(ii) reprocessing of spent fuel, enrichment of fissile material or heavy water
production technologies;
(iii) any information under section 26 which has been accessed by the
Authority or has come to its knowledge or made available to it in the discharge of its
functions;
(d) strive to be a knowledge organisation with state of the art scientific
capabilities in the domain of its responsibilities, arrange for and conduct research in
areas relevant to its functions and develop linkages with technical support
organisations;
(e) interact with other bodies and international organisations engaged in
activities relevant to the functions of the Authority including nuclear and radiation
safety, physical security of nuclear material and facilities, transportation of nuclear
and radioactive materials and nuclear and radiation safety and regulation:
Provided that the Authority shall not interact with such bodies and international
organisations outside India without the prior approval of the Central Government;
(f) advise the Central Government with respect to—
(i) safety of public and the environment;
(ii) measures to implement and coordinate a nationwide programme for
environmental surveillance to check any harmful build up of radioactivity in
the environment;
(iii) measures to ensure establishment and maintenance of appropriate
mechanisms and plans for preparedness in response to nuclear and radiation
emergencies;
(g) notify the limits of radiation exposure to radiation workers and the members
of the public;
(h) specify by regulations, the requisite qualification, the training  required to
the persons for employment at premises or places where at any activity relating to
33 of 1962.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
production, storage, disposal, transport and use of any nuclear material, radioactive
material or any other substance or equipment used for production, or use of atomic
energy is carried out,  and specify hours of work, minimum leave and requirements
of periodical medical examination of such employees;
(i) specify by regulations the requirement of approval to, or licensing of, the
persons referred to in clause (h);
(j) establish an appropriate regulatory mechanism which shall provide for issue
of consents, monitoring of compliances, inspections and enforcement;
(k) develop and notify the standards and codes, and develop and publish other
supporting documents for safety in design, siting, construction, commissioning,
operation, quality assurance, decommissioning, storage, transportation and other
activities related to plants, facilities, nuclear and radioactive wastes, radiation sources
and radioactive materials;
(l)  issue, renew, modify, suspend and revoke consents  with specified
conditions for conduct of any activity which come under its jurisdiction for the
production, storage, disposal, transport (within and outside India), transfer by sale
or otherwise, import, export and use of any nuclear material, radioactive material or
any other substance, or equipment used for production, or use of atomic energy;
(m) levy fee, by regulation, for issue, modification and renewal of consents;
(n) take such measures as to enforce compliance of the provisions of the Act
by the holder of the consent;
(o) notify measures for physical security within the area of main plant boundary,
physical protection of nuclear and radioactive materials under storage as well as
transport (within and outside India), and nuclear and radiation facilities;
(p) engage with the consent of Head of concerned bodies, the institutions,
laboratories, agencies, technical support organisations, industries, individual experts
and professionals of integrity and outstanding ability, who have expertise in scientific,
technical, sociological, legal and such other disciplines related to nuclear, radiation
and industrial safety to assist the Authority in the discharge of its functions;
(q) discharge its functions and powers in a manner consistent with the
international obligations of India;
(r) apprise, from time to time, the National Disaster Management Authority
established under section 3 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 regarding nuclear
safety and radiation safety measures and management of disaster arising from nuclear
incident notified under section 3 of the Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage Act, 2010
and coordinate with the said Authority in the case of such disaster;
(s) notify nuclear incident as required by section 3 of the Civil Liability for
Nuclear Damage Act, 2010.
(3)  The Authority may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, exempt, by notification,
subject to such conditions as may be specified by it in the notification, any radioactive
material, any class or classes of radioactive material or any radiation generating plant from
the applicability of any of the provisions of the safety related regulations or orders issued
under this Act.
21. The Authority, while discharging its powers and functions, shall not act against
the interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly
relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality.
Authority to
act in interest
of
sovereignty
and integrity
of India.
53 of 2005.
38 of 2010.
38 of 2010.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
22. Without prejudice to any provisions of this Act, the Authority may—
(a) direct any owner of, or holder of the consent or any person dealing with
radioactive material, radiation source or facility to hand it over to the Central
Government if, in the opinion of the Authority, continuation of such material or facility
under the control of its owner or the holder of the consent or any such person is
detrimental to the safety and physical security of such material or facility, or has a
potential to be detrimental to the safety of public or the environment;
(b)  advise the Central Government to take control of the radioactive material
or radiation source if owner thereof cannot be identified.
23. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Factories Act, 1948, the Authority
and other regulatory bodies shall, subject to the rules made under this Act, administer the
said Act, and do all things for the enforcement of its provisions, including the appointment
of inspecting staff, in any factory engaged in the development, production and use of
radiation and atomic energy or any facility engaged in research and development activities
related to radiation or atomic energy, and owned or administered by the Central Government
or any other authority or corporation established by it or a Government company under
the jurisdiction of the Authority or the regulatory bodies, as the case may be.
(2) No authority under the Factories Act, 1948 shall have jurisdiction in respect of
functions referred to in sub-section (1).
24. The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to the
Chairperson or any Member or officer of the Authority or a State Government or such
officer or authority subordinate to the State Government, subject to such conditions and
limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under
this Act (except the power to make regulations under section 52), as it may deem necessary.
CHAPTER VI
E
STABLISHMENT OF OTHER REGULATORY BODIES
25. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government may,
for the purposes of national defence and security, exempt,—
(a) any nuclear material, radioactive material, facilities, premises and activities;
(b) the premises, assets and areas associated with material and activities referred
to in clause (a), from the jurisdiction of the Authority.
(2) The Central Government may, for the purposes of regulating the material, facilities,
activities referred to in clause (a) or premises, assets and areas referred to in clause ( b) of
sub-section (1), by order, in writing establish one or more regulatory bodies and demarcate
responsibility thereof to discharge one or more of the functions in respect thereof which
otherwise before such exemption were within the jurisdiction of the Authority and such
functions amongst other things shall include to—
(i) ensure that the use of radiation and atomic energy is safe for the radiation
workers, the members of the public and the environment;
(ii) report to that Government release of radiation or radioactive material
exceeding specified limits from facilities under its jurisdiction into any area falling
within the jurisdiction of the Authority.
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, specify that the provisions of this
Act shall, subject to such modifications or conditions or adaptation as it may specify, apply
to such regulatory bodies.
Power of
Authority to
give
directions to
owner of
radioactive
material, etc.
Administration
of Factories
Act, 1948.
63 of 1948.
Delegation of
powers.
Establishment
of regulatory
bodies.
63 of 1948.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
26. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the regulatory bodies referred to in
sub-section (2) of section 25 shall not disclose to any person the information relating to
the activities falling under their jurisdiction.
(2) No Chairperson or Member or officer or other employees or consultant or expert
shall, either during his employment with such regulatory bodies or after cessation of such
employment, disclose any confidential information relating to activities falling under the
jurisdiction of regulatory bodies.
27. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time
being in force, the Central Government may, for the  purposes of national defence and
security, by order, exempt any area, nuclear material, radioactive material, nuclear facility or
plant from jurisdiction of the Authority or other regulatory bodies under this Act and carry
out those functions itself in relation thereto, which, but for such exemption, would have
been carried out by the Authority or other regulatory bodies under this Act.
CHAPTER VII
G
RANT OF CONSENT
28. (1) Every person shall, for carrying out any activity falling under the jurisdiction
of the Authority relating to production, storage, disposal, transport (within and outside
India), transfer by sale or otherwise, import, export  and use of any nuclear material,
radioactive material or any other substance, or equipment used for production, or use of
radiation or atomic energy, obtain the consent of the Authority and for that purpose, submit
an application in such form and manner, along with such fee and accompanied by such
documents and information as may be specified by the regulations.
(2) On receipt of the application under sub-section (1), the Authority shall undertake
an evaluation of the application based on the practices and requirements of codes and
standards developed by it.
(3) The  Authority, on completion of evaluation under sub-section (2), shall—
(a)  if it is of the opinion that the activity for which the consent has been
sought fulfils all the requirements for the grant of consent, it may, by an order in
writing, grant consent for such period and with or without condition for such activity;
(b) if it is of the opinion that the activity for which consent has been sought
does not fulfil all the requirements for the grant of consent, it may, by an order in
writing, refuse to grant consent;
(c) if the Authority has reasonable grounds to believe that the person may not
comply with the conditions which may be imposed under clause (a) in respect of the
consent, it may by an order in writing, refuse to grant consent for the proposed
activity.
(4) Where the Authority refuses to grant the consent referred to in clause ( c) of
sub-section (3), it shall record the reasons for such decision and furnish a copy thereof to
the applicant.
29. (1) The Authority may cancel consent granted under section 28 on any one or
more of the following grounds, namely:—
(a) the grantee of consent has violated any of the terms and conditions of
consent; or
(b) the grantee of consent has violated any provision of this Act; or
(c) the grantee of consent has, subsequent to the grant of consent, been
convicted by a court in India for any offence under this Act; or
Prohibition
of disclosure
of
information.
Power of
Central
Government
to carry out
certain
functions
itself.
Procedure for
grant of
consent for
carrying out
activities
related to
nuclear
material, etc.
Suspension
and
cancellation
of consent.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
(d) the consent has been obtained on misrepresentation, or suppression of
any material fact.
(2) Where the Authority, for reasons to be recorded in writing, is satisfied that,
pending the consideration of question of cancelling consent on any of the grounds
mentioned in sub-section (1) it is necessary so to do, it may, by order in writing, suspend
the consent so granted and require the grantee to show cause, within fifteen days from
the date of receipt of such order, as to why the consent should not be cancelled.
30. Every person who has been granted consent shall be responsible for safety and
physical security of radiation and nuclear facility and radioactive and nuclear material
contained therein.
31. ( 1) Where the Authority considers it expedient so to do, it may by order in
writing,—
(a) call upon any owner or any person in charge of or managing director, director,
secretary or other officer of radiation or nuclear facility at any time to furnish in writing
such information or explanation relating to its activities as the Authority may require
to carry out its functions under this Act; or
(b)  appoint one or more persons to make an inquiry in relation to the affairs of
any radiation or nuclear facility; and
(c) direct any of its officers or employees to inspect the books or other
documents of any radiation or nuclear facility.
(2) Where any inquiry in relation to the affairs of any person referred to in clause (a)
of sub-section (1)  has been undertaken under that  sub-section,—
(a) every owner or managing director or director, manager, secretary or other
officer, if such  person referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1)  is a company; or
(b)  every partner, manager, secretary or other officer, if such person referred
to in clause (a) of sub-section (1)  is a firm; or
(c) every other person or body of persons who has had dealings in the course
of business with any of the persons mentioned in clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub-
section (1),
shall be bound to produce before the Authority making the inquiry, all such books of account
or other documents in his custody or power relating to, or having a bearing on the subject-
matter of such inquiry and also to furnish to the Authority with any such statement or
information relating thereto, as the case may be, required of him within such time as may
be specified.
(3) Every person referred to in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) shall maintain such
records or other documents as may be prescribed.
32. The Authority may, for the purpose of discharge of its functions under this Act
issue such directions, to the persons who have been granted consent under this Act, as it
may consider necessary.
33. (1) The Authority or any other officer specially authorised by it in this behalf
may carry out such inspection or inquiry as may be necessary, enter any building or place
where the Authority has reason to believe that any document or object relating to the
subject matter of the inquiry may be found, and may seize any such document or object
subject to the provisions of section 100 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  in so far
as they may be applicable.
Responsibilities
of grantee of
consent.
Power of
Authority to
call for
information,
conduct
investigations,
etc.
Power of
Authority to
issue certain
directions.
Powers of
inspection,
search and
seizure.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
(2) For the purpose of sub-section ( 1), the Authority shall have power of access
to—
(a) premises and places, vehicle, vessel or aircraft where radiation is present
or used or proposed to be used; and
(b) documents, drawings, photographs, plans, models or any other form which
relates to or represents or illustrates any existing or proposed plant, used or proposed
to be used for the purpose of producing, developing or using atomic energy or
radiation.
34. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the Authority under sections 28
and 29 may file an application to the Authority for review of that order within a period of
thirty days from the date of such order:
Provided that the Authority may entertain such application after the expiry of the
said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it
within that period:
Provided further that notwithstanding the filing of an application under this section,
the aggrieved person shall abide by the order in question, unless it has been stayed by a
subsequent order of the Authority in writing.
(2) Every application for review under sub-section (1) shall clearly state the ground
or grounds on which a review is sought.
(3) An application for review filed before the Authority shall be heard and disposed
of as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made to finally dispose of the
application within a period of ninety days from the date of its filing.
CHAPTER VIII
A
PPEAL
35. ( 1) The Council shall, as and when required, constitute,  by notification, an
Appellate Authority for the purpose of this Act, to hear appeals from any order or decision
passed by the Authority under section 28 or section 29  or under sub-section (3) of section
34, as the case may be.
(2)  The Appellate Authority constituted under sub-section ( 1) shall consists of a
Chairperson and not more than two Members to be appointed by notification, by the Council.
(3)  The selection of the Chairperson and Members of the Appellate Authority shall
be made by the Council in consultation with the Chief Justice of  India or his nominee.
(4)  A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson or a Member
of the Appellate Authority unless he—
(a) in the case of Chairperson, is, or has been,  a Judge of the Supreme Court,
or the Chief Justice of a High Court;
(b) in the case of a Member, is an eminent scientist and has held the post of
Secretary to the Government of India or any equivalent post in the Department of
the Central Government in the Ministries or Departments or an institution
administered by that Government dealing with science and technology.
(5) The Central Government or any person aggrieved by an order referred to in
sub-section (1) may file an appeal before the Appellate Authority within a period of thirty
days from the date of such order:
Provided that the Authority  may entertain such appeal after the expiry of the said
period of thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing the appeal
within that period.
Review of
order of
Authority.
Appellate
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
(6) The appeal shall be filed in such manner and accompanied by such fees as may
be prescribed.
(7) Every appeal shall be heard and disposed of as expeditiously as possible, within
a period of ninety days from the date of its filing.
CHAPTER IX
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
36. The Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year
as may be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts
and expenditure of the Authority and forward the same to the Central Government.
37. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, make to the Authority grants of such sums of money as are required to
be paid.
38. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority under this Act shall have the
same rights, privileges and Authority in connection with such audit, as the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India generally has, in connection with the audit of the Government
accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books,
accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the
offices of the Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Authority, as certified by Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report
thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and the Central Government
shall cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
39. (1) The Authority shall furnish to the Central Government, at such time and in
such form and the manner as may be prescribed or as the Central Government may direct,
such returns and statements and such particulars in regard to any matter under the
jurisdiction of the Authority, as the Central Government may, from time to time, require.
(2) The Authority shall prepare, once every year, in such form and at such time as
may be prescribed, an annual report, giving a summary of its activities during the previous
year and copies of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government.
(3) A copy of the report received under sub-section ( 2) shall be laid by the Central
Government, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER  X
O
FFENCES AND PANALTIES
40. Whoever—
(a) discloses any information prohibited under section 26; or
(b) contravenes any condition subject to which a consent is granted under
section 28; or
(c) contravenes any order made under section 31; or
Budget.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Annual
statement of
accounts.
Furnishing of
returns, etc.,
to Central
Government.
Offences and
penalties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

15
(d) obstruct any person authorised by the Authority under section 33 in the
exercise of the powers under that section; or
(e) contravenes any rule or regulation made under this Act or any requirement,
prohibition or restriction imposed under any such rule or regulation; or
(f) fails to comply with any direction, order or decision of the Authority or
other regulatory bodies under this Act,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with
fine, or with both.
41. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible
to the company for the conduct of, the business of the company as well as the company
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission
of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a company, and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part
of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer or employees  of the company such
director, manager, secretary or other officer or employees shall also be deemed to be guilty
of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals or any other juridical person; and
(b) “director” means a whole-time director in the company and in relation to a
firm, means a partner in the firm.
CHAPTER XI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
42. (1) The Central Government may, from time to time, issue to the Authority or
other regulatory bodies,  such directions as it may think necessary in the interest of the
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign
States, public order, decency or morality or in the public interest.
(2) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions, the Authority shall, in exercise of
its powers or the performance of its functions, be bound by such directions on questions
of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time:
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to
express its views before any direction is given under this section.
(3) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or
not shall be final.
43. The Chairperson, Members, Secretary, officers and other employees of the
Authority shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the
provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code.
Offences by
companies,
etc.
Directions by
Central
Government.
Members,
officers and
employees of
Authority to
be public
servants.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
44. No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the Authority
or other regulatory bodies are empowered by or under this Act to determine.
45. Every Chairperson, Member, adviser, consultant, Secretary, officer or any other
employee of the Authority or other regulatory bodies shall, before entering upon his duties,
make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the First Schedule.
46.  No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central
Government or the Authority or any Member, officer or other employees thereof for anything
which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules and
regulations made thereunder.
47. No court inferior to the Chief Judicial Magistrate shall take cognizance of an
offence punishable under this Act, except upon a complaint in writing made by—
(i) the Authority or any officer of the Authority duly authorised by it where
the offence relates to an act falling within the jurisdiction of the Authority;
(ii) the Central Government or any officer of that Government duly authorised
by it in respect of any other offence.
48. (1) If, at any time, the Central Government is of opinion—
(a) that the Authority has acted in  a manner inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act or rules and regulations made thereunder; or
(b) that on account of circumstances beyond the control of the Authority, it is
unable to discharge the functions and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions
of this Act; or
(c) that the Authority has persistently made default in complying with any
direction issued by the Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the
functions and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act and as a
result of which default, the financial position of the Authority has suffered or the
administration of any radiation or nuclear installation has deteriorated; or
(d) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so
to do,
the Central Government may, by notification, supersede the Authority for such period, not
exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification:
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-section, the Central
Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Authority to show cause as to why
it should not be superseded, and shall consider the explanations and objections, if any, of
the Authority.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section ( 1) superseding the
Authority,—
(a) the Chairperson and other Members shall, as from the date of supersession,
vacate their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions
of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Authority, shall until
the Authority is re-constituted under sub-section ( 3), be exercised and discharged
by the Central Government or such authority or person as the Central Government
may specify in this behalf;
Bar of
jurisdiction.
Obligations as
to fidelity and
secrecy.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Cognizance
of offence.
Power of
Central
Government
to supersede
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

17
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until it is re-
constituted under sub-section (3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued
under sub-section (1), the Central Government may,—
(a) extend the period of supersession for such further term not exceeding six
months, as it may consider necessary; or
(b) re-constitute the Authority by fresh appointment and in such case the
Chairperson and other  Members who vacated their offices under clause ( a) of sub-
section (2) shall not be deemed disqualified for appointment:
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time before the expiration of the
period of supersession, whether as specified under sub-section ( 1) or as extended under
this sub-section, take action under clause ( b) of this sub-section.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub-section ( 1)
and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to
such action to be laid before each House of Parliament at the earliest.
49. (1) The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of,
the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
(2) Nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962
and save and except as otherwise provided, the provisions of this Act shall be in addition
to and not in derogation of that Act.
50. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a)  the salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions
of service of Chairperson and Members under sub-section (3) of section 11;
(b) the financial and administrative powers to be exercised by the Chairperson
under section 12;
(c)  the manner of maintaining books of account and other documents under
sub-section (3) of section 31;
(d) the manner and fees for filing appeal under sub-section (6) of section 35;
(e)  the form and time for preparing the budget under section 36;
(f) the form for annual statement of accounts under section 38;
(g) the form and manner of furnishing returns under sub-section (1) of section
39;
(h) the form and time for preparing the annual report  under sub-section (2) of
section 39;
(i) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which
provision is to be made by rules.
51. ( 1) The Authority may, by notification in the Official Gazette, and with the
previous approval of the Central Government, make regulations, not inconsistent with this
Act, and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Application
of other laws
not barred.
Power to
make rules.
Power to
make
regulations.
33 of  1962.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

18
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the time, place, procedure for transaction of business and the quorum of
the Authority under sub-section (1) of section 15;
(b) the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to, and other  terms and
conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the Authority under
sub-section (2) of section 17;
(c) the requisite qualifications and training required to persons   under clause
(h) of sub-section (2) of section 20;
 (d) the requirement of approval to, or the licensing of, persons under clause
(i) of sub-section (2) of section 20;
(e) levy of fee for issue, modification and renewal of consent under clause ( l)
of sub-section (2) of section 20;
(f) the form and manner of application for consent, the fee and documents and
information to accompany it under sub-section (1) of section 28;
(g) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations.
52. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule
or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule
or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
53. The enactments specified in the Second Schedule to this Act shall be amended
in the manner specified therein and such amendments shall take effect on the date of
establishment of the Authority.
54. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary for removing
the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three
years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.
Amendment
of certain
enactments.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
(See section 45)
I,...............,  do hereby declare that I will faithfully, truly and to the best of my skill and
ability, execute and perform the duties required of me as the Chairperson, Member, or officer
or other employee of the Authority  which properly relate to the office or position held by me
in relation to the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority.
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be communicated to any person
not legally entitled thereto any information relating to the affairs of the Authority or to the
affairs of any person having any dealing with the said Authority, nor will I allow any such
person to inspect or have access to any books or documents belonging to or in possession
of the said  Authority and relating to the business of the said Authority or the business of
any person having any dealing with the said Authority.
(Signature)
Signed before me
19
5
10

THE SECOND SCHEDULE
(See section  53)
PART I
AMENDMENTS TO THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962
(33 OF 1962)
1.  For section 16, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“16. The Central Government may, subject to such rules as may be made in this
behalf and by order, prohibit the manufacture, possession, transfer by sale or other-
wise, export or import of any radioactive material, except under a licence granted by it.”.
2. In section 17, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply on or after the
commencement of the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Act, 2011.”.
3. In section 23, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply on or after the
commencement of the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Act, 2011.”.
4. In section 26, in sub-section (1), in clause (a), for the words and figures “section 8,
14 or 17”, the words and figures “section 8 or 14” shall be substituted.
5. In section 30,—
(a) in sub-section (2), in clause (i), the words “use or disposal” shall be omitted;
(b) in clause (j), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply on or after the
commencement of the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Act, 2011.”.
PART II
A
MENDMENTS TO THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005
(22 OF 2005)
1. In section 8, in sub-section (1), after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(ca) information referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 20 of the
Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Act, 2011”.
2. In the Second Schedule, after item 7, the following item shall be inserted, namely:—
“7A. The Regulatory Bodies established under sub-section (2) of section 25 of
the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Act, 2011.”.
PART III
AMENDMENT TO THE DISASTER MANAGEMENT ACT, 2005
(53 OF 2005)
In section 6, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(2A) The National Authority, while laying down the policies, plans and guidelines for
disaster management for ensuring timely and effective response to disaster, shall have due
20
Substitution
of new
section for
section 16.
Control over
radioactive
material.
Amendment
of section 17.
Amendment
of section 23.
Amendment
of section 26.
Amendment
of section 30.
Amendment
of section 8.
Amendment
of Second
Schedule.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

21
regard to the safety requirements laid down and regulations made by the Nuclear Safety
Regulatory Authority  under the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Act, 2011 and coordinate
with such Authority in the case of a disaster resulting from a nuclear incident notified under
section 3 of the Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage Act, 2010.”.
PART IV
A
MENDMENT TO THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010
(38 OF 2010)
For section 3, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“3. (1) The Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority  established under the Nuclear Safety
Regulatory Authority  Act, 2011 shall, within a period of fifteen days from the date of occurrence
of a nuclear incident, notify such nuclear incident:
Provided that where the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority    is satisfied that the
gravity of threat and risk involved in a nuclear incident is insignificant, it shall not be
required to notify such nuclear incident.
(2)  The Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority  shall, immediately after the notification
under sub-section (1) is issued, cause wide publicity to be given to the occurrence of such
nuclear incident, in such manner as it may deem fit.”.
38 of 2010.
Nuclear
Safety
Regulatory
Authority to
notify nuclear
incident.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 3.
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Atomic Energy Act, 1962 was enacted, after repealing the Atomic Energy Act,
1948, to provide for a legal framework for the development, control and use of atomic energy
for the welfare of the people of India and for other peaceful purposes.
2. The Atomic Energy Regulatory Board was constituted by a notification issued
under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 to carry out certain regulatory and safety functions for
administering nuclear and radiation safety in the facilities under its jurisdiction. The said
Board is also vested with powers for regulating radiation safety in radiation facilities relating
to medicine, industry and research and for enforcement of the Factories Act, 1948 in respect
of installations under its jurisdiction. The said Board has functional independence and
reports to the Atomic Energy Commission.
3. The Fukushima incident in Japan has led to worldwide concerns and apprehension
on safety issues relating to nuclear power. The Government of India attaches highest
importance to nuclear safety and considers it expedient to establish statutory regulatory
bodies to further strengthen regulation of radiation and nuclear safety in the country. Hon’ble
Prime Minister has made a statement on the floor of the Lok Sabha on 14th March, 2011 and
assured that India’s nuclear safety regulatory framework would be strengthened.
4. It is, therefore, considered necessary to establish a legal framework for regulation
of radiation safety and nuclear safety to achieve highest standards of such safety based on
scientific approach, operating experience and best practices followed by nuclear industry
and to ensure that the use of radiation and atomic energy in all its applications is safe for the
health of the radiation workers, members of the public and the environment.
5. The Bill, inter alia, seeks—
(a) to provide for the establishment of the Council of Nuclear Safety to oversee
and review the policies with respect to radiation safety, nuclear safety and other
matters;
(b) to provide for the establishment of the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority
to ensure that the use of radiation and atomic energy is safe for the health of the
radiation workers, members of the public and the environment;
(c) to provide for the establishment of other regulatory bodies for the purpose of
national defence and security;
(d) to prohibit certain activities without the consent of the Nuclear Safety
Regulatory Authority and provide for the procedure for grant of consent to persons
carrying out the activities falling under the jurisdiction of such Authority;
(e) to provide for the suspension and cancellation of consent by the Nuclear
Safety Regulatory Authority and also for review of orders passed by it;
(f) to empower the Council of Nuclear Safety to constitute an Appellate Authority
with Chairperson who is a Judge of the Supreme Court or Chief Justice of a High Court
and two other Members who are eminent scientists in the field of nuclear or atomic
energy;
(g) to enable the Central Government or any person aggrieved by the order of
the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority to file an appeal to the Appellate Authority;
(h) to provide for the offences and penalties for contraventions of the provisions
of the Act;
22

23
(i) to empower the Central Government to supersede the Nuclear Safety
Regulatory Authority under the circumstances specified in the Act;
(j) to provide for certain amendments in the Atomic Energy Act, 1962; the Right
to Information Act, 2005; the Disaster Management Act, 2005; and the Civil Liability
for Nuclear Damage Act, 2010.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
7. The Notes on Clauses explains the various provisions contained in the Bill.
N
EW DELHI;
The 5th September, 2011. V . NARAYANASAMY .

Notes on clauses
Clause 1.— This clause, inter alia, seeks to extend the provisions of the Bill to the
whole of India.
Clause 2.—  This clause defines various expressions used in the Bill.
Clause 3.—This clause provides that the Act not to prejudice national sovereignty,
etc.  Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that nothing in the Act shall be construed as
to require or permit any person to do or to refrain from doing anything which the Central
Government may declare to be prejudicial to the national defence and security.  Sub-clause
(2) of the said clause provides that a declaration so made shall be conclusive and not be
called in question before any court of law.
Clause 4.— This clause provides for prohibition of certain activities without consent.
The said clause prohibits carrying out of any activity related to nuclear material, etc., falling
within the jurisdiction of the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority without obtaining its
written consent.  Further, it explains the expression ‘activity’.
Clause 5. — This clause provides for establishment of Council of Nuclear Safety. The
said clause empowers the Central Government to establish a ‘Council of Nuclear Safety’
consisting of Prime Minister as its Chairperson and the Union Ministers for Environment and
Forests, External Affairs, Health and Family Welfare, Home Affairs, Science and Technology,
any other Union Minister to be nominated by Central Government, the Cabinet Secretary, the
Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission, as its ex officio Members and such number of eminent
experts as may be nominated by the Central Government  also as its Members.
Clause 6.— This clause provides for meetings of Council. The said clause provides
that the Council shall meet at such places and intervals as may be necessary and to regulate
its own procedure for its meetings.
Clause 7.— This clause provides for powers and functions of Council. The said clause
provides that the Council shall oversee and review the policies with respect to radiation
safety, nuclear safety and other matters connected therewith or incidental thereto and for
this purpose, it shall have a Secretary to assist it.
Clause 8.— This clause provides for establishment of Nuclear Safety Regulatory
Authority. The sub-clause (1) of the said clause empowers the Central Government to establish
an Authority to be called as the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority to exercise the powers
conferred on and perform the functions assigned to it by or under the Act. The explanation
to it clarifies that notwithstanding anything contained in section 7, the Authority shall be
autonomous in the exercise of its powers and functions under the Act. Sub-clause (2) of the
said clause provides that the Authority shall be a body corporate. Sub-clause (3) of the said
clause provides that the head office of the said Authority shall be at such places as the
Central Government may notify.  Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that the Authority
may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, establish its offices at such other
places as may be considered necessary.
Clause 9.— This clause provides for composition of Nuclear Safety Regulatory
Authority. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the Authority shall consist of a
Chairperson, two whole-time Members and part-time Members not exceeding four to be
appointed by the Central Government on the recommendations of the Search Committees
constituted for the purpose.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that a person shall not be qualified for
appointment as Chairperson of the Authority unless he is an Indian citizen and of outstanding
ability, impeccable integrity and standing and having distinguished professional record and
24

25
experience of at least twenty-five years in Government, industry, academic institutions or
national laboratories and is an expert in one or more disciplines or areas of nuclear science
and technology, nuclear safety and regulation, operation and design of nuclear power plants
and fuel cycle facilities, radiation safety, nuclear medicine, radiation therapy, radiation
applications, industrial and chemical plant safety, earth science, environmental science and
engineering, power plant engineering or materials science and engineering or such other
discipline or areas which may in the opinion of the Central Government be relevant.
Sub-clause ( 3) of the said Act provides that a person shall not be qualified for
appointment as Member of the Authority unless he is a citizen of India and of outstanding
ability, impeccable integrity and standing and having distinguished professional record and
experience of at least twenty years in Government, industry, academic institutions or national
laboratories and is an expert in one or more disciplines or areas of nuclear science and
technology, nuclear safety and regulation, operation and design of nuclear power plants and
fuel cycle facilities, radiation safety, nuclear medicine, radiation therapy, radiation applications,
industrial and chemical plant safety, earth science, environmental science and engineering,
power plant engineering or materials science and engineering or such other discipline or
areas which may in the opinion of the Central Government, be relevant.
Clause 10.— This clause provides for constitution of Search Committees.  Sub-clause
(1) of the said clause empowers the Council to Constitute a Search Committee for the selection
of Chairperson and another Search Committee for the selection of Members of the Authority.
However, the said clause provides that the Chairperson and members of the such committees
shall be amongst persons of eminence having knowledge and experience in the field of
science, engineering and technology and that the Chairperson of the Authority shall be a
Member of the Search Committee constituted for the appointment of Members.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Central Government shall, within a
period of three months from the date of occurrence of any vacancy by reason of death,
resignation or removal of the Chairperson or a Member and six months before the
superannuation or completion of the term of the Chairperson or Member, make a reference to
the Search Committee for filling up the vacancy. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides
that no appointment of the Chairperson or Member shall be invalid merely by the reason of
any vacancy in the Search Committees. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that the
term of the Search Committees and the manner of search of panel of names for making
recommendations for appointment of Chairperson or Member shall be such as may be specified
by the Council. Sub-clause (5) of the said clause provides that the Search Committee shall
regulate its own procedure. Sub-clause (6) of the said clause provides that before appointing
any person as the Chairperson or Member of the Authority, the Central Government shall
satisfy itself that such person does not have any financial or other interest as is likely to
affect prejudicially his functions.
Clause 11.— This clause provides for the term of office and other conditions of
service of Chairperson and Members. Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that the
Chairperson and Members of the Authority shall hold office for a term of three years from the
date on which they enter upon their offices and shall be eligible for reappointment for a
further period of three years. However, the Chairperson shall not hold office as such after he
has attained age of seventy years and a whole-time Member shall not hold office as such
after he has attained the age of sixty-five years.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that any person holding any office (whether
as an employee or an officer or a director or managing director or secretary or manager or in
any other capacity) under the Central Government or State Government or in a company
(including an Government company referred to in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956) or
in any other institution, organization, society or university or Board shall on his selection as
the Chairperson or a whole-time Member be required to seek retirement or resign from the
services of such Central or State Government or company or institution or organisation or
society or University or Board, as the case may be, before accepting the employment as such
Chairperson or as the case may be, the Member.

26
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the salaries and allowances payable to, and
the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members shall be as such as
may be prescribed. However, the salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson or a Member shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.  Sub-
clause (4) of the said clause provides that the Chairperson or Member may relinquish his office by
giving in writing to the Central Government a notice of not less than three months or be removed
from his office in accordance with provisions of section 14 of the Act.
Clause 12.— This clause provides for the financial and administrative powers of
Chairperson. The said clause provides that the Chairperson shall be the Chief Executive
Officer of the Authority and shall exercise such financial and administrative powers as may
be prescribed. However, the Chairperson shall have authority to delegate financial and
administrative powers to any whole-time Member or an officer of the authority subject to the
condition that such Member or officer shall while exercising such delegated powers continue
to act under the direction, control and supervision of the Chairperson.
Clause 13.— This clause provides for certain restrictions on Chairperson or Members
of the Authority on their employment after cessation of office.
Clause 14.—This clause provides for removal of Chairperson and Members. The said
clause provides that the Central Government may, by order, remove from office the Chairperson
or any Member of the Authority under the circumstances specified therein.
Clause 15.— This clause provides for meeting of Authority.  The said clause  provides
that the Authority shall meet at such times and places, and observe such rules of procedure
in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum at such meeting)
as may be specified by regulations.
Clause 16.— This clause provides for vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of
Authority.  The said clause provides that no act or proceeding of the Authority shall be
invalidated merely by reason of any vacancy in or any defect in the constitution of the
Authority or any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member of the Authority or any
irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of the case.
Clause 17.— This clause provides for appointment of Secretary and such other number
of other officers, employees, consultants or experts as the Authority considers necessary for
the efficient discharge of its functions and exercise of its powers under the Act. However, no
appointment of officers or employees shall be made unless prior written approval of the
Central Government has been obtained by the Authority for creation of posts therefor.
However no appointment of officers or employees shall be made unless prior written approval
of the Central Government has been obtained by the Authority for creation of posts therefor.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to,
and other terms and conditions of service of the officers, other employees of the Authority
shall be such as may be specified by the regulations.
Clause 18.—This clause provides for transfer of assets, liabilities, etc., of  the Atomic
Energy Regulatory Board and saving of its actions, etc. The said clause provides that the
said Board shall stand dissolved on establishment of the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority
and that all sums of money due to the Board immediately before that date shall be deemed to
be due to the Authority and that all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which
could have been instituted by or against the Board may be continued or may be instituted by
or against the Authority.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Chairman and Members of the Board
shall be transferred as such to function as Chairperson and Members under the Act and be
deemed to be the Chairperson and Members of the Authority under the Act until the
Chairperson and Members of the Authority are appointed in accordance with the provisions
of the Act.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that every officer and employee holding a post
in Board shall hold the post in the Authority by the same tenure, and upon the same terms

27
and conditions of service including remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement and
other terminal benefits as he would have held such post as if the Act had not been passed
and shall continue to do so as an officer or employee of the Authority for a period of three
years unless he within three years opts not to be an employee of the Authority or until his
tenure, remuneration or other terms and conditions of service are altered by the regulations.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that every person who opts not to be an employee
of the Authority shall be governed by the rules and orders as are applicable to the Central
Government officers and employees of equivalent rank. Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides
that the tenure, remuneration and other terms and conditions of service including pension of
any employee of the Authority shall not be altered to his disadvantage without the previous
approval of the Central Government. Sub-clause ( 6) of this clause provides that after the
dissolution of the Board such of the functions and powers of Board as are vested in the
Authority shall be carried out by the Authority after such dissolution.
Clause 19.— This clause provides for jurisdiction of Authority. The said clause
provides that save as otherwise provided in sections 25 and 27, the jurisdiction of the
Authority shall extend to all areas to which this Act is applicable and activities relating to
production, development or use of atomic energy and radiation in all its applications, or
transport (within India or outside India), transfer by sale or otherwise, import, export or
storage or disposal of nuclear and radioactive material.
Clause 20.—This clause provides for functions of Authority. Sub-section (1) of this
clause provides that the Authority shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules
and regulations made thereunder, take measures, within its jurisdiction, to ensure that the
use of radiation and atomic energy is safe for the health of the radiation workers, members of
the public and the environment.  Explanation to this sub-clause clarifies that the functions
of the Authority shall be confined only to ensure the radiation safety and nuclear safety
during activities relating to production, storage, disposal, transport, transfer by sale or
otherwise, import, export and use of any nuclear material, radioactive material or any other
substance or equipment, and physical security of nuclear material, radioactive material, and
radiation and nuclear facilities and in no case shall extend to the functions or any other
matter which the Central Government is required to discharge under the Atomic Energy Act,
1962.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Authority shall also carry out other
functions which inter alia includes (a) devise and implement  policies and programmes for
radiation safety and nuclear safety to ensure that use of atomic energy or radiation in all its
applications is safe for, the health of radiation workers and members of public, and the
environment; (b) ensure high quality of safety management at all places where nuclear and
radiation related activities are carried out; ( c) ensure transparency by systematic public
outreach on matters relating to nuclear safety without disclosing sensitive information and
compromising confidentiality of commercially sensitive information of technology holders.
Further, it explains the expression “sensitive information” to mean information pertaining to
(i) physical security of nuclear material and facilities, or ( ii) reprocessing of spent fuel,
enrichment of fissile material or heavy water production technologies; (iii) any information
under section 26 which has been accessed by the Authority or has come to its knowledge or
made available to it in the discharge of its functions;  (d) strive to be a knowledge organisation
with state of the art scientific capabilities in the domain of its responsibilities, arrange for and
conduct research in areas relevant to its functions and develop linkages with technical
support organisations. (e) interact with other bodies and international organisations engaged
in activities relevant to the functions of the Authority including nuclear and radiation safety,
physical security of nuclear material and facilities, transportation of nuclear and radioactive
materials and nuclear and radiation safety and regulation. However, provided that the
Authority shall not interact with such bodies and international organizations outside India
without the prior approval of the Central Government; (f) advise the Central Government with
respect to – ( i) safety of public and the environment; ( ii) measures to implement and

28
co-ordinate a nationwide programme for environmental surveillance to check any harmful
build up of radioactivity in the environment; ( iii) measures to ensure establishment and
maintenance of appropriate mechanisms and plans for preparedness in response to nuclear
and radiation emergencies; (g) notify the limits of radiation exposure to radiation workers
and the members of the public; ( h) specify by regulations, the requisite qualification, the
training  required to the persons for employment at premises or places where at any activity
relating to production, storage, disposal, transport and use of any nuclear material, radioactive
material or any other substance or equipment used for production, or use of atomic energy is
carried out,  and specify hours of work, minimum leave and requirements of periodical medical
examination of such employees; (i) specify by regulations the requirement of approval to, or
licensing of, the persons referred to in clause ( h); (j) establish an appropriate regulatory
mechanism which shall provide for issue of consents, monitoring of compliances, inspections
and enforcement; (k) develop and notify the standards and codes, and develop and publish
other supporting documents for safety in design, siting, construction, commissioning,
operation, quality assurance, decommissioning, storage, transportation and other activities
related to plants, facilities, nuclear and radioactive wastes, radiation sources and radioactive
materials; (l)  issue, renew, modify, suspend and revoke consents  with specified conditions
for conduct of any activity which come under its jurisdiction for the production, storage,
disposal, transport (within and outside India), transfer by sale or otherwise, import, export
and use of any nuclear material, radioactive material or any other substance, or equipment
used for production, or use of atomic energy; (m) levy fee, by regulation, for issue, modification
and renewal of consents; (n) take such measures as to enforce compliance of the provisions
of the Act by the holder of the consent; (o) notify measures for physical security within the
area of main plant boundary, physical protection of nuclear and radioactive materials under
storage as well as transport (within and outside India), and nuclear and radiation facilities;
(p) engage with the consent of Head of concerned bodies, the institutions, laboratories,
agencies, technical support organisations, industries, individual experts and professionals
of integrity and outstanding ability, who have expertise in scientific, technical, sociological,
legal and such other disciplines related to nuclear, radiation and industrial safety to assist
the Authority in the discharge of its functions; ( q) discharge its functions and powers in a
manner consistent with the international obligations of India; (r) apprise, from time to time,
the National Disaster Management Authority established under section 3 of the Disaster
Management Act, 2005 regarding nuclear safety and radiation safety measures and
management of disaster arising from nuclear incident notified under section 3 of the Civil
Liability for Nuclear Damage Act, 2010 and coordinate with the said Authority in the case of
such disaster; (s) notify nuclear incident as required by section 3 of the Civil Liability for
Nuclear Damage Act, 2010.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Authority may, for reasons to be recorded
in writing, exempt, by notification, subject to such conditions as may be specified by it in the
notification, any radioactive material, any class or classes of radioactive material or any
radiation generating plant from the applicability of any of the provisions of the safety related
regulations or orders issued under this Act.
Clause 21.— This clause provides for Authority to Act in interest of sovereignty and
integrity of India.  The said clause provides that the Authority while discharging its powers
and functions, shall not act against the interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the
security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality.
Clause 22.—This clause provides for power of Authority to give directions to owner
of radioactive material, etc. The said clause empowers the Authority to direct any owner of or
holder of the consent or any person dealing with radioactive material, radiation source or
facility to hand it over to the Central Government if in the opinion of the Authority, continuation
of such material or facility under the control of its owner or the holder of the consent or any
such person is detrimental to the safety and physical security of such material or facility or
has a potential to be detrimental to the safety of public or the environment. It also provides
that the Authority may advise the Central Government to take control of the radioactive
material or radiation source if owner thereof cannot be identified.

29
Clause 23.— This clause provides for administration of Factories Act, 1948.  The said
clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the Factories Act, 1948, the
Authority and other regulatory bodies shall, subject to the rules made under the Act, administer
the Factories Act, 1948, and do all things for the enforcement of its provisions, including the
appointment of inspecting staff, in any factory engaged in the development, production and
use of radiation and atomic energy, or any facility engaged in research and development
activities related to radiation or atomic energy, and owned or administered by the Central
Government or any other authority or corporation established by it or a Government company
under the jurisdiction of the Authority or the regulatory bodies, as the case may be. It further
provides that no authority under the Factories Act, 1948 shall have jurisdiction in respect of
the above functions.
Clause 24.—This clause provides for delegation of powers.  The said clause provides
that the Authority may delegate to the Chairperson or any Member or officer of the Authority
or a State Government or such officer or authority subordinate to the State Government such
of its powers and functions under the Act (except the power to make regulations under
section 51), as it may deem necessary.
Clause 25.—This clause provides for establishment of regulatory bodies.  Sub-clause (1)
of the said clause provides that the Central Government may, for the purposes of national
defence and security, exempt any nuclear material, radioactive material, facilities, premises
and activities, the premises, assets and areas associated with material and activities from the
jurisdiction of the Authority.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Central Government may, for the purposes
of regulating the material, facilities, activities referred to in clause (a) or premises, assets and
areas referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1), by order, in writing establish one or more
regulatory bodies and demarcate responsibility thereof to discharge one or more of the
functions in respect thereof which otherwise before such exemption were within the
jurisdiction of the Authority and such functions amongst other things shall include to
(i) ensure that the use of radiation and atomic energy is safe for the radiation workers, the
members of the public and the environment; (ii) report to that Government release of radiation
or radioactive material exceeding specified limits from facilities under its jurisdiction into any
area falling within the jurisdiction of the Authority.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Central Government may specify that
the provisions of the Act shall subject to such modifications or conditions or adaptation as
it may specify, apply to such regulatory bodies.
Clause 26.—This clause provides for prohibition of disclosure of information. Sub-
clause (1) of this clause provides that save as otherwise provided in the Act, the regulatory
bodies established under sub-section (2) of section 25 of the Act shall not disclose to any
person the information relating to the activities falling under their jurisdiction.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that no Chairperson or Member or officer or
other employees or consultant or expert shall, either during his employment with such
regulatory bodies or after cessation of such employment, disclose any confidential information
relating to activities falling under the jurisdiction of regulatory bodies.
Clause 27.—This clause provides for power of Central Government to carry out certain
functions itself. The said clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained in this
Act or any other law for the time being in force, the Central Government may for the purpose
of national defence and security by order exempt any area, nuclear material, radioactive
material, nuclear facility or plant from jurisdiction of the Authority or other regulatory bodies
under the Act and carry out those functions itself in relation thereto which but for such
exemption would have been carried out by the Authority or other regulatory bodies under
the Act.
Clause 28.—This clause provides procedure for grant of consent for carrying out
activities related to nuclear material, etc.  Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that every

30
person shall, for carrying out activity falling under the jurisdiction of the Authority relating
to production, storage, disposal, transport (within and outside India), transfer by sale or
otherwise, import, export and use of any nuclear material, radioactive material or any other
substance, or equipment, etc., obtain the consent of the Authority and for that purpose
submit an application in the prescribed form and manner along with such fee and accompanied
by such documents and information as may be specified by regulations. This clause also
provides the procedure for grant or refusal of consent.
Clause 29.—This clause provides for suspension and cancellation of consent.  This
clause provides the grounds and procedure for revocation of consent granted under section
28 of the Act. It also stipulates that where the Authority is satisfied that pending the
consideration of question of cancelling consent, it may suspend the consent and require the
grantee to show-cause as to why the consent should not be cancelled.
Clause 30.—This clause provides for responsibilities of grantee of consent.  The said
clause provides that every person who has been granted consent shall be responsible for
safety and physical security of radiation and nuclear facility and radioactive and nuclear
material contained therein.
Clause 31.—This clause provides for power of Authority to call for information, conduct
investigation, etc. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that where the Authority considers
it expedient so to do, it may by order in writing, ( a) call upon any owner or any person in
charge of or managing director, director, secretary or other officer of radiation or nuclear
facility at any time to furnish in writing such information or explanation relating to its activities
as the Authority may require to carry out its functions under this Act; or (b)  appoint one or
more persons to make an inquiry in relation to the affairs of any radiation or nuclear facility;
and (c) direct any of its officers or employees to inspect the books or other documents of any
radiation or nuclear facility.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provided that where any inquiry in relation to the
affairs of any person referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) has been undertaken under
that  sub-section, (a) every owner or managing director or director, manager, secretary or
other officer, if such  person referred to in clause ( a) of sub-section (1)  is a company; or
(b)  every partner, manager, secretary or other officer, if such person referred to in clause (a)
of sub-section ( 1)  is a firm; or ( c) every other person or body of persons who has had
dealings in the course of business with any of the persons mentioned in clauses (a) and (b)
of sub-section (1), shall be bound to produce before the Authority making the inquiry, all
such books of account or other documents in his custody or power relating to, or having a
bearing on the subject-matter of such inquiry and also to furnish to the Authority with any
such statement or information relating thereto, as the case may be, required of him within
such time as may be specified. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that every person
referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall maintain such records or other documents as
may be prescribed.
Clause 32.—This clause provides for power of Authority to issue certain directions.
The said clause provides that the Authority may, for the purpose of discharge of its functions
under this Act, issue directions to the persons who have been granted consent under the
Act, as it may consider necessary.
Clause 33.—This clause provides for powers of inspection, search and seizure.  Sub-
clause (1) of this clause provides that the Authority or any other officer specially authorised
by it in this behalf may carry out such inspection or inquiry as may be necessary, enter any
building or place where the Authority has reason to believe that any document or object
relating to the subject matter of the inquiry may be found, and may seize any such document
or object subject to the provisions of section 100 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in
so far as they may be applicable.

31
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Authority shall have power of access to
premises and places, vehicle, vessel or aircraft where radiation is present or used or proposed
to be used; and documents, drawings, photographs, plans, models or any other form which
relates to or represents or illustrates any existing or proposed plant, used or proposed to be
used for the purpose of producing, developing or using atomic energy or radiation.
Clause 34.—This clause provides for review of order of Authority.  The said clause
provides that any person aggrieved by an order made by the Authority under sections 28
and 29 may file an application to the Authority for review of that order within a period of
thirty days from the date of such order.  However, the Authority may entertain such application
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause
for not filing it within that period. Further, notwithstanding the filing of an application under
this section, the aggrieved person shall abide by the order in question, unless it has been
stayed by a subsequent order of the Authority in writing.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that every application for review under sub-
section (1) shall clearly state the ground or grounds on which a review is sought.
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that an application for review filed before
the Authority shall be heard and disposed of as expeditiously as possible and endeavour
shall be made to finally dispose of the application within a period of ninety days from the
date of its filing.
Clause 35.—This clause provides for Appellate Authority.  Sub-clause ( 1) of this
clause provides that the Council of Nuclear Safety shall, as and when required, constitute by
notification, an Appellate Authority to hear appeals from any order or decision passed by the
Authority under section 28 or 29 or under sub-section (3) of section 34 as the case may be.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Appellate Authority shall consists of a
Chairperson and not more than two Members. Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the
selection of the Chairperson and Members of the Appellate Authority shall be made by the
Council in consultation with the Chief Justice of India or his nominee.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that a person shall not be qualified for appointment
as the Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Authority unless he in the case of Chairperson
is or has been a judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court and in case
of a Member, is an eminent scientist and has held the post of Secretary to the Government of
India or any equivalent post in the Department of the Central Government in the Ministries
or Departments or an institution administered by that Government dealing with science and
technology.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that the Central Government or any person
aggrieved by an order referred to in sub-section (1) may file an appeal before the Appellate
Authority within a period of thirty days from the date of such order.  However, the Authority
may entertain such appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that
there was sufficient cause for not filing the appeal within that period. Sub-clause (6) of this
clause provides for the manner of filing appeal and the fees.  Sub-clause (7) thereof provides
that every appeal shall be heard and dispose of  as expeditiously as possible within a period
of ninety days from the date its filing.
Clause 36.—This clause provides for budget.  The said clause provides that the
Authority shall prepare budget in each financial year for the next financial year showing the
estimated receipts and expenditure of the Authority and forward the same to the Central
Government.
Clause 37.—This clause provides for grants by Central Government.  The said clause
provides that the Central Government may after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, make to the Authority grants of such sums of money as are required to be
paid.

32
Clause 38.—This clause provides for annual statement of accounts.  Sub-clause (1) of
the said clause provides that the Authority shall maintain proper  accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by
the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the accounts of the Authority shall be audited
by him at such intervals as may be specified by him.
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India or any person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the
Authority under this Act shall have the same rights, privileges and Authority in connection
with such audit, as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India generally has, in connection
with the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand
the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers
and to inspect any of the offices of the Authority. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides
that the accounts of the Authority, as certified by Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon,
shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and the Central Government shall
cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 39.—This clause provides for furnishing of returns, etc., to the Central
Government.  Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the Authority shall furnish to
the Central Government, at such time and in such form and the manner as may be prescribed
or as the Central Government may direct, such returns and statements and such particulars
in regard to any matter under the jurisdiction of the Authority, as the Central Government
may, from time to time, require. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Authority
shall also prepare once every year, in such form and at such time as may be prescribed, an
annual report, giving a summary of its activities during the previous year and copies of the
report shall be forwarded to the Central Government. Sub-clause ( 3) of the said clause
provides that a copy of the report shall be laid by the Central Government before  each House
of Parliament.
Clause 40.—This clause provides for offences and penalties.  The said clause provides
that whoever discloses  any information prohibited under section 26, contravenes any
condition subject to which a consent is granted under section 28, contravenes any order
made under section 31, obstructs any person authorised by the Authority under section 33
in the exercise of the powers under that section, contravenes any rule or regulation made
under the Act or any requirement, prohibition or restriction imposed under any such rule or
regulation or fails to comply with any direction, order or decision of the Authority or other
regulatory bodies under the Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to five years or with fine or with both.
Clause 41.—This clause provides for offences by companies. Sub-clause ( 1) of the
said clause provides that where an offence under the Act has been committed by a company,
every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible
to the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.  However, nothing contained in the section shall render any such
person liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-clause (1), where an offence under the Act has been committed with the consent or
connivance of, or attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary
or other officer or employees shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. The explanation to the clause
clarifies and explains the terms ‘company’ and ‘director’.

33
Clause 42.—This clause provides for directions by Central Government.  Sub-clause (1)
of the said clause provides that the Central Government may, from time to time, issue to the
Authority or other regulatory bodies,  such directions as it may think necessary in the
interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations
with foreign States, public order, decency or morality or in public interest.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that without prejudice to the foregoing
provisions, the Authority shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions,
be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in
writing to it from time to time.  However, the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an
opportunity to express its views before any direction is given under this section. Sub-clause
(3) of the said clause provides that the decision of the Central Government whether a question
is one of policy or not shall be final.
Clause 43.—This clause provides for Members, officers and employees of Authority
to be publish servants.  It provides that the Chairperson, Members, Secretary, officers and
other employees of the Authority shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in
pursuance of any of the provisions of the Act, to be public servants within the meaning of
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Clause 44.—This clause provides for bar of jurisdiction.  The said clause provides that
no civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the Authority or other
regulatory bodies are empowered by or under the Act to determine.
Clause 45.—This clause provides for obligations as to fidelity and secrecy.  The
said clause provides that every Chairperson, Member, adviser, consultant, Secretary, officer
or any other employee of the Authority or other regulatory bodies shall, before entering
upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the First
Schedule.
Clause 46.—This clause provides for protection of action taken in good faith. It provides
that no suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central Government
or the Authority or any Member, officer or other employees thereof for anything which is in
good faith done or intended to be done under the Act or the rules and regulations made
thereunder.
Clause 47.—This clause provides for cognizance of offence.  The said clause provides
that no Court inferior to the Chief Judicial Magistrate shall take cognizance of an offence
under the Act except upon a complaint in writing made by the Authority or any officer of the
Authority duly authorised by it where the offence relates to an act falling within the jurisdiction
of the Authority or the Central Government or any officer of that Government duly authorised
by it in respect of any other offence.
Clause 48.—This clause provides for power of Central Government to supersede
Authority.  Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the Central Government may, by
notification, supersede the authority for such period not exceeding six months, extendable
for a further term not exceeding six months, in certain circumstances such as ( a) that the
Authority has acted in  a manner inconsistent with the provisions  of this Act or rules and
regulations made thereunder; or (b) that on account of circumstances beyond the control of
the Authority, it is unable to discharge the functions and duties imposed on it by or under the
provisions of this Act; or (c) that the Authority has persistently made default in complying
with any direction issued by the Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the
functions and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act and as a result of
which default, the financial position of the Authority has suffered or the administration of
any radiation or nuclear installation has deteriorated; or (d) that circumstances exist which
render it necessary in the public interest so to do.  However, only after giving reasonable

34
opportunity to the Authority to showcause as to why it should not be superseded and
considering explanations and objections, if any of the Authority.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that on supersession of the Authority, the
Chairperson and other Members shall vacate their offices and all powers, functions and
duties of the Authority be exercised and discharged by the Central Government or such
authority or persons as the Central Government may specify in this behalf.
It also provides that all properties owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until it
is reconstituted, vest in the Central Government.
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that on the expiration of the period of
supersession specified in the notification issued under sub-section ( 1), the Central
Government may (a) extend the period of supersession for such further term not exceeding
six months, as it may consider necessary; or ( b) re-constitute the Authority by fresh
appointment and in such case the Chairperson and other  Members who vacated their offices
under clause (a) of sub-section (2) shall not be deemed disqualified for appointment.  However,
the Central Government may, at any time before the expiration of the period of supersession,
whether as specified under sub-section ( 1) or as extended under this sub-section, take
action under clause (b) of this sub-section.
Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that the Central Government shall cause a
notification issued under sub-section ( 1) and a full report of any action taken under this
section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before each House of Parliament
at the earliest.
Clause 49.—This clause provides that application of other laws not barred.  The said
clause provides that the Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of, the provisions
of any other law for the time being in force. It further states that nothing in the Act shall affect
the provisions of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 and save and except as otherwise provided,
the provision of the Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of that Act.
Clause 50.—This clause confers upon the Central Government the power to make
rules for carrying out the provisions of the Act.  Sub-clause (2) of this clause enumerates the
various matters in respect of which such rules may be made the matters specified in the said
clause.
Clause 51.—This clause confers upon the Authority the power to make regulations
consistent with the Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the provisions of the Act.
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause enumerates the various matters in respect of which such
regulations may be made by the Authority.
Clause 52.—This clause provides that every rule and regulations made under the Act
shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 53.—This clause provides for amendment to certain enactments.  It provides
that the specified in the Second Schedule to this Act shall be amended in the manner specified
therein and such amendments shall take effect on the date of establishment of the Authority.
Clause 54.—This clause provides for power to remove difficulties.  The said clause
provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of the Act, as appear to it to be necessary for removing the
difficulty. However, no such order can be made under this section after expiry of three years
from the date of commencement of the Act. It further provides that every order made under
this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
The First Schedule to the Bill sets out the form of making declaration of fidelity and
secrecy.

35
Part-I of the Second Schedule provides for amendments to the Atomic Energy Act,
1962, Part-II thereof provides for amendments to the Right to Information Act, 2005, Part-III
thereof provides for amendments to the Disaster Management Act, 2005 and Part-IV thereof
provides for amendment to the Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage Act, 2010.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (1) of clause 8 of the Bill provides for the establishment of an Authority to
be called the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority by the Central Government. Sub-clause
(3) thereof provides that the head office of the Authority shall be at such place as the Central
Government may consider necessary. Sub-clause ( 4) thereof enables the Authority to
establish, with prior approval of the Central Government, its offices at such other places as
may be considered necessary.
2. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 9 of the Bill provides that the Authority shall consist of a
Chairperson, two whole-time Members and part-time Members not exceeding four to be
appointed by the Central Government. Sub-clause (3) of clause 11 of the Bill provides that
the Chairperson and Members of the Authority shall be entitled to such salary and allowances
and other terms and conditions of service as may be specified by rules made by the Central
Government.
3. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 17 provides that the Authority may appoint a Secretary
and such number of other officers, employees, consultants or experts as it considers necessary
for the efficient discharge of its functions and exercise of its powers.  Sub-clause (2) thereof
provides that the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to and other terms and conditions
of service of the officers and other employees of the Authority shall be such as may be
specified by regulations.
4. Clause 18 of the Bill provides that on and from the establishment of the Authority,
the existing Atomic Energy Regulatory Board shall stand dissolved and the Chairman and
Members of the said Board shall stand transferred to the Authority to function as its
Chairperson and Members until the Chairperson and Members of the Authority are appointed
in accordance with the provisions of the Bill. Further, sub-clause (3) thereof provides that on
and from the date of commencement of the Act, every officer and employee holding a post in
the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board before that date shall hold the post in the Authority by
the same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions of service for a period of three
years from the date of the commencement of this Act.   Therefore, there may not be any
immediate significant increase in the financial implication on constitution of the Authority or
in the near future.
5. Sub-clause (2) of clause 25 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, by
an order in writing, establish one or more regulatory bodies.
6. Sub-clause (1) of clause 35 of the Bill empowers the Council to constitute an Appellate
Authority to hear appeals. Sub-clause (2) thereof provides that the Appellate Authority shall
consist of a Chairperson and not more than two Members.
7. Clause 37 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, after due
appropriation made by  Parliament by law in this behalf make to the Authority grants of such
sums of money as are required to be paid.
8. It is estimated that during the financial year 2012-2013 a sum of rupees thirty-seven
crores may be required for the establishment of the Authority.  In addition, it is estimated that
during the Twelfth Plan, a sum of rupees one hundred and sixty-four crores may be required
for expanding and strengthening the activities of the Authority. The said expenditure will be
borne out of the usual budget grants of the Department of Atomic Energy.
9. It is not practicable to make an exact estimate of the expenditure both recurring and
non-recurring at this stage as the exact structure of the Council, other regulatory bodies and
the Appellate Authority would emerge later.
36

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 51 of the Bill confers power upon the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the provisions of the Act. The matters in respect of which such rules may be
made relate inter alia to (a) the salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and
conditions of service of Chairperson and Members under sub-section (3) of section 11; (b)
the financial and administrative powers to be exercised by the Chairperson under section
12; ( c)  the manner of maintaining books of account and other documents under sub-
section (3) of section 31; (d) the manner and fees for filing appeal under sub-section (6) of
section 35; (e)  the form and time for preparing the budget under section 36; (f) the form for
annual statement of accounts under section 38; ( g) the form and manner of furnishing
returns under sub-section (1) of section 39; (h) the form and time for preparing the annual
report under sub-section (2) of section 39; (i) any other matter which is to be, or may be,
prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to be made by rules.
2. Clause 52 of the Bill confers power upon the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority
to make, with the previous approval of the Central Government, regulations consistent with
the Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the provisions of the Act. The matters in
respect of which such regulations may be made relate inter alia to ( a) the time, place,
procedure for transaction of business and the quorum of the Authority under sub-section
(1) of section 15; (b) the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to, and other  terms and
conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the Authority under sub-
section (2) of section 17; ( c) the requisite qualifications and training required to persons
under clause  (h) of sub-section (2) of section 20; (d) the requirement of approval to, or the
licensing of, persons under clause  (i) of sub-section (2) of section 20; (e) levy of fee for
issue, modification and renewal of consent under clause (l) of sub-section (2) of section 20;
(f) the form and manner of application for consent, the fee and documents and information
to accompany it under sub-section ( 1) of section 28; and ( g) any other matter which is
required to be, or may be, specified by regulations.
3. The rules made by the Central Government and the regulations made by the Nuclear
Safety Regulatory Authority shall be laid as soon as may be, after they are made, before
each House of Parliament.
4. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made or notification
issued are generally matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable
to provide for them in the Bill itself.
5. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
37

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962
(33 OF 1962)
*****
16. The Central Government may prohibit the manufacture, possession, use, transfer
by sale or otherwise, export and import and in an emergency, transport and disposal, of any
radioactive substances without its written consent.
*****
26. (1) All offences under this Act shall be cognizable under the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898, but no action shall be taken in respect of any person for any offence under
this Act except on the basis of a written complaint  made—
(a) in respect of contravention of section 8, 14 or 17 or any rule or order made
thereunder, by the person authorised to exercise powers of entry and inspection;
*****
30. (1) * * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to an generality of the foregoing powers, such
rules may provide for—
*****
(i) regulating the manufacture, custody, transport, transfer, sale, export, import, use or
disposal of any radioactive substance;
*****
————
E
XTRACT FROM THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010
(38 OF 2010)
*****
CHAPTER II
LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE
3. (1) The Atomic Energy Regulatory Board constituted under the Atomic Energy Act,
1962 shall, within a period of fifteen days fromt he date of occurrence of a nuclear incident,
notify such nuclear incident:
Provided that where the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board is satisfied that the gravity
of threat and risk involved in a nuclear incident is insignificant, it shall not be required to
notify such nuclear incident.
(2) The Atomic energy Regulatory Board shall, immediately after the notification under
sub-section (1) is isued, cause wide publicity to be given to the occurrence of such nuclear
incident, in such manner as it may deem fit.
*****
5 of 1898.
Power to
make rules
Atomic
Energy
Regulatory
Board to
notify
nuclear
incident.
33 of 1962.
Control over
radioactive
substances.
Cognizance
of offences.
38

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish an Authority and such other regulatory bodies for regulation of radiation safety
or nuclear safety and achieving highest standards of such safety based on scientific
approach, operating experience and best practices followed by nuclear industry and to
ensure that the use of radiation and atomic energy in all its applications is safe for the
health of the radiation workers, members of the public and the environment and also to
establish a Council of Nuclear Safety to oversee and review the policies relating to
radiation safety and nuclear safety and to provide for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri V . Narayanasamy, Minister of State in the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pension)
GMGIPMRND—1813LS—05-09-2011.