1
Bill No. 76  of  2012
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
By
DR. BHOLA SINGH, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2012.
2.  After article 30 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
"31. Every citizen who lives below poverty line shall have the right to—
(i)  adequate health care;
(ii) shelter;
(iii) education upto the level of graduation;
Short title.
Insertion of
new article 31.
Basic facilities
to citizens
living below
poverty line.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(iv) guaranteed employment; and
(v) essential items of daily use at concessional rates.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this article,—
(i) "person living below poverty  line"  means such person whose monthly
income from all sources is such as may be determined by the Union from time to
time after taking into consideration all relevant factors as it may deem fit:
Provided that different criterion may be fixed for different classes of  persons
in various States and Union territories.
(ii) "guaranteed employment" means employment for a minimum period of
240 days in a year;
 ( iii) "essential items of daily use" includes fuel, items of groceries,
vegetables, milk and other edible items necessary for a decent living.".
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In our country a huge number of people are living below poverty line. Despite several
measures to improve their lot, their standard of living has not shown any significant
improvement. The people living below poverty line live in  slums under miserable and
unhygienic conditions. For want of adequate health care, many of them die in their early
ages. They mostly remain illiterate. It is the duty of the Government to take care of those
sections of the society. The people living below poverty line should be given some basic
facilities in order to enable them to lead a reasonably decent life. Therefore, it is proposed to
amend the Constitution with a view to making it mandatory on the part of the State to
provide certain facilities to persons living below poverty line.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI;
July 23, 2012. BHOLA  SINGH
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for certain facilities like education, health care, shelter
and employment, etc. to people living below poverty line. This would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely that an annual recurring expenditure of
about rupees five hundred crore will be involved. Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of
rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be involved.
4

MGIPMRND—1938LS(S3)—07-08-2012.
LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
—————
(Dr. Bhola Singh, M.P .)