1
THE PAYMENT OF COMPENSATION TO PERSONS ATTACKED
BY WILD ANIMALS  BILL, 2014
By
SHRI M.K. RAGHA V AN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for payment of compensation to persons attacked by wild animals and for
matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Payment of Compensation to Persons Attacked by
Wild Animals Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, ‘wild animal’ has the same meaning as assigned to it in the Wild Life
Protection Act, 1972.
Bill No. 76 of  2014
-
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
extent.
Definitions.
53 of 1972.
5

2
3. (1) The Central Government shall frame a Scheme for payment of compensation to
persons attacked by wild animals.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the scheme shall
include:—
(i) payment of compensation of rupees two lakh in case of death caused by a wild
animal;
(ii) payment of compensation of rupees fifty thousand in case of an injury caused by a
wild animal;
(iii) an insurance scheme for persons residing near areas generally inhabited or
frequented by wild animals; and
(iv) compensation in case of damage or loss to property or crops due to attack by wild
animals.
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
payment of compensation to the persons attacked by wild animals.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, no compensation shall be payable
to a person attacked by wild animal under the following circumstances:—
(i) if he has gone to a forest area or an area generally inhabited or frequented by
wild animals for the purpose of hunting or capturing the wild animals alive;
(ii) if he has attacked a wild animal except under the circumstance of self-defence;
(iii) if he has strayed into an area which is exclusively specified for wild animals;
and
(iv) if he commits any act which would result in hunting or torturing or leading to
cruelty to or exploiting a wild animal.
5. The Scheme shall be administered by such authority, not lower in rank than the
District Collector, as may be specified by the Central Government.
6. The provisions of  this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to frame a
scheme for
compensation
to persons
attacked by
wild animals.
Compensation
not payable in
certain
circumstances.
Administration
of the Scheme.
Power to make
rules.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In the recent days, there have been several cases of attacks by wild animals on innocent
persons resulting in death or serious injury to those persons. There have also been instances
when property and crops were damaged by wild animals.
It has also been seen that the victims of attack by wild animals are mostly poor people.
After such attacks, it often happens that they either die or suffer from permanent disability.
In either case, their dependants have to fight for their survival. At present there is no
provision for payment of compensation to the persons attacked by wild animals. There is a
provision for punishment for cruelty to wild animals but there is no provision for compensation
if wild animals attack innocent persons.
Therefore, a provision, with due safeguards, has been made for payment of
compensation to persons attacked by wild animals.
N
EW DELHI; M. K.  RAGHA V AN
June 30, 2014.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall frame a Scheme for
payment of compensation to the persons attacked by wild animals. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to
involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees three hundred crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore  is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for payment of compensation to persons attacked by wild animals
and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri M.K. Raghavan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—988LS(S3)—24.07.2014.