     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill  No.  76  of  2022
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR DEVELOPMENT AND
REJUVENA TION OF WA TER BODIES IN FOREST AREAS IN THE
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH BILL, 2022
By
SHRI SUDHEER GUPTA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide special financial assistance to the State Government of Madhya
Pradesh to meet the expense of development and rejuvenation of water
bodies in the forest areas  and for matters connected
therewith in the State of Madhya Pradesh.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance for Development
and Rejuvenation  of Water Bodies in Forest Areas in the State of Madhya Pradesh
Act, 2022.
Short title and
commencement.
5

(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “aquatic ecosystem” means all organic and inorganic matter and all
living organisms living in or located in or on water or the beds or shores of a
water body;
(b) “drain” includes gutters, wastewater canals, sewers and all outlets or
flow of waste water including overflow of rainwater;
(c) “forest   area”  means  any  district   where  more  than   thirty-three per
cent of the total geographical area is covered by forests and has been declared
as the forest area by the State  Government of the Madhya Pradesh or the
Central Government, as the case may be, for the purpose of this Act; and
(d) “groundwater” means all water under the surface of the ground, whether
in solid or liquid form;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) “water body” means any body of flowing or standing water, whether
natural or artificial and whether the flow or presence of water is continuous,
intermittent or occurs only during a flood, including but not limited to a lake,
river, creek, stream, tank, well, pond and wetland.
3. (1) The State Government of Madhya Pradesh shall forward the details of
the required infrastructure and the estimated cost of the water bodies project of the
forest areas falling in the State.
(2) The Central Government, shall on receipt of details, provide funds to
the State Government for the development of water bodies in the forest areas in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The funds provided under sub-section (2) shall be utilised for,—
(a) expeditious completion of ongoing water bodies projects in forest areas;
(b) construction of small ponds for the use of animals in the forest areas;
(c) digging wells and bore wells in the forest areas;
(d) installing electric pumps for pumping water in the forest areas;
(e) meeting costs incurred on implementing the “Water Bodies
Rejuvenation Scheme” based on the water resources of the forest areas;
(f) renovation of old ponds and water reservoirs in forest areas; and
(g) construction of canals.
(4) The State Government of Madhya Pradesh shall furnish the details of
expenditure likely to be incurred on the  water bodies development works in forest
areas to the Central Government in such manner and in such times as may be
prescribed:
Provided that if the State Government of  Madhya Pradesh fails to utilise the
funds for the purpose it was released or fails to produce the details under
sub- section (4), the Central Government shall withhold sanction of funds to the State
Government.
2
5
State Governments
to forward the
details to the
Central
Government.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Definitions.

4. The State Government of Madhya Pradesh shall, before forwarding the details
to Central Government under section 3, make the regulation for the purpose of—
(a) designating any area as forest area;
(b) designating any area as a water quality control zone for the purpose of
protecting water, aquatic eco-system or drinking water source;
(c) governing, regulating or prohibiting any use or activity in a water quality
control zone or any part of a zone;
(d) improving the drainage and sewerage system;
(e) ensuring clear separation between sewerage or waste water and sources
of clean water to avoid contamination; and
(f) ensuring quick absorption or clear flow of rain water and sources of
clean water to avoid contamination.
5. The State Government of Madhya Pradesh shall, before forwarding the details
to the Central Government under section 3, take into consideration the scientific,
intrinsic and other information relating to—
(a) the physical characteristics of land in the area, including its topography
and soil types;
(b) the ability of the soil or water in the area to assimilate nutrient and
other pollutants;
(c) water bodies or groundwater in the area, including information relating
to—
(i) the quality characteristics of the water;
(ii) the susceptibility of  water to contamination or adverse changes
in level; and
(iii) the extent to which the water is undistributed by human activity;
(d) the area’s aquatic eco-systems;
(e) whether the area contains a source or a potential source, of drinking
water;
(f) whether the area supports species that are sensitive to alterations in
water quality resulting from human activity;
(g) whether the area provides habitat for endangered species; and
(h) the perception of farmers and native inhabitants of the area regarding
quality, quantity and prospects of water in a particular zone including—
(i) the possibilities of flood and/or water logging; and
(ii) any other matter which the Government consider relevant.
6. The Central Government shall render scientific and technical advice
and assistance to the State Government of Madhya Pradesh if so required to
achieve the purposes of this Act.
7. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide financial assistance to the State
Government of Madhya Pradesh for protection of water bodies and for
promotion of rain harvesting and watershed management programmes.
5
10
15
20
3
Central Government
to provide financial
assistance to State
Government of
Madhya Pradesh.
Central Government
to render scientific
and technical advice.
State Government
of Madhya Pradesh
to consider the
scientific, intrinsic
and other information
relating to
water bodies.
Power of State
Governments to
make regulations.
25
30
35
40

(2) The Central Government before releasing the money shall ensure that State
Government has complied with the provisions of this Act.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to make
rules.
4
5
10

5
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There is growing global recognition that forest conservation efforts, most
importantly the local, natural and biodiversity-rich forests, yield better water, food
and nutrition security by tackling ‘development and climate inducted’ disaster in
various ways. It is argued that approximately seventy-five per cent. of the world’s
accessible fresh water for agricultural, domestic, urban, industrial and environmental
uses comes from forests. However, changes in climate and land-use are contributing
to altered groundwater and base flows locally, and precipitation regionally, with
approximately eighty per cent. of the world population facing water insecurity, the
management of forests for water is increasingly important.
The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 has put some restrictions on the use of
forest land for non-forest purposes. Due to this, water bodies and other development
activities cannot be undertaken in the forest areas. It is neither justified nor appropriate
to deprive the people who have been living in forest areas since time immemorial
from getting facilities for their upliftment. A large number of proposals relating to
water bodies and development of water bodies in the forest areas are pending approval
in the Ministry concerned. Due to lack of water bodies species living in the forest
areas have to depend on rain despite having the water reservoirs. Due to
non-availability of water bodies, the ecosystem of forest areas is degrading which
compels them to live in the verge of extinction.
The State Government do not have sufficient funds for the development of
water bodies projects in the forest areas. The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide financial
assistance to meet the expense of development and rejuvenation of water bodies in
the forest areas and for matters connected therewith in State of Madhya Pradesh.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;                              SUDHEER GUPTA
31 January, 2022.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for rendering of scientific and technical advice
and assistance to the State Government of Madhya Pradesh.  Clause 7 provides for
financial assistance to the State Government of Madhya Pradesh for development,
rejuvenation and protection of water bodies etc.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India.  As the sums of moneys which will be given to the State of
Madhya Pradesh as special financial assistance by appropriation by law made by
Parliament will be known only after the plans to be implemented by the State
Government of Madhya Pradesh with the approval of Government of India as
identified, it is not possible at present to give the estimates of recurring expenditure,
which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
No  non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the State Government of Madhya Pradesh to
make regulations for the purpose of designating any area as forest area, etc. Clause 8
empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purpose of this
Act. As the regulations and rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation,
therefore, is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide special financial assistance to the State Government of Madhya
Pradesh to meet the expense of development and rejuvenation of
water bodies in the forest areas  and for matters connected
therewith in the State of Madhya Pradesh.
.
————
(Shri  Sudheer Gupta, M.P .)