I 
5 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABUA ON 
BiB No. 77 of 197. 
THE CONSTITUTION (FIFTIETH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1979 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution oj India. 
J3E it enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic 
of -rndia as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Fiftieth Amendment) Act, Short 
19~ ti~ 
2. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution,- Amend-
ment of 
(a) in List II-State List, in entry 15, after the words "preven- Seventh 
tion of animal diseases", the words, figures and letter "subject to Schedule. 
the provisions of entry 17C of. List III" shall be inserted; 
(b) in List III-Concurrent List, after entry 17B, the following 
10 entry shall be inserted, namely:-
. "17C. Prohibiting the slaughter of cows and calves and 
other milch and draught cattle.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Directive Principle of State Policy contained in article 48 of the 
Constitution enjoins that "the State shall endeavour to organise agri-
culture and animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines and shall, 
in particular, take steps for preserving and, improving the breeds, and 
prohibiting the slaughter, of cows and calves and other milch and 
draught cattle". In order to give effect to this directive principle, 
several States have enacted legislation restricting slwRhter of cows and 
their progeny and other milch and draught cattle. 
2. Legislation in this matter is relatable to entry 15 of the State List 
and consequently there is no uniformity in the legislation enacted to 
give effect to this directive principle. There is a strong pubJic opinion 
in favour of a uniform legislation relating to prevention of slaughter 
of cows and calves' and other milch and draught cattle. The Lok Sabha 
also passed a Resolution on the 12th April, 1979, urging the Government 
of India to ensure that ban on the slaughter of cows and calves should 
be effected in accordance with the Constitutional provision. 
3. It is therefore proposed to amend the Constitution with the limited 
objective of securing legislative competence for Parliament to legislate 
on the subject of prohibition of s:Laughter of cows and calves and other 
milch and draught ~attle. To achieve this objective, it is proposed to 
insert a new entry in the Concurrent List on this subject and to make 
the existing entry 15 in the State List subject to the proposed new entry 
in the ConC'Urrent List. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object. 
NEW DELlu; SURJIT SINGH BARNALA. 
The 10th May, 1979. 
, 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
• • • • • 
SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
[Article 246] 
• • • • • 
. List II-State List 
• • • • • 
15. Preservation, protection and improvement of stock and prevention 
of animal diseases; veterinary training and practice. 
• • '. • • 
3 

LOK SABHA 
I 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
(Shri Surjit Singh BamaZa,. 
Minister of Agriculture and 
Irrigation) . 