As ~ucli> IN Ips: s~ ON 
(7 ..... NoYllOlft, 19M 
8W H •• ." ", 1," 
THE MINERAL OILS (ADOITIONAL DUTIES OF 
EXCISE AND CUSTOMS) AMENDMENT BILL, 1964 
A 
Bn.L 
further to amend the Mineral Oill (Additional Dutie. of E%CiIe and 
Custom..!) Act, 1958. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
\ 1. This Act may be called the Mineral Oils (Additional Duties of Short title. 
Excise and Customs) Amendment Act, 1964. 
S 2. In the Mineral Oils (Additional Duties of Excise and Customs) Amendment 
27 of 19S8• Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in the long of1ong title. 
title, for the words "certain mineral oils", the words "certain mineral 
products" shall be substituted. 
3. In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the Amendment 
10 words "Mineral Oils", the words "Mineral Products" shall be ofsection I. 
IS 
20 
substituted. 
4. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the Amendment 
Table, the following Table shall be substituted, namely: _ of BectiOtl 3· 
Description of goods 
I 
I. Motor spirit . 
2. Kerosene 
"TABLE 
Rate of additional duty 
2 
One hundred and sixty-five rupees per 
kiIolitre at fifteen degrees of Centigrade 
thermometer. 
Eighty rupees per kilolitre at fifteen degrees 
of Centigrade thermometer. 
3. Refined diesel oils and One hundred rupees per kilolitre at fifteen 
vaporizing oil. degrees of Centigrad~ thermometer. 
.... Diesel oil, not otherwise Sixty rupees per metric tonne. 
specified. 
25 5. Furnace oil . Sixty rupees per metric tonne. 

.. ' '! -
Description of goods 
I 
; .. 
6. hphe1t . and Bitumen as 
described in itein"No. 11(1) 
of the First. Schedule to 
- the Central Excises and 
Salt Act, 1944. 
7. All products as described 
in item No. I tA of the 
First Schedule to the 
. Central Excises and Salt 
Act, 1944. 
2 
Rate of additional duty 
2 
Fifty rupeOi per metric tonne. 
Three hundred rupees per metric tonne.". 
Amendment 5. In section 5 of the principal Act, in clau&e (b), the words and 
of section S. figure "under section 4 or" shall be omitted. 
Declaration under the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931 
S 
I of 1944-
10 
1 of 1944. 
It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public -interest IS 
that the provisiQJls of clause 4 of this Bill shall have immediate effect 
under the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931. 16 of 1931. 

~ 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Mine~l Oils (Addi~ionalDuties ~f'Exci~e'and Customs) Act, 
1958 WaS enacted for tile' purpose of levying ~nd collecting additional 
duties af excise and customs on certain mineral oils. The purpose 
underlying that ,enactment was to readjust, with effect from the 20th 
May, 1958, the excise and customs duties in the light of the reduction 
in prices agceed to by the principal companies distributing mineral 
oil products in India. The aforesaid Act provides for ceiling rates 
within which effective rat~s. are fixed by notification. Since the 
introduction ?f the revised pricing structure from the 1st October, 
1961 and up to the 30th September, 1964, a sum of nearly rupees five 
crares has accrued in favour of Government due to reduction of f.o.b. 
cost of petroleum products and freight thereon. It is expected that 
further accumulations of like nature will also accrue to Government. 
The existmg cetling rates will not enable a quick recovery of these 
amounts from the distributing companies. 
The Bi il seeks to enhance the existing ceiling rates adequately in 
respect of the mineral oil products already covered by the Act; at 
the san,e time, provision is also being made for levy of additional 
duties on certain other petroleum products such as asphalt and bitu-
men. This is being done with a view to enable appropriation from 
the companies or over-recoveries on these products, if fOUnd necessary 
in'the future. 
NEW DELHI; T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
The 12th November, 1964. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy, of letter dated the 14th November, 1964 from 
Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, Minister of Finance to the Secretary, Lok 
Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter, of the 
Bill further to amend the Mineral Oils (Additional Duties of Excise 
and Customs) Act, 1958 has recommended under article 117 (1) of 
the Constitution the introduction of the Bill in the Lok Sabha. 

Short tide 
a1d com-
meDcclDerlt. 
LeTy aDd 
collection of 
additional 
duties of 
escilC on 
certain 
mineral oils. 
Additional 
duties of 
esciIe I1ld 
CUItomI not 
to bc added 
to price of 
aoods for 
iale. 
• 
~XUl\E 
ExftACfS FROU _ ~ 01L$ (ADDrnONAJ. Dopa 0' heme: 
AN.» ClJSTO)(S) ACT, 1~ 
(27 or 1968) 
An Act to provide for the levy and collection of additional 
duties of excise and customs on certain mineral oils . 
• • • • • 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mineral Oila (Additional 
Duties of Excise and Customs) Act, 1958. 
• • 
3. (1) There shall be levied and collected in respect of the goods 
mentioned in column 1 of the Table hereunder duties of excise at 
such rates not exceeding those specified in relation thereto in 
column 2 of the said Table as may be specified by the Central 
Government by notification in the Official Gazette,-
Description of goods 
I. Motor spirit . 
2. Kerosene 
. 
3. Refined diesel oils and 
vaporizing oil. 
4. Diesel oil, not otherwise 
specified. 
S. Furnace oil 
• 
TABLE 
. Rate of additional duty 
Fifty-six rupees and five naye paise per 
kilolitre at fifteen degrees of Centigrade 
thermometer. 
Twenty-six rupees and eighty naye paise per 
kilolitre at fifteen degrees of Centigrade 
thermometer . 
Thirty-three rupees and fifty-five naye 
paise per kilolitre at fifteen degrees of 
Centigrade thermometer. 
Nineteen rupees and seventy naye paise per 
metric tonne. 
Nineteen rupees and seventy naye paise per 
metric tonne. 
• • • 
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 64A of the 
Indian Sale of Goods Act, 1930, or in any other law for the time 3 of 1930. 
being in force, or in any contract or agreement, no purchaser 
purchasing any ot the goods referred to in section 3, shall be liable 
to payor be sued for, or in respect of,-
• • • • • 
(b) the whole or any part of the additional duties of customs 
leviable under section 4 or under the Indian Tariff Act, 1934, to,. of I9U 
the extent to which such duties have become leviable by reason 
of this Act, 
as an addition to the contract price payable by him in respect of the 
goods so purchased'. 
• • • • • GMGlPND-T. S. Wing-74 M. of Law (318I)-I4-II-l964- 2200 

....... 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the ,Mineral Oils (Additional Duties of Excise and 
Customs) Act, 1958. 
(Shri T. T. Krishnamachari. 
Minister of Finance.) 