1. 
2, 
3. 
4. 
LOK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE MADRAS STATE (ALTERATION OF NAME) BILL, 1968 
(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
Page 1,-
in the long title of the Bill -
after ''Madras ,I insert ,,~" 
Page 2, line 17,-
omit "and" -
Page 2, line 23,-
ill "maye" read "make" 
Page 2,-
omit line 24 -
5. Page 6,-
in the marginal heading to article 3.lA,-
for "from" read "for" - -
6. . On the Docket Pa£e in the long titl~~ 
before "the name" read "to alter" -

. " 
, !t-!f!z 'n ft, e· 
THE MADRAS STATE (ALTERATION'OF NAME) 
BILL, t968, 
A 
BILL 
to alter the name of the St4te at M ... 
~)t e~actep" 1;Iy ParliaIllent in the Nin~enth Year of the 
l;l~~1:IJr>~~,c,:, 9~, lAdi~ ~,~ fo;U~~s:-:-
1, '(1) This Act'may be called the Madras State (Alteration of Short title 
, Name)' Act, 1968.'" , '.. " . - and com· 
'i '. mence_ 
(B) It shall come into force on such date as -the Central Govem- ment 
s JDAt ~~, by n~tic4tion in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
~. ~~! tJ:Us. Act,unle~ the ~ontext o~hel'wise requifes,-:- _ . Deftnl-
(a) "appointed day" mean~, th,e ~~ ap~~ ~ ~ liODl, 
,~tiop. (2) ~ ~tion 1 fo,~ the, comjng~to forc~ otthis Ac,t; . ,.. . .' " . ". 

Alteration 
of name 
of State 
of Madras. 
Amend. 
ment of 
article 
alA. 
article 188 
and arti-
cle 2goA 
ot the 
Consti· 
tution. 
Amend. 
ment of 
First 
and 
Fourth 
Schedules 
to the 
ConstL 
tution. 
Power to 
adapt 
lawi. 
Poowerto 
construe 
law .. 
i 
('b) lIappropriate Government" means, as retpeet.I a iaw re. 
lating to a matter enumerated in List I in the Seventh Schedule 
to the Constitution, the Central Government, and as respects any 
other law, the State Government; 
(c) "law" includes any enactment, Ordinance, regulation, S 
order, bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or other instrument 
having the force of law in the whole or any part of the State of 
Madras. 
3. As from the appointed day, the State of Madras shall be known 
as the State of Tamil Nadu. 
" In sub-clause (a) of clause (2) of article SIA, in sub-clause 
(a) of clause (1) of article 16S and in article 290A of the Constitution, 
for the word "Madras", the words "Tamil Nadu" shall be Itubstituted. 
5. (1) In the First Schedule to the Constitution, under the heading 
10 
ilL THE STATES", for the figure and word "7. Madras", the figure ]5 
and wQrds "7. Tamil Nadn" .shaU be substituted. 
(2) In the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, for the figure and 
and word "S. Madras", the figure a~ words "S. Tamil Nadu" shall be 
substituted. . 
6. (1) For the purpose of giving effect to the alteration of the 20 
name of the State of Madras by section 3, the appropriate Govern-
ment may, before the expiration of one yearfrom the appointed day, 
by order, maye such adaptations and modifications of any law made 
ment may, before the expiration of one year from the appointed 48Y, 
before the appointed day, whether by way of repe¥ or amendment 2S 
as may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such law 
shall have effect IUbjecl to the adaptations and modifications so made. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to prevent a com-
petent Legislature or other competent authority from repealing or 
amending any law adapted or modified by the appropriate Govern- 30 
m.ent under the said sub-section. 
7. Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision hal 
been made under section 6 for the adaptation of a law made before 

3 
the appointed day, any court. tribunal or authority required or em-
powered to enforce such law may construe the law in such manner, 
without affecting the substance, as may be necessary or proper In re-
gard to the matter before the court, tribunal or authority. 
S 8. Where immediately before the appointed day any legal proceed- Legal pro-
ings are pending to which, the Staw of Madras is a party, the State ceedin,s. 
of Tamil Nadu shall be deemed to be substituted for the State of 
;Madras in those proceedings. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Government of !4adras fQrwarded to, the Central Government 
in September, 1967: the-resolutiOn pas~ed unahimousi y by the Legis-
lative Assembly and the Legislative COuncil of Madras in July, 1967, 
recommending that the name of the State of Madras be changed into 
"Tamil Nadu" and requested the Central Government to bring for-
ward the necessary legislation in Parliament to give effect to the 
resolution. The Bill provides for such alteration of the name of the 
State of Madras and contains the necessary amendments to the pro-
visions of the Constitution and also consequential provisio118. 
2. As required by the proviso to article 3 of the Constitution, the 
President referred the Bill to the Legislature of the State of Madras 
for expressing its views thereon and that Legislature has approved 
the enactment of the Bill by Parliament. 
NEW Da.m; Y. B. CHAVAN. 
The 21st Augult, 19M. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 3 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 311[67-SR, dated the 23rd August, 1968 from 
Shri Y. H. Chavan, Minister of Home Affairs to the Secretary Lok 
Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter ef the 
Bill to alter the name of the State of Madras, recommends the intro-
duction of the Bill in the Lok Sabha under proviso to article 3 of the 
Constitution. 
4 ~ .... 

.MEMORANDUM REGARDlNCr~ATED LEGISLATION 
Clause. 6 ot the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to 
adapt and modify existing laws for the purpose of giving effeet to the 
alteration of the name ot the State of Madi'u by cliui18 3. !;ThiIJ 
power will be available only tor a period of one.,~ ~ ., ap-
pointed da,y. The adaptations and modifications cannot· affect the 
substance of the laws adapted. 
'2. 'The··de1~g'tion of'leg1~1a'tive pow~r it of IhidrMll ~8Ncter. 
; 

Savinc of 
laws pro-
viding 
from 
acquisition 
~ estates, 
etc. 
Constitu-
tion 01 
Legisla_ 
tures in 
States. 
" t',", ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
.. , 
• • • • 
3lA (1) • • • • • 
... (2) In· this article,-
, r"', 
"'(4) the expression '~tate" shall,' in relation to any 10C!al 
area, have the same meaning as that expression or its local equi-
.' valent ~s in the exiJtj:Qg law ~elating to land tenures in fOi'ce in 
that area and shall also include-
(i) any jagir, inam or muafi or other similar grant and 
in the States of Madras and Kerala, any ;anmam right; 
• • • • • 
168. (1) For every State there shan be a Legislature which shall 
consist of the Governor, and 
(a) in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, 
Madras, Maharashtra, Mysore, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and West 
Bengal, two Houses; 
• • • • • 
AnnU'a I 290A. A sum of forty-six lakhs and fifty thousand rupees shall be 
payment charged on, and paid out of, the Consolidated Fund of the State 01 
to certain Kerala every year to the Travancore Devaswom. Fund; and a sum of 
~~swom thirteen lakhs and fifty thousand rupees shall be charged on, and 
un. paid out of the Consolidated Fund of the State of Madras every year 
to the Devaswom Fund established in that State for the maintenance 
of Hindu temples and shrines in the territories transferred to that 
State on the 1st day of November, 1956, from the State of Travan .. 
core-Cochin. 
• • • • • 
FIRST SCHEDULE 
[Articles 1 and 4] 
I. THE STATES 
Name Territoriu 
• • • • • 
7. Madras The territories which immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution we:re e1thet 
_ ... (. 
. - - 6 
"' 

Name 
• 
Territorie. 
comprised in the Province of Madras or were 
being administered as if they formed part of 
that Province and the territories specified in 
section 4 of the States Reorganisation Act, 
1956, and the Second Schedule to the Andhra 
Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Bounda-
ries) Act, 1959, but excluding the territories 
specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 and 
sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Andhra 
State Act, 1953, and the territories specified in 
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 5, sec-
tion 6 and clause (d) of sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 7 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 
and the territories specified in the First Sche-
dule to the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Al-
teration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 . 
• • • 
FOURTH SCHEDULE 
[Articles 4(1) and 80(2)] 
Allocation of seats in the CoUDdl of States 
• 
To each State or Union territory specified in the first column of 
the following table, there shall be allotted the number of seats speci-
fled in the second column thereof opposite to that State or that Union 
territory, as the case may be. 
'r!\BLE. 
• • • • • 
8. Madras 18 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
.~ .lter the game;. Qfthe State o(Madras. 
(ShTi Y. B. Chavan, 
!..flnis,,,. '" HOIIU A//alrs.) 