. ZT APR 1३:
As mnTRopUCED IN LOK SABHA

[a की पि99टै

Bill No. 77 of 1992.

+ ERC a
| BHOPAL GAS LEAK DISASTER (PROCESSING OF CLAIMS)
. AMENDMENT BILL, 1992

A
BILL
to amend the Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster (Processing of Claims) Act, 1985.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows :— पे

1. This Act may be called the Bhopal Gas Laak Disaster (Pro-
“cessing of Claims) Amendment Act, 1992.

5 2, In section 6 of the Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster (Processing of
Claims) Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after
sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: —

4(5) The Commissioner and the officers subordinate to him autho-
rised to discharge functions under the Scheme shall be deemed to be
a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.”.

3. In section 7 of the principal Act, after the words “not below the
rank of a Secretary to that Government”, the words “or the Commis-
sioner” shall be inserted at the end-

2 APR

2

Short
title.

Amend-
ment of
section 6.

Amend-
ment of
section 7.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster (Processing of Claims) Act, 1985
confers certain powers on the Central Government to secure that claims
arising out of, or connected with, the Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster are
dealt with speedily, effectively, equitably and to the best advantage of
the claimants and for matters incidental thereto. Section 6 of the Act
provides for appointment of a Commissioner for the welfare of the
victims and other officers and employees to assist him. Section 7 of the
Act provides for delegation by the Central Government of all or any
of its powers under the Act except those specified in section 9 to the
Government of Madhya Pradesh or an officer of the Central Govern-
ment not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to that Government or an
officer of the Government of Madhya Pradesh not below the rank of a
Secretary to that Government. | i

2. Since the Commissioner for the welfare of the victims is the per-
son in-charge of implementing the Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster (Registra-
tion and Processing of Claims) Scheme, framed under the Act, and for
disbursement of the compensation amount, it is considered necessary
that he should also be included among the authorities who can be dele-
gated powers by the Central Government under section 7 of the Act.
Accordingly, the Act is proposed to be amended so that the powers could
be delegated to the Commissioner for the administration of the Scheme,

3. The Commissioners, Additional Commissioners and Deputy Com-
missioners are to exercise quasi-judicial functions under the Act and
the proceedings before them would be judicial proceedings. For reasons
of functional necessity, it is proposed to declare them as civil courts for
the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, which provides for prosecution for contempt of lawful
authority of public servants for offences against public justice and for
offences relating to documents given in evidence and for dealing with
offences affecting the administration of justice.

4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Deum; CHINTA MOHAN.
The 8th April, 1992,



ANNEXURE
Extract FroM THE BHoraL Gas Leak DIsAsTer
(Processine or Cuamms) Act, 1985
(21 oF 1985)

* * * * *

7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, delegate, subject to such conditions and limitations as may be
specified in the notification, all or any of its powers under this Act (ex-
spting the power under section 9 to frame a Scheme) to the Govern-
ment of Madhya Pradesh or an officer of the Central Government not
below the rank of a Joint Secretary to that Government or an officer of
‘the Government of Madhya Pradesh not below the rank of a Secretary
to that Government. i i

* * * * *

Power to
delegate.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to amend the Bliopal Gas Leak Disaster (Processing of Claims) :

(Dr. Chinta Mohan, Minister of State in the —
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers)