~ , , 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA 
BJll No. 77o{.'70 
THE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE CESS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1970 ' 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Agricuttural Produce Cess Act, 19-40. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-first tear of the ,Republic 
of India as follows: - ' 
1. This Act may be called the Agricultural Produce Cess (Amendment) 
Act, 1970. 
Short 
title. 
.'" . 
~ I- - , 
rJ ',( 
"..r .', '~~ ~ 
n of 1940. 5 2. In section 2 of the Agricultural Produce Cess Act, 1940 (hereinafter Amendment 
referred to as the principal Act), for clause (a), the following clause shall oflectioo a· 
be substituted, namely:-
520f1962. 
'(a) "Col1ector" means a Collector of Customs as defined in 
clause (8) of section 2 of the Customs Act, 1962, and'. 

2 
~t 3. In section, 5 o'f the principal Act, for the words "The Central Board 
oflCdiOll ,. of Revenue", the words and figures "The Cen.tral Board of Excise and 
Customs constituted under the Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963" shall 
be substituted. 
In.ertion 
of new 
Ilec:tlona SA 
and ,D. 
Certain 
proriaiOlll 
of the 
CUltoms 
Act.I96~ 
to apply. 
Penaltles 
Auwadment 
of section 7. 
4. After section 5 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be S 
inserted, namely:-
"5A. The provisions of the Customs Act, 1962, and the rules and 50l uf 1962. 
reauJations made thereunder, including those I'elating to refunds and 
exemptions from duty, ,~hall so far as may be, apply in relation 
to the levy aDd collection of customs duty on all a:-tic1es included in 10 
the Schedule as they apply in relation to the levy and collection of 
duty payable to the Central (iovernment under that Act. 
5B. (1) Whoever-
(a) evades the payment of any customs duty under this Act, 
or IS 
(b) fails to furnish any information which it is his duty to 
furnish or furnishes information which is false in material parti-
culars or which he does not ~lieve t,:), be true, or 
(c) obstructs the Collector or any other officer in the perfor-
mance of his duties under this Act or any rules made thereunder, 20 e'I!'.' 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months, 'Of with fine which may extend to two 
thousand rupees, or with both, 
(2) Any court trying an offence under this Act may direct that 
any article specified in the Schedule in respect of which it is satisfied 2S 
that an offence punishable under this Act has been committed shall 
be forfeited to the Central Government and may also direct that all 
packales, coverings or receptacles in which such article is contained 
and every vessel or other conveyance used in carrying such article 
shaY. be forfeited to the Central Government.". 30 
5. In sub-section (1) of section. 7 of the principal Act, for the words 
·'the representatives of the Central Legislature", the words "the Members 
of Parliament" shall be substituted. 
I 
e. In section 9 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely: - 3S 
.. (3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
me)' be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is 
in session for a total perio'd of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session in which it is so laid or the successive sessions aforesaid, 40 
both H'O'Uses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houlelagree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall there-
a.ftet hIIft,eift!et <>nly in such modified form or be of no effect, as 
the case may be; so, however. that any such modification or annul-
ment. shall be without prejudice t·o the validity of anything previ~ 45 
ously done under that rule,". 

3 
7. In the Schedule to' the principal Act, for item 21, the following item 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"21. Sheep's or lamb's wool and animal hair, whether or ·no~ 
~coured or carded." 
Amcnd .... r.1 
Of the 
Schedule. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Agricultural Produce Cess Act, 1940 provides ror imposition of 
cess at the rate of one-half of one per cent. ad valorem on all articles 
included in the Schedule to this Act which are exported from India. 
There is no specific provision in this Act for the levy of penalty in cases 
where the expo'rters attempt to evade payment of the cess. 
2. In the recent past with a view to achieve simplification in the 
matter of collection of the cess, it has been decided that in cases where 
the cess payable is only up to Rs. 100 in each case the exporters may 
be permitted to affix customs revenue stamps equivalent to the cess pay-
able on th~ ba&is of their self assessments of the value of the cargo. The 
correctness of the stamps affixed will be verified with reference to the 
Customs House record afterwards and short recovery, if any claimed. 
3. Further, the Agricultural Produce Cess is in the nature of a customs 
duty which is collected by the customs collectors. These customs collec-
tors have been exercising various powers vested in them under the 
Customs Act, 1962, in the collection of the cess also. In order to dis-
courage evasion of tax and misdeclaration of value o'f the cargo and short 
payment of cess, it is proposed that the provisions of the Customs Act, 
1962 and the rules and regulations made thereunder should be applicable 
to the levy and collecti<:ms of the cess. 
4. Opportunity has also been taken to carry out certain other amend-
ments of clariftcatory or consequential nature. '0. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 27th July, 1970. FAKHRUDDIN ALI AHMED. 
PRESfDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 26 (6) 16B-Budget, dated the 21st July. 1970 from 
Shri Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed, Minister of Food and Agri culture to the 
Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the Agri-
cultural Produce Cess (Amendment) Bill, 1970 recommends the introduc-
tion and considl!ration of the Bill in the Lok Sabha under article 117 (1) 
and 117 (3) of the Constitution of India. 
4 
, . 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Ag, .cultural Produce Cess Act, 1940 provides for the levy and 
collection of cess in the nature of a duty of customs in respect of the 
articles included in the Schedule to the Act. The collections including 
recoveries of penalties made through the existing revenue collection 
organisations are to be credited to the ConsoLdated Fund of India in the 
first instance. Thereafter, the entire net proceeds (gross collections less 
refunds) reduced by the cost of co'llection as determined by the Govern-
ment of India are paid to the l.C.A.R. to meet the expenditure of the 
various activities undertaken by it. 
2. The net revenue from the proposed legislation, on the basis of the 
current trend, is est;mated to be of the order of Rs. 4,000 per year only 
and suitable budget provision exists for this purpose. No non-recurring 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India is involved (ft antici-
pated on account of the amendments proposed in the Bill. 
3. InCidentally, it may be pointed out that the proposed amendments are 
not altogether new in character. Recovery of the cess including recover-
ies of short payments and the refunds thereof are already being made 
by the various collectors of customs under the powers vested in them in 
pursuance of the proviSions of the Customs Act, 1962. The present legis-
lation only attempts to make the Agricultural Produce Cess Act, 1940 
up-to-date and exhaustive so that possible legal complications which 
might arise in future are guarded against. 
, 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Section 6 ($) of the Agricultural Produce Cess Act, 1940 empowers 
the Central Government to make rules regulating the expenditure of 
money out of the cess.paid to the Council under the Act. Further the 
Central Bo'ard of Revenue (now the Central Board of Excise and Customs 
constituted under the Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963) has been 
empowered under section 5 of the Act to make rules, providing on such 
conditions as may be specified in the rules, regarding refund of, and 
exemption from, Cess. The matters in respect of which rules may be 
made relate to procedure and details. Therefore, the delE!g8tion of legis-
lative power is of a normal character. 

19 of 1934. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE CESS ACT, 1940 
(27 OF 1940) 
* * • • • 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context,-
(a) "Collector" means a Customs-collector as defined in clause 
(c) of section 3 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878, or a Collector. of Land 
Customs as defined in clause (c) of section 2 of the Land Customs 
Act, 1924, as the case may be, and 
* • • • • 
5. The Central Board of Revenue may make rules providing, on su"h 
conditions as may be specified, in the rules, fO'r-
(a) the refund of duty levied where articles are exported by 
land and subsequently imported into India, and 
(b) the export by land, without payment of the duty of articles, 
which are subsequently to be imported into India. 
* • • • • 
7. (1) The' Council shall constitute a Standing F'nance Committee, 
of which one member shall be· chosen. from· omong the representatives 
of the Central Legislature on the governing body of the Council, and one 
member shall be an officer appointed by the Central Government. 
• • • • • 
9. (1) * • • • 
(3) All rules made under this Act shall be laid before Parliament as 
soon as may be after they are made. 
• • 
21. WOOL, raw. 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 3) 
• 
7 
• 
Definition .. 
Refund of, 
and 
"emption 
romceu. 
Standin. 
Pinance 
Committee. 
Power of 
Central 
Government 
to make 
rules. 

.' 
LOK SABl-IA 
A 
BILL 
lurther tel amend the Agricu1tUl'al ProJuce Cess Act, 19,0, 
(Shri Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed, 
Minister of Food and 
Agriculture,) 