As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABH#. ON' 
2 6 JUN 1967 
Bill No. 77 or 1"7 
THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES OF MINISTERS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1967 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Salaries and Allowance, of Minister. Act, 1952. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows :-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Salaries and Allowances of Short title 
and Ministers (Amendment) Act, 1967. COD1II1enCe-
merit. 
S (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of 
November, 1966. 
2. Section 4 of the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, 1952 Amendment 
shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof and,- ofsection 4· 

(i) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, {or the words 
"fifteen clays", the words "one month" shall be substituted; and 
(ii) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered and before 
the Explanation, the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:- 5 
"(2) In the event of the death of the Minister, his family 
shall be entitled to the use of the fumlshed residence 
occupied by the Mioister-
(a) for a perlod of two months immediately after 
his death, without payment of ren't and no charge shall 10 
fall on the family 01 the Minister in respect of the main-
tenance of such residence, and 
(b) for a further period of one month, on payment 
of rent at such rates as may be prescribed by rules made 
In this behalf by the Central Government and also 15 
charges In respect of electricity and water consumed in 
that residence during such further period.". 
2 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under section 4 of the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, 
1952, a Minister (which tenn includes Deputy Minister) ia entitled, 
without payment of rent, to the use of a furnished residence through-
out his term of office and a period of 15 days immediately thereafter. 
This period. ill short even when a Minister vacates otllce and is even 
more so when a Minister's family has to vacate the house after his 
death, considering that this is the period which would, in most cases, 
be taken up in completing the funeral rites. It is, therefore, proposed 
to increase with effect from the 1st November, 1966 the period to one 
month when the Minister vacates offtce and to three months in the 
event of his death.. For the first two months, the deceased Minister's 
family will not be liable for payment of rent or maintenance charges 
but during the third month, the family will have to pay rent at the 
pl'e'scribed rates and charges for electricity and water. 
Y. B. CHAV AN. 
NI-;W DELHI; 
The 20th March, 1967. 
3 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Under section 4 of the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, 
1952, a Minister (which term includes a Deputy Minister) is entitled, 
without payment of rent, to the use of a furnished residence through-
out his term of office and a period of 15 days immediately thereafter. 
The proposed provision in clause 2 of the Bill is to increase this perioa 
to one month when a Minister vacates office and to three months in 
the event of his death (the intention being that the deceased 
Minister's family may retain the residence for a period of two montos 
after the death of the Minister without payment of rent and for a 
further period of one month on payment of rent at prescribed rates). 
If the period of retention is increased to one month or three months, 
as the case may be, instead of 15 days as at present, the additional 
financial expenditure likely to be involved out of the Consolidated 
Fund of India will be about Rs. 1,200 or, as the case may be, Rs. 4,500 
in the case of a Minister and will be about Rs. 815 or, as the case may 
be, Rs. 3,150 in the case of a Deputy Minister. However, as the ex-
penditure is of an uncertain and unpredictable nature, it would not 
be possible to make an exact assessment of the amount likely to be 
involved, but it is not expected to be large. 
4 

EXTRACT FROM THE SALAlUES AND ALLoWANCES OF Mnn:sTBas Act, 1952 
(58 01' 1952) 
• • • • • 
Relidence of 4. Each Minister shan be entitled without payment of rent to tIie 
Ministen. use of a furnished residence throughout his term of oftlce and for a 
period of fifteen days immediately thereafter, and no charge shaD. 
fan on the Minister personally in respect of the maintenance of .w:Il 
residence. 
Ezplanation.-For the purposes of this section, "residenCe" in-
cludes the staft· quarters and other buildings appurtenant thereto, 
and the garden thereof, and "maintenance" in relation to a residence 
includes the payment of local rates and taxes and the provialon of 
electricity and water. 
• • • • • 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers 
Act, 1952. 
(Shri Y. B. ChafJan, 
Minister of Homs AJlairs.) 