AS INTRODUCED IN THE Lok SABHA

2H 1968

Bill No._77_of 1998

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998
By
‘SHRI MADHUKAR SiRPOTDAR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as

1, This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1998.
2. After article 75 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,

“754. Notwithstanding anything contained in articles 74 and 75—

(J) The House of the People shall express its lack of confidence in the Prime
and his Council of Ministers only by electing his successor through a composite
supported by a majority of the total members of the House and presenting an address
effect to the President, who shall then appoint the person so elected as the new
e Minister.

2) In the event of failure of the Council of Ministers to secure, or retain the confidence
‘House of the People, and if the House is not able to elect a person to be appointed as
Prime Minister in accordance with the provisions laid down in clause (1), the
it shall, upon the advice of the Council of Ministers, dissolve the House of the
e within ten days, unless the House elects another person to be appointed as Prime

within this period”.

Short title.
Insertion of
TSA.
Provisions as to

the Council of


Amendment of
article 85.

Insertion of
new article
164A,

Provisions as to
confidence in
the Council of
Ministers,

‘Amendment of
article 174.

2,

3. In article 85 of the Constitution, in clause (2), the following proviso shall be
at the end, namely:—

"Provided that the power under sub-clause (b) of clause (2) shall be is
subject to the provision of article 75A”.

4. After article 164 of the Constitution, the following article shall be ins
namely:—

“16A. Notwithstanding anything contained in articles 163 and 164—

(1) The Legislative Assembly shall express its lack of confidence in the Chief Minis
and his Council of Ministers only by electing his successor through a composite m
supported by a majority of the total members of the Assembly and presenting an addi
that effect to the Governor, who shall then appoint the person so elected as the new
Minister.

(2) In the event of failure of the Council of Ministers to secure, or retain the confid
of the Legislative Assembly, anu if the Assembly is not able to elect a person to be appoil
as the new Chief Minister in accordance with the provisions laid down in clause (1), ।
Governor shall, upon the advice of the Council of Ministers, dissolve the Legisl:
Assembly within ten days, unless the Assembly elects another person to be appoint
Chief Minister within this period.”.

5. In article 174 of the Constitution, in clause (2), the following proviso shall
added at the end, namely:—

“Provided that the power under sub-clause (b) of clause (2) shall be exerci:
subject to the provisions of article 164A”.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Indian political system has come under increasing stress due to fractured polity
10 multiplicity of political parties. During the last four General Elections since 1989, no
litical party could secure majority in the House of the People. This period was marked by
succession of seven coalition or minority governments resulting in frequent elections,
is had a destabilising effect on the national psyche and our socio-economic system. A
estion mark has also arisen on the credibility of the present constitutional framework.

2. The Government has already decided to constitute a panel to review the Constitution

cope with emerging trends in Indian polity. A new dispensation is needed to impart
bility to our polity.

3. Even within the existing constitutional framework, a provision is needed to assign
irect and effective role to the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies for
ting an alternative Government when the Council of Ministers fails to secure, or retain
confidence of the House/Assembly. Such a provision will accord priority and activate
role of the House of the People and the Legislative Assembly, and eliminate the vice of

om political manoeuvres. Moreover, in that case, the dissolution of the House/
mbly shall become the last resort, and occur only when there is an insuperable
titutional impasse.

4. This Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives by insertion of two new articles
and 164A in the Constitution.

_ New Dewnt; MADHUKAR SIRPOTDAR


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * * *

85. (/) The President shall from time to time summon cach House of Parliament to
meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between its
last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session.

(2) The President may from time to time—
(a) prorogue the Houses or either House;
(4) dissolve the House of the People.

* * * * * *

174, (1) The Governor may from time to time summon the House or each House of
the Legislature of the State to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months

shall not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first
sitting in the next session.

(2) The Governor may from time to time—
(a) prorogue the House or either House;

(b) dissolve the Legislative Assembly.

* * * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Madhukar Sirpotdar, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MAND—1248LS—6-7-98,