BJU No. n of 1'55. 
11m FARIDABAD DEVELOPMENT 
CORPORATION BILL, 1955 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOlt SABRA) 

8W No. 71 of 1955. 
THE FARIDAB~ DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 
BILL,1955 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the' establiBhment Imd· regulation of a I trading Cor-
poration for the purpose of carrying on and promoting' trade 
and industry in the town of Faridabad, assisting i'n the reha-
bilitation of displaced persons settled the1"ein ·and 10r matters 
connected therewith . 
. BE it enacted ,bY'Pall1hunent: in' the Sixth ;Year _ of the.--:Republic 
of InciiaJ as follows~-
CUArT,ER I 
PIu'.LDIIINAllY ... 
5 ,1. This Act·-may be called the EaridaRad .peJlelopmEint Corpo. Short tide. 
ration Act, 1955. 
, 2. -In this Act, unless the context otherwise l'equires,- ~Qn •• 
(a) "Corporation" ,means the Faridabad Development 
Corporation established .. under section 3; 
10 (b) "displaced person" means any _person who, on. accQ1,Ult 
of the setting up of the Dominions of India and Pakistan or 
on. account, of civil, disturbances or .the fear of. such disturb-
ances in any area no~ forming part of Pakistan, has ... ~fter 
the 1st day of March, 1947, left, or been displaced. from, his 
15 place of residence in such. area and who has been subsequen~ 
ly residing in India; 

Incorpora-
ion. 
Consti-
Ndon of 
the Corpo. 
ration. 
Torm and 
coadidonl 
oflorvicot 
oImemboa. 
2 
(c) "Faridabad" means the new township at Faridabad 
in the district of Gurgaon in the State of Punjab, the area of 
which is described in the Schedule; 
(d) "member" means a member of the Faridabad Deve-
lopment Corporation and includes its Chairman; 5 
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under 
this Act. 
CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE CORPORATION 
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government 10 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, 
there shall !>e established a Corporation by tie name of the Farid-
abad Development Corporation. 
(2) The said Corporation shall be a body corporate having per-
petual succession and a common seal, and shall by the said name 15 
sue and be sued. 
4. The Corporation shall consist of a Chairman and such other 
members, being not less than four and not more than eight, all 
the Central GovernmeQt may, b.y notifl~atiQn U,l ~h~ Official 
Gazette, appoint. ~9 
5. (1) The term of office and conditions of serviee of the Cp$ 
man and other members shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Chairman or any other member may relign his oftlce 
by writing under hil "hand addressed to the Central Govenunent. 
but he shall continue in office until the appointment of his sue- i!\ 
cessor is notified in the Official Gazette. 
(3) A casual vacancy Created by the resignation of the Chair..:. 
; man or any other member under sub-section (2) or for any other 
reason shall be filled by fresh appointment. 
1?isqualiJic::a- 6. A person shall be disqualified for being appointed or for So 
~~:oi~~e~~ continuing as a member of the Corporation if he has, directly or 
for. conti-' indirectly, any interest in a subsisting contract made with, or in 
:=t::'of any work being done for, the Corporation except as a shareholder 
~e Corpoca- (other than a director) in an incorporated company: non. 
Provided that where he is a shareholder, he shall disclose te 35 
the Central Government the nature and extent of shares held by 
him in such company. 

7. If any member of the Corporation is by infirmity or other- '\,empo~ 
wise rendered temporarily incapable of carrying out his duties or :n;e~~bcr' 
is absent on leave or otherwise in circumstances not involving 
the vacation of his appointment, the Central Government may 
5 appoint another person to act in his place during his absence. 
S. No act or proceeding of the Corporation shall be invalid by vacancites . amongs reason only of the existence of any vacancy amongst its members members or 
or any defect in the constitution thereof. :!~:ti- ~ 
tution not 
to invalidate 
acts or pro-
ceedings of . 
the Corpora 
• tion. 
9. The Corporation may constitute such committees for gene": Comminees of the 
10 ral or speCial purposes as the Corporation deems necessary to Corporation. 
carry out the purposes of this Act. 
10. (1) The Corporation shall meet for the transaction 
business at such times and places as may be prescribed: 
of Meetings of the 
Corporation . 
Provided that the Chairman may, whenever he thinks fit. and 
15 shall, upon the written requisition of not less ~han two members. 
call a special meeting. 
(2) The Chairman or, in his absence, any memb~r chosen by 
the members present from among themselves, shall preside at a 
meeting of the Corpdration. 
20 (3) .All questions which come before any meeting of the Cor-
poration shall be decided by majority of votes of the members 
present, and in the case of an equality of votes, the Chairman, 
ur in his absence, any other person presiding, shall have a second 
or casting vote. 
25 11. All orders and decisions of the Corporation shall be Au!henti-
authenticated by the si,.gnature of the Chairman or any other :~~:! ~~d 
member authorised by the Corporation in this behalf, and all other other inatru-
instruments issued by the Corpor~tion sh~ll be authenticated by ~:~~~o­
the signature of the 4dminiatrator or any other officer of the Cor- ra!i0n. 
30 poration authorised in like manner in this behalf . 
. 12. (1) There shall be an Administrator of the Corporation who Afpoin~ei1t 
shall be appointed by the Central Government. ~ta~s-
(2) The Administrator shall be the chief executive officer of ~ftt1re og,;~n 
the Corporation -and all other officers of the Corporation shall be poration. 
3.1 subordinate to him. 
(3) The Administrator shall have the right to take part in the 
discussions of the Corporation or of any of its committees but 

4 r. 
shilJllctlot: ,haw· 'the, right to vote at the meetings of the,' Corpora-
tion or· of any of its: cOM.mittees': 
Provided that when one of the members of the Corporation is 
appointed under sub-section (1) as the Administrator, such Adminis-
trator shall have all the rights and privileges of a member. 5 
(4) The Corporation may appoint such other officers as it may 
consider necessary for the efficient performance of its functions 
under this Act. 
CHAPTER III 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE CORPORATION 
-
10 
Genel'll1 duty 13, It shall be the general duty of the Corporation to carry on 
~::~~~r..; and promote trade, business and industry iil Faridabad. to assist 
Powen'of ' 
the Cor-
poration. 
in the rehabilitation of displaced persops settled therein and to 
manage and develop the property of the Union vested in the Cor-
poration. 15 
14. (1) The Corporation may exercise all such powers as may 
be necessary or expedient for the purpose of carrying out its 
funetions, under ,this Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing pro-
vision, such 'power shall include the power- !lO 
(a) to acquire and hold such property, both movable and 
immovable, as the Corporation may deem necessary for effi-
ciently performing its functions under this Act and to' make 
impr~vements in such property and to transfer by way of sale, 
lease or otherwise any such property; 25 
(b) tocar~ on or promote any trade. business or industry; 
(c) to give financial or other assistance to persons to 
enable them to carryon trade, business or industry in Farid-
abad primarily with a view to providing employment to, and 
rehabilitating, displaced persons settled- therein; 30 
(d) to construct or cause to be constructed residential or 
other buildings and to sell or let such buildings or cause them 
to be sold or let, on sueh terms as may be prescribed; 
(e) to advance loans on such terms and for such purposes 
as may be pres~ribed; 35 
(1) to supply or cause to be supplied, in accordance with 
the law for the time being in force, electrical energy for 
domestic and, industrial, purp0Be8 'at reasonable rates; 
(g) to take such other measures as the Corporation may 
deem necessary for the rehabilitation of dispJaCled pel'lOJIs set- 40 
tIed in Faridabadj 

S 
(h) to ,take such steps as may be necessary for improving 
the economic and social conditions of the inhabitants of 
Faridabad. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall affect the exercise of any power 
5 or the performance of any function by. any local authority having 
jurisdiction in Faridabad. 
15. All non-recurring expenditure incurred by the Central Gov· Capital 
ernment or the body known as the Faridabad Development Board ~o~~ration. 
for and in connection with the development of Faridabad or for 
JO any of the purposes referred to in this Act upto the date of the 
establishment of the Corporation and declared to be capital ex-
penditure by the Central Government shall be treated as the 
capital provided by the Central Government to the Corporation. 
16. The Central Government may, after due appropriatfion made Grants and 
15 by Parliament by law in this behalf, make such grants and advance Icoans to ~e • orporatlon such loans to th'! Corporation as the Central Government may deem 
necessary for the performance of the functions of the Corporation 
under this Act; and all grants made and all loans advanced shall 
be on such terms and conditions as the Central Government may 
20 determine. 
17. All property, assets and funds owned or acquired by the Vesting ot 
Central Government or purporting to have been owned or acquir- PhIOPeoerty in e rpo-ed by the body known as the Faridabad Development Board for the ation. 
purposes of the development of Faridabad or for any of the pur-
25 poses referred to in this Act before the establishment of the Cor-
poration shall, on such establishment, vest in the Corporation . • 
18. The Corporation shall repay, at such intervals and on such Repayme 
terms as the Central Government may determine, the amount of ~~~~~ 
capital provided under section 15 and all loans advanced under with inte 
30 section 16 with interest at such rate as may, from time to time, 
be fixed by that Government .and such repayment of capital or 
loan or payment of interest shall be deemed to be part of the ex-
penditure of the Corporation. 
19. (1) All rights. liabilities and obligations of the Central Gov- eolWratioD 
35 ernment which, whether arising out of any contract or otherwise. ~igt::!nd 
were acquired or incurred by it in connection with any transaction liabilities . of the CeD-for the development of Farldabad or for any of the purposes re- tral Govern-
ferred to in this Act before the establishment of the Corporation, ment. in certaIn 
casel. 

6 
shall be deemed to have been acquired or incurred by the Corpo-
ration and shall be the rights, liabilities and obligations, respec-
tively, of the Corporation. 
(2) .All suits or other legal proceedings instituted or which 
might but for the issue of the notification under sub-section (1) cif 5 
section 3 have been instituted by or against the Central Govern-
ment may be continued or fnstituted by or against the Corporation. 
Fund of the ZOo (1) The Corporation shall have its own Fund and all receipts Corporation. 
Provision for 
depreciation 
and reserve 
and other 
funds. 
Power of the 
Corporation 
to spend. 
Budget. 
Annual 
Report. 
Accounts 
and Audit. 
of the Corporation shan be carried thereto and all payments by the 
Corporation shall be made therefrom. 
(2) All moneys ~longing to the Fund shall be deposited in 
such bank or invested in such manner as may be decided by the 
Corporation. 
10 
ZI. (1) The Corporation shall make such provision for deprecia-
tion and for reserve and other funds as the Central Government 15 
may from time to time direct. 
(2) The management of these funds. the sums to be carried 
from time to time to the credit thereof and the application of the 
moneys comprised therein shall be determined in accordance with 
such directions as the Central Government may from time to time 20 
issue. 
22. The Corporation shall have power to spend such sums as it 
thinks fit for performing its functions under this Act, and such sums 
shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the Fund of the 
Corporation. 25 
23. The Corporation shall prepare, in such form and at such time 
each year as may be prescribed, a budget in respect of every finan-
cial year next ensjling showing the estimated receipts and expendi-
ture, and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Govern-
ment. 30 
24. The Corporation shall prepare in such form and at such time 
each year as may be prescribed an annual report giving a true and 
full account of its activities during the previous financial year and 
copies thereof shall be sent to the Central Government and the 
Government of the State of Punjab. 35 
Z5. (1) The Corporation shall cause to be maintained such books 
of account and other books in relation to its accounts in such form 
and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) The accounts of the Corporation shan be audited at 
times and in such manner as may be prescribed. 

XLV of 
1860. 
7 
26. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, Amount due 
where a loan has been advanced to any person for the construction cto the ti' 
f b 'ld' h b 'ld orpora on o a Ul 109 or were a UI ing has been transferred to any person, to be first 
the amount due to the Corporation on account of the loan or transfer charge. 
5 together with inberest thereon shall be a first charge on the building 
so constructed or transferred. 
(2) The Corporation may also take such further Security as it 
may consider necessary for advancing any loan or for tran;;ferring 
any building. 
10 CHAPTER V 
MIsCELLANEOUS 
27. For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government may, Direction 
from time to time, give to the Corporation such general or special 
directions as the Central Government thinks fit and in the perfor-
15 mance of the functions, the Corporation shall comply with such 
directions. 
28. The Corporation shall furnish to the Central Government Returna and 
such returns, statistics, accounts and other information with resp~ct Reports. 
to its property or activities as the Central Government may from 
~o time to time require. 
29. When any money is due to the Corporation from any person, Mode of 
then. without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, the Corpora- ~r=~~~~yS 
tion may, after giving that person an opportunity of being heard, due to th~ 
issue a certificate to the Collector of the amount due and the Collec- Corporation. 
25 tor shall proceed to recover that amount in the 3ame manner as an 
arrear of land revenue. 
30. The Corporation may, by general or special order in writing, ~el~~~~. 
delegate to the Chairman or any other member or any officer of 
the Corporation, subject to such conditions and limitations (if any) 
30 as may be speCified in the order, such of its powers and duties 
under this Act as it may deem necessary for the efficient running 
of the day-to-day administration of the Corporation. 
31. All members and officers of the Corporation shall, when Medmbffjers 
. rtf t t i . f f h .. an 0 cers actmg or purpo ng 0 ac n pursuance 0 any 0 t e prOVISIOns of the Corpo-
35 of this Act, be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of ratlin to be 
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. ~~ts. 
32. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against any mem- Bar of l~gal 
ber or officer of the Corporation in respect of anything which is in proceedtn gs 
good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act. 

Validation 
ofcertaiD 
transaction •• 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
Power to 
make rulea. 
8 
33. On the establishment of the Corporation under section 3,-
(a) all action purportin~ to have been taken, and all trans-
actions purporting to have been made, by or with the body 
known as the FaridaQad Development Board (including any 
action or transaction by which any property, asset or right was 5 
purported to have been acquired or any liability or obligation, 
whether by contract Or otherwise, was purported to have been 
incurred) shall be deemed to have been validly and lawfully 
taken or made by or with the Corporation af; if this Act were in 
force and the Corporation were in existence on the day on 10' 
w~ich such action was taken or transaction was made; and 
(b) in particular, and without prejudice to the generality of 
the foregoing provision,-
(i) all property and assets vesting in the body known as 
the Faridabad Development Board shall vest in the Corpo- 15 
ration; 
(ii) all rights, liabilities and obligations of the body 
known as the Faridabad Development Board. whether aris-
ing out of any contract or otherwise, shall be the rights, lia· 
bilities and obligations, respectively, of the Corporation; and 20 
(iii) all leases granted by, all contracts made with, and 
all instruments executed On behalf of, the body known as the 
Faridabad Development Board shall be deemed to have 
been granted by, made with, or executed on behalf of, the 
Corporation and shall have effect accordingly. 
34. If any doubt or difficulty arises in giving effect to the provi-
sions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order, make such 
provision or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provi-
sions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient 
for the removal ()f the doubt or difficulty, and the order of the Cen- 30 ' 
tral Government, in such cases,shall be final. ... 
35. (1) The Central 'Government may, by notification. in the Offi-
cial Gazette, make rules for carrying out the plil'poses of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow- 35· 
ing matters, namely: - \ 
(a) the term of office a1l:d other ~ttiioM of service of 
members; 
(b, the terms and ecmditiunJ of 1I8l'Viee of the MmiDist:rator 
:and other '~ of the Corperatioilj 40· 

• 9 
(c) meetings of the Corporation and the procedure for con~ 
ducting business thereat; 
(b) the intervals at which, and the terms on which, the capi-
tal provided or loan advanced by the Central Government to 
the Corporation may be repaid, and the rate at which interest 
may be paid on the capital provided or loan advanced by the 
Central Government; 
(e) the form and manno in which the· budget and the 
annual report may be 'prepa,red; 
10 <f> the manner in which the accounts of the Corporation 
may be maintained and audired; 
(g) the form and manner in which returns, statistics, 
accounts and other information may 'be furnished to the Central 
Government; 
(h) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed 
under this Act. 
(3) All rules made under this section shall, as soon as may be 
af,ter they are made, be laid before both Houses of Parliament. 
THE SCHEDULE 
20 [See section 2(c)J 
Faridabad is included within the following boundaries, namely:- Area of Faridabad 
North-Karkhana garden, Railway Station and Rest House, 
. Faridabad, buildings be10nging to Shrimati Sushila Devi 
and abadi Fetehpur Chandela. , . 
25 East-Delhi~Mathura Road. 
SotLth-Abadi village Majasar. 
West-Badkhal Band; Hill of villages Dabwa, Nawadah. Koh 
and Daulatabad; Abadi village Saran. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
A township has been constructed at Faridabad about 18 miles 
South of Delhi for the rehabilitation of displaced persons from 
the former North West Frontier Province. In 1949, an autonomous 
Board was constituted by the Central Government for the adminis-
tration of the township. But since this Board was not a legal entity, 
it could neither sue nor be sued. It was, therefore, felt that a statu-
tory body should be set up at Faridabad. This matter h. been un-
der consideration for the last three years. At first, it was proposed 
to set up a body having municipal, development and rehabilitation 
functions under the joint control of the Central Government and 
the State Governments. But as local self-government was a State 
subject, it was not possible to give legal authority to the Central 
Government over municipal functions. The other alternative was 
to vest the cont~ol of the Board entirely in the State Govern-
ment. Since this was not considered feasible in view of the heavy 
investment made by the Central Government in Faridabad and fur-
ther expenditure likely to be incurred by them on the promotion of 
new industries for providing gainful employment to the residents 
of the township, it was decided that --a trading Corporation should 
be set up by central legislation. The Punjab Government has also 
concurred in this proposal. 
2. The Bill provides for the- setting up of a Corporation whose 
main functions will be (a) to maintain and develop the property of 
the Union vested in the Corporation, (b) to assist in the rehabilitation 
of displaced persons settled in Faridabad and (c) to carry on and 
promote trade, business and ind1lStry in the town with the object of 
assisting the displaced persons in their rehabilitation. 
MEHR CHAND KHANNA. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 7th December, 1955. 
10 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Central Government has so far advanced about rupees three 
and a half crores as loan to the Faridabad Development Board. This 
amount will be treated as the capital provided by bhe Central Govern-
ment to t!te Corporation under clause 15 of the Bill. 
Under clause 16 of the Bill, the Central Government has been 
empowered to advance further loans and make further grants to the 
Corporation to enable it to develop the economy of the township and 
to rehabilitate displaced persons settled therein. It is not possible, 
at this stage, to give any estimate of. the loans which may have to be 
advanced to the Corporation. The Faridabad Development Board is 
being given a recurring grant of about rupees twenty-eight lakhs per 
annum to meet the expenditure on municipal services, health, edu-
. cation, cash doles to the inmates of the Women's Home and infirmary 
and relief works, etc., which have been started to provide temporary 
employment to the unemployed adults of Faridabad. This grant 
will gradually be reduced as more industries are established in 
Faridabad and when the economy of the township improves and it 
becomes possible to levy municipal taxes on bhe residents. It may 
not. however, be possible to reduce the grant for another three years 
or so. 
Under clause 18, provision has been made that the amount of the 
capital provided under clause 15 and all loans which will be advanc .. 
ed under ellUl' 16 shall be repaid by the Corporation with interest. 
" 
II 

EXPLANATORY ,MEMORANDUM·· REGARDING DELEGATED 
LEGISLATION 
Clause 35 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules, by notification in the Official Gazette, to carry out the pur-
poses of the Act. The matters in respect of which such rules may be 
made are specified therein. 
The matters specified -therein are of a routine character. They 
relate to the terms and conditions of service of the members of the 
Corporation and of the Administrator and other officers of the Cor-
poration. Rules -may be made. in respect of the procedure for con-
ducting the buspess of the Corporation and of the returns and 
statistics to be furnished by the Corporation. Rules may also be 
made in respect of the repayment of the capital and loans advanced 
by the Central Government with interest. 
All these are matters of a procedural character. Provision has 
·been made that rules made by' the Central Government shall be laid 
before· Parliament. 
_ The delegated legislation is of a normal character. 
, 
J2 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for establishment and regulation of a trading 
Corporation for the purpose of carrying on and promoting 
trade and industry in the town of Faridabad, assisting in 
the rehab:titation of displaced persons settled therein and 
for matters connected therewith. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article I 17 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha 
the consideration of the Bill. 
.. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary . 
(Shri Mehr Cluznd Khanna, 
Minister of Rehabilitation.) 