As inTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

17 DEC 2008

Bill No. 77 of 2004

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004

‘Sunt Surest CHanvet, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2004.

2. In article 275 of the Constitution, in the clause (1), after the second proviso, the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that there shall be paid out‘of the Consolidated Fund of India as

grants-in-aid of the revenue of the State of Himachal Pradesh every year to the tune
of rupees five thousand crore for development of hilly and remote areas in that State."

Short title.

Amendment
of article
275.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS:

Himachal Pradesh, as the name suggests, is a hilly State. The State consists of many
big and small hills and remote areas. For proper development of these areas, sufficient money
is required. Even after 57 years of independence, many of the tribes in the remote areas of the
State have not seen and experienced any civilization.

It would be in order if the Central Government diverts sufficient funds through grants
to Himachal Pradesh every year for all round development of hilly and remote areas in the
State.

New एज; SURESH CHANDEL
August 26,2004,


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides that a sum of rupees five thousand crore shall be paid out
of the Consolidated Fund of India as grants-in-aid of the revenue of the State of Himachal
Pradesh per annum for development of the State.

This will involve recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India to the tune
of rupees five thousand crore per annum. No non-recurring expenditure would be involved
from the Consolidated Fund of India.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * . . *

275. (1) Such sums as Parliament may by law provide shall be charged on the
Consolidated Fund of India in each year as grants-in-aid of the revenues of such States as.
Parliament may determine to be in need of assistance, and different sums may be fixed for
different States:

Provided that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as grants-in-aid
of the revenues of a State such capital and recurring sums as may be necessary to enable that.
State to meet the costs of such schemes of development as may be undertaken by the State
with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of promoting the welfare of the
Scheduled Tribes in that State or raising the level of administration of the Scheduled Areas
therein to that of the administration of the rest of the areas of that State:

Provided further that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as
grants-in-aid of the revenues of the State of Assam sums, capital and recurring, equivalent
to—

(a) the average excess of expenditure over the revenues during the two years
immediately preceding the commencement of this Constitution in respect of the
administration of the tribal areas specified in [Part I) ofthe table appended to paragraph
20 of the Sixth Schedule; and

(b) the costs of such schemes of development as may be undertaken by the
State with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of raising the level
of administration of the said areas to that of the administration of the rest of the areas
of that State,

* . . . . .



LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Suresh Chandel, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—2401LS—24.09.2004.