1
THE POPULATION CONTROL BILL, 2016
By
SHRI PRAHLAD  SINGH  PATEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for population control and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called as the Population Control Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 77 of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government
of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Board" means District Board constituted under section 4;
(c) "child" includes an adopted child; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. No person shall procreate more than two living children after a period of one
year from the commencement of this Act.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall constitute a Board to be known as the
District Board in every district for the purpose of this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of—
(a) Chief Medical Officer of the district;
(b) District Collector;
(c) one representative of Panchayat each at village, intermediate or district
level; and
(d) one representative of Municipal Council or Corporation, as the case
may be.
5. If any person intends to procreate more than two living children for any medical
reason, he shall apply to the Board for necessary permission in such form and manner
as may be prescribed.
6. (1) On receipt of an application from a person under section 5, the District
Board shall examine the reasons furnished by an applicant and communicate its decision
within a period of one month.
(2) If the District Board is satisfied that exceptional medical circumstances exist
which require the applicant to opt for third child, the District Board shall grant necessary
permission.
(3) If the District Board is not satisfied with the reasons furnished by the applicant,
the District Board may, after giving an opportunity to the applicant of being heard to
the applicant in the matter, reject the application.
7. The appropriate Government shall take steps to encourage, promote and
motivate married couples to opt for small family norms with a view to check the rising
population in the country.
8. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall not be entitled
to avail any benefit under any ongoing welfare scheme of the Government.
9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained
to the contrary in any other law for the time being in force.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
Definitions.
No person
shall
procreate
more than
two living
children.
Constitution
of a District
Board.
Application
for permission
from District
Board.
Permission for
procreation of
third child by
Board.
Appropriate
Government
to promote
small family
norms.
Disentitlement
of benefits
for
contravention
of the Act.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
20
25
15
30
35
40

3
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any
such modification of annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
Rapid increase in population is creating pressure on available natural resources
in the country. The resources are shrinking day by day due to consumption by
increasing population.
Our welfare schemes are not giving desired results as these schemes are meant
for limited population. Unless we make a definite law to check population explosion,
the welfare schemes will not yield desired results.
It is very hard to replenish natural resources. Every citizen has a responsibility to
use our natural resources in a sustainable manner and the increasing population is
creating an extra burden on existing resources. Therefore, it is necessary to enact a law
to put a check on increasing population at the earliest. In view of consistent threat to
natural resources it is necessary to take immediate steps to check growing population
in the country in order to achieve sustainable development.
The Bill seeks to provide for making it compulsory for every citizen not to procreate
more than two living children after one year from coming into force of this Act. It also
provides that if any person contravenes the provisions of this Act, he shall not be
entitled to avail any benefit under any ongoing welfare scheme of the Government.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; PRAHLAD SINGH PATEL
February 10, 2016.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill provides for taking steps to encourage, promote and motivate
married couples to opt for small family norms. The Central Government shall have to
incur some expenditure for implementing the provisions of this Bill in respect of Union
Territories. The State Government will incur expenditure in respect of their States out of
their respective consolidated funds. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of rupees twelve crores per annum will be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for population control and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Prahlad Singh Patel, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—27LS(S3)—16.04.2016.