Short title and 
commencement.
5
AS introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 77 of 2023
THE SMALL LAND HOLDING FARMERS (PROTECTION AND 
WELFARE) BILL, 2023
By
Shri GanesAN Selvam, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for protection and welfare of small land holding farmers by constitution of a 
Minimum Price Assurance Commission and a Small Land Holding Farmers Welfare Fund 
and for matters connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Small Land Holding Farmers (Protection and Welfare) 
Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2
5
10
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “agricultural produce” means agricultural produce specified in the schedule;
(b) “Commission” means the Minimum Price Assurance Commission constituted
under section 6;
(c) “Fund” means the Small Land Holding Farmers Welfare Fund constituted under
section 4;
(d) “minimum assured price” means the price of the agricultural produces fixed and
declared by the Central Government under section 3;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) “small land holding farmer” means a person possessing agricultural land
measuring not more than ten acres and who has no major income from any source other 
than agriculture.
3. The Central Government shall, on recommendation of the Commission, at least
one month before every financial year, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare the 
minimum assured price for each agricultural produce.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Fund to be known as the Small Land Holding Farmers Welfare Fund for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act.   
(2) The initial corpus of rupees one hundred crore of which rupees fifty crore shall
be provided by the Central Government, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, and rupees fifty crore shall be provided by the State Governments 
in such proportion as may be prescribed. 
(3) The Central Government and State Governments shall contribute every year
to the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed. 
(4) There shall also be credited to the Fund moneys received under corporate social 
responsibility from the corporate and other private individuals.
5. The Fund shall be utilized for—
(i) providing minimum assured price for agricultural produce;
(ii) payment of pension to every small land holding farmer who has attained
the age of fifty-five years; 
(iii) financial assistance to the young small land holding farmers for innovative
proposals; and 
(iv) establishing efficient institutional mechanism for full-fledged marketing
of agricultural produce.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as possible but not later than six
months of the commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a Commission to be known as the Minimum Price Assurance Commission. 
Definitions.
Central 
Government to 
declare minimum 
assured price 
of agricultural 
produce.
Constitution 
of Small Land 
Holding Farmers 
Welfare Fund.
15
Utilization of 
Fund.
20
25
30
35Constitution of 
the Minimum 
Price Assurance 
Commission.

(2) The Commission shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner,
as may be prescribed, from amongst the persons having knowledge in the field 
of agricultural operations in small land holding farming sector and expertise in 
agricultural economics; 
(b) a Vice-Chairperson to be elected by and from amongst the members of the
Commission representing the small-holder farmers; 
(c) two Members of Parliament, one each from Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha, to be
elected by the respective Houses; 
(d) one member not below the rank of Joint Secretary, representing the Union
Ministry of Agriculture; 
(e) one member not below the rank of Joint Secretary, representing the Indian
Council of Agriculture Research; and 
(f) five members representing small land holding farmers to be nominated by
the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The term of office of the Commission shall be three years.
(4) The Commission shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and common
seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property both movable and immovable and 
to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
7. The Commission shall recommend to the Central Government—
(a) the minimum assured price for agricultural produce after taking into consideration
the cost of cultivation including fifty per cent. margin on the cost of cultivation; and 
(b) the steps to be taken for the improvement of livelihood of small-holder farmers.
8. The Central Government may issue such directions to the State Governments as it
may think necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
10. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
3
Functions of the 
Commission.
Power to issue 
directions.
Act to have 
overriding effect.
Power to make 
rules.
5
10
15
20
35
25
30

SCHEDULE  
[see section 3] 
1. Fibre Coconut
2. Cereals Paddy
3. Oil seeds Coconut, Oil palm
4. Fruits Mango, Orange, Papaya, Guava, Banana, Grapes, Jack fruit, 
Pineapple, Rambutan, Mangostin, Cocoa
5. Vegetables Common pea, Gram, Tomato, Turmeric, Bitter gourd, Snake 
gourd, Ash gourd, Winter crops, Chilly
6. Tubers T opioca, Carrot, Beet root, Common taro, Elephant foot yam, 
Carrot, Potato
7. Spices Pepper , Cardamom, Ginger, Nutmeg, Clove, Cinnamon
8. Cash crops Rubber , Tea, Coffee
4

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Agriculture plays a major role in Indian economy and small land holding farmers owe 
a considerable share in it. Small land holding farmers are farmers with a low asset base 
and limited resource endowments and who depend on household members for most of the 
labour, small land holding farmers are characterized by smaller applications of capital but 
higher use of labour and other family-owned inputs, and generally higher index of cropping 
intensity and diversification. Farmers, especially small land holding farmers fall in debt 
trap due to vagaries of nature and lack of assured minimum support price for agricultural 
produce. 
Currently, a farmer is born under debt and dies under the threat of its repayment. Due to 
total negligence and non-remunerative profession, youngsters are not preferring agriculture 
as promising and profitable. The pitfalls in farming policy and Free Trade Agreements make 
the situation more assailable, especially in rural economies. The whole proceedings result 
in social discontent, anarchy and turmoil which paves the way for terrorism and naxalism. 
In short, an immediate effective intervention is needed by the Government to safeguard 
the dreams, hopes and aspirations of agrarian people. The constitution of the Small Land 
Holding Farmers Welfare Fund and the Minimum Price Assurance Commission will lend 
a helping hand in removing indebtedness and social insecurity from small land holding 
farming community. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi
;                     G ANESAN SELVAM 
February 27, 2023.
5

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Small Land Holding Farmers 
Welfare Fund with initial corpus of one hundred crore rupees of which fifty crore rupees 
shall be provided by the Central Government. Clause 6 provides for constitution of a 
Minimum Price Assurance Commission for the welfare of small land holding farmers. The 
Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from Consolidated Fund of India. It is 
estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore would be involved 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
__________
A
BILL
to provide for protection and welfare of small land holding farmers by constitution of a 
Minimum Price Assurance Commission and a Small Land Holding Farmers Welfare Fund 
and for matters connected therewith.
_________
(Shri Ganesan Selvam,  M.P .)