1
Short title and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL,  2020
By
DR. T. R. PAARIVENDHAR,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act,  2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 326 of the Constitution, for the words "eighteen years " the words
"seventeen years" shall be substituted.
Bill  No. 77  of  2020
Amendment
of article 326.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The minimum age of eighteen years for voting is prescribed by the Constitution.
However, in many countries, the debate is going on to reduce the voting age to below
eighteen. The young voters do not care for caste backgrounds of candidates and hence
improve the chances of clean and honest people getting elected.
The Present-day youth are literate and enlightened and well advanced in general
knowledge/awareness. They are very keenly watching day-to-day politics and what is going
on in the country and able to find out the solutions to all problems because of social media,
print media and electronic media. So, they may be given a chance to elect a person/political
leader of their choice to rule the country by voting in the Lok Sabha elections as well as in the
State Assembly elections. This would add more young voters to the electoral college. The
voting registration should start when a person is sixteen years old but must be eligible to
vote when he completes seventeen years of age.
Hence, there is need to further amend the Constitution to lower the voting age from the
existing eighteen years to seventeen years without any further delay.
As per the data published by Statistical Research Department in December, 2019,
approximately forty-four million youth between sixteen-seventeen years across the country
will exercise franchise their right to vote in the coming elections to the Legislative Assemblies
of the States and Lok Sabha in the year 2024.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; T. R.  PAARIVENDHAR
January  27, 2020.

3
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to lower the age of voting to the House of the People and to
the Legislative Assemblies of States from eighteen years to seventeen years. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that an expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore  would be involved from
the Consolidated Fund of India for the purpose of revision of electoral roll, printing of
additional ballot papers at the time of election, setting of additional polling stations, etc.
The Bill, on enactment, would not involve any other expenditure, either recurring or
non-recurring.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
** * *
326. The election to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assembly of every
State shall be on the basis of adult suffrage; that is to say, every person who is a citizen of
India and who is not less than eighteen years of age on such date as may be fixed in that
behalf by or under any law made by the appropriate Legislature and is not otherwise
disqualified under this Constitution or any law made by the appropriate Legislature on the
ground of non-residence, unsoundness of mind, crime or corrupt or illegal practice, shall be
entitled to be registered as a voter at any such election.
** * *
Elections to the
House of the
People and to the
Legislative
Assemblies of
States to be on
the basis of adult
suffrage.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. T.R. Paarivendhar,  M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5349LS(S3)—03-03-2020.