Bill No. 77-F of 2025 
THE NATIONAL ANTI-DOPING (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2025 
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
 LOK SABHA ON 11TH AUGUST, 2025 
RAJYA SABHA ON  12TH AUGUST, 2025 )

15 of 2022. 
Bill No. 77-F of 2025
THE NATIONAL ANTI-DOPING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025 
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A 
BILL 
to amend the National Anti-Doping Act, 2022. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. Section 2 of the National Anti-Doping Act, 2022 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act) shall be numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof and in 
sub-section (1) as so numbered,— 
Short title and 
commencement. 
Amendment of 
section 2. 

2 
Insertion of new 
section 2A. 
Application of 
World 
Anti-Doping 
Code. 
(i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(aa) “Anti-Doping Organisation” means the World Anti -Doping 
Agency or a signatory to the Code which is responsible for adopting 
rules for initiating, implementing or enforcing any part o f the doping 
control process and includes the International Olympic Committee, the 
International Paralympic Committee, other major event organisations 
that conduct testing at their events, International Federations, and the 
National Anti-Doping Organisations;’; 
(ii) in clause (b), after the word and figure “section 4”, the words “or as
detailed under the Code as set out in the Schedule” shall be inserted; 
(iii) in clause ( e), for the words “or such other person”, the words
“, parent or any other person” shall be substituted; 
(iv) in clause (n),––
(a) for the words “up to the disposal”, the words “till the final
disposal” shall be substituted; 
(b) after the words “Ant i-Doping Rule Violation”, the words “or
violation of the prohibition of participation during ineligibility or 
provisional suspension” shall be inserted; 
(v) for clause (q), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(q) “in -competition” means the  period commencing at
11:59 p.m. on the day before a competition in which the athlete is 
scheduled to participate till the end of such competition and the sample 
collection process related to such competition;’; 
(vi) after clause (s), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(sa) “marker” means a compound, group of compounds or
biological variable that indicates the use of a prohibited substance or a 
prohibited method;’; 
(vii) after clause (t), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ta) “metabolite” means any substance produced by a
biotransformation process;’; 
(viii) clause (w) shall be omitted;
(ix) for clause (x), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(x) “out -of-competition” means any period whi ch is not
in-competition;’; 
(x) in clause ( zc), after the words “any substance”, the words “or class
of substances” shall be inserted; 
(xi) in clause (zg), the words “and testing of samples” shall be omitted;
(xii) after sub -section ( 1) as so n umbered, the following sub -section
shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(2) The words and expressions used in this Act and not defined 
but defined in the Code shall have the same meanings respectively
assigned to them in that Code.”. 
3. After section 2 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:— 
“2A. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 
other law, such of the provisions of the World Anti -Doping Code as are set 
out in the Schedule shall have the force of law in India. 

3 
(2) The Central Government may, from time to time, by notification in
the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule in conformity with any 
amendments, duly made and adopted, of the provisions of the said Code set 
out therein.  
(3) Every notification issued under sub-section (2) shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is issued, before each House of Parliament.”. 
4. For section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:— 
 “4. Any one or more of the follow ing circumstances or acts or  
conducts shall constitute Anti-Doping Rule Violation for the purposes of this 
Act, namely:— 
(a) the presence of a prohibited substance or its metabolites or
markers in an athlete’s sample, unless such presence is exempted under 
section 5; 
(b) use or attempted use by an athlete of any prohibited substance
or any prohibited method, unless such use is exempted under section 5; 
(c) evading sample collection ; or refusing or failing to submit to
sample collection without compelling justification after notification by 
a duly authorised person; 
(d) whereabouts failures by an athlete as specified in the Code;
(e) tampering or attempted tampering with any part of doping
control by an athlete or other person; 
(f) possession of any prohi bited substance or any prohibited
method by an athlete or athlete support personnel, unless such 
possession is exempted under section 5; 
(g) trafficking or attempted trafficking in any prohibited
substance or prohibited method by an athlete or other person; 
(h) administration or attempted administration by an athlete or
other person to any athlete in -competition of any prohibited substance 
or prohibited method, or administration or attempted administration to 
any athlete out -of-competition of any prohibited  substance or any 
prohibited method that is prohibited out-of-competition; 
(i) assisting, encouraging, aiding, abetting, conspiring, covering
up or any other type of intentional complicity or attempted complicity 
involving an Anti-Doping Rule Violation, attempted Anti-Doping Rule 
Violation or violation of the prohibition against participation during 
ineligibility or provisional suspension by any other person; 
(j) prohibited association by an athlete or other person as the
Agency may specify by regulations; 
(k) acts by an athlete or other person to discourage or retaliate
against reporting to authorities.”. 
5. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words
“individual 
athlete or athlete support personnel”, the words “athlete or other 
person” shall be substituted. 
6. In section 7  of the principal  A ct,  in  sub-section  ( 7), after  the  words
“International Federation”, the words “, National  Olympic Committee, National 
Paralympic Committee” shall be inserted. 
7. In section 10 of the principal Act, sub-section (5) shall be omitted.
Substitution of 
new section for 
section 4. 
Anti-Doping Rule 
Violation. 
Amendment of 
section 6. 
Amendment of 
section 7. 
Amendment of 
section 10. 

4 
Amendment of 
section 11. 
Amendment of 
section 12. 
Amendment of 
section 14. 
Amendment of 
section 16. 
Amendment of 
section 17. 
Amendment of 
section 19. 
Substitution of 
new section for 
section 20. 
Power of 
collecting 
samples and 
testing. 
Substitution of 
new section for 
section 21. 
Result 
Management 
process. 
8. In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (d), after the
words “who are”, the words “or have been” shall be inserted. 
9. In section 12 of the principal Act,—
(a) for the word “Board”, wherever it occurs, the words “Central
Government” shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words “specified by regulations”, wherever they occur, the
word “prescribed” shall be substituted. 
10. In section 14 of the principal Act, after sub -section ( 6), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“(7) The Director General or any other staff member of the Agency 
shall have operational independence from any National Sports Federation, 
International Federation, National Olympic Committee, National Paralympic 
Committee or any Government department or agency with responsibility for 
sport or anti-doping.”. 
11. In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3),––
(a) for clause (i), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:–––
 “(i) coordinating and cooperating with the Anti -Doping   
Organisations and National Sports Federations;”; 
(b) in clause (k), the word “Other” shall be omitted.
12. In section 17 of the principal Act, for the words “Therapeutic
Exemption”, the words “Therapeutic Use Exemption” shall be substituted. 
13. In section 19 of the principal Act, for the words and figures “the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973”, the words and figures “the Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023” shall be substituted. 
14. For section 20 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:–– 
“20. Notwithstanding the power of the Agency to direct the collection 
of samples of an athlete at any time and at any place, if the Agency has 
reasons to believe that an athlete has committed an Anti -Doping Rule 
Violation, it shall require su ch athlete to submit samples for testing, in 
accordance with such procedure and in such manner, as may be specified by 
regulations.”. 
15. For section 21 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:–– 
“21. (1) After receiving an adverse report from a dope testing laboratory 
indicating presence of any prohibited substance or its metabolites or markers in the 
sample of an athlete or evidence of the use of a prohibited method, the Agency 
shall carry out initial examination of the report in such manner as may be specified 
by regulations and verify, if Therapeutic Use Exemption has been granted to such 
athlete in respect of such substance or if there has been any departure from the 
International Standard for Laboratories or International Standard for Testing and 
Investigations that may have caused the adverse analytical finding or if it is 
apparent that the adverse analytical finding was caused by an ingestion of the 
relevant prohibited substance through a permitted route. 
(2) Where, after examination and verification under sub-section (1), the
Agency is satisfied that no Therapeutic Use Exemption has been granted to 
the athlete and that there has been no departure from the International 
Standard for Laboratories or International Standard for Testing and 
Investigations that may have caused the adverse analytical finding or that the 
adverse analytical finding was not caused by an ingestion of the relevant 
prohibited substance through a permitted route, it shall take suc h actions in 
such manner, as may be specified by regulations.”.  
2 of 1974. 
46 of 2023. 

5 
16. In section 23 of the principal Act,—
(a) for the words “specified by regulations”, wherever they occur, the
word “prescribed” shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words “regulations as may be made by the
Board”, the words “rules as may be made by the Central Government” shall 
be substituted; 
(c) for sub -section (9) and the Explanation, the following sub -sections
and Explanation shall be substituted, namely:— 
‘(9) The World Anti-Doping Agency, the International Olympic 
Committee, the International Paralympic Committee and the concerned 
International Federation may prefer an appeal against the decision of 
the Appeal Panel to the Court of Arbitration for Sport, in accorda nce 
with the rules of the Court of Arbitration for Sport and the Code. 
(10) Where the case involves international level athlete or
international events,— 
(a) such athlete or other person who is subject to the
decision being appealed; 
(b) the National Anti-Doping Agency;
(c) the International Federation;
(d) the World Anti-Doping Agency; and
(e) the International Olympic Committee or the
International Paralympic Committee, as the case may be, where 
the decision may have an effect in relation to the Olympic Games 
or the Paralympic Games including decisions affecting eligibility 
for the Olympic Games or the Paralympic Games, 
may appeal against the decision of the Disciplinary Panel to the Court 
of Arbitration for Sport. 
(11) Notwithstandin g anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) to
(10), in cases where the World Anti -Doping Agency  has a right to 
appeal under Article 13 of the Code and no appeal has been filed by 
any party against the final decision of the Agency, the World 
Anti-Doping Agency may appeal against such decision to the Court of 
Arbitration for Sport without exhausting other remedies provided under 
this Act and the rules made thereunder. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of sub -sections ( 9) to ( 11), 
“Court of Arbitration for  Sport” means an international body 
established in 1984 to settle disputes related to sport through arbitration 
whose headquarter is in Lausanne, Switzerland.’. 
17. In section 24 of the principal Act, after the word “Board,”, the words
“ Appeal Panel,” shall be inserted. 
18. In section 26 of the principal Act,––
(a) in sub-section (2), in the proviso, for the words “may, if required,”,
the word “shall” shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (4), in clause (d), after the words “standard operative
procedures”, the words “,  subject to the International Standard for 
Laboratories” shall be inserted. 
19. In section 29 of the principal Act,––
(i) after clause (c), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
Amendment of 
section 23. 
Amendment of 
section 24. 
Amendment of 
section 26. 
Amendment of 
section 29. 

6 
Amendment of 
section 30. 
Amendment of 
section 31. 
Insertion of 
Schedule. 
“(ca) the manner of constituting the Appeal Panel under 
sub-section (1) of section 12; 
(cb) the manner of appointment of the Chairperson, 
Vice-Chairperson and other members of the Appeal Panel and the 
conditions subject to which such appointments shall be made under 
sub-section (3) of section 12; 
(cc) the grounds on which a member of the Appeal Panel may be
removed under sub-section (4) of section 12;”; 
(ii) after clause (f), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(fa) the other decisions against which an appeal may be filed,
and the form and manner in which and the time within which such 
appeal may be filed under sub-section (1) of section 23; 
(fb) the procedure to be followed by the Appeal Panel under 
sub-section (2) of section 23; 
(fc) the manner of communicating the decision of the Appeal 
Panel under sub-section (8) of section 23;”; 
(iii) in clause ( m), after the word and figures “section 26”, the words
“, subject to the International Standard for Laboratories” shall be inserted. 
20. In section 30 of the principal Act,––
(i) clauses (e), (f) and (g) shall be omitted;
(ii) clauses (l), (m) and (n) shall be omitted.
21. In section 31 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1),––
(i) in the opening portion, for the words “for complying with the
requirements of international obligations and commitments including the 
Code”, the words “in compliance with the international obligations and the 
Code, including its International Standards,” shall be substituted;  
(ii) in clause ( j), for the words “anti -doping control”, the words
“doping control” shall be substituted; 
(iii) in clause (m), the word “other” shall be omitted;
(b) in sub-section (2),–––
(i) clause (b) shall be omitted;
(ii) for clause ( c), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:— 
“(c) the prohibited association by an athlete or other person 
under clause (j) of section 4;”; 
(iii) clause (d) shall be omitted.
22. After section 34 of the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be
inserted, namely:–– 
“THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 2A) 
PROVISIONS OF THE WORLD ANTI-DOPING CODE, WHICH SHALL HAVE
FORCE OF LAW
ARTICLE 2 ANTI-DOPING RULE VIOLATIONS 
The purpose of Article 2 is to specify the circumstances and conduct which 
constitute anti-doping rule violations. Hearings in doping cases will proceed 
based on the assertion that one or more of these specific rules have been violated. 

7 
Athletes or other Persons shall be responsible for knowing what constitutes  
an anti -doping rule violation and the substances and methods which have 
been included on the Prohibited List. 
The following constitute anti-doping rule violations: 
2.1   Presence of a Prohibited Substance or its Metabolites or Markers in 
an Athlete’s Sample 
2.1.1 It is the Athletes’ personal duty to ensure that no Prohibited 
Substance enters  their  bodies.  Athletes  are  responsible for any 
Prohibi
ted Substance or  its Metabolites or  Markers  found to  be 
present in their Samples. Accordingly,  it is not  necessary that 
intent, Fault, Negligence or knowing Use on the Athlete’s part be 
demonstrated in order to establish an anti-doping rule 
violation under Article 2.1.7 
7 
[Comment to  Article 2.1.1:  An  anti-doping rule violation is 
committed under this Article without regard to an Athlete’s Fault. This 
rule has been referred to in various CAS decisions as “Strict 
Liability”. An Athlete’s Fault is taken into consideration in 
determining the Consequences of this anti-doping rule violation under 
Article 10. This principle has consistently been upheld by CAS.] 
2.1.2 Sufficient proof of an anti-doping rule violation under Article 2.1 
is established by any of  the following: presence of a Prohibited 
Substance or its Metabolites or Markers in the Athlete’s A 
Sample where the Athlete waives analysis of the B Sample and  
the B Sample is not analyzed; or, where the Athlete’s B Sample is 
analyzed and the analysis of the Athlete’s B Sample confirms the 
presence of  the  Prohibited  Substance  or  its  Me
tabolites  or 
Markers found in the Athle te’s A Sample; or where the Athlete’s 
A or  B  Sample is  split into  two  parts  and the  analysis  of  the 
confi
rmation part of the split Sample confirms the presence of the 
Prohibited Substance or i ts  Metabolites or Markers found in the 
first part of the split Sample or the Athlete waives analysis of the 
confirmation part of the split Sample.8 
8 [Comment to Article 2.1.2: The Anti-Doping Organization with 
Results Management 
responsibility may, at its discretion, choose 
to have the B Sample analyzed even if the Athlete does not request 
the analysis of the B Sample.] 
2.1.3 Excepting those substances for which a Decision Limit is 
specifically identified in the Prohibited List or a Technical 
Document, the presence of any reported quantity of a Prohibited 
Substance or its Metabolites or Markers in an Athlete’s Sample 
shall constitute an anti-doping rule violation. 
2.1.4 As an exception to the general rule of Article 2.1, the Prohibited 
List, International Standards, or Technical Documents may 
establish special criteria for reporting or the evaluation of certain 
Prohibited Substances.  
2.2   Use or Attempted Use by an Athlete of a Prohibited Substance or a 
Prohibited Method 9 
9 [ Comment to Article 2.2: It has always been the case that Use or 
Attempted Use of a Prohibited Substance or Prohibited Method may 
be established by any reliable means. As noted in the Comment to 
Article 3.2, unlike the proof required to establish an anti -doping rule 
violation under Article 2.1, Use or Attempted Use may also be 
established by other reliable means such as admissions by the Athlete, 

8 
witness statements, documentary evidence, conclusions drawn  from 
longitudinal profiling,  including data collected as part of the Athlete 
Biological Passport, or other analytical information which does not 
otherwise satisfy all the requirements to establish “Presence” of a 
Prohibited Substance under Article 2.1. Fo r example, Use may be 
established based upon reliable analytical data from the analysis of an 
A Sample (without confirmation from an analysis of a B Sample) or 
from the analysis of a B Sample alone where the Anti -Doping 
Organization provides a satisfactory  explanation for the lack of 
confirmation in the other Sample.] 
2.2.1 It is the Athletes’ personal duty to ensure that no Prohibited 
Substance enters their bodies and that no Prohibited Method is 
Used. Accordingly, it is not necessary that intent, Fault, 
Negligence or knowing Use on the Athlete’s part be demonstrated 
in order to establish an anti -doping rule violation for Use of a 
Prohibited Substance or a Prohibited Method.  
2.2.2 The success or failure of the Use or Attempted Use of a 
Prohibited Substance or Prohibited Method is not material. It is 
sufficient that the Prohibited Substance or Prohibited Method was 
Used or Attempted to be Used for an anti-doping rule violation to 
be committed.10 
10 [Comment to Article 2.2.2: Demonstrating the “Attempted Use” 
of a Prohibited Substance or a Prohibited Method requires proof of 
intent on the Athlete’s part. The fact that intent may be required to 
prove this particular anti-doping rule violation does not undermine 
the Strict Liability principle established for violations of Article 2.1 
and violations of Article 2.2 in respect of Use of a Prohibited 
Substance or Prohibited Method. An Athlete’s Use of a Prohibited 
Substance constitutes an anti -doping rule vio lation unless such 
Substance is not prohibited Out -of-Competition and the Athlete’s 
Use takes place Out-of-Competition. (However, the presence of a 
Prohibited Substance or its Metabolites or Markers in a Sample 
collected In-Competition is a violation of Article 2.1 regardless of 
when that Substance might have been administered.)] 
2.3   Evading, Refusing or Failing to Submit to Sample Collection by an 
Athlete     
Evading Sample collection; or  refusing or  failing to  s ubmit  to  Sample 
collection without compelling justification after notification by a 
duly authorized Person.11 
11 [Comment to Art icle  2.3: For example,  it w ould  be an  anti-doping 
rule violation of “evading Sample collection” if it were established that 
an Athlete was deliberately avoiding a Doping Control official to evade 
notification or Testing.  A violation  of “failing to submit to Sample 
collection” may be based on either intentional or negligent conduct of 
the Athlete, while “evading” or “refusing” Sample collection 
contemplates intentional conduct by the Athlete.] 
2.4   Whereabouts Failures by an Athlete 
Any combination of three missed tests and/or filing failures, as defined 
in the International Standard for Results Management, within a 
twelve-month period by an Athlete in a Registered Testing Pool. 
2.5    Tampering or Attempted Tampering with any Part of Doping Control 
by an Athlete or Other Person 
2.6   Possession of a Prohibited Substance or a Prohibited Method by an 
Athlete or Athlete Support Person 

9 
2.6.1 Possession by an Athlete In-Competition of any Prohibited Substance 
or any Prohibited Method, or Possession by an Athlete 
Out-of-Competition of any Prohibited Substance or any Prohibited 
Method which is prohibited Out-of-Competition unless the Athlete 
establishes that the Possession is consistent with a Therapeutic Use 
Exemption (“TUE”) granted in accordance with Article 4.4 or other 
acceptable justification.12 
12 [Comment to Articles 2.6.1 and 2.6.2: Acceptable justification 
would not inc lude, for example, buying or Possessing a 
Prohibited Substance for purposes of giving it to a friend or 
relative, except under justifiable medical circumstances where 
that Person had a physician’s prescription, e.g., buying Insulin 
for a diabetic child.] 
2.6.2 Possession by an Athlete Support Person In -Competition of any 
Prohibited Substance or any Prohibited Method, or Possession by 
an Athlete Support Person Out -of-Competition of any Prohibited 
Substance or any Prohibited Method which is prohibited 
Out-of-Competition in connection with an Athlete, Competition 
or training, unless the Athlete Support Person establishes that the 
Possession is consistent with a TUE granted to an Athlete in 
accordance with Article 4.4 or other acceptable justification.13 
13[Comment to Articles 2.6.1 and 2.6.2: Acceptable justification 
may include, for example, (a) an Athlete or a team doctor 
carrying Prohibited Substances or Prohibited Methods for 
dealing with acute and emergency situations (e.g., an epinephrine 
auto-injector), or (b) an Athlete Possessing a Prohibited 
Substance or Prohibited Method for therapeutic reasons shortly 
prior to applying for and receiving a determination on a TUE.] 
2.7  Trafficking or Attempted Trafficking in any Prohibited Substance 
or Prohibited Method by an Athlete or Other Person 
2.8  Administration or Attempted Administration by an Athlete or 
Other Person to any Athlete In -Competition of any Prohibited 
Substance or Prohibited Method, or Administration or Attempted 
Administration to any Athlet e Out -of-Competition of any 
Prohibited Substance or any Prohibited Method that is Prohibited 
Out-of-Competition  
2.9 Complicity or Attempted Complicity by an Athlete or Other Person 
Assisting, encouraging, aiding, abetting, conspiring, covering up or any 
other type of intentional complicity or Attempted complicity involving 
an anti -doping rule violation, Attempted anti -doping rule violation or 
violation of Article10.14.1 by another Person.14 
14 [Comment to Article 2.9: Complicity or Attempted Complicity ma y 
include either physical or psychological assistance.] 
2.10 Prohibited Association by an Athlete or Other Person 
2.10.1 Association by an Athlete or other Person subject to the 
authority of an Anti -Doping Organization in a professional or 
sport-related capacity with any Athlete Support Person who: 
2.10.1.1 If subject to the authority of an Anti -Doping 
Organization, is serving a period of Ineligibility; or 
2.10.1.2 If not subject to the authority of an Anti -Doping 
Organization, and where Ineligibility has not been addressed 
in a Results Management process  pursuant to the Code,  has  

10 
been convicted or  found in a criminal, disciplinary or 
professional proceeding to have engaged in conduct 
which would have constituted a violation of anti -doping 
rules if Code-compliant rules had been applicable to such 
Person. The disqualifying status of such Person shall be in 
force for the longer of six  (6) years from the criminal, 
professional or disciplinary decision or the duration of the 
criminal, disciplinary or professional sanction imposed; or 
2.10.1.3 Is serving as a front or intermediary for an individual 
described in Article 2.10.1.1 or 2.10.1.2. 
2.10.2 To establish a violation of Article 2.10, an Anti -Doping 
Organization must establish that the Athlete or other Person 
knew of the Athlete Support Person’s disqualifying status. 
The burden shall be on the Athlete or other Person to establish 
that any association with an Athlete Support Person described 
in Article 2.10.1.1 or 2.10.1.2 is not in a professional or 
sport-related capacity and/or that such association could not 
have been reasonably avoided. 
Anti-Doping Organizations that are aware of Athlete Support 
Personnel who meet the criteria described in Article 2.10.1.1, 
2.10.1.2, or 2.10.1.3 shall submit that information to WADA. 15 
15 [Comment to Article 2.10: Athletes and other Persons must 
not work with coaches, trainers, physicians or ot her Athlete 
Support Personnel who are Ineligible on account of an 
anti-doping rule violation or who have been criminally convicted 
or professionally disciplined in relation to doping. This also 
prohibits association with any other Athlete who is acting as a 
coach or Athlete Support Person while serving a period of 
Ineligibility. Some examples of the types of association which are 
prohibited include: obtaining training, strategy, technique, 
nutrition or medical advice; obtaining ther apy, treatment or 
prescriptions; providing any bodily products for analysis; or 
allowing the Athlete Support Person to serve as an agent or 
representative. Prohibited association need not involve any form 
of compensation.  
While Article 2.10 does not requi re the Anti -Doping 
Organization to notify the Athlete or other Person about the 
Athlete Support Person’s disqualifying status, such notice, if 
provided, would be important evidence to establish that the 
Athlete or other Person knew about the disqualifying status of 
the Athlete Support Person.]. 
2.11 Acts by an Athlete or Other Person to Discourage or Retaliate 
Against Reporting to Authorities 
Where such conduct does not otherwise constitute a violation of 
Article 2.5: 
2.11.1 Any act which threatens or seeks to intimidate another Person 
with the intent of discouraging the Person from the good -faith 
reporting of information that relates to an alleged anti-doping rule 
violation or alleged non-compliance with the Code to WADA, an 
Anti-Doping Or ganization, law enforcement, regulatory or 
professional disciplinary body, hearing body or Person conducting 
an investigation for WADA or an Anti-Doping Organization. 
2.11.2 Retaliation against a Person who, in good faith, has provided 
evidence or information that relates to an alleged anti-doping rule 
violation or alleged non-compliance with the Code to WADA, an  

11 
Anti-Doping Organization, law enforcement, regulatory or 
professional disciplinary body, hearing body or Person conducting 
an investigation for WADA or an Anti-Doping Organization. 16 
16 [Comment to Article 2.11.2: This Article is intended to protect 
Persons who make good faith reports, and does not protect 
Persons who knowingly make false reports.] 
For purposes of Article 2.11, retaliation, threatening and 
intimidation include an act taken against such Person either 
because the act lacks a goo d faith basis or is a disproportionate 
response.17 
17 [ Comment to Article 2.11.2: Retaliation would include, for 
example, actions that threaten the physical or mental well -being 
or economic interests of the reporting Persons, their families or 
associates. Retaliation would not include an Anti -Doping 
Organization asserting in good faith an anti-doping rule violation 
against the reporting Person. For purposes of Article 2.11, a 
report is not made in good faith where the Person making the 
report knows the report to be false.]”. 
—————

A 
BILL 
to amend the National Anti-Doping Act, 2022. 
———— 
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
RS-P&PS—GB(E)―036―27.08.2025