THE BASIC AND PRIMARY EDUCATION (COMPULSORY
TEACHING IN MOTHER TONGUE) BILL, 2009
By
SHRI OM PRAKASH YADAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory use of mother tongue in imparting basic and primary
education to children in all educational institutions and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Basic and Primary Education (Compulsory Teaching
in Mother Tongue)  Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “basic education” means education provided in preparatory schools or
kindergarten and such other schools by whatever name called;
Short title
and extent.
Bill No. 77 of  2009
Definitions.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
(c) “educational institution” includes all schools whether run by Government
or Government bodies or private institutions, association or trust, whether aided by
Government or not, recognized or unrecognized, imparting education to the children
from primary level;
(d) “mother tongue” means the language generally spoken in the family of the
child who learns it from his mother and other family members and which is one of the
languages mentioned in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution of India;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) “primary education” includes education up to the level of middle class or
eighth standard.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, every educational institution shall impart basic and primary education to the children
in their mother tongue or dialect generally spoken in the region or State, as the case may be,
where such an institution is located, in addition to Hindi or English language, as the case
may be, so as to properly develop the faculties of the children.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1) the appropriate Government shall appoint
language teachers in all Government run or aided schools and shall provide requisite
infrastructure for that purpose.
(3) The appropriate Government shall derecognize the educational institutions not
complying with the provisions of this Act for such period as it may deem necessary and
impose such other sanctions as may be prescribed after giving such institutions a reason-
able opportunity to defend their cases.
4. The appropriate Government may either retrospectively from the enactment of this
Act or prospectively exempt from the operation of the provisions of this Act, the members of
any race, sect or tribe to which it may consider it impossible or inexpedient to apply the
provisions of this Act.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the States for appointing language teachers and
for providing other infrastructure required for the purposes of this Act.
6. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provi-
sions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made or direction be given after three years of the
commencement of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect notwith-
standing anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in
force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be made in addition to and not in
derogation of any other law for the time being in force.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions afore-
said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without Prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Compulsory
imparting of
basic and
primary
education in
mother
tongue of the
child.
Power to
exempt.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
For a child, the easiest language to acquire knowledge and understanding of worldly
affairs is his mother tongue. He learns to speak his mother tongue from his mother and
family members, who generally speak the language spoken from generations or the dialect
of their forefathers or of the area or region in which they reside. In major parts of our
country, Hindi is the main language with different dialects at different places but it is written
in Devanagari script and can be understood easily  Then, there are regional languages. A
total of twenty-two languages have been recognized by our Constitution. The mother
tongue, no doubt, is the most appropriate language for a child to develop his faculties.
However, when a child is admitted in the play school or Kindergarten or primary school,
more so in the so called elite or public schools, he has to switch over to English medium,
which is the medium of instruction in such schools. At this stage the real difficulty of the
child begins. He speaks and understands a particular language, i.e., his mother tongue, but
the education is imparted to him in a different language. This causes strain and in order to
become a part of the system he starts ignoring his own mother tongue. In the Hindi speaking
areas, students of public schools cannot count in Hindi and do not recognize Hindi alphabet
because in their school they cannot speak in their language and have to speak only in
English. In many schools, students are penalized if they speak in any language other than
English. Though the child learns English by compulsion but he is not at ease with this
language and on the other hand he does not develop sufficient knowledge of his own
language. It is, therefore, necessary that a child should be imparted basic and primary
education in his mother tongue, which is the easiest language for him. Thereafter, the child
grows up and he can acquire the skills in other languages and opt for the language of his
choice for his further studies.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; OM  PRAKASH  YADA V
July 10, 2009.
3
SERVER 3 \ BILL 2004 \ LS \78LS.PM65

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall appoint language
teachers and provide requisite infrastructure for it. The expenditure in respect of schools in
Union territories and those funded or aided by the Central Government shall be borne out of
the Consolidated Fund of India. Clause 5 of the Bill makes it obligatory for the Central
Government to provide requisite funds to the States for carrying out the purposes of this
Bill.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crore may be involved as recurring
expenditure per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory use of mother tongue in imparting basic and primary
education to children in all educational institutions and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Om Prakash Yadav, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3815LS(S3)—05-11-2009.