THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
By
SHRI L. RAJAGOPAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2007.
2. After article 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,—
“21B. (1) Every citizen shall have the right to shelter in such manner as
Parliament may, by law, determine.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent the State from making any provision for
fixing criteria for allotment of houses to the citizens.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special housing
schemes for senior citizens, physically challenged persons, persons belonging to
scheduled castes, scheduled tribes, other backward classes, divorced women and
other weaker sections of the society.
Explanation : For the purpose of the this article, “shelter” means a dwelling
unit with all basic civic amenities.”.
Short title.
Insertion of new
article 21B.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  77 of 2007
Right to shelter.5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Even after six decades of independence, crores of citizens are still homeless. They
have to suffer the elements in all its fury—be it winter, summer or rainy season. The problem
of homelessness is increasing day-by-day both in rural and urban areas. Population explosion
and other social and economic reasons are the major reasons for housing shortage in the
country. Due to acute shortage of houses in the country, lakhs of poor people are forced to
live on the pavements, footpaths, shed of the bus stands, under flyovers and bridges, as
they cannot afford houses of their own. Crores of people are living in Jhuggi and Jhonpris,
kutcha and semi-pucca houses which lack basic facilities like sanitation, electricity, clean
water etc. Shelter is one of the basic human needs. It is necessary that the Government
should come forward to ensure adequate housing for homeless citizens not only because it
is their right, but, because it is an investment that would guarantee a healthy and satisfied
citizens.
The Supreme Court has recognized the right to housing by bringing it within the
ambit of right to life. At the same time, housing right has been recognized and reaffirmed in
all international and regional covenants, which have been ratified by our country. Hence,
the Central and the State Governments are under legal obligation to provide adequate
housing to the millions of people who are living in absolute homelessness. Therefore, it has
become more necessary to incorporate right to housing as a fundamental right in the
constitution.
The Bill is to seek the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; L. RAJAGOPAL
July 30, 2007.
2

3
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for incorporation of right to shelter in the Fundamental
Rights of the citizens. The Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to give an exact amount of expenditure to be
involved. However, it is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten
thousand crore is likely to be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *
21A. The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age
of six to fourteen years in such manner as the State may, by law, determine.
* * * * * * *
Right to
Education.

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
—————
(Shri L. Rajagopal, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4136LS(S5)—30-10-2007.