     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 77 of 2022
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR DEVELOPMENT
AND REJUVENATION OF WATER BODIES IN
FOREST AREAS IN THE STATE OF
RAJASTHAN BILL, 2022
By
SHRI C. P. JOSHI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide special financial assistance to the State Government of
Rajasthan to meet the expense of development and rejuvenation
of water bodies in the forest areas  in the State of
Rajasthan and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:–
1.(1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance for Development
and Rejuvenation  of Water Bodies in Forest Areas in the State of Rajasthan Act,
2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5

2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “aquatic ecosystem” means all organic and inorganic matter and all living
organisms living in or located in or on water or the beds or shores of a water
body;
(b) “drain” includes gutters, wastewater canals, sewers and all outlets or
flow of waste water including overflow of rainwater;
(c) “forest   area”  means  any  district   where  more  than   thirty-three
per cent of the total geographical area is covered by forests and has been
declared as the forest area by the State  Government of the Rajasthan or the
Central Government, as the case may be, for the purpose of this Act;
(d) “groundwater” means all water under the surface of the ground, whether
in solid or liquid form;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) “water body” means any body of flowing or standing water, whether
natural or artificial and whether the flow or presence of water is continuous,
intermittent or occurs only during a flood, including but not limited to a lake,
river, creek, stream, tank, well, pond and wetland.
3.(1) The State Government of Rajasthan shall forward the details of the
required infrastructure and the estimated cost of the water bodies project of the
forest areas falling in the State.
(2) The Central Government, shall on receipt of details, provide funds to
the State Government for the development of water bodies in the forest areas in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The funds provided under sub-section (2) shall be utilised for,—
(a) expeditious completion of ongoing water bodies projects in forest
areas;
(b) construction of small ponds for the use of animals in the forest
areas;
(c) digging wells and bore wells in the forest areas;
(d) installing electric pumps for pumping water in the forest areas;
(e) meeting costs incurred on implementing the “Water Bodies
Rejuvenation Scheme” based on the water resources of the forest areas;
(f)renovation of old ponds and water reservoirs in forest areas; and
(g) construction of canals.
(4) The State Government of the Rajasthan shall furnish the details of
expenditure likely to be incurred on the  water bodies development works in forest
areas to the Central Government in such manner and in such times as may be
prescribed:
Provided that if the State Government of the Rajasthan fails to utilise the
funds for the purpose it was released or fails to produce the details under
sub-section (4), the Central Government shall withhold sanction of funds to the
State Government.
2
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40
Definitions.
State
Governments
to forward the
details to the
Central
Government.

4. The State Government of Rajasthan shall, before forwarding the details to
Central Government under section 3, make the regulation for the purpose of,—
(a) designating any area as forest area;
(b) designating any area within the forest areas as a water quality control
zone for the purpose of protecting water, aquatic eco-system or drinking
water source;
(c) governing, regulating or prohibiting any use or activity in a water
quality control zone or any part of a zone;
(d) improving the drainage system;
(e) ensuring clear separation between waste water and sources of clean
water to avoid contamination; and
(f) ensuring quick absorption or clear flow of rain water and sources of
clean water to avoid contamination.
5. The State Government of Rajasthan shall, before forwarding the details to
the Central Government under section 3, take into consideration the scientific,
intrinsic and other information relating to,—
(a) the physical characteristics of land in the area, including its topography
and soil types;
(b) the ability of the soil or water in the area to assimilate nutrient and
other pollutants;
(c) water bodies or groundwater in the area, including information relating
to,—
(i) the quality characteristics of the water;
(ii) the susceptibility of water to contamination or adverse
changes in level; and
(iii) the extent to which the water is undistributed by human activity;
(d) the area’s aquatic eco-systems;
(e) whether the area contains a source or a potential source, of drinking
water;
(f) whether the area supports species that are sensitive to alterations in
water quality resulting from human activity;
(g) whether the area provides habitat for endangered species; and
(h) the perception of native inhabitants of the area regarding quality,
quantity and prospects of water in a particular zone including,—
(i) the possibilities of flood and/or water logging; and
(ii) any other matter which the Government consider relevant.
6. The Central Government shall render scientific and technical advice and
assistance to the State Government of Rajasthan if so required to achieve the
purposes of this Act.
3
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
Power of State
Governments
to make
regulations.
State
Government of
Rajasthan to
consider the
scientific,
intrinsic and
other
information
relating to
water bodies.
Central
Government to
render
scientific and
technical
advice.

7. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide financial assistance to the State
Government of Rajasthan for protection of water bodies and for promotion of rain
water harvesting and watershed management programmes in the forest areas.
(2) The Central Government before releasing the money shall ensure that
State Government has complied with the provisions of this Act.
8.(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
4
10
15
5
Central
Government to
provide
financial
assistance to
State
Government of
Rajasthan.
Power to make
rules.

5
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Rajasthan faces one of the greatest scarcity of water resources in the country.
It has 5.67 per cent. of population and about 11 per cent. of country’s livestock
but it has only 1.16 per cent. of surface water and 1.70 per cent. of ground water.
Thus Rajasthan a state with about 10 per cent. of land area has only around
1% of country’s water resources.
Rajasthan is the driest State with nearly 70 per cent. (2/3rd) of the area
classified as arid and semi arid region. The annual average demand in 2010 in the
State was of 31333.74 Million Cubic Meter (MCM) with an availability of
10448.59 MCM annual average surface water (having 75 per cent. dependability)
and 10563.01 MCM of annual average ground water. Hence there is gap of around
30 per cent. in demand and availability. Moreover, groundwater availability in
Rajasthan is highly variable, depending on hydrological conditions.
The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 has put some restrictions on the use of
forest land for non-forest purposes. Due to this, water bodies and other development
activities cannot be undertaken in the forest areas. It is neither justified nor
appropriate to deprive the people who have been living in forest areas since time
immemorial from getting facilities for their upliftment. A large number of proposals
relating to water bodies and development of water bodies in the forest areas are
pending approval in the Ministry concerned. Due to lack of water bodies species
living in the forest areas have to depend on rain despite having the water
reservoirs. Due to non-availability of water bodies, the ecosystem of forest areas
is degrading which compels them to live in the verge of extinction.
State Government do not have sufficient funds for the development of water
bodies projects in the forest areas. The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide financial
assistance to meet the expense of development and rejuvenation of water bodies
in the forest areas and for matters connected therewith in State of Rajasthan.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;                                           C.P. JOSHI
31 January , 2022.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for rendering of scientific and technical advice
and assistance to the State Government of Rajasthan. Clause 7 provides for
financial assistance to the State Government of Rajasthan for development,
rejuvenation and protection of water bodies.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India.  As the sums of moneys which will be given to the State of
Rajasthan as special financial assistance by appropriation by law made by Parliament
will be known only after the plans to be implemented by the State Government of
Rajasthan with the approval of Government of India as identified, it is not possible
at present to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be involved
out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the State Government of Rajasthan to make
regulations for the purpose of designating any area as forest area, etc. Clause 8
empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purpose of
this Act. As the regulations and rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation, therefore, is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide special financial assistance to the State Government of Rajasthan
to meet the expense of development and rejuvenation of water bodies
in the forest areas  in the State of Rajasthan and for
matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri C.P . Joshi, M.P.)