As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

; | 2 | “hes oe LO AIC 1h

oF 4 - ae
lS ae तक
gig ae Te en
Vi«

Bill No. 77 of 2005
E OLD AGE PENSION AND REHABILITATION BILL. 2005
द SHRIMATI KRISHNA TIRATH, M.P. -

A .

3 7 BILL

ide for payment of pension and provision of other rehabilitation facilities to old

persons

it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1) This Act may be called the Old Age Pension and Rehabilitation Act, 2005 Short _ title,
extent and
) It extends to the whole of India | ia ' commencement.
It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
cial Gazette, appoint a .

:
|


Definitions.

~ Pension to old
persons.

Facilities for
infirm
persons.

Facilities to old
persons.

Constitution
of Old Persons
Welfare Fund.

Expenses to be
met out of the
Fund. —

4,

Power to make
rules.

‘under section 6.

2

2. In this ‘Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the State Goy
and.in the case of a Union territory, the Central Government; and |

(0) “old person" means any person who has attained the age of sixty
more and who has no independent and adequate means of livelihood.

3. (7) Every old person shall, on an application made in the prescribed form, k
rupees five hundred per mensem as pension, by the appropriate Government,

(2) The pension payable Shall be subject to alteration on the basis of the prey;
cost-index as may be determined by the Central Government. =

(3) The pension referred to in sub-section (/) shall be disbursed to old person |
appropriate Government through Government Treasury or any branch of nationalisec
as may be prescribed by the Central Government. ms 7

4. The infirm from amongst the old persons Shall be accommodated in "Old Pe :
Homes" to be set up in every district by the appropriate Government.

5. It shall be the responsibility of appropriate Government in their respec
jurisdictions to provide to old persons,— | हि a

(a) free medical aid in Government hospitals and other nearest dispen a
recognised by the Government; and

(b) residenttal accommodation free of cost.

6. (1) There shall be constituted by the Central Government a Fund to be knowns |
"Old Persons Welfare Fund" to carry out the purposes of this Act.

(2) The Fund shall consist of the sums paid into it by the C

entral Government ar
grants and donations received from welfare agencies including i

nternational agencies,

7. The expenses incurred on providing the old persons with pension and other
rehabilitation facilities provided under this Act shall be met out of the Fund constitute

8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
carrying out the purposes of this Act. ;


८2263, 24036

STATEMENT OF OBJECT SAND REASONS _

It is Customary in our country for every Indian to look-after his aged parents but
now the economic conditions are such that it is not possible for the low income persons
to support them. Today we find millions of old persons who are unable to take care of
themselves or who do not have sufficient means or any support to lead a happy life. These
people, who are without any source of income, live in hunger and are left uncared for. The
majority of the aged are stil} left to fend for themselves. Our country, being a welfare State,
should provide social security to such old and infirm persons.

This Bill seeks to give impetus to the new social order and seeks to provide pension,

medical and residential facilities to old persons.

New DeLH; KRISHNA TIRATH

. 47713, 2005.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bil] provides for the payment of pension at the rate of rupees five

hundred per month to such old persons who have attained the age of 60 years or more and
who have no independent and adequate means of livelihood. Clause 4 provides that infirm

persons from amongst the old persons shall be accommodated in old persons homes tobe

set up in every district: Clause Sprovides for medical aid and residential] facilities free of cost

to old persons. Clause 6 provides for the constitution of Old Persons Welfare Fund by the — a ;
Central Government. This Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Ae

Fund of India.

It cannot be estimated at this Stage as to how many old persons will need assistance |

from the Central Government. Owever, an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ane
thousand crores is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of india.

initial stage.

A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees ten crore will also be involved at the

7
mM



_MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

_ Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
__ the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only the delegation of.
_ legislative power is of a normal character. _ ' |
#
5 '
ty f

ee

as


1.06 SABHA

हि | + ० है a. !
BILL
to provide for payment of pension and provision of other rehabilitation facilities
to old persons.

(Shrimati Krishna Tirath, MP) —

MGIPMRND—1197LS—09.06.2005.