THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.    (1)  This Act may be called the National Highways Authority of India (Amendment)
Act, 2008.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.     In the National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988, in section 3, for sub-section
(3), the following shall be substituted, namely:—
 “(3)   The Authority shall consist of :—
(i)  a Chairman;
(ii)  not more than six full-time members; and
(iii)  not more than six, but at the least four, part-time members,
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of section 3.
68 of 1988.
Bill No. 77 of 2008
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
to be appointed by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette:
Provided that the Central Government shall, while appointing the part-time
members, ensure that at least two of them are non-government professionals having
knowledge or experience in financial management, transportation planning or any
other relevant discipline.”.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Section 3 of the National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988 provides for
constitution of the National Highways Authority of India. As per sub-section (3) of the said
section, the authority shall consist of (i) a Chairman; (ii) not more than five full-time members;
and (iii) not more than four part-time members. Keeping in view the vastly increased mandate
for National Highways Authority of India and also the greatly enhanced participation
envisaged for the private sector, it is proposed to amend sub-section (3) of section 3 to
increase the strength of full-time members from five to six and part-time members from four to
six to allow induction of professionals of repute in the fields of financial management,
transportation planning and other relevant areas. Induction of outside professionals will
enhance the capacity of the Authority to take strategic decisions, widen its perspective,
bring in the best management practices, and assist in achieving the goal of higher private
participation.
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
T. R. BAALU
N
EW DELHI;
The 5th December, 2008.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-section (3) of section 3 of the National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988
provides for a Chairman, not more than five full-time Members, and not more than four part-
time Members. Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (3) of section 3 of the said Act
to provide for not more than six full-time Members and not more than six, but at the least four,
part-time Members.
2.  The salaries and allowances of additional full-time and part-time Members of the
Authority shall be paid by the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI).
3.  The Bill does not involve any other expenditure of a recurring or non-recurring
nature.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 1988.
68 OF 1988
*****
CHAPTER II
THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
3. (1) * * * * *
(3)   The Authority shall consist of —
(i)  a Chairman;
(ii)  not more than five full-time members; and
(iii)  not more than four part-time members,
to be appointed by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.
*****
Constitution
of the
Authority.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988.
————
(Shri T.R. Baalu, Minister of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways)
GMGIPMRND—4421LS(S-5)—16.12.2008.