1
THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES
AND REMAINS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI A.T. NANA PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains Act, 1958.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites
and Remains (Amendment) Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In section 20A of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section ( 1),—
(i) for the words "one hundred meters", the words "fifty meters" shall be
substituted; and
(ii) the proviso shall be omitted.
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 77 of  2014
Amendment
of section
20A.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
24 of 1958.
5
10

2
Amendment
of section
20B.
Amendment
of section
20-I.
Insertion of
new section
20R.
Central
Government
to provide
funds for
development
of all
monuments
and archaeo-
logical sites.
3.  In section 20B of the principal Act,—
(i) for the words "two hundred meters", the words "one hundred meters" shall
be substituted; and
(ii) the first proviso shall be omitted.
4. In section 20C of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the words, "before the
16th day of June, 1992", the words, "on the date of coming into force of the Ancient
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010,"
shall be substituted.
5. In section 20-I of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (b), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ba) prepare plans for beautification, renovation and development of ancient
monuments and archaeological sites and upgradation and creation of infrastructural
facilities in and around the ancient monuments and archaeological sites.".
6. After section 20Q of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"20R. The Central Government shall make available adequate funds for
development of all monuments and archaeological sites and for creation and
upgradation of infrastructure at such sites, as recommended by the Authority under
clause (ba) of sub-section (1) of section 20-I”.
Amendment
of section
20C.
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 was amended
in 2010 which came as a shock to thousands of people owning properties near monuments
and sites covered under the Act. With the coming into force of the Act, thousands of people
can no longer construct or repair or renovate their properties because of the restriction
imposed by the Act on any such activity within the stipulated distance from the monuments.
Several public projects have come to standstill or have been disallowed due to
restrictions imposed under the Act. On the one hand people are suffering because they are
not allowed to undertake any construction activity and on the other hand public works have
been stalled.
There are thousands of monuments in our country which are lying in a dilapidated
condition. They are misused by anti-social elements for illegal activities. A situation has
arisen that these monuments are neither improved nor used for any purpose nor any
construction activity is allowed near the monuments. It is accordingly proposed to renovate/
upgrade facilities in these sites so as to exploit their tourism potential. The Bill seeks to
amend the Act, with a view to relax the restrictions imposed under the Act so as to mitigate
the difficulties faced by the people.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI;
June, 27, 2014.
3
A.T. NANA PATIL

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall make available adequate
funds for preparing plan for beautification, renovation, development, upgradation, creation
of infrastructural facilities in and around ancient monuments and archaeological sites. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It
is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS ACT, 1958
(24 OF 1958)
* * * * * * * *
20A. (1) Every area, beginning at the limit of the protected area or the protected
monument, as the case may be, and extending to a distance of one hundred metres in all
directions shall be the prohibited area in respect of such protected area or protected
monument:
Provided that the Central Government may, on the recommendation of the Authority,
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify an area more than one hundred metres to be
the prohibited area having regard to the classification of any protected monument or protected
area, as the case may be, under section 4A.
(2) * * * *
(3) * * * *
20B. Every area, beginning at the limit of prohibited area in respect of every ancient
monument and archaeological site and remains, declared as of national importance under
sections 3 and 4 and extending to a distance of two hundred metres in all directions shall be
the regulated area in respect of every ancient monument and archaeological site and remains:
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify an area more than two hundred metres to be the regulated area having regard to the
classification of any protected monument or protected area, as the case may be, under
section 4A.
20C. (1) Any person, who owns any building or structure, which existed in a prohibited
area before the 16th day of June, 1992, or, which had been subsequently constructed with
the approval of the Director-General and desires to carry out any repair or renovation of
such building or structure, may make an application to the competent authority for carrying
out such repair or renovation, as the case may be.
* * * * * * * *
20-I. (1) The Authority shall exercise or discharge the following powers or functions,
namely:—
(a) * * *  * *
(b) make recommendations to the Central Government for grading and classifying
protected monuments and protected areas which may be declared after the
commencement of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
(Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010, as of national importance under section 4;
* * * * * * * *
Declaration of
prohibited
area and
carrying out
public work or
other works in
prohibited
area.
Declaration of
regulated area
in respect of
every
protected
monument.
Application
for repair or
renovation in
prohibited
area, or
construction
or
reconstruction
or repair or
renovation in
regulated area.
Functions and
powers of
Authority.
5

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites
and Remains Act, 1958.
—————
(Shri A.T. Nana Patil, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—989LS(S3)—24-07-2014.