As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
BUI No. 78 of 1..,& 
THE CODE OF CIlVlL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BII..&4 1979 
BILL 
further to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year ot the Republic at 
India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) 
Ad, 1979. 
Short 
title. 
2. In section 123 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter Amend-
5 of 1908. S referred to 8S the principal Act), in sub-section (2), after clause (c), the ment of 
following clause shall be inserted, namely:- section 
10 
U(d) in the towns of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay. an advocate 
entitled to practise on the original side of the High Court". 
S. In the First Schedule to the principal Act,-
(4) in Order V, in rule 20, in sub-rule (lA), for the words "a 
daily neWSpaper circulating in the locality", the words "8 news-
paper having circulation in the locality" shall be substituted; 
123. 
Amend-
ment of 
First 
Schedule. 

Numerous 
persons 
having 
same 
interest 
in pr0-
ceeding 
under . 
article 
226. 
(Ib) after Order XLIX, the following Order shall be inserted.. 
namely:-
"ORDER XLIXA 
P~OCEEDINGS BEFORE HIGH COURTS UNDER ARTICLE 226 OF '1'BI! CONSUl anON 
1. (1) Where numerous persons have the same interest with 5 
respect to any question of law or f-act or any relief which may_ 
be the subject matter of a proceeding befo~e a High Court under 
article 226 of the Constitution-
(a) one or more of such persons may, with the permis-
sion of the Court, proceed or be proceeded against, or may 10 
defend such proceeding, on behalf of, or for the benefit of, 
all persons so interested; 
(Ib) the Court may direct 'that one or mOl'e of such 
persons may proceed or be proce~ed against, or may 
defend such proceeding, on behalf of, or for the benefit of, IS 
all persons so interested. 
(2) The Court shall, in every case where a permission or 
direction is given under sub-rule (1), at the petitioner's ex-
pense, give notice of the institution of the proceeding to all 
p~rsons so interested, either by personal service, or, where, by ~o 
reason of the number of persons or any other cause, such service 
is not reasonably practicable, by public advertisement, as the 
Court in each case may direct. 
(3) Azly person on whose behalf, or for whose benefit, a pro-
ceedingia instituted, or defended \meier sub-rule (1) may apply ~5 
to the Court to be made a party to such proceeding. 
(4) No part of the relief. claimed in any such proceeding shall 
be abandoned, and no such proceeding shall be withdrawn, and no 
agreement, compromise or satisfaction shall be recorded in any 
such proceeding, unless the Court has given, at the petitioner's 30 
expense, notice to all' persons so interested in the manner specified 
in sub-rule (2) . 
(5) Where any pe~on proceeding 9r defending in any such 
proceeding does not proceed with due diligence in the proceeding 
or defence, the Court may substitute in his place any other person 35 
having the same interest in the proceeding. 
(6) Any direction, order or writ issued or passed in a pro-
ceeding to which this rule applies shall be binding on all persons 
on whose behalf, or for whose benefit, the proceeding is instituted. 
or defended. as the case may be. 40 
ExpLanation.-For the purpose of determining whether the 
persons who proceed or are proceeded against, or defend, have 
the same interest in one proceeding. it is not necessary to establish 
that such persons have the same ground of relief 88 the persons 
on whose behalf, or for whose benefit, they proceed Or are proceed- 45 
ed against, or defend the proceeding, as the case may be.". 

STATEMENT OF ,OBJECTS AND REASONS 
A new sub-rule was inserted in Rule 20 of Order V of the First Schedule 
to the Code of Civil Procedure by the Amendment Act, 1976. This had 
the effect of providing that an advertisement for substituted service of 
summons could be published only in a daily newspaper. The All India 
Small and Medium Newspapers Association had represented that this has 
resulted in considerable hardship to over two thousand weekly newspapers, 
as they are ineligible for this class of advertisement. In view of this hard-
ship and the fact that it is the Court which chooses the particular news-
paper in which an advertisement has to be published having regard to the 
likelihood of its being seen by the persons for whom it is intended, it is 
proposed to amend the sub-rule, so as to enable such advertisements to be 
published in newspapers having circulation in a locality in which the 
defendant is last known to have actually and voluntarily resided, carried 
on business or personally worked for gain, irrespective of whether the 
newspaper is a daily newspaper or not. 
2. Sectilon 141 o~ the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 makes the procedure 
provided in the Code in regard to suits applicable, so far as they may be, 
to all proceedings in any court of civil jurisdiction. The Amending Act 
of 1976 added an Explanation to this section to the effect that-its provisions 
do not apply to proceedings under article 226 of the Constitution. It has 
been pointed out that this amendment has had the effect of preventing 
representative writ petitions being ftled in the High Courts, with the result 
that in a large number of cases, wherein no dispute as to factS is involved 
but only to a question of law, iden~al petitions. have been ftled by a large 
number of interested persons, resulting in unnecessary delay and expense. 
While it is no doubt open to the High Courts to frame a rule authorising 
representative writ petitions, in order to make for uniformity and to avoid 
unnecessary litigation, it· is proposed to insert new Order XLIX-A in the 
First Schedule to the Code, so as to enable representative writ petitions to 
be filed. ' 
3., Section 123 (2) of the Code, dealing with the composition of the Rule 
Committee, provided that in the High Courts of Calcutta, Madras and 
Bombay, the Rule Committee shall include an Attorney. With the aboli-
tion of the institution of Attorneys, reference to Attorneys in this section 
was deleted by the Repealing and Amending Act of 1978. The Government 
of Maharashtra has suggested that in place of Attorneys, representation 
should be given to Advocates entitled to practise on the Originat Side of 
the High Court. It is, therefore, proposed to amend section 123 (2) of the 
Code to provide for representation to this class of Advocates in Rule 
Committees. 
4. The BUI seeks to give effect to the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; SHANT! BHUSHAN. 
The 7th May, 1979. 
3 

Conatitu-
tloIl of 
Rule 
Com-
mltteeI 
in certain 
States. 
Substitut-
ed service. 
Ex'rBAC~ FROM THE CoDE OF CIVIL PR~uu:, 1908. 
(5 OF 1908) 
• • • • • 
111. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Each aqch Committee shall coDlist ot. t~ faU9wtni 
~y:-
• • • • • 
THE FIRST SCHEI>tJ'LJ 
• • • • • 
o~v 
IssUll AND SDV'ICZ 01' S'ulomNs 
• • • • • 
zt. (1) • • • • • 
peraona, 
(lA) Where the aourt acting under sub-rule (l>--/~. ~ by 
-.n" .sve~t it) '" ~ew~. ~ newPfl8r .-n .,.a .44Wy nftII-
paper circ~tiM jn the loc;ality in wbjcb ~;~~ is last ~ 
tQ .. ve .... U¥· andVilbmtarily ~ ~""_ ..... " ......... 
toUlly worked for gain. 
. ~.' 
\, 
• • 
· . · "~ 
.\ .-
• 
4 
• • 
I 
.",," 
" 
" 
" , 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
f\U'ther tc;> amend the Cod~ of Civil procedure, 1908. 
(Shri Shanti BhtUhan, 
MiniBter of lAw, Jumc~ and 
,.. ~ompany AfftDr"~ . 