Bill No. 78 of 1959 
THE HAJ COMMITTEE BILL, 19S9 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA 
ON 16TH NOVEMBER, 1959) 

LOK SABRA 
Co:-rige nda 
to 
THE RAJ C(J.fi\lI TTEE BILL, . 1959 
(To be introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. Pag~ 4, line 35,-
for 11th? N st of th3 year" r6ad 
"me -::. ting aha1l be . six" 
2. Page 5, in the marginal heading to clause 11,-
after "Vacancies" insert "etc." 
NEll[ DELHI, 
November ~4~_1900. 
Kar1;ika 23, 1881 (Saka) 

BUl No. 78 of 19$9 
THE HAJ COMM.ITTEE BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
Bn..L 
to utablish a Committee in the Port of Bombay for assisting Muslim 
pilgrims to Saudi Arabia, Syria, Iraq, Iran and Jordan and fM 
matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Perliament in the Tenth Year of the Repablic of 
India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Haj Committee Act, 1959. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
S (a) "Committee" means the Haj Committee constituted 
10 
under this Act; 
(b) "pilgrim" means a Mu::>lim proceeding on or returning 
from pilgrimage to Saudi Anbia, Syria, Iraq, Iran or Jordan; 
(c) "pilgrim ship" means a ship Conveying or about to convey 
pilgrims from or to the port of Bombay to or from any port in 
the Red Sea other than Suez; 
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under 
this Act. 
Short title. 
Deftnidona. 
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Centml Government Incorpora-
15 may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this bemlf, ~H.i 
there shall be established a Committee by the name of the Haj !tee. 
Committee. 
(2) The said Committee shall be a body corporate having perpe-
tual succession and a common seal and shall by the said name sue 
%('1 and be sued. 
1130 (B) LS.-l 

'2 
Composition . of the Com- 4. (1) The CommIttee shall consist of the following members, 
mittcc. namely:-
Nomination, 
and co-
option of 
memben. 
(a) the Collector of Customs, Bombay, ex ol/icio; 
(b) the Chairman, Port Trust, Bombay, ex officio; 
(c) the Principal Officer, Mercantile Marine Department, 5 
Bombay, ex officio; 
(d) the Commissioner of Police for Greater Bombay, ex 
officio; 
(e) the Municipal Commissioner, Greater Bombay, ex 
o~; IG 
(f) the Port Health Ofticer, Bombay, ex otJicio; 
(g) two members to be nominated by the. Central Govern-
ment; 
(h) three members of Parliament of whom two are to be 
nominated by the Speaker of the House of the People from among tj 
its members and. one by the Chairman of the Council of Smtes 
from among its members; . 
(i) one member to represent the State Government of-Bom-
bay to be nominated by that Government; 
(j) two members of the Bombay State Legislative Assembly aD 
to be nominated by the Speaker of that Assembly; 
(k) two members of the Municipal Corporation of Greater 
Bombay to be nominated by the State Government of 
Bombay on the recommendation of the Muslim members of the 
Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay; 
(1) three members, of whom two shall be. Shia Muslims, 
to be co-opted by all the members of the Committee to represent 
such interests as, in their opinion, are directly and actively 
interested in the welfare of the pUgrims. 
(2) Every nomination under this section shall1ake-·eftect'ss soon 30 
as it is notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette. 
5. (1) The members of the Committee shall be nominated or co-
opted in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) As soon as may be after the nomination of the members of the 
Committee and the co-option of the members referred. to in clause (1) ~5 
of sub-section (1) of section 4, the Central Government shall publish 

3 
in the Official Gazette a .list (If the names ai, all members nomiJaa1led 
and co-opted: 
Provided that the failure to co-opt a member shall not prevent 
the Central Government from making nominations or from publish-
5 ing the list of members GS provided in this sub-section: 
Provided. f.urther that the list of members. of a new Committee 
shall not be published before the expiry of three years from the date 
of the publication of the list of members of the Committee which it 
is replacing. 
10 6. (1) After the publication '.of the list of members of the Com- ~aiV:: 
mittee under sub-section (2) of section 5, the Central Government Chairmen. 
shall direct the Committee to elect one of its members to be the 
Chairman within such time as may be specified in the direction. 
(2) If within the time so specified the Committee fails to elect 
IS a Chairrmn, the Central Government may appoint a member of the 
Committee to be the Chairman thereof. 
(3) The Chairman shall exercise such powers and discharge such 
duties as may be prescribed. 
(4) The Committee shall elect from among its members not more 
2C than two members to be Vice-Chairmen who shall exercise such 
powers and discherge such duties as may be determined by bye-laws 
made in this behalf by the Committee. 
(5) The IElppointment or election of the Chairman and the Vice-
Chairmen shall be notified by the Central Government in the Official 
25 Gazette. 
7. The term of office of the members of the Committee (other Term o( 
than the e~ officio members and members filling casual vacancies) office. 
shall .be not less than three ~s,commencing on the day following 
the publication of the list of members under sub-section (2) of section 
30 5, and ending on the date of the publication of the list of members 
of the next Committee. 
8. (1) At such time as the Central Government may deem to be Conautucion 
expedient before or after the expiry of the period of three years ~=LCom­
after ihepublication of the list of members of a Committee under 
35 sub-section (2) of section 5, the Central Government shall take or 
cause to be taken all necessary steps for the nomination . and co-
option of members of the new Committee. 
(2) No person shall be ineUgible for nomination or co-option to 
the ~ Committee on the ground that he is or has been a member of 
40 the Committee. 

Duties of 
Committee. 
Meetinp of 
Committee. 
4 
•. (1) The duties of the Committee shall be-
(4) to collect and disseminate information useful to p!l-
grims; 
(b) to advise and assist pilgrims during their stay in the 
city and the port of Bombay, while proceeding on or returning S 
from pilgrimage, in all matters including vaccination, inocula-
tion, medical inspection and issue of passes and passports, and 
to co-operate with the local authorities concerned in such mat-
ters; 
(c) to give relief to indigent pilgrims; 
(d) to negotiate and co-operate with railways, shipping 
companies, airways and travel agencies for the purpose of secur-
ing travelling facilities for pilgrims; 
(e) to find suitable guides for employment by shipping 
10 
companies on pilgrim ships;. IS 
(f) to bring the grievances of pilgrims and any irregulari-
ties or omissions on the part of a master or owner of a pilgrim 
ship in carrying out the provisions of the Indian Merchant Ship-
ping Act, 1923, to the notice of the authorities concerned, and 21 of 1923. 
to suggest remedies; 30 
(g) to appoint a pilgrim as "Amirul-Haj" on board a pil-
grim ship to represent the grievances of the pilgrims to the 
master or owner of the ship; 
(h) generally to look after the welfare of the pilgrims; and 
(i) to discharge such other duties in connection with pil- as 
grim traffic as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Central Government shall afford all reasonable assis-
tance to the Committee in the discharge of the duties imposed by 
this section. 
10. (1) The Committee shall meet at least once in every month So 
during the four months before the Haj Day and during the two 
months after the Haj Day, and at least once in three months during 
the rest of the year· 
(2) The number of members required to make a quorum at any 
the rest of the year. 3' 
(3) All matters shall be decided by a majority of votes of the 
members present, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chair-
man or other person presiding shall have a casting vote. 

5 
11. No act or proceeding of the Committee shall be invalid 
reason only of the existence of any vacancy among its members 
any defect in the constitution thereof. 
by VaC&D~ 
not to m-or validate ICti 
or proceed-
ing. of the 
Committee. 
lZ. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Executi~ 
5 Committee, appoint a person to be the Executive Officer thereof who ~~rr!tp_ 
shall also be the Secretary to the Committee. loyee8. 
(2) The Committee shall, subject to the approval of the Central 
Government, appoint such other employees as it may consider neces-
sary for the efficient discharge of its duties under this Act. 
10 13. (1) The Committee shall appoint one or more sub-committees Sub-com-
consisting of such number of its members as it thinks fit for the ~ttee •. and 
inspection of pilgnm' ships ~.~tlon of . pllgnm 
(2) Any such sub-committee when inspecting a pilgrim ship shall ships. 
be accompanied by the certifying officer appointed for the port under 
alof1923· IS section 151 of the Indian Merchant Shipping Act, 1923, or by the 
Surveyor of the ship or other person deputed by the certifying 
officer. 
(3) The Executive Officer of the Committee, or a sub-committ~ 
appointed under sub-section (1) may enter and inspect any pilgrim 
20 ship advertised or offering to sail from, or which has returned to, 
the port of Bombay. 
(4) A master or any officer of a pilgrim ship who fails to render 
reasonable facilities for such inspection shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to five hundred! rupees. 
2, (5) No magistrate other than a presidency magistrate or magis-
tratE" of the first class shall take cognizance of an offence punishable 
under sub-section (4), and such magistrate shall take cognizance of 
such offence only on written complaint by the Chairman of the Com-
mittee. 
30 (6) The Committee may also appoint other sub-committees for 
such purposes as it may think fit and any such sub-committee shall 
consist of such number of members and other persons as may be 
delennined by bye-laws made in this behalf by the Committee. : . 
14. The Commitiee shall have its own Fund to be called the Haj H~j p~ 
3~ Fund, and there shall be placed to the credit thereof the following 
sums, namely:-
(a) the interest on all deposits made by pilgrims under 
clause (b) of section 208A of the Indian Merchant Shipping Act, 
1923; 1 

6 
(b) the fees charged for the registration of .pilgrim passes in 
pur&1olance .. of any rule made under section. 213·0£ the lDdian 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1923; 
(c) the sums realised from the sale of the effects of deceased 
pilgrims and sums of money left by deceased pilgrims, which 5 
are unclaimed .and have lapsed to the Government; 
(d) aJly fees which may be levied for the issue of visitors' 
passes to friends and relations of pilgrims who desire to go on 
board'a "pilgrim ship; 
21 of 19230 
(e) the amount standing at the commencement of this Act 10 ;~ 
Vestilll of 
propertyiD 
the Com-
mittee. 
to the credit of the Fund known as the Indigent Pilgrims' Fund: 
Provided .that such:amount shall be applied.by the Committee 
sole1yfor the relief Df indigent pilgrims; 
(1) any sums received by the Haj Fund from private 
lOurceB;.-and: 15 
(g) . any sums;allotted by the Central Government 'or any 
Stat~ Government to the Haj Fund. 
15. All property, assets and funds owned or acquired, befOlle tlle 
establishment of the Committee under this Act, by the Port Haj 
Committee of Calcutta and the Port Haj Committee of Bombay cons- 20 
tituted under the Port Haj Committees Act, 1932, shall, on such·e8tab- ~ ofl932 
Ushment, vest in' the Committee and form' part of the Haj ; -Fund 
referred to in section 14. 
APPlication.. 16. The Haj . Fund shall, .subject to any rules.that maybe made ofihe Hat Ftmd. under this Act, be under the control and management of the Com- 25 
mittee, and shall be applied to the following purposes, namely:-
(a) pay and allowances of the Executive Officer and other 
employees of the Committee; 
(b) payment of charges and expenses incidental ·to the 30 
objects specified in section 9; 
(c) any other object specified in the rules made under sec-
tion 17. 
Power to 17. (1) The Central Government may, by notiflcaticm'. in the 
aaaIre rule-. Official .Gazette, make rules to carry out the 'purposes of this Act. 
(2) 'm' particular~' and .without ·prejudice·totAe~t~I:-.ofi the 35 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of ,thefoUow-
ing maUel'B"namely:-
(a) 'the manner;of' nomJDationa.nd :ce-optten.of ,members of 
the Committee; 

S 
IC 
7 
fb)- the-disqualifications for--being, chosen as, or for being, 
members of the Committee; 
(c) the manner in which doubts and disputes relating to 
co-option of members may be determined; 
(d) the filling up of casual vacancies in the office of, the 
Chairman and other members of the Committee; 
(e) the')relnovaLof the: Cbairman and other'members of the 
Committee and their resignation from office; 
(f) the term of office of the Chairman and his powers and 
duties; 
(g) the duties which may be entrusted to the Committee; 
(h) the powers and duties of the Executive Officer and the 
conditions of service of the Executive Officer and, other emplo-
yees of the Committee; 
IS (i) the custody of the Haj Fund and the investment of 
balances therein; 
(j) the objects for which the Haj Fund may be applied; 
(k) the limit of expenditure which may be inC'llITed by 
the Committee without-sanction of the Central Government; 
(l) the accounts to be kept by the Committee and the 
audit of such accounts; 
(m) the preparation, submission and approval of the budget 
of the Committee; 
(n) the returns, statements and reports to be submitted by 
2S the Committee; 
(0) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as 
may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is 
in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
30 in one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the &xpiry 
of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately 
following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
3S effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule 

Power to 
make bye-
IaWi. 
RctJeal and 
laviDp. 
8 
18. (1) The Committee may make bye-laws not inc::onsJ.steni 
with this Act or the rules made thereunder-
(a) prescribing the manner of election of the Vic&-
Chairmen; 
(b) prescribing the term of office and the powers and S 
duties of the Vice-Chairmen; 
(c) regulating the removal or resignation of a Vice-Chair-
man and the filling up of casual vacancies in the office of Vice-
Chairman; 
(d) regulating the convening of the meetings of the Com- 10 
mittee and the conduct of business thereat; 
(e) prescribing the registers and records to be maintained; 
(f) providing for the publication of its proceedings and any 
matter of interest to pilgrims; and 
(g) providing for any other matter which the Committee IS 
deems necessary for giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Bye-laws made by the Committee under this section shall 
be submitted to the Central Government and shall not take effect 
until they have been confirmed by the Central Government. 
(3) Bye-laws which have been confirmed by the Central Govern- ~o 
ment shall be published in the Official Gazette. 
19. (1) The Port Haj Committees Act, 1932, is hereby repealed. 20 or 1933. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, the Port Haj Committee of 
Bombay constituted under the said Act shall, until the establishment 
of the Committee under this Act, continue to function as if this Act 2S 
had not been passed and on such establishment of the Committee, 
the Port Haj Committee of Bombay shall stand dissolved. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
According to the Port Haj Committees Act, 1932, as originally 
enacted, three Port Haj Committees were constituted at the three 
ports of Bombay, Calcutta and Karachi. Consequent upon constitu-
tional changes in the country, the Act wes suitably amended to pro-
vide for the continuance of the Calcutta and the Bombay Commit-
t~ only, the reference to the Karachi Committee being omitted 
therefrom. The Calcutta Committee, however, ceased to function 
from 1948 owing to the partition of Bengal and there is a ballJllce of 
about Rs. 15,000 lying to the credit of the defunct Port Haj Fund, 
Calcutta, which cannot be utilised for any other purpose or trans-
ferred to any Port Haj Fund unless the Act is amend~. Further all 
pilgrim traffic to Saudi Arabia, Iraq and Iran is now centralised at 
Bombay. 
2. It is, therefore, considered desirable that the Act should be 
revised to bring it in line with the present requirements of the 
Haj pilgrims and to JIlake the Port Haj Committee a l1!presentative 
body of the country. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve this object. 
Nzw DELHI; LAKSHMI N. MENON. 
The 2&'ct Septembe1", 1159. 
• 1130 (B) LS.-2 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 17 empowers the Central Government 
to make rules generally for carrying out the purposes of the Bill 
when enacted and sub-clause (2) enumerates the various matters in 
respect of which rules may be made. These matters relute, among 
others, to nomination, co-option, disqualification, resignation, etc., of 
the members of the Committee, filling up of casual vacancies in the 
office of Chairman or other member, term of office of the Chairman 
and his powers and duties, accounts to be kept by the Committee and 
their audit and preparation of the budget of the Committee. 
2. Clause 18 empowers the Haj Committee to make bye-laws 
which are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Bill or the rules 
made thereunder, in regard to the manner of election, term of office, 
powers and duties, removal and resignation of the Vice-Chairmen 
of the Committee, conduct of business at the meetings of the Com-
mittee, maintenance of registers and records, publication of proceed-
ings and matters of interest to pilgrims, and any other matter con-
sidered necessary for giving effect to the prOvisions of the Bill. The 
b~e-Iaws are subject to confirmation by the Central Government. 
3. The rules and bye-laws will thus be confined to matters of 
procedure and the delegation of legislative powers both to the Cen-
tral Government and the CommitteP. is of a normal type. 
. r 
10 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to clltablish a Committee in the Port of Bombay for asS]stmg 
Muslim pilgrims to Saudi Arabia, Syria, Iraq, Iran and" 
Jorjan and for matters COnnected therewith~ 
Shrimati Lakshmi N. Menon, 
Deputy Minister of External Affairs ... 