Bill No. 78 of 19S' 
TIlE WORKING JOURNALISTS(FIX~ TION 
OF RATES OF WAGES) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 

of 1947. 
BID No. " .f ItSl 
THE WOR,KING JOURNALISTS (FIXATION OF RAT:aS 
OF WAGES) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODtICJ:D IN LOIt SUHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the fixation. of rates 01 wages in respect 01 working 
journalists and fOT matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Workine Journalists (Fixation of Short 
Rates of Wages) Act, 1958. title. 
S 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Delbtt-
10 
IS 
(a) "Committee" means the Committee constituted under tiona. 
section 3; 
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under thfI 
Act; 
(c~ "Wage Board" means the Wage Board constituted under 
the Working Journalists Act by notification No. S.R.O. 1075 of 
·.he Government of India in the Ministry of Labour, dated the 
2nd May, 1956; 
(d) "Wage Board decision" means the decisions of the Waee 
Board published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary, Part n. 
Section 3, dated the 11th May, 1957; 
(e) "wages" means wages as defined in the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947; 

2 
(J) "Working Journalists Act" Means the Working 
Journalists (Conditions of Service) and Mis1:ellaneous Provisions 
Act, 1955; 
(g) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act, 
and defined in the Working Journalists Act, shall have the mean- S 
lngs respeetively assigned to them in that Act. 
ecm.titu· 3. (1) For the purpose of enablin&" the Central Government to fix 
~~uee. rates of waces in respect of working journalists in the Iilht of the 
Judgment of the Supreme Court, dated the 19tb day of March, 1958, 
relatine to the Wale Board decision, and in the light of all other LO 
releva~t cn:c~tances, the Central Government shall, as soon as may 
... ·~~tlie:~.o~encement of this Act, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a Committee consisting of the following persons, 
nameli:-
(i) an officer of the Ministry of Law not below the rank of 15 
Joint Secretary, nominated by the Central Government, who 
shall be the Chairman of the Committee, 
(ii) three persons nominated by the Central Government 
from among the officers of each of the Ministries of Home. Affairs, 
. Labour and Employinent and Information and Broadcastine, 10 
(iii) a thartered· ac(ountant nominated by the Central 
Govenunept. 
(2) If for any reason a vacancy (other than a vacancy by reason of 
temporary absence) occurs in the office of the Chairman or any other 
member of the Committee, the Central Government may appoint 2S 
another person in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) to 
flIl the vacancy, and the inquiry before tbe Committee may be conti-
llUed from thestaee which had been reached when the vacancy arose. 
450t 1 
(3) The Central Government may appoint a Secretary to the 
Committee, and may also provide the Committee with such other 30 
staff as may· be necessary . 
Funetions 
ef Com-
mittee. 
(4). The Secretary shall perform such functions of a ministerial 
or other nature as the Committee or the Chairman thereof may 
R$sign or delegate to him. 
4 .. (1) The Committee shall, by notic~ published in such manner 3' 
as- it thinks: fit, call upon newspaper establishments and working 
joumalists ·BDd other persons interested in th.e Wage Board decision 
to make such representations as 'they may think fit as respects the 
W"ge;Board'deciSion aIld . .the rates.of wages whieh may be fixed 
under this Act in respect of working journalists.· 40 

(2) Every such representation shall be in writing and shall be 
made within such period not exceeding thirty days, as the Committee 
may specify in the notice, and shall state-
(a) the specific grounds of objection, if any, to the Wage 
S Board decision, 
(b) the rates of wages which, in the opinion of the person 
making the representation, would be reasonable, having regard 
to the capacity of the employer to pay the same or to any other 
circumstance, whichever may seem relevant to the person making 
(0 the representation in relation to his representation, 
(c) the alterations or modifications, if any, which, in the 
opinion of the person making the representation, should be made 
in the Wage Board decision and the reasons therefor. 
(3) The Committee shall take into account the representations 
JS aforesaid, if any, and after exa~ining the materials placed before the 
Wage Board and such further materials as have since been obtained 
by or made available to it under this Act, make such recommenda-
tions, as it thinks fit, to the Central Government for the fixation of 
rates of wages in respect of working journalists, whether by way of 
:.;ao modification or otherwise, of the Wage Board decision; and any such 
recommendation may specify, whether prospectively or retrospec-
tively. the date from which the rates of wages should take effect. 
(4) In making any recommendations to the Central Government, 
the Committee shall have regard to all the matters set out in sub-
:.;as section (I) of section 9 of the Working Journalists Act. 
(5) The Committee may, if it thinks fit, take up for consideration 
separately groups or classes of newspaper establishments, whether on 
the basis of regional classification or on any other basis, and make 
recommendations from time to time in regard to each such group or 
30 class. 
5. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (2), the Powers of 
Committee may exercise all or any of the powers which an industrial ~~~;e. 
14 of 1947 tribunal, constituted under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, exer-
cises for the adjudication of an industrial dispute referred to it and 
3S shall, subject to the provisions contained in this Act and the rules, 
if -.my, made thereunder, have power to regulate its own procedure. 
(2) Any representations made to the Committee and any docu-
ments furnished to it by way of evidence, shall be open to inspection 
on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, by any person interested 
40 in the matter. 
(3) If in the course of any inquiry it appears to the Committee 
that it is necessary to examine any accounts or documents or obtain 

Power of 
Central 
Govern-
mentto 
enforce 
recom-
menda-
tions of 
Commit-
tee. 
Working 
journa-
lists en-
titled to 
wBlesBt 
4 
any statements from any person, the Committee may authorise any 
officer of the Central Government (hereinafter referred to as "the 
authorised officer") in that behalf; and the authorised officer shall, 
subject to the directions of the Committee, if any, examine the 
accounts or documents or obtain the statements from the person. 5 
(4) The authorised officer may, subject to the directions of the 
Committee, if any, exercise all or any of the powers which an indus-
trial tribunal may exercise under sub-section (2) or sub-section 
(3) of section 11 of the Industrial "Disputes Act, 1947. 14 of 1947. 
(5) The authorised officer shall be deemed to be a public servant 10 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 45 of 1880. 
6. (J) As soon as may be, after the' receipt of the recommenda-
tions of the Committee, the Central Government shall make an 
order in terms of the recommendations or subject to such modifi-
cations, if any) as it thinks fit, bei~g modifications which, in the I; 
opinIon of the Central GO\Ternr:nent, do not effect important altera-
tions in the character of the recommendations. 
(2) NotWithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
Central Government may, if it thinks fit,-
(a) make such modifications in the recommend'ltions, not 2.0 
being modifications of the nature referred to in sub-section (I). 
as it thinks fit: 
Provided that before making any such modifications, the 
Central Government shall cause notice to be given to all persons 
likely to be affected thereby in such manner as may be pres- 2.5 
cribed, and shall take into account any representations which 
they may make in this behalf in writing, or 
(b) refer the recommendations or any part thereof to the 
Committee, in which case the Central Government shall con- • 
sider its further recommendations and make an order eitther in 30 
term;;; of the recommendations or with such modifications of the 
na ture referred to in sub-section (1). 
(3) Every order made by the Central Government shall be 
published in the Official Gazette together with the recommendations 
of the" Committee relating to the order, and the order shall come 35 
into operation on the date of pUblication or on such date. whether 
p:rospectively or retrospectively, ~s may be specified in the order. 
7. Subject to the provisions contained in section 11, on the com-
ing into operation of an order of the Central Government, every .... 
working journalist shall be entitled to be paid by his employer 40 

s 
wages at a rate which shall in no case be less than the rate 
VI'ages specified in the order. 
of rates not 
less than 
those spe-
cified in 
the 
order. 
8. The Central Government may, at any time after. the expiry Review 
of three years from the date of the order passed by it under this ~~ order 
5 Act, if it is of opinion that circumstances require that the rates of Central 
wages specified in the order should be revised, constitute a Wage ~~~~:n­
Board as provided in section 8 of the Working Journalists Act, and 
where a Wage Board is so constituted, the provisions of the Work-
ing Journalists Act shall apply thereto. 
l~ 9. (1) Where any amount is due under this Act to a working Recovery 
journulist from an employer, the working journalist may, without d~::\~ey 
prejudice to any other mode of recovery, make an application to the ~orking 
State Government for the recovery of, the money due to him, and if li~~S~na­
the State Government, or such authority as the State Government 
IS may specify in this behalf, is satisfied that any money is so due, it 
shall issue ,.] certificate for that amount to the Collector, and the 
Collector shllll proceed to recover that amount in the same manner as 
an arrear of land revenue. 
(2) If any question arises as to the amount due under this Act to 
:10 a working journalist from '3n employer, the State Government may, 
on its own motion or upon application made to it, refer the question to 
any Labour Court constituted by it under section 7 of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947, and the said Act shall have effect in relation to 
the Labour Court as if the question RO referred were a matter speci-
2S fied in the Second Schedule to that Act which has been referred to 
the Labour Court for adjudication. 
(3) The decision of the Labour Court shall be forwarded by it to 
the State Government which made the reference, Gnd any amount 
found due by the Labour Court may be recovered in the manner 
30 provided in sub-section (1). 
10. All notices, letters, authorisations, orders or other documents Autt.henbf·-ca lOn 0 
to be issued or made by the Committee under this Act may be orders, 
authenticllted by the Chairman or the Secretary thereof or any letttersf, e C.,o 
other officer authorised by the Committee in this behalf and any t~e Com-
_! notice, letter, authorisation, order or other document so authenti- mlttee. 
catedshall be presumed to have been duly issued or made by the 
Committee. 
11. (I) Sections 8, 10, 11, 12 and 13 of the Working Journalists l~~c~~f 
Act sholl have no effect in relation to the Committee. Working 
Journa-
lists 
Act, etc. 

Vacan- . 
cies, etc., 
not to 
Invali-
datepro-
ceedlnl8 
of Com-
mittee. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
Repeal 
and 
saving. 
6 
(2) The provisions of this Act shall have eftect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith in the terms of any award, agree-
ment or contract of service, whether made before or after the com-
mencement of this Act: 
Provided that where under any such award, agreement, contract S 
of service or otherwise, a working journalist is entitled to benefits 
in respect of any matter which are more favourable to him than 
those to which he would be entitled under this Act, the working 
journalist shall continue to be entitled to the more favourable bene-
fits in respect of that matter, notwithstanaing that he receives bene- 10 
fits in respect of other matters under this Act. 
(3) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed. to preclude 
any working journalist from entering into any agreement with an 
employer for granting him rights or privileges in respect of any 
matter which are more favourable to him than those to which he 1$ 
would be entitled under this Act. 
12. No act or proceeding of the Committee shall be invalid merely 
by reason of the existence of any vacancy among its members or 
any defect in the constitution thereof. 
13. (1) ,The Central Government may, by notification in the 20 
Oftlcial Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for-
(a) the manner in which notices under this Act may be 
published; 25 
(b) the procedure to be followed by the Committee in the 
exercise of its powers under this Act; 
(c) the powers and functions of the Committee which may 
be delegated to any of its members; 
(d) the fees to be paid for inspection of documents furnished 30 
to the Committee. 
14. (1) The Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates of Wages) 
Ordinance, 1958, is hereby repealed. ' 
(2) NotWithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done 35 
or taken under this Act as if this Act had commenced on the 14th 
day of June, 1858. 
3 of l!l", 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
A Wage Board for fil(ing the rates of wages in respect of work-
ing journalists was constituted by the Central Government under 
section 8 of the Working Journalists (Conditions of Service) and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 (45 of 1955) and its decision 
was published in May, 1957. This decision was challenged by 
certain newspaper establishments in petitions filed before the 
Supreme Court; and that Court set aside the decision on the 19th 
March, 1958, on the ground that it did not take into account the 
capacity of the industry to pay. 
To consider the situation arising out of the decision of the 
Supreme Court and to frame an agreed scheme in respect of the 
wages of working journalists, several meetings were held with the 
representatives of newspaper employers and working journalists; 
but it was not found possible to come to an agreement. Conse-
quently an Ordinance entitled the Working Journalists (Fixation 
of Rates of Wages) Ordinance, 1958 (3 of 1958), was promulgated 
on the 14th June, 1958. This Ordinance provided for the establish-
ment of a special Committee for the purpose of making recommen-
dations to the Central Government in regard to the rates of wages 
to be fixed for working journalists. This Committee has already 
started fu~ctioning. It is now proposed to replace the Ordinance 
by an Act of Parliament. . 
NEW DELHI; 
The 23rd July, 1958. 
G. L. NANDA. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bili contemplates the appointment of a Committee by the' 
Central Government to make recommendations for enabling the 
Central Government to fix rates of wages in respect of werking 
journalists. 
Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to 
constitute a Committee consisting of one representative each of 
the Ministries of Law, Home Affairs, Labour and Employment and 
Information and Broadcasting and one chartered accountant, 
The Central Government is also empowered to appoint a Secretary 
to the Committee for' the performance of such functions as the 
Committee or the Chairman thereof may assign to him and also to 
appoint any such other staff as may be considered necessary. It 
is proposed that the representatives of the Ministries may continue 
to draw their salary, etc., from the respective Ministries and 
similarly the Secretary to the Committee may continue to draw 
his salary, etc., from the Ministry in which he is employed. The 
expenditure on the honorarium to be granted to the chartered 
accountant member of the Committee and on the staff and other' 
incidental charges is likely to be about Rs. 24,000 for a period of 4 
months during which it is expected that the Committee might be 
able to make its final recommendations to the Government. 
Clause 5(2) of the Bill lays down that any representations 
made to the Committee and any documents furnished to it 
!>y way of evidence, would be open to inspection on payment of 
a fee. It is not possible to estimate the income which the Committee 
may have on this account. 
However, there may be a total additional expenditure of 
about Rs. 24,000 on account of the setting up of the Committee under 
the Bill. 
I 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clouse (1) of clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central 
Government to make rules to carry out the purposes of the Bill 
and sub-clause (2) of that clause specifies the matters in respect 
of which rules may be made. These matters relate to the manner 
in which notices may be published, the procedure to be followed 
by the Committee in the exercise of its powers, the powers and 
functions of the Committee which may be delegated to any of its 
members for facilitating the work of the Committee, and. the fees to 
be paid for inspecting the documents furnished to the Committee. 
The delegation of powers is of a normal character. 
9 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the fixation of rates of wages in respect of work-
ing joumalists and for matters connected therewith. 
The President has, in persuance of clause (3) of article I I 7 of 
. the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the 
·consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Gulzarilal Nanda, 
Minister of Labour and Employment and Planning.) 