As intRopucep IN Lok SABHA

°3 bey i399

Bill No. 78 of 1999
————_

THE TECHNOLOGY BANK OF INDIA BILL, 1999
By
‘Suet Kirrr 50849, M.P.
rN
BILL पर

| Jor the establishment of a Technology Bank to assist professionals engaged in
research work in various disciplines.

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as
ws:—

1. (J) This Act may be called the Technology Bank of India Act, 1999. Shor tile,
(2) It extends to the whole of India, Sind

comimence-
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by"
ion in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
(4) ‘Bank’ means the Technology Bank of India established under section 3;
(0) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under the Act;

Definitions.

(©) ‘professional’ means a researcher or a scientist engaged in research work
in space or engineering or medicine including all systems of Indian medicine or


Establishment
of Technology
‘Bank of India.

Object of the
Bank,

Application for
loan.

energy, agriculture, chemicals, defence, environment, food processing, non-
conventional energy sources, petroleum and allied products, science and technology
including bio-technology, electronics and ocean development.

3. (2) The Central Government shall establish a bank to be known as
“Technology Bank of India” with its headquarters at New Delhi.
(2) The Central Goverament shail establish a branch of the Bank in every
State capital and Union territory.

(3) The Bank shall consist of a Chairman and four other members to be
appointed by the Central Government,

(4) Every branch of the Bank shail consist of a General Manager and such
other officers and staff as may be required.

(5) The terms and conditions of service and appointment, salaries and
allowances of Chairman, members and employees of the Bank shall be such as
may be prescribed.

4. The main object of the Bank shall bé (0 financially assist the professionals in their
research work.

5. (7) Every professional wishing to avail of financial assistance from the Bank shall
emed branch of Bank.

epplying for loan the professional shall furnish all details about his research,
tructure available with him and required and amount of loan and the

experience, i)

period for which it is required.

Branch to
forward

application to
head office.

fiead Office to
decide on
sanction of loan.

Professional to

info

about bis
research.

Professional not
to leave the
country during
research,

6. The concerned branch shall forward the application to the Head Office with its
recommendations within a period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the application.

7, (1) The Head Office shaii consider the application taking into account the
recommendations of the concerned branch and arrive at a decision within a period of
fiftcen days from the date of receipt of such application

(2) The Head Office shall have the power either to increase or decrease the amount

of loan applied for or the period for which it is sought and its decision thereon
shall be final.

8. (1) Upon the decision of the Head Office to sanction the loan, the loan amount
shali be given to the professional at once.

(2) The ioan amount so sancticned shail be interest free.

(3) The loan amount shall be repayable within such period as may be determined in
the terms and conditions governing the loan

(4) The loan shall be repayable by the professional after his research work has been
completed or after a period of five years from the date of sanction of loan, whichever is
earlier,

9. Every professional who has been sanctioned a loan by the Bank shall, upon
completion of his research work inform the Central Government or the State Government,
as the case may be, and the Bank about his research work.

19. (1) Every professional who applies for loan shall give an undertaking to the
effect that he shall not leave the country during the period of his research:

Provided that the Central Government may, in special circumstances to be recorded


| allow a professional to go abroad to acquaint himself with the new techniques
will promote or help in his research work.

(2) No professional who has been sanctioned a loan by the Bank shall leave the
until he has submitted his research work to the Central Government and repaid

वा, The Central Government may, after considering the research work submitted
professional, give award to him and provide him with suitable employment in an
or organisation under the Central Government.

12. The Central Government shall provide housing and stipend at such rates,
may determine, to a professional during his research for a period of five years or
completes his research, whichever is earlier,

13. If any professional violates the provisions of
|be proceeded against him at on:
of five years and a fine of rupe

ction 10, deportation proceedings
e and he shall be punished with imprisonment for a
@s five lakh and he shall be required to repay the loan

44, The Central Government say, by

y notification in the official Gazette, make Tules
ing out the purposes of this Act

Employment to
Professional,

Assistance to
professtonals.

Punishment.

Power to mats

es.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Due to lack of facilities and financial assistance, our young researchers and
are not able to do any research work or engage themselves in any project. They are |
multinationals and foreign countries and as a result our country is not able to utilise
talent.

Therefore, it is proposed to encourage our researchers and scientists by giving
all sorts of assistance to do their research work. It is accordingly proposed that
researchers shall be given loan by the bank for their research work and during that
they will be provided with housing and stipend facilities. However, the researchers
submit their papers or project to the Government after the completion of their work so
the country can fully benefit from their work.

The Bill serves two purposes, on the one hand it helps our researchers to do
work peacefully and on the other it helps us to utilise their talent and benefit from
research work.

New DELHI; KIRIT SOM.
October 25, 1999.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bili provides for the establishment of a Technology Bank of India, It

ier provides for the establishment of offices and branches of the bank in every State
and Union Territory. The bank shail consist of a Chairman, four other members,
al Manager and other employees and also provides for salaries andi allowances to
n. Clause 11 provides that the Central Government shall give award and suitable
loyment to those who have completed their research work. Clause 12 provides for
g and stipend to researchers for a period of five years. प्र

Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund

ndia. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred
>. A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
out the purposes of the Bill, As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the | i
of legislative power is of a normal character.



LOKSABHA

BILL

to provide for we estacus.unent of a Lechnology Bank to assist professionals en;
‘in research werk in various disciplines.

(जात Kirit Somaiya, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1719LS—1 1-11-1999.