As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
~, ; 
BID Ne.78of 1987 
THE ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) 
CONTINUANCE BILL, 1987 
.A 
BILL 
to continUe the ES8ential Commodities (Special Provisions) Act, 1981 jor 
a further period. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Eas~tial Commodities (Special Pro- Short 
visions)' Continuance Act; UJ87. title. 
18 of 1981. Sa In paragraph 2 of the preamble to the Essential Commodities Amend· 
(Special ProVisions) Act, 1981 (hereinafter referred to as the principal rnent of 
Act), for the words "five years", the words "ten years" shall be subStj~ preamble. 
tuted . 
. 3. In .ection 1 of the priaejpal Aet, in .u .... seetion (3), for the wordi Amend· 
10 ··ftve years", the wonls Uten years" shall be substituted. IDIiIllt of section 1. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (1955 Act) provides for re!Ula-
tion of production, supply and pricing of essential commodities. This 
Act had been amended from time to time to make its provisions more 
effective. 
2. With a view to dealing more effectively with persons indulging in 
anti-social activities like hoarding and black marketing and the evil of 
vicious inflationary prices, the Essential Commodities (Special Provisions) 
Act, 1981, was enacted by Parliament. The said Act made special provi-
sions by way of amendments to the 1955 Act for a temporary period of 
five years. These provisions related inter alia to:-
(i) the trial in a summary way, of aU offences under the 1955 
Act; 
(ii) the constitution, for the purposes of such trial, of Special 
Courts, consisting of a singJe Judge who shall be appointed by a 
High Court and who shall be a person who is qualified to be a Judge 
of a High Court o.r who is or has been a Sessions Judge or an Addi-
tional Sessions Judge for not less than one year; 
(iii) providing minimum mandatory imprisonment for a period 
of not less than three months for all offences except an offence of 
abetment in regard to procuring of food stuffs or drugs by persons 
for their own use Or for the use of any member of their family, and 
not for the purpose of carrying on any business or trade which is 
punishable with fine only; 
(iv) providing for enbancementof tbetenn of imprisonment 
awardable in case of ~onvictiOft in a summlry trial from one year 
to two years; 
(v) making of all offences under the 1955 Act to be non-bailable; 
(vi) providing for stricter provisions for grant of bail and mak-
ing it obligatory on the part of the Courts to give an opportunity-to 
the prosecution to oppOSe the bail application. 
3. Tb~ provisions of the Essential Commodities (Special Provisions) 
Act, 1981 (18 of 1981), were brought into force on the 1st day of Septem-
ber, 1982, in all the States and Union territories except the States of 
Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram and the Union territories of Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, and Lakshadweep. The 
aaid provisions will cease to have effect on the expiry of five years from 
the said date in aU the States altd Union territories where they have 
been brought into force. 
4. The reasons for which the ~bove mentioned special provisions 
were enaeted and brought into force still continue to exist. The queStion 
2 

3 I "-"{ 
of their continuance has, therefore, been considered in consultation with 
all the States and Union territories who are of the view that the said 
provisions have proved very useful and effective and should continue in 
fo.rce. It is, therefore, proposed to continue the provisions of the Essen-
tial Commodities (Special Provisions) Act, 1981, for a further period of 
five years with effect from the 1st day ot September, 1987. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object. 
NEW DEuu; 
The 10th August, 1987. H. K. L. BHAGAT. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to extend the period of operation of the 
special provisions made by the Essential Commodities (Special Provi-
sions) Act, 1981, by way of amendments in the Essential Commodities 
Act, 1955, for a further period of five years with effect from the 1st day 
of September, 1987. 'The Special Courts already established under section 
12A of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, will, therefore, continue and 
other Special Courts may also be established in the next five years. The 
expenditure on such Courts in the Union ter;ritories which do not have 
their own consolidated funds will have to be met by the Central Gov-
ernment. It is estimated that the recurring expenditure on each Special 
Court towards salary, allowances and other dharges would he ablout 
rupees two lakhs per annum and towards non-recurring expenditure 
about rupees one lakh for the first year, in respect of Union territories 
which do not have their own consolidated funds. 
2. There will be no other recurring or non-recurring expenditure. 
4 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE EsSENTIAL C0MJ400mES (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) 
Acr, 1981 
(18 OF 1981) 
• • • • • 
WHEREAS for ensuring the availability of essential commodities at 
fair prices, it is necessary to curb the hoarding and black marketing nf, 
and profiteering in, such commodities; 
AND WHEREAS for dealing more effectively with persons indulging 
in such anti-social activities and the evil of vicious infiationary prices, it 
is necessary to make certain special provisions by way of amendments to 
10 of 1955 the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, for a period Of five years; 
100f 1897. 
• • • • • 
1. (1) • • • • • 
(3) It shall cease to have effect on the expiry of five years from the 
date of commencement of this Af;t except as respects things done . or 
omitted to be done before such cesser of operation of this Act, and section 
6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, shall apply upon such cesser of ope-
ration of this Act as if it had then been repealed by a Central Act. 
• • • • • 
5 
Short 
tiUe, 
commeace-
ment and 
duration. 

LOK SABRA 
" . 
. ' . 
J : 
A 
BILL 
to continue the Essential CommOdities (Special Provisions) Act, 1981 for 
a' further period. . 
. , 
(Shri H. K. L. Bhagat, Minute,. of Parliamentary Affairs and Minilte,. cd 
Food and C~vil Suppl~B.) . 