As passep sy Lox SABHA
on 2lst August, 972
Bill No. 78-C of 972
THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) BILL, 7972
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
l. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
AUTHORITIES TO BE APPOINTED OR CONSTITUTED UNDER THE Act
Appointment of Director and other officers.
Appointment of Chief Wild Life Warden and other officers.
Power to delegate.
Constitution of Wild Life Advisory Board.
Procedure to be followed by the Board.
Duties of Wild Life Advisory Board.
CHAPTER III
HUNTING OF WILD ANIMALS
SAA छा फ्री w
9. Hunting of wild animals.
0. Maintenance of records of wild animals killed or captured.
ll. Hunting of wild animals to be permitted in certain cases.
2. Grant of permit for special purposes.
3. Suspension or cancellation of ‘licence.
4. Appeals.
5. Hunting of young and female of wild animals.
6. Declaration of closed time.
7. Restrictions on hunting.
: CHAPTER IV
SAncTUARIES, NATIONAL PARKS, GAME RESERVES AND CLOSED AREAS
Sanctuaries
8. Declaration of sanctuary: -
9. Collector to determine rights.
20. Bar of accrual of rights.
2l. Proclamation by Collector.~
22. Inquiry by Collector.
23. Powers of Collector.
~ @)


Gi) &
CLAUSES :
24, Acquisition of rights.
25. Acquisition proceedings. ४
26. Delegation of Collector’s powers,
27. Restriction on entry in sanctuary.
28, Grant of permit.
29. Hunting in sanctuary without permit prohibited.
30. Causing fire prohibited.
3l, Prohibition of entry into sanctuary with weapon.
82. Ban on use of injurious substances.
33. Control of sanctuaries.
34. Registration of certain persons in possession of arms.
National Parks
35. Declaration of National Parks
Game Reserve
86. Declaration of game reserve.
Closed Area
37. Declaration of closed area.
Sanctuaries or National Parks declared by Central Government
38. Power of Central Government to declare areas as sanctuaries or
National Parks.
CHAPTER V
TRADE OR COMMERCE IN WILD ANIMALS, ANIMAL ARTICLES AND TROPHIES
39. Wild animals, ete., to be Government property.
40. Declarations.
4i, Inquiry. and preparation of inventories.
42. Certificate of ownership.
43. Regulation of transfer. of animal, etc.
44, "Dealings in trophy and animal articles without licence
prohibited.
45. Suspension or cancellation of licences,
46. Appeal.
47. Maintenance of records.
48. Purchase of animal, etc., by licensee.
49. Purchase of captive animal, etc, by a person other than a
licensee.
CHAPTER VI
PREVENTION AND DETECTION OF OFFENCES
50. Power of entry, search, arrest and detention.
5l. Penalties. हर र i
52. Attempts and abetment. Sey eee pete era
53. Punishment for wrongful seizure. ee
54. Power to compound offences.
55. Cognizance of offences, " t ey ee Oe


CLAUSES
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
6l.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
८ (iit) Ane
Operation of other laws not barred.
Presumption to be made in certain cases,
Offences by companies,
CHAPTER VII
MiscELLANEOUS
Officers to be public servants,
Protection of action taken in good faith,
Power to alter entries in Schedules,
Declaration of certain wild animals to be vermin.
Power of Central Government to make rules,
Power of State Government to make rules,
Rights of Scheduled Tribes to be protected,
Repeal and savings.
SCHEDULE I,
SCHEDULE II.
SCHEDULE वा,
SCHEDULE Iv.
SCHEDULE V.
5
sene


SH dein ला्धा॥#/ desbetT
t noinU on} fis of bas
aid} tqobs ysor es oisia
sig to sonsue
sitotiniet coinU
estinpot seiwienio txetnoo off eeslau 092 eidt als -infted
.2eroit
“Isontas” (६)
Bmuoy tisdt bas
88989 sierdy
is Ismtigs” ($)
ए8 bliw १0 [secticrs
fo
8 of ansom “ofoi
7 cert toto: lec
j
iboen 88 ६87 Isoting: love to 4 vers 79 slondw ort doidw nt toofed
nv
Ill olubsde@ at bofliosqe Ismiangs- yas ansort “omy yid* (6)
8907 “brs0dl” (४)
० (OB Nee 78:6 ७१॥9४2
T 9fub oe हे IPE i CT गा(गए फतवा (PROTECTION) BILE, 7672")qed to betsiqss et dg Loli o If NY(As PASSED ० 7 लि ABHA.
2
ytivitaso oi bord १०
pd asbulont “alitso” (0)
Tor 23808 dinob-ziasdqols. siteenob
provide for the protection of wild animals.and..birds; and, for,matters
connected therewith or ancillary or incidental thereto
दघक 70: _ “rok MW sth opiiyy YotdO* (६)
Wuereas it is expedient, to, provide ;for the protection.of wild animals
and birds and for matters connected therewith or ancillary or incidental
thereto soba botelnob et doulw 8978 ad} enessm “sets batolis” (6)
anitend of | food £0 to: (7) molisss
- AND WHEREAS Parliament has,no power to make. laws; for the States
5 With respect to any of the matters aforesaid. except as, provided in
articles 249 and 250 of the Constitution; 3
—or nottsisr ni SoA eit to teereotrornrrios Or
WHEREAS ‘in ne suance of Clause ः due. | 4 of the
cath ion tesolution i ave been passe ly Fath he ia of the
Legislitutes of the States OP Andhra Pradesh Bikar; Gitjarat) Haryana,
to Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh? Matipurs Punjab; Rajasthan! Uttar
Pradesh and, West Bengal to the, effect, that, the matters aforesaid, should
be regulated in those States by Parliament, by, laws , 705 pan sabvid
Br it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-thi¥a ‘Year i0ot the
Republi¢.,of, India: as followstr joey oil! anno “iotasiitE’ (०) Ba
Op 78 seiiode to (\) avilose-degiepippR व 89 obi solsviezotd stil ;
TI
° et.08 ese? 9 5rtu. bors peer ARe 7 “ayiseet- orden” (६९) ५
ovieest giisy 8 od
4. (7) This Act may be called the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 972. Short title,
i of hotie*ot एक viii eaear? “ziteqor4 teacniiie7eD? Ot) ae
(2) It extends, in the first instance, to the whole of thé! Statessof commence, —
- Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya ment,
E
&


2
Pradesh, Manipur, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal
and to all the Union territories; and it shall also extend to such other
State as may adopt this Act by resolution passed in that behalf in pur-
suance of clause (l) of article 252 of the Constitution.
(3) It shall come into force in a State or Union territory to which 5
it extends, or may become extended in future, on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification, appoint, and different dates may be
appointed for different provisions of this Act or for different States or
Union territories.
Defini- 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 70
tions.
(7) “animal” includes amphibians, birds, mammals and reptiles
and their young, and also includes, in the cases of birds and reptiles,
their eggs;
(2) “animal article’ means an article made from any captive
animal or wild animal, other than vermin, and includes an article or 75
object in which the whole or any part of such animal has been used;
(3) “big game” means any animal specified in Schedule III;
(4) “Board” means the Wild Life Advisory Board constituted
under sub-section. (7) of section 6;
(5) “captive.animal” means any animal, specified in Schedule I, 20
Schedule II, Schedule III or Schedule IV, which is captured or kept
or bred in captivity;
(6) “cattle” includes buffaloes, bulls, bullocks, camels, cows,
domestic elephants, donkeys, goats, horses, mules, pigs and sheep, and
also includes their young; =
(7) “Chief Wild Life Warden” means the person appointed as
such under clause (a) of sub-section (7) of section 4;
(8) “closed area’ means the area which is declared under sub-
section (7) of settion 37 to be closed to hunting;
(9) “Collector” means the chief officer in charge of the revenue 3°
administration of atistrict;
(70) “commencement of this Act”, in relation to—
(a) a State, means commencement of this Act in that State,
(6) any provision of this Act, means the commencement of
that provision. in the concerned State; 35
(77) “dealer” means any person who carries on the business of
buying and selling any captive animal, animal article, trophy, uncur-
ed trophy or meat;
é (72) “Director” means the person appointed as Director of Wild
Life Preservation under clause (a) of, sub-section (7) of section 3; 4०
(73) “game reserve” means an area declared under section 36 to
be a game reserve;
(74) “Government property” means any property referred to in
section 39; |


3
(75) “habitat” includes land, water or vegetation which is the
natural home of any wild animal;
(:6) “hunting”, with its grammatical variations and cognate ex-
pressions, includes,
5 (०) capturing, killing, poisoning, snaring and trapping of
any wild animal and every attempt to do so,
(6) driving any wild animal for any of the purposes speci-
fied in sub-clause (a),
(c) injuring or destroying or taking any part of the body of
Io any such animal or, in the case of wild birds or reptiles, damag-
ing the eggs of such birds or reptiles, or disturbing the eggs or
nests of such birds or reptiles;
(77) “land” includes canals, creeks and. other water channels,
reservoirs, rivers, streams and lakes, whether artificial or natural,
5 and also includes boulders and rocks;
(76) “licence” means a licence granted under this Act;
(79) “manufacturer” means a manufacturer of animal articles;
(20) “meat” includes blood, bones, sinew, eggs, fat and flesh,
whether raw or cooked, of any wild animal, other than vermin;
20 (27) “National Park” means an area declared, whether. under sec-
tion 35 or section 38, or deemed, under sub-section (3) of section 66,
to be declared, as a National Park;
(22) “notification” means a notification published in the Official
Gazette;
25 (23) “permit” means a permit granted under this Act or any rule
made thereunder;
(24) “person” includes a firm;
(25) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(26) “sanctuary” means an area declared, whether under section
30 48 or section 38, or deemed, under sub-section (3) of section 66, to be
declared, as a wild life sanctuary;
(27) “small game” means any animal specified in Schedule IV;
(28) “special game” meéans any animal specified in Schedule II;
(29) “State Government”, in relation to a Union territory, means
35 the Administrator of that Union territory appointed by the President
under article 239 of the Constitution;
(30) “taxidermy”, with its grammatical variations and. cognate
expressions, means the curing, preparation or preservation of
trophies;
40 (37) “trophy” means the whole or any part of any captive animal हे
or wild animal, other than vermin, which has been kept or, preserved
by any means, whether artificial or natural, and includes—
(a) rugs, skins and- specimens of such animal: mounted: in
whole or in part through a process of taxidermy, and.


4
(6) antler, horn, rhinoceros horn, hair, feather, nail, tooth,
musk, eggs and nests;
(32) “uncured trophy” means the whole or atiy part of any cap-
tive animal or wild animal, other than vermin, which has not under-
gone a process of taxidermy, and includes a freshly killed wild ani-
mal;
(33) “vehicle’ means any conveyance used for movement on
land, water or air and includes buffalo, bull, bullock, camel, donkey,
elephant, horse and mule;
(34) “vermin” means any wild animal specified in Schedule V; 7०
(35) “weapon” includes ammunition, bows and arrows, explosives,
firearms, hooks, knives, nets, poison, snares and traps and any instru-
ment or apparatus capable of anaesthetizing, decoying, destroying,
injuring or killing an animal
(36) “wild animal” means. any animal found wild in nature and 75
includes any animal specified in Schedule I, Schedule II, Schedule ITI.
Schedule IV or Schedule V, wherever found;
(37) “wild life” includes any animal, bees, butterflies, crustacea,
fish and moths; and aquatic or land vegetation which forms part of
any. habitat; 20
(38) “Wild Life Warden” means the person appointed as such
under clause (6) of sub-section (7) of section 4 Sie eae
CHAPTER II >978[99 9
AUTHORITHS TOBE) APPOINTED OR CONSTITUTED, UNDEHOTHE ACT
Appoint- 3. (7) The Central Government may, for the purposes of this Act, 25
ment of appoint—.. [8 #nsom “tirrtoq” (६६) ae
Director Di हे i 5 sisbanatent shear 3and other (a) A Director of Wild Life Preservation;
officers. (0) Assistant Directors of Wild Life*Presetvation: “nd
(c) such other officers and ‘employees:as iihy be Mecessavy.
(2) In the performance of his, duties, and exerciga of his-noyeys by or ae
under this Act, the, Dinecton shall ,be-subject to.sich genexplor special ce
directions, as the Central Government..may, fron time, to, time, gives h
(8) The Assistant Directors of Wild, Life Preservation and.»ther)officers
and employees appointed under this section shall be subord‘nate to the
Ditéctoubardae mi bsilissqa Ismins vis ears “308 Isioaqa” (28) 35
eG). THE State’ Gb verninient Ways! fok the purpdses "GF (this Act, _
appoinit=“! sft vik halatodeds. wiotiviot rota tet to totstteiaimbA 5500 te
novntienoD-adito-O6& olshtis tabas
(a) a Chief Wild Life Warden;
steno. by ‘wild ee wd denis! aia” att titiw.“yinpsbixsl? (08)
ato noite mz29tq 7o mouR IBC Haris end ४8850 prtalezotqe9. 40
(०) such other officers and employees as may be necessary.
: i e perfor: ane of his du Na exercise of, his TS by or0 कप this 9 ' हु 5 a
: pee ict t fhe c case pe reli ae 3. be’ stig c हम a ch eneralor special ditee int S tes ite’ Goyernment may, from time to timegive ots है 03897 ३: a Peo we
0(3) Phe! Wild Life Warden! and other omeets ‘atid'ertiléy6es appointed 45
éction’shall be subordinatelto the Chiét Wild Lite Warden


5 ere
5. (7) The Director may, with the previous approval of the Central Power to
Government, by order in writing, delegate all or any of his powers and delegate.
duties under this Act to any officer subordinate to him subject to such
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order.
2 (2) The Chief Wild Life Warden may, with the previous approval of
the State Government, by order in writing, delegate all or any of his
powers and duties under this Act, except those under clause (a) of sub-
section (7) of section l, to any officer subordinate to him subject to
such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order.
70 (3) Subject to any general or special direction given or condition im-
posed by the Director or the Chief Wild Life Warden, any person, autho-
rised by the Director or the Chief Wild Life Warden to exercise any
powers, may exercise those powers in the same manner and to the same
effect as if they had been conferred on that person directly by this Act
75 and not by way of delegation.
6. (7) The State Government, or, in the case of a Union territory, Constitu-
the Administrator, shall, as soon as may be after the commencement of tion ae
this Act, constitute a Wild Life Advisory Board consisting of the following Nae
members, namely:— CE rab
20 (a) the Minister in charge of forests in the State or Union terri-
tory, or, if there is no such Minister, the Chief Secretary to the
State Government, or, as the case may be, the Chief Secretary to the
Government of the Union territory, who shall be the Chairman;
(b) two members of the State Legislature or, in the case of a
25 Union territory having a Legislature, two members of the Legislature
of the Union territory, as the case may be;
(c) Secretary to the State Government, or the Government of
the Union territory, in charge of forests;
(d) Chief Conservator of Forests, ex officio;
30 (e) an officer to be nominated by the Director;
(f) Chief Wild Life Warden, ex officio;
(g) such other officers and non-officials, not exceeding fifteen, 4
who, in the opinion of the State Government, are interested in the
protection of wild life.
35 (2) The State Government shall appoint Chief Conservator of Forests
or Chief Wild Life Warden as the Secretary of the Board.
(3) ‘The term of office of the members of the Board referred to in
clause (g) of sub-section (7) and the manner of filling vacancies among
them shall be such as may be prescribed.
40 -(4) The members shall be entitled to receive such allowances in res-
pect of expenses incurred in the performance cf their duties as the State
Government may prescribe.
7. (7) The Board shall meet at least twice a year at such place as the Proce-
State Government may direct. dure to
be follow-
peas z 3 ५ Gh a45 (2) The Board shall regulate its own: procedure (including the eae need eS
~ tum).


Duties of
Wild Life
Advisory
Board.
Hunting
of wilg
animals.
6
(3) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalid merely by reason
of the existence of any vacancy therein or any defect in the constitution
thereof or any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the
merits of the case.
8. It shall be the duty of the Wild Life Advisory Board to advise the 5
State Government,—
(a) in the selection of areas to be declared as sanctuaries, Natio-
nal Parks, game reserves and closed areas and the administration
thereof;
(6) in formulation of the policy in granting licences and permits 70
under this Act;
(c) in any matter relating to the amendment of any Schedule; and
(d) in any other matter connected with the protection of wild life,
which may be referred to it by the State Governnient.
CHAPTER III 3
HUNTING OF WILD ANIMALS :
9. (7) No person shall hunt any wild animal specified in Schedule I.
(2) No person shall hunt any wild animal specified in Schedule II,
Schedule III, or Schedule IV, except under, and in accordance with, the
conditions specified in a licence granted under sub-section (5). 20
(3) Any person desiring to obtain a licence referred to in sub-section
(2) shall apply, in such form, and on payment of such fee, as may be pres-
eribed, to the Chief Wild Life Warden or any other officer authorised by
the State Government in this behalf (hereinafter referred to a3 the autho-
vised officer).
25
(4) An application under sub-section (3) may be made for all or any
of the following kinds of licences, namely: —
(a) Special game hunting licence.
(9) Big game hunting licence.
(c) Small-game hunting licence. 30
(d) Wild animal trapping licence:
Provided that any such licence may be restricted to the hunting or
trapping of such animal as may be specified therein,
(5) On receipt of an application under sub-section (3), the Chief Wild
Life Warden or the authorised officer may, after making such inquiry as 35he may think fit with regard to the fitness or otherwise of the applicant to
receive the licence, grant or refuse to grant such licence after recording
in writing his reasons for such grant or refusal; and when the grant of alicence is refused, the fee paid therefor shall be refunded to the applicant.
(6) A licence granted under this section shall— 4०
(a) be in such form as may be prescribed;
(b) be valid for such period as may be specified therein;
(c) be subject to such terms, conditions and restrictions as may
be prescribed;
(d) not be transferable, z 45


7
40 (7) The holder of every licence shall maintain a record, containing sarees
such particulars as may be prescribed, of the wild animals, other than ०
थे कर A records of
vermin, killed or captured by him during the currency of the licence. wild’ ani-
(2) When any animal specified in Schedule II or Schedule III is killed, mie 3
5 wounded, or captured by the holder of a licence, he shall, not later than ,antured,
fifteen days from the date of such killing, wounding or capture, or before
leaving the area specified in the licence, whichever is earlier, intimate in
writing to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer, the pres-
cribed particulars of such animal killed, wounded or captured by him.
Lo (3) The holder of every licence shall, not later than fifteen days from
the date of expiry of such licence, surrender the records maintained by
him under sub-section (7) and the licence to the Chief Wild Life Warden
or the authorised officer, and shall sign a declaration, in the prescribed
form certifying the accuracy of the records maintained by him under
5 sub-section ().
li. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the Hunting of
time being in force and subject to the provisions of Chapter IV,— bes te
(a) the Chief Wild Life Warden may, if he is satisfied that any pies
wild animal specified in Schedule I has become dangerous to human ५३०३.
50 life or is so disabled or diseased as to be beyond recovery, by order
in writing and stating the reasons therefor, permit any person to
hunt such animal or cause such animal to be hunted;
(०) the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer may,
if he is satisfied that any wild animal specified in Schedule II, Sche-
25 dule III, or Schedule IV, has become dangerous to human life or to
property (including standing crops on any land) or is so disabled or
diseased as to be beyond recovery, by order in writing and stating
the reasons therefor, permit any person to hunt such animal or
cause such animal to be hunted. f
30 (2) The killing or wounding in good faith of any wild animal in de-
fence of oneself or of any other person shall not be an offence:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall exonerate any person
who, when such defence becomes necessary, was committing any act in
contravention of any provision’ of this Act or any rule or order made there-
35 under.
(3) Any wild animal killed or wounded in defence of any person
shall be Government property.
i2. Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, it shall Grant
be lawful for the Chief Wild Life Warden, to grant, with the previous of permit
go Permission of the State Government, a permit, by an order in writing ee
3 stating the reasons therefor, to any person, on payment of such fee as bear
: may be prescribed, which shall entitle the holder of such permit to hunt,
subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, any wild animal
specified in such permit, for the purpose of,—
45 (a) education;
(b) ‘scientific research; or
(c) collection of specimens for zoological gardens, museums and
similar institutions. है FE


Suspension
or cancel-
lation of
licence,
Appeals.
Hunting
of young
and
female
of wild
animals.
Declara-
_ tion of
closed _
time.
Restric-
tions on
hunting.
8
43. ‘The Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer may, sub-
ject to any general or special orders of the State Government, for good
and sufficient reason, to be recorded in writing, suspend or cancel any
licence granted under this Chapter:
Provided that no such suspension or cancellation shall be made except 5
after giving the holder of the licence a reasonable opportunity of being
heard.
i4. (7) An appeal from an order refusing to grant a licence under
section 9, or an order suspending or cancelling a licence under section 8,
shall lie,— 0
(a) if the order is made by the authorised officer, to the Chief
Wild Life Warden, or
(b) if the order is made by the Chief Wild Life Warden, to the
State Government.
(2) In the case of an order passed in appeal by the Chief Wild Life 45
Warden under sub-section (7), a second appeal shall lie to the State
Government.
(3) Subject as aforesaid, every order passed in appeal under this
section shall be final.
(4) No appeal shall be entertained unless it is preferred within fif- 20
teen days from the date of the communication to the applicant of the
order appealed against:
Provided that the appellate authority may admit any appeal after the
expiry of the period aforesaid, if it is satisfied that the appellant had
sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal in time. 25
5. No person shall, unless specially authorised by a licence, hunt
ihe young of any wild animal, other than vermin, or any female of such
animal, or any deer with antlers in velvet.
i6. (7) The State Government may, by notification, declare the whole
year or any part thereof, to be a closed time throughout the State, or any 30
part thereof, for such wild animal as may be specified in the notification
and no hunting of such animal shall be permitted, during the said period,
in the area specified in the notification.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (7) shall not apply to) vermin unless
otherwise specified by the State Government in this behalf. 35
7. (7) No person shall—
(०) hunt any wild animal, from or by means of, a wheeled or a
mechanically propelled vehicle on water or land, or by aircraft;
(b) use an aircraft, motor vehicle or launch for the purpose of
driving or stampeding any wild animal; 49
(c) hunt any wild animal with chemicals, explosives, nets, pit-
falls, poisons, poisoned-weapons, snares or traps, except in so far as
they relate to the capture of wild animals under a Wild Animal
Trapping Licence;
(d) hunt any special game or big game other than with a rifle, 45
unless specially authorised by the licence to hunt with a shot-gun
using single-slug bullets;


9
(९) for the purpose of hunting, set fire to any vegetation;
(f) use any artificial light for the purpose of hunting, except
when specially authorised to do so under a licence in the case of
carnivora over a kill;
5 (g) hunt any wild animal during the hours of night, that is to
say, between sun-set and sun-rise, except when specially authorised
to do so under a licence in the case of carnivora over a kill;
(h) hunt any wild animal on a salt-lick or water hole or other
drinking place or on path or approach to the same, except sand-
0 grouse and water-birds;
(४) hunt any wild animal on any land not owned by Govern-
ment, without the consent of the owner or his agent or the lawful
occupier of such land;
(j) notwithstanding that he holds a licence for the purpose,
i5 hunt any wild animal during the closed time referred to in section 6;
(k) hunt, with the help of dogs, any wild animal except water-
bird, chakor, partridge or quail.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (7) shall not apply to vermin.
CHAPTER IV
20 Sanctuaries, NATIONAL PARKS, GAME RESERVES AND CLOSED AREAS
Sanctuaries
48. (7) The State Government may, by notification, declare any area pecla.
to be a sanctuary if it considers that such area is of adequate ecological, ration of
faunal, floral, geomorphological, natural or. zoological significance, for the Sanctuary.
25 purpose of protecting, propagating or developing wild life or its environ-
ment.
(2) The notification referred to in sub-section (7) shall specify, as
nearly as possible, the situation and limits of such area.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, it shall be sufficient to
30 describe the area by roads, rivers, ridges or other well-known or readily
intelligible boundaries.
49. Whenever any area is declared to be a sanctuary, the Collector Collector
shall inquire into, and determine, the existence, nature and extent of the to deter-
rights of any person in or over the land comprised within the limits of mine
rights,35 the sanctuary. :
20. After the issue of a notification under section i8, no right shall Bar of
be acquired in, on or over the land comprised within the limits of the accrual
area specified in such notification, except by succession, testamentary or of rights.
intestate.
4° 2i. When a notification has been issued under section 48, the Collector Procla-
shall publish in the regional language in every town and village in or in TMationa 
> 
: 
; 
‘ 
bythe neighbourhood of the area comprised therein, a proclamation— Colleton
(०) specifying, as nearly as possible, the situation and the limits
of the sanctuary; and
45 (8) requiring any person, claiming any right mentioned in sec-
tion 9, to prefer before the Collector, within two months from the
oe


Inquiry
by
Collector.
Powers
of
Collector.
Acquisi-
tion of
rights.
Acquisi-
tion
proceed-
ings.
0
date of such proclamation, a written claim in the prescribed form,
specifying the nature and extent of such right with necessary de-
tails and the amount and particulars of compensation, if any, claimed
in respect thereof.
22. The Collector shall, after service of the prescribed notice upon the 5
claimant, expeditiously inquire into—
(a) the claim preferred before him under clause (9) of section
2i, and
(0) the existence of any right mentioned in section 9 and not
claimed under clause (9) of section 2], I0
so far as the same may be ascertainable from the records of the State
Government and the evidence of any person acquainted with the same.
23. For the purpose of such inquiry, the Collector may exercise the
following powers, namely: —
(a) the power to enter in or upon any land and to survey, de- 75
mareate and make a map of the same or to authorise any other
officer to do so;
(b) the same powers as are vested in a civil court for the trial
of suits.
24. (4) In the case of a claim to a right in or over any land referred 20
to in section 9, the Collector shall pass an order admitting or rejecting
the same in whole or in part.
(2) If such claim is admitted in whole or in part, the Collector may
either—
(०) exclude such land from the limits of the proposed sanc- 25
tuary, or
(b) proceed to acquire such land or rights, except where by an
agreement between the owner of such land or holder of rights and
the Government, the owner or holder of such rights has agreed to
surrender his rights to the Government, in or over such land, and on 30
payment of such compensation, as is provided in the Land Acquisi- I of 894,
tion Act, 894
25. (7) For the purpose of acquiring such land, or rights in or over
such land,—
(a) the Collector shall be deemed to be a Collector. proceeding 35
under the Land Acquisition Act, 894: l of 894.
(9) the claimant shall be deemed to be a person interested and
appearing before him in pursuance of a notice given under section
9 of that Act;
(०) the provisions of the sections, preceding section 9 of that 40
Act, shall be deemed’ to have been complied with;
(०) where the claimant does not accept the award made in his
favour in the matter of compensation, he shall be deemed, within
the meaning of section 8 of that Act, to be a person interested who
has not accepted the award, and shall be entitled to proceed to claim 45
relief against the award under the provisions of Part IIT of that Act:


26
(९) the Collector, with the consent of the claimant, or the court,
with the consent of both the parties, may award compensation in
land or money or partly in land and partly in money; and
(f) in the case of the stoppage of a public way or a common
5 pasture, the Collector may, with the previous sanetion of the State
Government, provide for an alternative public way or common
pasture, as far as may be practicable or convenient.
(2) The acquisition under this Act of any land or interest therein
shall be deemed to be acquisition for a public purpose.
३० 26, The State Government may, by general or special order, direct Delegation
that the powers exercisable or the functions to be performed by the berate
Collector under sections 9 to 25 (both inclusive) may be exercised and powers,
performed by such other officer as may be specified in the order.
27. (7) No person other than,— Restric-(7) No person other than ae
i P entry in5 (a) a public Servant on duty, ee
(b) a person who has been permitted by the Chief Wild Life
Warden or the authorised officer to reside within the limits of the
sanctuary,
(०) a person who has any right over immovable property
20 within the limits of the sanctuary,
(d) a person passing through the sanctuary along a public
highway, and é
(e) the dependants of the person referred to in clause (a),
clause (b) or clause (c),
25 shall enter or reside in the sanctuary, except under and in accordance
with the conditions of a permit granted under section 28.
(2) Every person shall, so long as he resides in the sanctuary, be
bound—
(a) to prevent the commission, in the sanctuary, of an offence
6 against this Act; $
(b) where there is reason to believe that any such offence
against this Act has been committed in such sanctuary, to help in 5
discovering and arresting the offender;
(९) to report the death of any wild animal and to safeguard its
35 remains until the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer
takes charge thereof;
(d) to extinguish any fire in such sanctuary of which he has
Imowledge or information and to prevent from spreading, by any
lawful means in his power, any: fire within the vicinity of such sane-
40 tuary of which he has knowledge or information; and
(९) to assist any forest officer, Chief Wild Life Warden, Wild
Life Warden or police officer demanding his aid for preventing the
commission of any offence against this Act or in the investigaton of
any such offence, : tse


42
मत 28. (7) The Chief Wild Life Warden may, on application, grant to any
permit. person a permit to enter or reside in a sanctuary for all or any of the
following purposes, namely:—
(a) investigation or study of wild life and purposes ancillary
or incidental thereto; 2)
(b) photography;
(०) scientific research;
(d) tourism;
(e) transaction of lawful business with any person residing in
the sanctuary. ; Io
(2) A permit to enter or reside in a sanctuary shall be issued sub-
ject to such conditions and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed.
Hunting 29. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, no
in sane- person shall hunt any wild animal in a sanctuary or remove therefrom
Sate any wild animal, whether alive or dead, or any trophy, uncured trophy, ;;
लग, or meat derived from such animal:
prohibited. Brovided that if the Chief Wild Life Warden is satisfied that it is
necessary that any wild animal in a sanctuary should be hunted or
removed,—
(a) for the better protection of wild life, or 20
(b) for any other good and sufficient reason,
he may, with the previous approval of the State Government, grant a
permit authorising any person to hunt or remoyve.such wild animal under
the direction of an officer authorised by him or cause it to be hunted or
removed. 25
(2) A permit granted under sub-section (7). shall specify the
kind and number of wild animals that may be hunted or removed
by the holder of such permit.
(3) The Chief Wild Life Warden may, for good and sufficient rea-
=~ son, to be recorded in writing, cancel any permit granted under section 3°
28 or under this section:
Provided that no. such cancellation shall be made except after giving
the holder of the permit-a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(4) Any person aggrieved by the cancellation of a permit under
sub-section (3) may, within fifteen days from the date of sich eancel- 35
lation, appeal to the State Government, whose decision shall be final:
Provided that the State Government may admit any appeal prefer-
red after the expiry of the period aforesaid if it is satisfied that the
appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal in time.
Causing _ 30. No person shall set fire to a sanctuary, or kindle any fire, or leave 40
os fre any fire burning, in a sanctuary, in such manner as to endanger such
prohibited. sanctuary.
_.Prohibi- .... 3. No person shall enter a sanctuary with any weapon except with
tion of the previous permission in writing of the Chief Wild Life Warden or the
aes authorised officer. 4s


a 43
32. No person shall use, in a sanctuary, chemicals, explosives or any Ban on
other substances which may cause injury to, or endanger, any wild life 758 of
in such sanctuary. oe
२ subs-
tances,
33. The Chief Wild Life Warden shall be the authority who shall con- (0७0 of
5 trol, manage and maintain all sanctuaries and for that purpose, within sanctu-
the limits of any sanctuary,— | aries.
(a) may construct such roads, bridges, buildings, fences or
barrier gates, and carry out such other works as he may consider
necessary for the purposes of such sanctuary;
IO (b) shall take such steps as will ensure the security of wild
animals in the sanctuary and the preservation of the sanctuary and
wild animals therein;
(c) may take such measures, in the interests of wild life, as he
may consider necessary for the improvement of any habitat;
I5 (d) may regulate, control or prohibit, in keeping with the inte-
rests of wild life, the grazing or movement of cattle; rs
(e) may regulate, control or prohibit, any fishing.
34. (7) Within three months from the declaration of any area as a Registra-
sanctuary, every person residing in or within ten kilometres of any such tion of
54 of 959. 20 sanctuary and holding a licence granted under the Arms Act, 959, Ser
for the possession of arms or exempted from the provisions of that papier
Act and possessing arms, shall apply in such form, on payment of such sion of
fee and within such time as may be prescribed, to the Chief Wild Life arms.
Warden or the authorised officer, for the registration of his name.
25 (2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (3), the Chief
Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer shall register the name of
the applicant in such manner as may be prescribed.
National Parks
35. (7) Whenever it appears to the State Government that an area, Declara-
३० whether within a sanctuary or not, is, by reason of its ecological, faunal, tion of
: ४ ँ Bice हे National
floral, geomorphological or zoological association or importance, needed Parks
to be constituted as a National Park for the purpose of protecting, pro- :
pagating or developing wild life therein or its environment, it may,
by notification, declare its intention to constitute such area as a National
35 Park.
(2) The notification referred to in sub-section (7) shall define the
limits of the area which is intended to be declared as a National Park. *
(3) Where any area is intended to be declared as a National Park,
the provisions of sections 9 to 26 (both inclusive) shall, as far as may
40 be, apply to the investigation and determination of claims, and extin-
guishment of rights, in relation to any land in such area as they apply
to the said matters in relation to any land in a sanctuary.
(4) When the following events have occurred, namely,—
(a) the period for preferring claims has elapsed, and all claims,
if any, made in relation to any jand in an area intended to be dec-
lared as a National Park, have been disposed of by the State Goy-
ernment, and न
(b) all rights in respect of lands proposed to be included in the
National Park have become. vested in the State Government,
45
:


Declara-
tion of
game
reserve.
Declara-
tion of
closed
area.
Power of
Central
Govern-
ment to
declare
areas as
sanctua-
ries or
National
Parks.
4
the State Government shall publish a notification specifying the limits
of the area which shall be comprised within the National Park and dec-
lare that the said area shall be a National Park on and from such date
as may be specified in the notification.
(5) No alteration of the boundaries of a National Park shall be made 5
except on a resolution passed by the Legislature of the State.
(6) No person shall destroy, exploit or remove any wild life from a
National Park or destroy or damage the habitat of any wild animal or
deprive any wild animal of its habitat within such National Park except
under and in accordance with a permit granted by the Chief Wild Life 79
Warden and no such permit shall be granted unless the State Govern-
ment, being satisfied that such destruction, exploitation or removal of
wild life from the National Park is necessary for the improvement and
better management of wild life therein, authorises the issue of such
permit. पड़
(7) No grazing of any cattle shall be permitted in a National Park
and no cattle shall be allowed to enter therein except where such cattle
is used as a vehicle by a person authorised to enter such National Park.
(8) The provisions of sections 27 and 28, sections 30 to 32 (both in-
elusive), and clauses (a), (b) and (९) of section 33, and section 34 shall, 20
as far as may be, apply in relation to a National Park as they apply in
relation to a sanctuary.
Game. Reserve
36. (7) The State Government may, by notification, declare any area
to be a game reserve. 25
(2) No hunting of any wild animal shall be permitted in such re-
serve €xcept under and in accordance with a licence issued under this
section by the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer.
Closed Area
37. (7) The State Government may, by notification, declare any area ,,
closed to hunting for such period as may be specified in the notification.
(2) No hunting of any wild animal shall be permitted in a closed area
_-during the period specified in the notification referred to in sub-sec-
tion (४).
Sanctuaries or National Parks declared by Central Government
38. (7) Where the State Government leases or otherwise transfers
any area under its control, not being an area within a sanctuary, to the
Central Government, the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that
the conditions specified in section 8 are fulfilled in relation to the area
so transferred to it, declare such area, by notification, to be a sanctuary
and the provisions of sections 9 to 35 (both inclusive), 54 and 55 shall a
apply in relation to such sanctuary as they apply in relation to a sanc-
tuary declared by the State Government.
(2) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that the conditions
specified in section 35 are fulfilled in relation to any area referred to in
sub-section (7), whether or not such area has been declared, to be a 252
sanctuary by the Central Government or the State Government, declare
such area, by notification, to be a National Park and the provisions of
sections 35, 54 and 55 shall apply in relation to such National Park as
they apply in relation to a National Parlx declared by the State Gov-
ernment.
35
5°


5
33
20
25
30
a
40
as
५
48
(3) In relation to a sanctuary or National Park declared by the Cen-
tral Government, the powers and duties of the Chief Wild Life Warden
under the sections referred to in sub-sections (7) and (2), shall be exer-
tised and discharged by the Director or by such other officer as may be
authorised by the Director in this behalf and references, in the sections
aforesaid, to the State Government: shall be construed as references to
the Central Government and reference therein to the Legislature of the
State shall be construed as a reference to Parliament. s
CHAPTER V
TRADE OR COMMERCE IN WILD ANIMALS, ANIMAL ARTICLES AND TROPHIES
39. (l) Every—
(a) wild animal, other than vermin, which is hunted under Wild ani-
section l] or sub-section (7) of section 29 or sub-section (6) of sec- mals, etc.
tion 35 or kept or bred in captivity in contravention of any provision to be
of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder or found dead, Govern-
or killed without a licence or by mistake; and property,
(b) animal article, trophy or uncured trophy or meat derived
from any wild animal referred to in clause (a) in respect of which
any offence against this Act or any rule or order made thereunder
has been committed,
shall be the property of the State Government, and, where such animal
is hunted in a sanctuary or National Park declared by the Central Gov-
ernment, such animal or any animal article, trophy, uncured trophy or
meat derived from such animal, shall be the property of the Central
Government.
(2) Any person who obtains, by any means, the possession of Gov-
ernment property, shall, within forty-eight hours from obtaining such
possession, make a report as to the obtaining of such possession to the
nearest police station or the authorised officer and shall, if so required,
hand over such property to the officer-in-charge of such police station
or such authorised officer, as the case may be.
_ (8) No person shall, without the previous permission in writing of
the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer—
(०) acquire or keep in, his possesion, custody or control, or
(b) transfer to any person, whether by way of gift, sale or
otherwise, or
(c) destroy or damage,
such Government property.
40. () Every person having at the commencement of this Act the
control, custody or possession of any captive animal specified in Schedule’ Declara-
7 or Part I of Schedule II, or any uncured trophy derived from such tions.
animal or salted or dried skins of such animal or the musk of a musk
deer or the horn of a rhinoceros, shall, within thirty days from the ९675
mencement of this Act, declare to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the
authorised officer the number and description of the animal, or articleof the foregoing description under his control, custody or possession éand the place where such animal or article is kept.
(2) No person shall, after the commencement of this Act, acquire,
receive, keep in his control, custody or Possession, sell, offer for sale or


Inquiry
and prepa-
ration of
inventor-
ies,
Certi-
ficate of
ownership.
Regula-
tion of
transfer of
animal,
ete.
§
i6
otherwise transfer or transport any animal specified in Schedule I of
Part II of Schedule II or any uncured trophy or meat derived from such
animal, or the salted or dried skins of such animal or the musk of a
musk deer or the horn of a rhinoceros, except with the previous permis-
sion in writing of the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer. 5
(3) Nothing in sub-section (7) or sub-section (2) shall apply to a
public museum or 200.
(4) The State Government may, by notification, require any person
to declare to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer any
animal article or trophy (other than a musk of a musk deer or horn of a jo
rhinoceros) or salted or dried skins derived from an animal specified in
Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II in his control, custody or possession
in such form, in such manner, and within such time, as may be pres-
cribed.
4l, (7) On receipt of a declaration made under section 40, the Chief I5
Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer may, after such notice, in
such manner and at such time, as may be prescribed—-
(a) enter upon the premises of a per°on referred to in section 40;
(b) make inquiries and prepare inventories of animal articles,
trophies, uncured trophies, salted and dried skins and captive animals 20
specified in Schedule I and Part वा of Schedule II and found thereon;
and
(c) affix upon the animals, animal articles, trophies or uncured
trophies identification marks in such manner as may be prescribed.
N 2
(2) No person shall obliterate or counterfeit any identification mark :
referred to in this Chapter.
42. The Chief Wild Life Warden may, for the purposes of section
40, issue a certificate of ownership in such form, as may be prescribed, to
any person who, in his opinion, is in lawful possession of any wild animal
or any animal article, trophy, uncured trophy and may, where possible, 3°
mark, in the prescribed manner, such animal article, trophy or uncured
trophy for purposes of identification.
43. (7) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), sub-section (3)
and sub-section (4), a person (other than a dealer) who does not possess
a certificate of ownership shall not— 35
(a) sell or offer for sale or transfer whether by way of sale,
gift or otherwise, any wild animal specified in Schedule I or Part II
of Schedule II or any captive animal belonging to that category or
any animal article, trophy, uncured trophy or meat derived there-
from;
(b) make animal articles containing part or whole of such
animal;
(c) put under a process of taxidermy an uncured trophy of such
animal,


*ठ/
éké¢ept with the previowis permission in writing of the Chief Wild Life
Warden or the authorised officer.
(2) Where a person transfers or transports from the State in which
he resides to another State or acquires by transfer from outside the State
5 any such animal, animal article, trophy or uncured trophy as is referred
to in sub-section (J) in respect of which he has a certificate of ownership,
he shall, within thirty days of the transfer or transport, report the trans- |
fer or transport to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the avihorised officer
within whose jurisdiction the transfer or transport is effected.
30 (3) No person who does not possess a certificate of ownership shall
transfer or transport from one State to another State or acquire by trans-
fer from outside the State any such animal, animal article, trophy or
uncured trophy as is referred to in sub-section (7) except with the pre-
vious permission in writing of the Chief Wild Life Warden or the autho-
35 rised officer within whose jurisdiction the transfer or transport is to be
effected.
(4) Before granting any permission under sub-section (7) ot sub-sec-
tion (3), the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer shall satisfy
himself that the animal or article referred to therein has been lawfully
20 acquired.
(5) While permitting the transfer or transport of any animal, animal
article, trophy or uncured trophy, as is referred to in sub-section (7), the
Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer—
(a) shall issue a certificate of ownership after such inquiry as he
oe) may deem fit; ;
(b) shall, where the certificate of ownership existed in the name
of the previous owner, issue a fresh certificate of ownership in the
name of the person to whom the transfer has been effected:
(c) may affix an identification mark on any such animal, animal
30 article, trophy or uncured trophy.
(6) Nothing in this section shall apply—
(a) to animal articles or trophies made out of feathers of pea-
cocks;
(b) to any transaction entered into by a public museum or 200
35 with any other public museum or zoo.
44. (7) Except under, and in accordance with, a licence granted under
sub-section (4), no person shall—
(a) commence or carry on the business as—
(0) a manufacturer of or dealer in, any animal article; or,
40 (ii) a taxidermist; or
(tii) a dealer in trophy or uncured trophy; or
(४0) a dealer in captive animals; or
(v) a dealer in meat; or
(6) cook or serve meat in any eating-house:
Dealings
in trophy
and animal
articles
without
licence
prohibited.


I8
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall prevent a person, who,
immediately before the commencement of this Act was carrying on the
business or occupation specified in this sub-section, from carrying on such
business or occupation for a period of thirty days from such commence-
ment, or where he has made an application within that period for the 5
grant of a licence to him, until the licence is granted to him or he is in-
formed in writing that a licence cannot be granted to him:
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to manu-
facturers: of, and dealers in, articles made of ivory and feathers of pea-
cocks. To
Explanation —For the purposes of this section, “eating-house” includes
a hotel, restaurant or any other place where any eatable is served on
payment, whether or not such payment is separately made for such eatable
or is included in the amount charged for board and lodging.
(2) Every manufacturer of, ० dealer in, animal article, or every 5
dealer in captive animals, trophies or uncured trophies, or every taxider-
mist shall, within fifteen days from the commencement of this Act,
declare to the Chief Wild Life Warden his stocks of animal articles,
captive animals, trophies and uncured trophies, as the case may be, as on
the date of such declaration and the Chief Wild Life Warden. or the 55
authorised officer may place an identification mark on every animal
article, captive animal, trophy or uncured trophy, as the case may be.
(3) Every person referred to in sub-section (7) who intends to obtain
a licence, shall, within fifteen days from the commencement of this Act,
make an application to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised os
officer for the grant of a licence.
(4) (०) Every application referred to in sub-section (3) shall be made
in such form and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, to the
Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer.
(0) No licence referred to in sub-section (7) shall be granted unless
the Chief Wild Life Warden, or the’ authorised officer having regard to
such matters as may be prescribed in this behalf and after making such
inquiry in respect of those matters as he may think fit, is satisfied that the
licence should be granted.
(5) Every licence granted under this section shall specify the premises
in which and the conditions, if any, subject to which the licensee shall
carry on his business.
(6) Every licence granted under this section shall— :
(a) be valid for one year from the date of its grant;
(b) not be transferable; and
(c) be renewable for a period not exceeding one year at a time.
(7) No application for the renewal of a licence shall be rejected unless
the holder of such licence has been given a reasonable opportunity of
presenting his case and unless the Chief Wild Life Warden or the autho-
rised officer is satisfied that—
30
35
40
45
(i) the application for such renewal has been made after the
expiry of the period specified therefor, or
(zi) any statement made by the applicant at the time of the grant
or renewal of the licence was incorrect or false in material parti
culars, or pene ee 3°


999
(४४) the applicant has contravened any term or condition of the
licence or any provision of this Act or any rule made thereunder, or
(i) the applicant does not fulfil the prescribed conditions.
(8) Every order granting or rejecting an application for the grant or
5 renewal of a licence shall be made in writing.
(9) Nothing in the foregoing sub-sections shall aypiy in relation to '
vermin.
45, Subject to any general or special order of the State Government,
the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer may, for reasons to
IO be recorded by him in writing, suspend or cancel any licence granted or
renewed under section 44:
Provided that no such suspension or cancellation shall be made except
after giving the holder of the licence a reasonable opportunity of being
heard.
TS 46. () An appeal from an order refusing to grant or renew a licence
under section 44 or an order suspending or cancelling a licence under
section 45 shall lie—
(a) if the order is made by the authorised officer, to the Chief
Wild. Life Warden; or
ed (b) if the order is made by the Chief Wild Life Warden, to the
State Government. 5
(2) In the ease of an order passed in appeal by the Chief Wild Life
Warden under clause (a) of sub-section (2), 8 second appeal shall lie to
the State Government.
25 (3) Subject as aforesaid, every order passed in appeal under this sec-
tion shall be final.
(4) An appeal under this section shall be preferred within thirfy days
from the date of the communication, to the applicant, of the crder ap-
pealed against:
30 Provided that the appellate authority.may admit any appeal preferred
after the expiry of the period aforesaid if it is satisfied that the appellant
had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal in tine. .
47. A licensee under this Chapter shall—
(a) keep records, and submit such returns of his dealings, as
35 may be prescribed,—
(i) to the Director or any other officer ‘authorised by him
in this behalf, and : :
(ii) to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer,
-and.
(b) make such records available on demand’ for inspection by
such officers. : |
५ 25 तीर
Suspen-
sion or
eancella-
tion of
licences,
_Appeal.
Mainte-
nance of
records. °


Purchase
of
animal,
ete., by
licensee.
Pur-
chase of
captive
animal,
ete.,
by a
person
other
_than a
— licensee.
Power
of entry,
search,
arrest
and
deten.
tion.
20
\
48, No licensee under this Chapter shall— f
(a) keep in his control, custody or possession,—
(i) any animal, animal article, trophy or uncured trophy in
respect of which a declaration under the provisions of sub-section
(2) of section 44 has to be made but has not been made;
(ii) any animal or animal article, trophy, uncured trophy
or meat which has not been lawfully acquired under the provi-
sions of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder;
(b) (i) capture any wild animal, or
(ii) acquire, receive, keep in his control, custody or possession, or
sell, offer for sale or transport, any captive animal specified
in Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II or any animal article,
trophy, uncured trophy or meat derived therefrom or serve
such meat, or put under a process of taxidermy or make ani-
mal article containing part or whole of such animal,
except in accordance with such rules as may be made under this Act:
Provided that where the acquisition or, possession, control or custody
of such animal or animal article, trophy or uncured trophy entails the
transfer or transport from one State to another, no such transfer or
transport shall be effected except with the previous permission in writing
of the Director or any other officer authorised by him in this behalf:
Provided further that no such permission under the foregoing proviso
shall be granted unless the Director or the officer authorised by him
is satisfied that the animal or article aforesaid has been lawfully acquired.
49. No person shall purchase, receive or acquire any captive animal,
wild animal, other than vermin, or any animal article, trophy, uncured
trophy or meat derived therefrom otherwise than from a dealer or from a
person authorised to sell or otherwise transfer the same under this Act:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to any transaction
entered into by a public museum or zoo with any othe: public museum
or 200.
CHAPTER VI
PREVENTION AND DETECTION OF OFFENCES
50. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force, the Director or any other officer authorised by him
in this behalf or the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer or
any forest officer or any police officer not below the rank of a sub-
inspector, may, if he has reasonable grounds for believing that any
person has committed an offence against this Act—
Bio}
प्र
20
30
35
(a) require any such person to produce for inspection any 40
captive animal, wild animal, animal article, meat, trophy or uncured
trophy in his control, custody or possession, or any licence, permit
or other document granted to him or required to be kept by him
under the provisions of this Act;
(b) stop any vehicle or vessel in order to conduct search or 45
inquiry or enter upon and search any premises, land, vehicle or vessel,
jn the occupation of such person, and open and search any baggage
or other things in his possession;


2i
(९) seize any captive animal, wild animal, animal article, meat,
trophy or uncured trophy in the possession of any person and
appearing to him to be Government property, together with any
trap, tool vehicle, vessel or weapon used for committing any such
5 offence, and unless he is satisfied that such person will appear and
answer any charge which may be preferred against him, arrest him
without warrant, and detain him.
(2) Any officer of 8 rank not inferior to that of an Assistant Director
of Wild Life Preservation or Wild Life Warden, who or whose sub-
30 ordinate, has seized any trap, tool, vehicle, vessel or weapon under
clause (c) of sub-section (7), may release the same, on the execution by
the owner thereof of a bond for the production of the property so
released, if and when so required, before the Magistrate having jurisdic-
tion to try the offence on account of which the seizure has been made.
5 (3) It shall be lawful for any of the officers referred to in sub-section
(0) to stop and detain any person, whom he see doing any act for which
a licence or permit is required under the provisions of this Act, for the
purposes of requiring such person to produce the licence or permit and
if such person fails to produce the licence or permit, as the case may be,
20 he may be arrested without warrant, unless he furnishes his name and
address, and otherwise satisfies the officer arresting him that he will
duly answer any summons or other proceedings which may be taken
against him.
(4) Any person detained, or things seized under the foregoing power,
25 shall forthwith be taken before a Magistrate to be dealt with according
to law.
(5) Any person who, without reasonable cause, fails to produce any-
thing, which he is required to produce under this section, shall be guilty
of an offence against this Act.
30 (6) (०) Where any meat or uncured trophy is seized under the provi-
sions of this section, the Assistant Director of Wild Life Preservation or =
any other officer of a gazetted rank authorised by him in this behalf or
the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer may arrange for
the sale of the same and deal with the proceeds of such sale in such
35 Manner as may be prescribed. ~
(b) Where it is proved that the meat or uncured trophy seized under
the provisions of this section is not Government property, the proceeds
of the sale shall be returned to the owner.
(7) Whenever any person is approached by any of the officers referred
4० to in sub-section (7) for assistance in the prevention or detection of an
offence against this Act, or in apprehending persons charged with the
violation of this Act, or for seizure in accordance with clause (c) of sub-
section (7), it shall be the duty of such person or persons to render such
assistance.
45 5. (7) Any person who contravenes any provision of this Act or penal.
any rule or order made thereunder or who commits a breach of any of ties
the conditions of any licence or permit granted under this Act, shall be
guilty of an offence against this Act, and shall, on conviction, be punish-
able with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or
50 with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both:


22
Provided that where the offence committed is in relation to any
animal specified in Schedule I or Part वा of Schedule II or meat of any
such animal or animal article, trophy or uncured trophy derived from
such animal or where the offence relates to hunting in a sanctuary or a
National Park, such offence shall be punishable with ic)prisonment for 5
a term which shall not be less than six months but may extend to six
years and also with fine which shall not be less than five hundred rupees:
Provided further that in the case of a second or subsequent offence of
the nature mentioned in the foregoing proviso, the term of imprisonment
shall not be less than one year and the amount of the fine shall not jo
be less than one thousand rupees.
(2) When any person is convicted of an offence against this Act, the
Court trying the offence may order that any captive animal, wild animal,
animal article, trophy, uncured trophy or meat in respect of which the
offence has been committed, and any trap, tool, vehicle, vessel or weapon, 75
used in the commission of the said offence be forfeited to the State Gov-
ernment and that any licence or permit, held by such person under the
provisions of this Act, be cancelled.
(3) Such cancellation of licence or permit or such forfeiture shall be
in addition to any other punishment that may be awarded for such 2°
offence.
(4) Where any person is convicted of an offence against this Act, the
Court may direct that the licence, if any, granted to such person under
the Arms Act, 959, for possession of any arm with which an offence
against this Act has been committed, shall be cancelled and that such 25
person shall not be eligible for a licence under the Arms Act, 959, for
a period of five years from the date of conviction.
54 of 959.
52. Whoever attempts to contravene, or abets the contravention of, any
Attempts ae i
arid of the provisions of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder
abetment. shall be deemed to have contravened that provision or rule or order, as 3°
the case may be.
=—Punish- . - 53. If any person, exercising powers under this Act, vexatiously and
ment for unnecessarily seizes the property of any other person on the pretence of
yes Se seizing it for the reasons mentioned in section 50, he shall, on conviction,
as be panishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 35
* months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with
both.
Power 54, (7) The State Government may, by notification, empower the Chief
to ecom- Wild Life Warden or any officer of a rank not inferior to that of a Deputy
pound Conservator of Forests,— : : 40
offen= ;
ces, d (a) to accept, from any person against whom a reasonable sus-
picion exists that he has committed an offence against this Act, pay-
ment of a sum of money by way of composition of the offence which
such person is suspected to have committed; and
(b) when any property has been seized as liable to be forfeited, 45
ao to release the same on payment of the value thereof as estimated by
such officer. :
-


23
(2) On payment of such sum of money or such value, or both, as the
case may be, to such officer, the suspected person, if in custody, shall be
discharged, and the property, other than Government property, if any,
seized, shall be released and no further proceedings in respect of the
5 offence shall be taken against such person.
(3) The officer compounding any offence may order the cancellation of
any licence or permit granted under this Act to the offerider, or if not
empowered. to do so, may approach an officer so empowered, for the
cancellation of such licence or permit.
(4) The sum of money accepted or agreed to be accepted as composi-
tion under clause (b) of sub-section (7) shall, in no case, exceed the sum
of two thousand rupees:
£0
Provided that no offence, for which a minimum period of imprisonment
has been prescribed in sub-section (7) of section 5!, shall be compounded.
55. No court shall take cognizance of any offence against this Act ex-
75 cept on the complaint of the Chief Wild Life Warden or such other officer
as the State Government may authorise in this behalf.
56. Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to prevent any person from
being prosecuted under any other law for the time being in force, for
ge any act or omission which constitutes an offence against this Act or
from being liable under such other law to any higher punishment or
penalty than that provided by this Act: :
Provided that no person shall be punished twice for the same offence.
57. Where, in any prosecution for an offence against this Act, it is
established that a person is in possession, custody or control of any
25 captive animal, animal article, meat, trophy or uncured trophy, it shall
be presumed, until the contrary is proved, the burden of proving which
shall lie on the accused, that such person is in unlawfui possession, cus-
tody or control of such captive animal, animal article, meat, trophy or
30 uncured trophy.
58. (7) Where an offence against this Act has been committed by a
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was
in charge of, and was résponsible to, the company for the conduct of the
business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed to be
35 guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and pun-
ished ‘accordingly: ‘
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence
9 prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (7), where an
offence against this Act has been committed by a company and it is prov-
ed that the offence has been committed with the corisent or connivance
of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secre-
54 tary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Cogni-
zance
of off-
ences.
Opera-
tion of
other
laws
not
barred.
Presump-
tion to be
made in
certain
cases.


Officers
to be
public
ser-
vants.
Protec-
tion of
action
taken in
good
faith,
Power to
alter
entries in
Schedules.
Ba ies ee, 24 ise oS
Explanation—For the purposes of this section —
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or
other association of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
CHAPTER VII
MiscELLANEOUS
59. Every officer referred to in Chapter II and every other officer
exercising any of the powers conferred by this Act shall be deemed to be
a public servant within the meaning of section 2l of the Indian 7९7४] 70 45 of 860
Code.
60. (7) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against
any officer or other employee of the Central Government or the State
Government for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be
done under this Act.
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Gov-;,
ernment or the State Government or any of its officers or other em-
ployees for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which
is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.
6l. (7) The Central Government may, if it is of opinion that it is
expedient so to do, by notification, add any entry to any Schedule or20
transfer any entry from one Part of a Schedule to another Part of the
same Schedule or from one Schedule to another.
(2) The State Government may, if it is of opinion that it is expe-
dient so to do, by notification, transfer any entry from Schedule II, Sche-
dule III, Schedule IV or Schedule V to Schedule I and may also transfer25
any entry from Part I of Schedule IJ, or Schedule III, Schedule IV or
Schedule V, to any other Schedule.
(3) On the issue of a notification under sub-section (7) or sub-section
(2), the relevant Schedule shall be deemed to, be altered accordingly,
provided that every such alteration shall be without prejudice to any-30
thing done or omitted to be done before such alteration.
(4) If any alteration of any Schedule made by the State Government
under sub-section (2) is repugnant to any alteration made therein by
the Central Government under sub-section (7), then, the alteration made
by the Central Government, whether made before or after the notifica-3>
tion made by the State Government, shall prevail and the alteration
made by the State Government shall, to the extent of the repugnancy,
be void:
Provided that any such alteration made by the State Government, if
it has been made with the previous consent of the Central Government,4o
shall prevail in that State:
Provided further that nothing in the foregoing proviso shall prevent
the Central Government from modifying or cancelling, at any time, the
alteration made by the State Government,


Pe ० 25
62. Subject to the provisions of section 6, the State Government may, oe
by notification, declare any wild animal other than those specified in Sche- meee
dule I and Part II of Schedule II to be vermin for any area and for such wild ani
period as may be specified therein and so long as such notification is in mals
§ force, such wild animal shall be deemed to have been included in Schedule’ to be
Vv vermin.
63. (7) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for Power
all or any of the following, namely:— oe
(a) the form in which declaration shall be made .under Sub- cmment
Lo section (2) of section 44; to make
(b) the terms and conditions which shall govern transactions rules: 4
referred to in clause (b) of section 48;
(c) matters specified in sub-section (2) of section 64 in so far as
they relate to sanctuaries and National Parks declared by the Central
Is Government.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as’ may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions afore-
said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall there-
after have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
25 shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that rule.
20
64. (7) The State Government may, by notification, make rules for Power vf
carrying out the provisions of this Act in respect of matters which do not State
G c:
fall within the purview of section 63. Cate
30 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore- 0 makeहर les.
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following Sec
matters, namely: —
(a) the term of office of’ the members of the Board referred to in
clause (g) of sub-section (7) of section 6 and the manner of filling
35 vacancies among them;
(b) allowances referred to in sub-section (4) of section 6;
(c) the forms to be used for any application, certificate, claim,
declaration, licence, permit, registration, return or other document,
made, granted, or submitted under the provisions of this Act and the
40 fees, if any, therefor;
(d) the conditions subject to which any licence or permit may
be granted under this Act;
(e) the particulars of the record of: wild animals) (captured or
killed) to be kept and submitted by the licensee;
(f) regulation of the possession, transfer and the sale of captive
45. animals, meat, animal articles, trophies and uncured trophies; oe
(g) regulation of taxidermy;


Rights
of Sche-
duled
Tribes
to be
protected.
Repeal
and.
savings
26
(h) any other matter which has to be, or may: be; prescribed
under this Act. fi
65. Nothing in this Act shall affect the hunting rights conferred on
the Scheduled Tribes of the Nicobar Islands in the Union territory of
Andaman and Nicobar Islands by notification of the Andaman and
Nicobar Administration, No. 40/67/F, No. G635 Vol. Ill, dated the 28th
April, 967, published at pages l to 5 of the Extraordinary issue of the
Andaman and Nicobar Gazette, dated the 28th April, 967.
66. (7) As from the commencement of this Act, every other Act relat-
ing to any matter contained in this Act and'in force in-a State shall, to 7९
the extent to which that Act or any provision contained therein corres-
ponds, or is repugnant, to this Act or any provision contained in this
Act, stand repealed:
Provided that such repeal shall not,—
(i) affect the previous operation of the Act so repealed, or any- ड
thing duly done’ or suffered thereunder;
(ii) affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired,
acerued ‘or incurred under the Act’so repealed;
(tit) affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in
respect of any offence committed against the Act 80 repealed; or 2०
(iv) affect any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in Tes-
pect of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, for-
feiture, or punishment as aforesaid; ;
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted,
continued or enforced, and any such penalty, forfeiture and: punishment 35
may be imposed, as if the aforesaid Act had not been repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal,—
(a) anything done or any action taken under the Act 80 Tre
pealed (including any notification, order, certificate, notice or receipt
issued, application made, or permit granted) which is not inconsis-
tent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have 79607 done
or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act as if this Act
“were in force at the time such thing was done or action was taken,
Vand shall continue to be in force, unless and until superseded by any-
thing done or any action taken under this Act; 53 aki 35
(b) every licence granted under‘any Act so repealed and in force
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to
“have been granted under the corresponding provisions of this Act
and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, continue to be in
force for the unexpired portion of the period for which such licence 40
had been granted.
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that any sanc-
tuary or National Park declared by a State’ Government under any Act
repéaled under sub-section () shall be: deemed to be a sanctuary or
National Park, as the case may be, declared by the State Government 45
under this Act and where any right in or over any land in any such Na-
tional Park which had not been extinguished under the said Act, at or
before the commencement of this Act, the extinguishment of such rights *
shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
30


ली,
Noe
2 oO pe oo
88
0.
LY,
2,
48.
44.
5.
6.
7.
i8.
49;
20.
al.
22.
23.
24:
25.
26.
27.
28,
29;
30.
3i.
33.
34,
35.
SCHEDULE I
(See sections 2, 8, 9, l, 40, 4, 43, 48, 5], 6l and 62)
Part I: MamMats
Binturong (Arctictis binturong).
Black buck (Antelope cervicapra):
Brow-antlered deer or Thamin (Cervus eldi).
Caracal (Felis caracal).
Cheetah (Acinonyx jubatus).
Clouded leopard (Neofelis nebulosa).
. Dugong (Dugong dugon).
Fishing cat (Felis viverrina).
Golden cat (Felis-temmincki).
Golden langur (Presbytis geei).
Hispid hare (Caprolagus hispidus).
Hoolock (Hylobates hoolock).
Indian lion (Panthera leo persica).
Indian Wild Ass (Equus hemionus khur),.
Indian Wolf (Canis lupus).
Kashmir Stag (Cervus elaphus hanglu).
Leopard cat (Felis bengalensis) i
Lesser or Red panda (Ailurus fulgens).
Lion-tailed macaque (Macaca silenus) .
Loris. (Loris tardigradus)..
Lynx (Felis lynx isabellinus).
Malabar Civet (Viverra megaspila).
Marbled cat (Felis marmorata) .
Markhor (Capra falconeri).
Musk deer (Moschus moschiferus).
Ovis Ammon or Nyan (Ovis ammon hodgsoni).
Pallas’s cat (Felis manul).
Pangolin (Mc vis crassicaudata) .
Pygmy hog (sus salvanius).
Rhinoceros (Rhinoceros unicornis).
Rusty spotted cat (Felis rubiginosa).
Slow Loris (Nycticebus coucang).
Snow leopard (Panthera uncia) .
Spotted linsang (Prionodon pardicolor).
Swamp deer (all sub-species of Cervus duvauceli).
27,


36.
37.
38.
39,
40.
4l,
Sosa 50 2) On 09.4 5
90
40.
id,
42,
i3.
i4,
5.
i6.
478
28.
28
Takin or Mishmi Takin (Budorcas tazicolor).
Tibetan Gazelle (Procapra picticaudata) .
Tibetan Wild Ass (Equus hemionus kiang).
Tiger (Panthera tigris).
Urial or Shapu (Ovis vignei).
Wild buffalo (Bubalus bubalis).
Part II : AMPHIBIANS AND REPTILES
Crocodiles (including the Estuarne or salt water crocodile) (Cro-
codilus porosus and Crocodilus palustris).
Gharial (Gavialis gangeticus). |
Part III : Bros
Bazas (Aviceda jeordoni and Aviceda leuphotes).
Cheer Pheasant (Catreus wallichii).
Great Indian Bustard (Choriotis nigriceps) .
Great Indian Hornbill (Buceros bicornis).
Jerdon's Courser (Cursorius bitorquatus).
Lammergeier (Gypaetus barbatus).
Large Falcons (Falco peregrinus, Falco biarmicus and Falco chic-
quera),
Mountain Quail (Ophrysia superciliosa) .
Narcondom Hornbill [Rhyticeros (undulatus) narcondami].
Nicobar Megapode (Megapodius freycinet) .
Peafowl (Pavo cristatus). BEE}
Pinkheaded duck (Rhodonessa caryophyllacea) i
Selater’s Monal (Lophophorus sclateri) .
Siberian White crane (Grus leucogeranus) .
Tragopan Pheasants (Tragopan melanocephalus, Tragopan blythii,
Tragopan satyra, Tragopan temmincki).
Whitebellied Sea Eagle (Haliaetus leucogaster).
White-eared Pheasant. (Crossoptilon crossoptilon) .
White-winged Wood Duck (Cairina Scutulata). i


0.
Hels
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
॥ ६
i8.
49:
20.
2i,
22,
23.
ils
2.
3.
SCHEDULE II
(See sections 2, 8, 9, 0, l, 40, 4, 43, 48, 5, 6 and 62)
SpeciraL GAME
Part I
Agra Monitor Lizard [Varanus griseus (Daudin)].
Bengal Porcupine (Atherurus macrourus assamensis).
Bison or Gaur (Bos gaurus).
Capped Langur (Presbytis pileatus).
Crab-eating Macaque (Macaca irus wmbrosa).
Dolphins (Dolphinus delphis, Platanista gangetica).
. Ferret Badgers (Melogale moschata and Melogale personata).
Flying squirrels (All-species of the genus Hylopetes, Petaurista,
Belomys and Eupetaurus).
. Giant squirrels (Ratufa macroura, Rafuta indica and Ratufa
bicolor).
Himalayan Brown bear (Ursus arctos).
Himalayan crestless Porcupine (Hystrix hodgsoni).
Hog badger (Arctonyx collaris).
Indian elephant (Elephas maximus). i Bt
Leaf Monkey (Presbytis phayrei). eee
Malay or Sun bear (Helarctos malayanus) . Fae a 30
Pig-tailed Macaque (Macaca nemestrina). 8504 25807
Pythons (Genus Python).
Serow (Capricornis swmatraensis) .
Stump-tailed Macaque (Macaca speciosa). Ky.
Tibetan Antelope or Chiru (Panthelops hodgsoni).
Water Lizard (Varanus salvator)
Wild Dog or Dhole (Cuon alpinus).
Wild yak (Bos grunniens).
Part II aie
Leopard or Panther (Panthera pardus).
Nilgiri langur (Presbytis johni).
Nilgiri Thar (Hemitragus hylocrius) .
29


ana ४ WD ++
SCHEDULE III
(See sections 2, 8, 9, 0, and 6l)
Bic GAME
. Andaman Wild Pig (Sus andamanensis) .
. Barking deer or Muntjac (Muntiacus muntjak).
. Bharal (Ovis nahura).
. Chinkara or Indian Gazelle (Gazella gazella bennetti).
. Chital (Amis axis).
Four-horned antelope (Tetraceros quadricornis) .
Gorals (Nemorhaedus goral, Nemorhaedus hodgsoni).
8. Himalayan black bear (Selenarctos thibetanus).
I0.
iB;
I2.
48.
Das
5.
i6.
7
48
I9.
. Himalayan Ibex (Capra ibex).
Himalayan thar (Hemitragus jemlahicus).
Hog deer (Axis porcinus).
Hyaena (Hyaena hyaena).
Mouse deer (Tragulus meminna).
Nilgai (Boselaphus tragocamelus).
Ratel (Mellivora capensis).
Sambar (Cervus unicolor) .
. Sloth bear (Melursus wrsinus).
. Tibetan wolf (Canis lupus).
. Wild pig (Sus scrofa).


SCHEDULE IV
(See sections 2,8, 9, ll and 6l) \
SmMaLL GAME
Desert cat (Felis libyca).
Desert fox (Vulpes bucopus).
Ermine (Mustela erminea).
Hares (Black naped, Common Indian, Desert, Himalayan Mouse-
hare)
. Marmots (Marmota bobak himalayana, Marmota Caudata).
Martens (Martes foina intermedia, Martes flavigula, Martes gwat-
kinsii) .
Otters (Lutra lutra, Lutra perspicillata, Aonyx cinerea).
Red fox (Vulpes vulpes).
Tibetan fox (Vulpes ferrilatus).
40. Weasels (Mustela sibirica, Mustela kathiah and Mustela altaica).
il. Birds (other than those sub-species and species mentioned ia Part
III of Schedule I or in Schedule V, and belonging to the families
listed below: —
(i) Barbets (Capitonidae).
(ii) Barn Owls (Tytoninae).
(tii) Blue-birds (Irenidae).
(iv) Bustards (Otididae).
(०) Bustard-Quail (Turnicidae).
(vi) Chaffinches (Fringillinae).
(vii) Cranes (Gruidae). कु
(viii) Ducks (Anatidae).
(ix) Emerald Dove (Columbidae).
= (x) Faleons (Falconidge).
(wi) Finches (Fringillidae).
(xii) Flamingoes (Phoenicopteridae).
(xiii) Flycatchers (Muscicapidae).
(xiv) Geese (Anatidae).—
(xv) Goldfinches and allies (Carduelinae) .
(xvi) Grouse (Pteroclididae).
(xvii) Hawks (Accipitridae).
(xviii) Hornbills (Bucerotidae).
(xiv) Ioras (Irenidae). ; }
+ (xx) Jungle and Spur fowl (Phasianidae).
(a:ti) Megapodes (Megapodiidae). :
(xxii) Minivets (Campephagidae). है
Soi Sous
Aan
न्य
22


32
(xxiii) Orioles (Oriolidae).
(xxiv) Owls (Strigidae).
(xxv) Oystercatchers (Haematopodidae).
(xxvi) Partridges (Phasianidae).
(xxvii) Pelicans (Pelecanidae).
(22०४४) Pheasants (Phasianidae).
(xxix) Pigeons (except Blue Rock pigeon) (Columbidae).
(22%) Pittas (Pittidae).
< (22220) Quail (Phasianidae).
(४2४४४) Snipe (Charadriidae).
(2००४४) Sunbirds (Nectariniidae).
(xxxiv) Swans (Anatidae).
(६2००) Thrushes (Muscicapidae).
(xxxvi) Trogons (Trogonidae).


=


irds and for matter:and b
