As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA ON

1 | Bill No. 78 of 1991

THE TERRORIST AND DISRUPTIVE ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 1991

A
BILL

further to amend the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention)
Act, 1987.

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-second Year of the Republic
of India as follows:— )

1. (1) This Act may be called the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities Short

(Prevention) Amendment Act, 1991. ba
com-
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 2nd day of mence-
May, 1991. ment.

2. In the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 Amend-
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 1, in sub- ment of
section (4), for the words “four years”, the words “six years” shall be “cco” 1

bstit of Act 28
10 substituted. | of 1987.
tee 3. (1) The Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Amend. Repeal
of 195%: ment Ordinance, 1991, is hereby repealed. ee

(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken
under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be

15 deemed to have heen done or taken under the principal Act, as amended
by this Act. | 1


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987
(28 of 1987) was enacted to replace the ‘Terrorist and Disruptive
Activities (Prevention) Ordinance, 1987 (Ord. 2 of 1987) with effect from
the 24th May, 1987 to meet the extraordinary situation created by wide-
spread terrorist violence in many parts of the country. It was expected
that it would be possible to overcome this problem to a large extent
within a period of two years. It was, therefore, provided in the said
Act that it would remain in force for a period of two years, that is, till the
23rd May. 1989. The life of the said Act was further extended by two
years, that is. up to the 23rd May, 1991 through the Terrorist and Dis-
ruptive Activities (Prevention) Amendment Act, 1989. In view of the
fact that the Act was expiring on the 23rd May, 1991 and the terrorist
violence still continued unabated, it was decided to further extend the
said Act by two years. Since the House of the People had been dissolved
and the Council of States was not in session and the circumstances existed
which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action, the Presi-
dent was pleased to promulgate the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities
(Prevention) Amendment Ordinance, 1991 (Ord. 5 of 1991) on the znd
May, 1991 for this purpose.

2. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance.

New DELnt; 8. 8. CHAVAN.
The 22nd July, 1991.


| | FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Section 9 of the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention)
Act, 1987 provides for constitution of Designated Courts by the Central
Government or the State Governments and also for appointment of
Judges and Additional Judges of those Courts. Section 13 of the said
Act provides for appointment of Public Prosecutors, Additional Public
Prosecutors and Special Public Prosecutors by the Central Government
or the State Governments, as the case may be.

2. The expenditure towards the setting up of Designated Courts by
the State Governments and towards salaries and allowances of the Judges,
Public Prosecutors and staff of such Courts will be defrayed out of the
Consolidated Funds of the States. The expenditure towards setting up
of Designated Courts by the Central Government in any State or Union
territory (other then the Union territory of Pondicherry) will be met out.
of the Consolidated Fund of India. The provisions of the said Act
were extended for a period of two years with effect from the 24th May,
1989. The provisions of the said Act have been further extended for a
period of iwo years with effect from the 24th May, 1991, by
promulgation of the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention)
Amendment Ordinance, 1991 on the 2nd May, 1991. it is proposed to
replace the said Ordinance by an Act of Parliament, The likely expendi-
ture on each Designated Court and on the salaries and allowances of the
Judges, Public Prosecutors, Additional Public Prosecutors, staff, etc., over
® period of six reonths, is expected to be about Rs. 7 lakhs, cut of which
Rs, 3.5 lakhs will be of a recurring nature and Rs. 3.5 lakhs of a non-
recurring nature. As it is not possible at this stage to visualise the
number of such Courts that may have to be established, it is, therefore,
not possible to give an estimate of actua] expenditure that may have to
be incurred in this behalf.


Short
title,
extent,
applica-
tion,

mence-
ment,
dura-
tion
and
savings.

ANNEXURE

Extract FROM THE TERRORIST AND Disruptive ActiviTIES
(Prevention) Act, 1987

| (28 or 1987)
* * * * *
PART I
PRELIMINARY
1. (0). * * + * 2

(4) It shall remain in force for a period of four years from the 24th
day of May, 1987, but its expiry under the operation of this sub-section
shall not affect— 1

(a) the previous operation of, or anything duly done or suffer-
ed under, this Act or any rule made thereunder or any order made
under any such rule, or; |

(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued
or incurred under this Act or any rule made thereunder or any
order made under any such rule, or

(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect
of any offence under this Act or any contravention of any rule
made under this Act or of any order made under any such rule, or

(a) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect
of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture
or punishment as aforesaid,

and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be institut-
ed, continued or enforced and any such penalty, forfeiture or punish-
ment may be imposed as if this Act had not expired.

* * * * a



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention)
Act, 1987.

(Shri 8. B. Chavan, Minister of Home Affairs)