At )t4rli!o4>()C~ 'N l..tJ1:.. ~/J1!JI1t- ()1\/ 
!lie .. ~ IH laGK SMJlA 
<0' 
BiU No. 78 of I,,! 
THE CONSTITUTION (TWENTY-THIRD AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1969 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Constitution, (Twenty-third Amendment) Short tide. 
Act, 1969. 
S 2. In article 330 of the Constitution, in sub-clause (b) of clause (1), for 
the words "except the Scheduled Tribes in the tribal areas of Assam", 
the words "except the Scheduled Tribes in the tribal areas of Assam and 
in Nagaland" shall be substituted. 
3. In article 332 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words 
.10 "except the Scheduled Tribes in the tribal areas of Assam", the words 
"except the Scheduled Tribes in the tribal areas of Assam and in Naga-
land" shall be substituted. 
to (1) In article 333 of the Constitution, for the words "nominate 
such number of members of the community to the Assembly as he con-
IS siders appropriate", the words "nominate one member of that community 
to the Assembly" shall be substituted. 
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall affect any representa-
tion of the Anglo-Indian community in th~ Legislative Assembly of any 
State existing at the commencement of this Act until the dissolution of 
..ao that Assembly. 
5. In artlele 3M 01. the ConstltutiOll, for the words "twenty years". 
the wwtJa "thirty ~ sball be subatttuted. 
AmeDdment 
of article 
330· 
Amendment 
of article 
333. 
Amendment 
of article 
333· 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to amend article 334 of the Constitution to-
provide for the continuance of the representation of the Anglo-Indian 
community in the House of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies 
of the States by nomination for a further period of ten years from 26th 
January, 1970. It is estimated that the recurring expenditure on the 
salaries and allowances and other concessions, of the two representatives 
of the Anglo-Indian community in the House of the Peopl~ under article' 
331, will be of the order of Rs. 50,000 per annum. 
2. There will be no non-recurring expenditure. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
... ... • ... • 
PART XVI 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO CERTAIN CLASSES 
330. (1) Seats shall be reserved in the House of the People for-
... ... ... ... 
(b) the Scheduled Tribes except the Scheduled Tribes in the 
tribal areas of Assam; and 
• ... ... • ... 
332. (1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes, except the Scheduled Tribes in the tribal areas of 
Assam, in the Legislative Assembly of every State. 
• ... ... • • 
333. Notwithstanding anything in article 170, the Governor of a State 
may, if he is of opinion that the Anglo-Indian community needs represen-
tation in the Legislative Assembly of the State and is not adequately 
represented therein, nominate such number of members of the community 
to the Assembly as he considers appropriate. 
334. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, 
the provisiOns of this Constitution relating to-
(a) the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People and in the Legislative 
Assemblies of the States; and 
(b) the representation of the Anglo-Indian communit; in the 
House of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States 
by nomination, 
shall cease to have effe~t on the expiration of a period of twenty years 
from the commencement of this Constitution: 
Provided that nothing in this article shall affect any representation in 
the House of the People or in the Legislative Assembly of a State until 
the dissolution of the then existing House or Assembly, as the case may 
be. 
• • • • • 
Reservation 
of seats for 
Scheduled 
Castes and 
Scheduled 
Tribes in 
the House 
of the 
People • 
RI..'Scrvation 
of seats for 
Sch~d\lled 
Castes and 
Scheduled 
Tribes in 
the Legisla-
tive Assem-. 
blies of the 
States. 
Representa-
tion of the 
Anglo-Indian 
community 
in the Le-
gislative 
Assemblies 
of the States. 
Reservation 
of seats and 
special re-
presentation 
to cease after 
twenty 
years. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Article 334 of the Constitution lays down that the provisions of the 
Constitution relating to the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes and the representation of the Anglo-Indian commu-
nity by nomination in the House of the People and the Legislative 
Assemblies of the States sball cease to have elect on the expiration of a 
period of twenty years from the commencement of the Constitution. 
Although the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes have mad~ consi-
derable progress in the last twenty years, the reasons which weighed 
with the Constituent Assembly in making provisions with regard to the 
aforesaid reservation of seats and nomination of members, have not ceased 
to exist. It is, therefore, proposed to continue the reservation for the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and the representation of 
Anglo-Indians by nomination for a further period of ten years. 
2. More than ninety per cent. of the population of the State of NUa-
land, which came into being in 1963, is tribal. It would be anomalous 
to make provision for reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes in Legislatures in the States where they are in a majority. It is, 
therefore, proposed, as desired by the Government of Nagaland, not to 
make any reservation for the Scheduled Tribes in Nagaland either in the 
House of the People or in the State Legislative Assembly. Articles 330 
and 332 of the Constitution afe bemg amended for this purpQSe. 
3. Under article 338 of the Constitution, the number of Anglo-Indians, 
who may be nominated to the State Legislative Assemblies, is left to the 
discretion of the Governor. It is now proposed to amend that article so 
as to provide that not more than one Anglo-Indian should be nominated 
by the Governor to any State Legislative Assembly. This amendment 
will not however affect representation of the Anglo-Indian community 
in the existing Legislative Assemblies until their dissolution. 
NEW DELHI; P. GOVINDA MENON. 
The lIth August, 1969. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 