1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE GYMNASIUMS AND FITNESS CENTRES (REGULATION)
BILL, 2016
By
SHRI A.T. NANA PATIL, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of gymnasiums and fitness centres which are engaged in
activities, such as imparting training on weight lifting and body building and
conduct courses for weight reduction and proper nutrition in the country
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Gymnasiums and Fitness Centres (Regulation) Act,
2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 78 of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “competent authority” means any office or officer appointed by the
appropriate Government under section 4;
(c) “gymnasium or fitness centre” means any establishment, by whatever name
called, engaged in imparting training on weight lifting, body building and offering
nutritional advice on fitness and weight reduction;
(d) “instructor” means any person engaged for imparting training on weights,
body building and nutritional advice to members enrolled in any gymnasium or fitness
centre;
(e) “member” means any person enrolled with any gymnasium or fitness centre;
and
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) With effect from such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette appoint, no person or establishment shall run a gymnasium or a fitness
without prior registration with the competent authority.
(2) Any person or establishment running a gymnasium or fitness centre prior to
coming into force of this Act shall apply for registration to the competent authority within
a period of forty-five days from the date of commencement of this Act in such form and
manner as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette
appoint a competent authority for the purposes of registration of gymnasiums or fitness
centres within its jurisdiction.
(2) The competent authority shall—
(i) on receipt of an application for registration of gymnasium or fitness centre,
the competent authority shall scrutinize the application and may call for such other
information or documents from the applicant as may be prescribed;
(ii) before registering any gymnasium or fitness centre, inspect the site to have
the first hand information of the infrastructure available with the gymnasium or the
fitness centre and the compliance of the norms and standards fixed by the appropriate
Government in this regard;
(iii) after being satisfied with the various requirements under this Act, grant a
registration certificate to the applicant in such form and manner as may be prescribed
which shall be valid for two years;
(iv) renew the registration only after re-inspecting the gymnasium or fitness
centre and on fulfilment of requirements fixed in this behalf by the appropriate
Government under this Act; and
(v) refuse to register a gymnasium or fitness centre or renew its registration if
the applicant fails to comply with the norms and standards fixed by the appropriate
Government:
Provided that in case of non-registration or non-renewal of registration of a gymnasium
or a fitness centre, the competent authority shall record reasons in writing and communicate
the same to the applicant, within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of application
for registration.
Definitions.
Compulsory
registration
of Gymna-
sium and
fitness
centres.
5
10
Procedure for
Registration.
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
5. The appropriate Government shall,—
(a) determine the fee to be charged by any gymnasium or fitness centre from
members for various activities;
(b) prescribe minimum qualification for appointment of instructor in any
gymnasium or fitness centre;
(c) fix the instructor-member ratio for gymnasium and fitness centres;
(d) lay down norms for minimum infrastructure for starting and running
gymnasium and fitness centres; and
(e) prescribe such other norms as may be necessary for the purpose.
6. Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend up to two years and also with fine which may
extend up to five lakh rupees.
7. (1) Where a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or any rule, direction
or order made there under has been committed by a company, every person who, at the time
the contravention was committed, was in charge of and was responsible to the company for
the conduct of business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the
contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to punishment if he proves that the contravention was committed without his
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where a contravention of
any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder has been
committed by a company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the
consent or connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director,
manager, secretary or other officer of the company such director, manager, secretary or
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section:—
(i) “company” means anybody corporate and include a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(ii) “director” in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three
years from the date of commencement of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days,
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
Appropriate
Government
to prescribe
norms for
gymnasium
and fitness
centres.
Penalty.
Offences by a
company.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
With the increase in the awareness among the public to have good health and physique,
gymnasium and fitness centres are mushrooming in every nook and corner of big fitness
centres have branches in many parts of the country, including small towns. Moreover,
these gymnasiums and fitness centres charge a hefty fee from their members who with a
view to have better looks and physique spend the money. Many of these gymnasiums and
fitness centres are not having adequate infrastructure to run their activities and are operating
from small room, garage, terrace etc. In India, starting a gym is as easy as opening a kirana
store. They have some fancy machines but not enough good trainers, certified to ply their
trade add to this the unchecked practice or prescribing dietary supplements at will. Often,
they contain substances that can potentially damage organs like the kidneys, liver and
gonads.
The activities of body building and weight lifting is closely linked with the diet of a
person and if the person is not advised about the proper diet, it may have an adverse effect
on the health of a person. This is a highly specialised job which must be carried out by
professionals under strict supervision and hygienic environment. Many of the so-called
gymnasiums are not having, qualified instructors and are running without any nutritionist
or dieticians. These gymnasiums are just fleecing their members besides playing with the
health of lakhs of people. As of now, there is no effective law to regulate the operations of
gymnasiums and fitness centres. With more and more people visiting wellness centres,
there is a need to standardize the quality of service. Therefore, it is high time to regulate the
activities of these gymnasiums to protect the interest of public at large.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; A.T. NANA PATIL
March 14, 2016.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall appoint competent
authority for the purposes of registration of gymnasium and fitness centres. The expenditure
relating to States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the respective States.
However, the Central Government shall bear the expenditure for implementing the provisions
of the Act in Union territories. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of
rupees twenty crore may be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees two crore is also likely to be
involved.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
powers is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of gymnasiums and fitness centres which are engaged in
activities, such as imparting training on weight lifting and body building and
conduct courses for weight reduction and proper nutrition in the country
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri A.T. Nana Patil, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5318LS(S3)—16-04-2016.