1
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill  No. 78 of  2009
THE PROVISION OF COMMUNICATION FACILITIES IN EVERY
VILLAGE BILL, 2009
By
SHRI OM PRAKASH YADAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the facilities of telephone and post and telegraph office in all the
villages of the country and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by  Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Provision of Communication Facilities in Every
Village Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, the words and expressions used
but not defined in this Act and defined in the Indian Post Office Act, 1898 and the Indian
Telegraph Act, 1885 shall have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in these Acts.
Short title and
extent.
Definition.
6 of 1898
13 of 1885
5

2
Provision of
Communication
facilities in
villages.
Power to
make rules.
3. The Central Government shall provide in every village throughout the country, the
following facilities, namely:—
(i) a post and telegraph office; and
(ii) a public telephone connection with STD facility under the control of the
head of the Village Panchayat.
4.   (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In India, about seventy-five per cent. of the people live in villages. There are a number
of villages in remote areas inhabited by tribals and backward classes. Even after sixty-two
years of our independence, no development work has been done at such places. There are
no postal facilities available in these areas. There are no telephones and the villages have
virtually no communication links with the rest of the country. It takes months together for a
letter to reach in these villages. Most of the villagers come to the cities for work and remain
cut-off from their families due to non-availability of modern means of communication in their
native villages. The postal, telephone and other communication facilities have thus become
necessary for every village. The villagers can deposit their money in saving account of the
post offices thereby making available a lot of money to the Government for development
works. The introduction of modern means of communication in every village will be the first
step towards taking the boon of modern science to the doorsteps of rural India.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; OM  PRAKASH  YADA V
July 10, 2009
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that every village shall be provided with the facilities of a
post and telegraph office as well as a public telephone connection with STD by the Central
Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of about rupees two hundred crore per annum will be
involved as a recurring expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
A sum of rupees fifty lakh is also likely to be involved as a non-recurring expenditure.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to the matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, a normal character.
5

6
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the facilities of telephone and post and telegraph office in all the
villages of the country and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Om Prakash Yadav, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4004LS(S5)—27.10.2009.