1
THE NATIONAL ASSETS (PROTECTION) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI A.T. NANA PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the declaration and recognition of national assets and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Assets (Protection) Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the  Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the
following shall be recognized as National assets and protected as such:—
(i) Peacock—the National Bird;
Bill No. 78 of 2014
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Declaration
and protection
of National
Assets.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(ii) Lotus—the National Flower;
(iii) Tiger—the National Animal;
(iv) Ganga—the National River;
(v) Cow and its progeny; and
(vi) Yathartha Geeta—National Book.
3. Whoever,—
(i) causes any injury or kill or attempt to kill any animal or bird protected as
National Assets under this Act; or
(ii) pollute or damage or causes to pollute or damage river Ganga in any manner;
or
(iii) mutilates, burns or shows disrespect to the National Book,
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years
and with fine which may extend upto rupees one lakh.
4. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Punishment.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Since time immemorial, certain things in our country have been recognized as sacred
and national assets. Steps have been taken by successive Governments to preserve and
protect them and to give them their due place in events of national importance. Infact, the
Project Tiger was started to protect the tiger from extinction, as tiger was considered as the
national animal. The Ganga Action Plan was started to cleanse and protect river Ganga.
Similarly, our national bird Peacock is on the verge of extinction, and therefore needs immediate
steps to protect it. Moreover, replicas of Peacock, Lotus and Tiger are used in National
events and functions to showcase our national pride in having them in our country. But
cases of showing disrespect to these symbols of national pride by causing injury to them or
killing them or damaging or by acts of polluting have increased. If we are to protect our
national assets, we have to take stringent action to ensure its safety and preservation.
The Bill seeks to preserve and protect these national assets.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; A.T. NANA PATIL
June 27, 2014.
3

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
4

GMGIPMRND—1422LS(S3)—24-07-2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the declaration and recognition of national assets and for
matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri A.T. Nana Patil, M.P.)