As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2 9 JUL 2005

Bill No. 78 of 2005
RSET अं 00७७४ जप ERTS 12

THE AIRLINES REGULATORY AUTHORITY BILL, 2005
By
SHRI CHANDRAKANT KuairE, M.P.
A
BILL

10 provide for setting up of an Airlines Regulatory Authority and for matters connected
vy ७ therewith.

sitenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

__ 1. (J) This Act may be called the Airlines Regulatory Authority Act, 2005. Short title,
mi | . tant,
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India. काका तले
| d .
(3) It shall come into force at-once. dele

(4) It shall apply to all airline eompanies, including private and foreign airline
mpanies operating to and from India and providing commercial helicopter/aircraft services
yment basis. oe r

2. In this act, unless the context otherwise requires,— | | Definitions.

4 (a) "Authority" means the Airlines Regulatory Authority set up under section 3
of this Act; and : a

_ (6) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.


Airlines
Regulatory
Authority.
Composition
of the
Authority.

Functions of

the Authority.

Penalty for
violation of
the Act.

Power to
make rules.

2

3. The Centrai Government shall constitute an authority to be known as the Airl | 1 ;
Regulatory Authority to regulate the operations of various airline companies in the country

4, The Authority shall consist of—
(i) a Chairman, to be appointed by the Central Government;
(ii) three other Members, one each representing airline companies,

Department of Commerce and the Department of Industry, to be nominated byt 6
Central Government; and

(iii) the Secretary of Ministry of Civil Aviation shall be the ex officio secretary of
the Authority | d

5, The Authority shall perform the following functions, namely:—

(i) prescribing guidelines regarding functioning ofall airline companies operating
in the country;

(ii) formulation of guidelines regarding services provided by various airline
companies in the country; |

(iii) fixing fares for various domestic/foreign flights without putting any
restrictions on the power of the airline companies to fix fares lower than that fixed by
the Authority; |

| (iv) prescription of guidelines regarding minimum facilities to be provided to
passengers without restricting the power of the airline companies to provide more —
facilities than prescribed by the Authority; 1

(५) issuing guidelines regarding payment of compensation to passengers in
case of delay in the scheduled flights; ,

(vi) prescribing facilities to be provided to passengers by airline companies in
case of delay/cancellation of flights due to reasons beyond the control of airline
companiés;

(vii) prescribing norms regarding fees including license fees for the usage of the |
airport; |

(viii) prescribing compensation for loss of luggage, baggage or awarding
compensation to passengers in case of delay in transit of luggage or baggage;

(ix) issuing guidelines regarding insurance cover for passengers;

(x) issuing guidelines regarding prior information to passengers in case of delay/
cancellation or rescheduling of flights; and

(xi) any other function that may be entrusted to it by the Central Government

6. In case of violation of any of the guidelines framed by the Authority by any airline
company, the registration or licence issued to the airline company shall automatically stand
suspended for a minimum period of six months

7. The Central Government may, by notification in the official gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act

है.


STATEMENT OF OBJECT r S AND REASONS

_ There has been mushroom growth of private airlines in the country as a result of
economic liberalization. Since there is 10 mechanism regulating for the functioning of air-
lines, they are not functioning properly and are harassing the passengers by undue delay/
cancellation of scheduled flights. The constitution of regulatory body in aviation sector is
required to mitigate the problems being faced by the airlines passengers

Hence the Bill.

New DELHI: | CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE
May 13, 2005.

A ly OE, ae,

ore


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM _

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of an Airlines Regulatory Authority.
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the composition of the authority. The Bill, therefore, if =
enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a
an annual recurring expenditure of rupees ten crore would be involved. हि

A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one crore is also likely to be involved.



_ 1
F
4
4

1

;

;

oe

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of

legislative power is of a normal character.

*

OR EILEEN EL NT सतह: पक ४“

RR aa Nanogen ee ee
a SSS |

pererasiee a awe Es

BALK eee AEE
en eee Sea

SSS =

re ५३3५५... 4८.
उस न जल न जा Se a ee

a
eee



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for setting up of an Airlines Regulatory Authority and for matters connected
. | therewith. | |

(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—1335LS-(S-3)—28-06-2005.