AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 78 of 2022
THE ONLINE GAMING (REGULA TION) BILL, 2022
By
ADV. DEAN KURIAKOSE, M.P.
A
BILL
to establish an effective regime to regulate online gaming industry to prevent
fraud and misuse and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Online Gaming (Regulation) Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) “appropriate authority” means a person or organization designated as such
by the Central Government;
(b) “Commission” means the Online Gaming Commission constituted under
section 3;
(c) “license” means a license granted by the Commission under the provisions
of the Act for the purpose of facilitating Online Gaming;
(d) “licensee” means any person who has been granted a license to install and
operate Online Gaming Server, and any other activity to facilitate Online
Gaming;
(e) “Online Gaming” means games played on any electronics device including
Personal Computers, Mobile Phones, Tablets and other devices;
(f) “Online Gaming Server” means any main frame computer or set of computers,
installed or maintained by the Licensee, that accepts, processes, stores and
validates transactions arising out of Online Gaming, and which manages,
monitors and controls the entire system of Online Gaming;
(g) “Online Gaming Website” means the internet domain registration or URL
address of the Licensee through which Online Sports Gaming is conducted;
(h) “player” means a participant of any online game as certified by the
Commission; and
 (i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
CHAPTER II
REGULATION OF ONLINE SPORTS BETTING
3.(1)  The Central Government shall constitute a Commission, to be known as
the Online Gaming Commission, to exercise the powers conferred upon, and to
perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consists of a Chairperson,  Vice-Chairperson and five
members to be nominated by the Central Government, with at least one expert from
the field of law, one expert from the field of cyber technology and one person with
experience in law enforcement.
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and every member of the Commission
shall hold office for a period of three years from the date such person assumes office.
(4) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or a member may, by writing under his
hand addressed to the Central Government, resign from the office as such Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson or member, as the case may be.
(5) The Central Government shall remove a person from the office of Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson or a member if that person—
(a) becomes an undischarged insolvent;
(b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment;
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of discharging his functions;
(e) has in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his position as a
member, so as to render a person’s continuance in office detrimental to
public interest.
Constitution
of Online
Gaming
Commission.
Definitions.
Governments.
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
10
2

(6) The Central Government shall provide the Commission with a Secretary and
such officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of
the functions of the Commission under this Act.
(7) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and employees appointed for the purpose of the Commission
shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
4.  The Commission shall–
(a) oversight the functioning of Online Gaming Websites;
(b) make periodical or special reports to the Central Government on any
matter pertaining to Online Gaming;
(c) suggest appropriate measures to control or curb illegal Online Gaming;
(d) grant, suspend and revoke licenses for online gaming websites and to
determine fee for license applications and license renewals of such websites;
and
(e) any other matter referred to it by the Central Government.
5. (1) No person shall engage in Online Gaming except through an Online Gaming
Website.
(2) No person shall operate an Online Gaming Server or an Online Gaming
Website without a license granted under this Act.
(3) Any person who operates an Online Gaming Server or an Online Gaming
Website without a license, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three years and with such fine as may be prescribed.
6.(1) Any person desiring to obtain a license shall make an application in writing
to the Commission in such form and manner, as may be prescribed.
(2) On receipt of the application, the Commission may, after making such inquiry
as it considers necessary, by order in writing, either grant the License or refuse to
grant the License, assigning reasons for its decision.
7.(1) A license, unless it is cancelled or surrendered, shall remain in force for
such period, not exceeding six years, as may be specified in it.
(2) A licensee may surrender the license through a notice in writing to the
Commission.
(3) The cancellation, surrender, or expiry of a License shall not affect any liability
for anything done or omitted to be done before the date on which it ceases to have
effect.
8. An applicant for the license shall pay to the Commission such amount as may
be prescribed as application fee for grant of the license.
9. The license issued shall not be transferable.
10. The Commission may, on application made to it, renew the license granted
under this Act, on payment of fee prescribed for renewal of a License or refuse to
renew any such license after assigning the reasons for refusal in writing.
11.(1) The Commission may, at any time, after giving the licensee a reasonable
opportunity of being heard, suspend or cancel the license on any of the following
grounds, namely:
(i) that there has been a breach of any of the conditions subject to which the
license was granted.
Function of
the
Commission.
3
Ambit of
Online
Gaming.
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
10
License for an
Online
Gaming
Server.
Cancellation
or surrender of
the license.
Fee for the
license.
License to be
non-transferable.
Renewal of
the license.
Suspension or
Cancellation
of the license.
45

(ii) that the licensee has contravened any of the provisions of this Act or rules
made thereunder.
(2) Whenever a license is suspended or cancelled, the Commission shall record
the reasons for such suspension or cancellation and furnish a copy thereof to the
person whose license has been cancelled or suspended.
(3) If the licensee is found to have breached any of the conditions of the license,
then the licensee shall be punished with such fine as may be prescribed.
12. The licensee shall maintain accounts relating to Online Gaming in such  form
and manner, as may be prescribed and submit it to the Commission.
13.(1) If any person, other than the licensee while engaging in Online Gaming
through Online Gaming Website, commits a breach of any of the conditions of the
License as exhibited or of the rules to be observed in playing such games, such
person shall be punished with such fine as may be prescribed.
(2) The Licensee shall exhibit on the approved website, the conditions subject to
which the License was granted, and all rules governing the conduct of Online Gaming.
14.(1) The Commission may request the police to investigate any acts of violations
of the sections under this Chapter.
(2) It shall be lawful for any police officer, not below the rank of Deputy
Superintendent of Police, to search premises and to seize materials in accordance
with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
15. All offences under this chapter shall be cognizable and bailable.
16. The Central Government may, by notification, permit Foreign Direct Investment
including technological collaboration, in Online Gaming, subject to any conditions
or restrictions as may be prescribed.
17. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to a person providing backend
services in India, including hosting and maintenance services, for any international
gaming website based outside India.
18. (1) The Commission may, in consultation with the Central Government, make
rules for carrying out purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
the rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(i) the form and manner of making an application for a License, the fees to be
paid for its grant or renewal, and the conditions subject to which it may be
granted;
(ii) the manner of keeping accounts relating to Online Gaming, the form in
which and the intervals at which they shall be submitted to the
Commission;
(iii) the restrictions or conditions with regard to the age or other conditions of
the persons who may be employed for Online Gaming or may be permitted
to play such games online or otherwise take part in the organization or
exhibition of such games;
(iv) the restrictions or conditions with regard to the admission of participants
and the fees, if any, to be charged for their admission;
Maintenance of
accounts relating
to Online
Gaming by the
licensee.
Punishment for
breach of
conditions of
licensee by
players.
Exclusions.
Rule-making
power of the
Commission.
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
10
4
Request by the
Commission for
investigation.
Offences to be
cognizable and
bailable.
Foreign Direct
Investment and
Technology
Collaboration in
Online Gaming.
2 of 1974.

(v) the type of notices to be exhibited and the manner in which they are to be
exhibited on the Online Gaming Website;
(vi) the restrictions or conditions with regard to providing credit facilities by
the Licensee to participants of Online Gaming and the prohibition or
regulation of participation by proxy in Online Gaming;
(vii) the fine to be paid by persons for violating provisions under Chapter II of
the Act; and
(viii) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.
CHAPTER III
MISCELLANEOUS
19. The provisions of this Act, shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of any inconsistency,
the provisions of this Act shall have effect to the extent of such inconsistency.
20.(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a
period of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made,
be laid before each House of Parliament.
5
Act to have
overriding
effects.
Power to
remove
difficulties.15
20
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Online gaming industry has grown leaps and bounds in the last decade in
India. India has around 420 million active online gamers and the industry is slated to
grow to $5 billion by 2025. Since the gaming industry has such a profound impact on
the nation, it is necessary that it should be regulated. The internet is rapidly spreading
to new areas in rural India. In this context, more people will be exposed to the Online
games in the coming years. The effect of long hours of gaming, especially amongst
the adolescents are well known. It can impair normal socialisation, can cause physical
and mental harm and even monetary loss. Many games also offer “in-app purchases”
that generate huge revenue for them. In many cases, children play these games due to
peer pressure and sometimes spend money to acquire these “assets” inside the game.
This leads to wastage of national resources. The games also lead to wastage of
productive time by the players. While the recreational utility of these games are well
known, their addictive features are also well documented. In this context, it is imperative
that a national commission must be instituted to regulate them. There should be rules
and regulations based on which Online games should be allowed to operate in India.
There should be limitations like the amount of time one can play the game every day,
maximum money that could be spent by one person etc. The rules and regulations
must also keep up with the times, and the Online gaming commission will be in a
position to regulate the industry by setting standards accordingly.
Hence this Bill.
     NEW DELHI; DEAN KURIAKOSE
4 February, 2022.
6

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of this Bill provides for establishment of the Online Gaming Commission.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred
crore per annum will be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
7

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clauses 3 and 18 of the Bill empower the Central Government and the Online
Gaming Commission, respectively to make rules for carrying out the purposes of
this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
8

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish an effective regime to regulate online gaming industry to
prevent fraud and misuse and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
—————
(Adv. Dean Kuriakose, M.P .)