Short title and
commencement.
THE OTHER BACKWARD CLASSES (REMOV AL OF CREAMY LAYER
CRITERIA) BILL, 2021
By
SHRI GANESH SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for removal of creamy layer criteria while providing reservation in favour of
Other Backward Class of citizens in services and posts under the Central
Government and its establishments.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Other Backward Classes (Removal of Creamy Layer
Criteria) Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 78 of 2021
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, "creamy layer" with reference to
Other Backward Class means a person belonging to such class and whose annual income
exceeds such prescribed limit as notified from time to time by the Central Government for the
purpose of excluding him for availing the benefits of reservation provided to Other Backward
Classes in civil posts and services under the Central Government.
3. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any judgment, decree, order
or direction of any Court, the creamy layer criteria shall not be applicable till twenty-seven
per cent. of posts reserved for Other Backward Classes have been filled up by persons
belonging to such classes.
4. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definition.
Removal of
Creamy Layer
criteria
amongst
Other
Backward
Classes while
providing
reservation.
Power to
make rules. 10
5
15
2

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 16 (4) of the Constitution mentions that "Nothing in this article shall prevent
the State from making any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour
of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately
represented in the services under the State".
So far, people from Other Backward Classes are being given reservation for appointments
to the posts under Government services on the basis of social and educational backwardness.
There are various schemes and special provisions for the welfare of the persons of
Other Backward Classes in the country. However, despite all these measures, the number of
appointments of persons of Other Backward Classes to the important posts is negligible. As
a result, no significant change is visible in their social status.
The nine-member Constitutional bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in their verdict
of 16 November, 1992 in the case regarding reservation to socially and educationally backward
classes (Indra Sawhney & others vs. Union of India and others) given on the basis of
majority in which Hon'ble Justice Pandian and Justice Sawant in their judgments clearly
emphasized that when a person is placed in the unrestricted category, it should be clear
without any doubt that social backwardness has come to an end.
The Parliamentary Committee on Welfare of Other Backward Classes (2018-19) has
mentioned in its Twenty-First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) that as on 01.01.2016, in
78 Ministries/Departments of Central Government, in posts of Group 'A' and Group 'B', the
percentage of representation of Other Backward Classes is 13.01 and 14.78 respectively. It is
also mentioned in the report that due to lack of availability of eligible candidates of Other
Backward Classes, the prescribed twenty-seven per cent. reservation for Other Backward
Classes could not be filled up.
As per the report of Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions, as on 01.01.2019 there are 970 posts vacant in the direct recruitment
of Indian Administrative Service Officers and 524 promotional posts of Indian Administrative
Service Officers are vacant. In the same sequence, the report also shows that as on 01.01.2018,
a total number of 10859 backlog posts of Other Backward Classes are lying vacant in the
Department of Posts, Atomic Energy and the Ministries of Defence, Railways, Housing and
Urban Affairs and the Home Affairs. Out of this, the maximum posts of 6260 and 3428 earmarked
for Other Backward Classes are lying vacant in the Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of
Defence respectively.
In the following para (para 522, decision today, V ol. 6, No. 9, 30 November, 1992) of the
verdict given by Justice P.V . Sawant, the Hon'ble Judge of the nine-member Constitutional
Bench of the Supreme Court, the same thing has been fully clarified i.e. the basis of reservation
is not the scrutiny of income but its main basis is social and educational backwardness.
"The right criterion for judging the forwardness of the forward among the backward
Classes is to measure their capacity not in terms of the capacity of others in their class, but
in terms of the capacity of the members of the Forward Classes, as stated earlier. If they cross
the Rubicon of backwardness, they should be taken out from the Backward Classes and
should be made disentitled to the provisions meant for the said classes."
Due to the rule pertaining to creamy layer, there is no provision for reservation in
appointment of people from Other Backward Classes coming under creamy layer. As a result,
the Government cannot provide reservation to them. In this situation, it has become necessary
to abolish the concept of creamy layer in order to ensure the social as well as overall
development of the people of the Other Backward Classes. In such a situation, the reservation
earmarked for Other Backward Classes may be provided by doing away with the concept of
creamy layer.
3

The Bill, therefore, seeks to do away with the concept of creamy layer criteria with a
view to ensure adequate representation of the socially and educationally backward citizens
in the services and posts under the Central Government till twenty-seven per cent. reservation
meant for Other Backward Class citizens is achieved.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI; GANESH SINGH
March 11, 2020.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for removal of creamy layer criteria while providing reservation in favour of
Other Backward Class of citizens in services and posts under the Central
Government and its establishments
————
(Shri Ganesh Singh, M.P .)