AS ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill  No.  78  of  2023
THE  CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2023
By
Sඁඋං Uඇආൾඌඁ Bඁൺංඒඒൺඌൺඁൾൻ Pൺඍංඅ, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Code on Social Security, 2020
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code on Social Security (Amendment) Act, 2023.
 (2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement.

   2. In section 15 of the Code on Social Security, 2020 (hereinafter referred to as 
principal Act), in sub-section (1), in clause (b), after sub-clause (iii) the following proviso 
shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the Employees Pension Scheme shall be revised every five years to 
index for inflation or to be linked to the interest payable on Government Security in 
such manner as may be prescribed.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause,— “(a) “inflation” includes the rate of 
increase in the observed general price index between two time periods; and
(b) “Government Security” includes a tradable instrument issued by the Central 
Government or the State Governments acknowledge the Government’s debt 
obligation towards short term (usually called treasury bills with original maturities of 
less than one year) or long term security (usually called Government bonds or dated 
securities with original maturity of one year or more).”.
   3. In Chapter VIII of the principal Act, for the heading the following heading shall be 
substituted, namely:—
“SOCIAL SECURITY AND CESS IN RESPECT OF BUILDING, OTHER 
CONSTRUCTION WORKERS AND INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKERS”.
    4.  After section 108 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:—
“108A. (1) There shall be constituted an Inter-State Migrant Workers Welfare 
Fund for the welfare of inter-state migrant workers and there shall be credited 
thereto—
(a) contribution from the States from where the inter-migrant worker 
has migrated; 
(b) contribution from the States to which migrant worker has migrated;
(c) contribution from the principal employers; and
(d) minimum contribution from the inter-State migrant worker.
(2)  The amount from the Inter-State Migrant Worker Welfare Fund shall exclusively 
be utilized for the welfare of inter-State migrant workers.”.
    
Subﬆitution of 
new heading 
for heading.
Amendment of 
section 15.
Insertion of new 
section 108A.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The Social Security Code (the Code), 2020 has been enacted to amend and 
consolidate the laws relating to social security with the goal to extend social security to all 
employees and workers either in the organized or unorganized or any other sectors. The 
Code has vital provisions with respect to social security benefits to workers including gig 
workers. India’s obligation to provide a comprehensive social security cover for the workers 
may be traced to several provisions enshrined in the Constitution of India which include 
inter-alia securing equal pay for equal work for both men and women; directions pertaining 
to the State’s responsibility for making effective provisions for assistance in cases of 
unemployment, old age, sickness and disablement; for securing just and humane conditions 
of work. 
 Pensions contribute to economic growth through a range of pathways at household, 
community and national levels. Within households, they are used for investing in children, 
tackling stunting and enabling them to attend and perform well in school, thereby helping 
them become a more effective and productive workforce. Pensioners and their families 
use the cash they receive to supplement in income generating activities while working age 
household members are better able to gain employment, increasing overall productivity of 
the labour force. They also enable households to recover their productivity more quickly 
following shocks.
 Pension indexation affects the income of a large and increasing number of older 
people. Without indexation, benefit increases are subject to discretionary decisions by 
governments or pension authorities, implying that the value of a pension in payment depends 
on economic and political cycles. Therefore, section 15 of the Code has been amended to 
include inflation indexed pensions schemes. 
 Further, in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic one of the issues that emerged is 
the conditions of the Inter-State Migrant Workers, their retention in job, food and ration 
facilities for them, etc. Therefore it is only imperative that a separate fund be created for the 
purpose of providing monetary support to Inter-state Migrant Workmen. 
 Hence this Bill.
       Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                             UNMESH BHAIYYASAHEB PATIL
   November 23,  2022

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 4 of the Bill vide proposed new section 108A provides for constitution of an 
Inter State Migrant Workers Welfare Fund for the purpose of welfare of inter-state migrant 
workers. 
 The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India.  It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred 
crore per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
 A non-recurring expenditure of about one hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved.

ANNEXURE 
[Eඑඍඋൺർඍ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Cඈൽൾ ඈඇ Sඈർංൺඅ Sൾർඎඋංඍඒ Aർඍ, 2020]
(Aർඍ ඇඈ. 36 ඈൿ 2020) 
 *     *          *                *                 *
 15 . (1) The Central Government may, by notification—
 *     *          *                *                 *
(b) frame a scheme to be called the Employees' Pension Scheme for the purpose 
of providing for—
(i) superannuation pension, retiring pension or permanent total disablement 
pension to the employees of any establishment or class of establishments to which 
this Chapter applies; 
(ii) widow or widower's pension, children pension or orphan pension payable 
to the beneficiaries of such employees; and 
(iii) nominee pension;
 *     *          *                *                 *
CHAPTER VIII
Sඈർංൺඅ Sൾർඎඋංඍඒ ൺඇൽ Cൾඌඌ ංඇ Rൾඌඉൾർඍ ඈൿ Bඎංඅൽංඇ඀ ൺඇൽ Oඍඁൾඋ 
Cඈඇඌඍඋඎർඍංඈඇ Wඈඋ඄ൾඋඌ
 108. (1) There shall be constituted by a Building Workers' Welfare Board a fund to 
be called the Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Fund and there shall be 
credited thereto—
(a) the amount of any cess levied under sub-section (1) of section 100; 
(b) any grants and loans made to the Building Workers' Welfare Board by the 
Central Government; and 
(c) all sums received by the Building Workers' Welfare Board from such other 
sources as may be decided by the Central Government. 
(2) The Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Fund shall be applied 
for meeting— 
(a) expenses of the Building Workers' Welfare Board in the discharge of its 
functions under sub-section (6) of section 7; 
(b) salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and 
other employees of the Building Workers' Welfare Board; and 
(c) expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Code. 
(3) No Building Workers' Welfare Board shall, in any financial year, incur 
expenses towards salaries, allowances and other remuneration to its members, officers and 
other employees and for meeting the other administrative expenses exceeding five per cent. 
of its total expenses during that financial year.
*     *          *                *                 *
Schemes.
Building 
and Other 
Conﬆruction 
Workers’ Welfare 
Fund and its 
application.

  
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Code on Social Security, 2020
————
(Shri  Unmesh Bhaiyyasaheb Patil, M.P .)