1
Short title
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 78 of  2017
THE PREVENTION OF EXTRAV AGANCE AND UNLIMITED
EXPENDITURE ON MARRIAGES BILL, 2017
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention and prohibition of sheer extravagance and unlimited
expenditure being incurred on marriages and related ceremonies in various
parts of the country and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Extravagance and unlimited Expenditure
on Marriages Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) 'appropriate Government' means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) 'expenditure on marriage' includes expenses incurred, prior to, during and
after the marriage celebrations and related ceremonies on invitation cards, hiring
and decoration of pandals, banquet hall, hotel, barat ghar or such other places
illumination and fireworks, the bridegroom's procession, luncheon or dinner and
other refreshments offered to the guests, wedding clothes, ornaments, jewellery,
garlands, any kind of gift, in cash or kind, in the form of dowry or any other local
custom;
(c) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) 'related ceremonies' includes any custom or ritual, preceding or succeeding
a marriage, such as betrothal, engagement, ring exchange, traditional sangeet
programme, mehandi, reception or any other ritualistic or traditional customs
prevailing in the place.
3. Notwithstanding any tradition or custom prevailing in any religion, community,
tribe or sect, the appropriate Government shall prescribe an  upper ceiling for the
expenditure that can be incurred in any marriage and related ceremonies of a couple, after
taking into consideration the demographic details and circumstances of the place concerned:
Provided that the appropriate Government may, if it considers necessary, make
exceptions and relax the limit of total expenditure in individual cases, based on sound
reasons and justifications for such relaxation.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being  in force,
the appropriate Government may issue directions to the local authorities for achieving the
objects of this Act.
5. Any person, who violates the provisions of this Act, or the rules framed or
directions issued there under, shall be liable to imprisonment for a term which may extend up
to one year or fine which may extend up to rupees one lakh or with both.
6. Nothing contained in this Act shall affect the validity of any marriage solemnized
under the provisions of relevant and applicable Acts or personal laws nor shall this Act be
deemed to directly or indirectly affect the validity of any mode of contracting marriage.
7. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Definitions.
Prohibition of
extravagance
on marriages
and related
ceremonies.
Appropriate
Government to
issue
directions.
Penalty.
Saving.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Marriages in India have become highly extravagant and lavish affairs, involving lakhs,
and even crores, of rupees. Instead of preserving the sanctity of the sacred union of two
individuals in life, people are using the marriages and the various ceremonies related to it
as an opportunity to show off their wealth and status, with heavily decorated Shamianas,
Banquet Halls, sumptuous feasts, special effects, professional dance and music groups,
powerful fireworks, etc. It is an open secret that, in most of such pompous weddings, any
unspecified amount of money, costly gifts, jewellery and other articles are exchanged as
'Dowry'. Even the invitation cards, which used to be very simple and meaningful, have now
become a status symbol, with each party trying to outdo the just concluded marriage
ceremony in the area. People have also started the practice of distributing costly gifts and
sweets to the Guests attending marriages and receptions and even while giving invitation
cards. Indeed, people are now thinking sky-high to add more colour and pomp to marriages,
with weddings nowadays taking place in historic places, luxury yachts, ships, planes, etc.
At this rate, it will not be far when people start planning to conduct a wedding in the Moon!
The betrothal or 'engagement' ceremony has now become a mini marriage itself,
with hundreds of guests and lavish spending. The impact of such growing extravagance in
marriages is telling upon the lower-middle and lower class people, who try to match the
unabashed and pompous rich marriages, often with borrowed money or by selling their
hard-earned assets, and later find themselves in severe debt trap. Such uncontrolled
expenditure on marriages are, in fact, break the very fabric of our society and institutionalizes
the practice of dowry and wasteful expenditure.
The real victims of these extravagant marriages are the poor people, who do not have
adequate resources to marry off their daughters and leave their lives to destiny.
It is high time that the Government take proactive steps to curb the tendency of
extravagant expenditure in marriages and related ceremonies, by enacting an appropriate
Act, to monitor regulate and control the unlimited wasteful expenditure being incurred in
the name of marriages.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL  CHINAYYA  SHETTY
March 14, 2017
3

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
4

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention and prohibition of sheer extravagance and unlimited
expenditure being incurred on marriages and related ceremonies in various
 parts of the country and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—578LS(S3)—14-06-2017.