1
THE  SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF ODISHA
BILL, 2015
BY
SHRI KALIKESH NARAYAN SINGH DEO, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Odisha for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other
Backward Sections of people, welfare of agricultural labourers,
assistance for relief and restoration of damaged infrastructure
in the State due to recurrent natural calamities and for
the development, exploitation and proper
utilization of its resources.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of Odisha
Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. 78  of  2015
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of Odisha to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be undertaken
by the State with the approval of the Government of India for the purposes of:—
(i) promoting the welfare of Schduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other
Backward Sections of people;
(ii) implementing welfare measures aimed at improving the condition of
agricultural labourers;
(iii) providing assistance to the State in matters of relief and restoration of
damaged infrastructure in the State due to recurrent natural calamities; and
(iv) development, exploitation and proper utilization of the resources in the
State.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Odisha.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
5
10

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Odisha is socially and economically backward. It has been ranked as the
most backward and least developed. Problems such as poverty, unemployment and illiteracy
are rampant and required to be addressed urgently and in a time-bound manner. It is also
essential to take up measures for proper utilization of its resources, welfare of weaker sections
in the region and for initiating new development schemes for the most economically backward
Koraput, Balangir and Kalahandi (KBK) region.
Recurrent natural calamities year after year warrants further assistance from the Centre
for relief and restoration of damaged infrastructure in the State in a time-bound manner. Due
to recurring natural calamities, the condition of agricultural labourers in the State is far from
satisfactory and their protection and welfare is of paramount importance.
The State of Odisha has also been facing the problem of Naxalite violence for a number
of years. In view of its economic backwardness, the naxalites have found sympathetic elements
within the population. Economic backwardness is the root cause of the naxalite problem. It is,
therefore, necessary that the Central Government should come forward and provide financial
assistance to the State of Odisha for its all-round development.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KALIKESH NARAYAN SINGH DEO
February 9, 2015

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation  provide, as
special financial assistance to the State of Odisha to meet the costs of such schemes of
development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of
India.
The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated
Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the State of Odisha. As the sums
of moneys which will be given to the State of Odisha as special financial assistance by
appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the welfare schemes to be
implemented by the State Government with the approval of Government of India are identified,
it is not possible at present to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be
involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to  provide  for  special  financial  assistance to the State of Odisha for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of  Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward
Sections of people, welfare  of  agricultural labourers, assistance for relief
and restoration of damaged infrastructure in the State due to recurrent
natural calamities and for the development, exploitation and
proper  utilization of its resources.
————
(Shri Kalikesh Narayan Singh Deo, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4769LS(S3)—05-03-2015.