1
Short title and
commencement.
THE CINEMATOGRAPH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
DR. SHASHI THAROOR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 4 of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act),—
(a) in sub-section (1), clause (iii) shall be omitted; and
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(3) No person apart from the Board shall sanction films for public
exhibition.".
Bill  No.  78  of  2018
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of section 4.
37 of 1952. 5
10

2
3. In section 5B of the principal Act, for sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section ( 1), the Board shall
exercise its power to certify a film for public exhibition in accordance with the guidelines
mentioned in Schedule I.".
4. In section 5C of the principal Act in sub-section (1), clause (e) shall be omitted.
5. Section 6 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
6. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "likely to cause a
breach of the peace, by order, suspend the exhibition of the film", the words "likely to cause
a breach of public order, despite taking reasonable measures to prevent the same, by order,
suspend the exhibition of the film" shall be substituted.
7. After Part IV of the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be inserted,—
"SCHEDULE  I
PART I
O
BJECTIVE OF GUIDELINES
1. These guidelines shall ensure that—
(a) Children and adults are protected from potentially harmful or otherwise unsuitable
content;
(b) Audiences, particularly parents and those with responsibility for children, are
empowered to make informed viewing decisions;
(c) Artistic expression and creative freedom are not unduly curbed in the process of
classification of films;
(d) The process of certification by Board is responsive, at all times, to social change.
PART II
CATEGORY OF CERTIFICA TION
2. Certification of a film by the Board shall be in the following categories—
(a) U—film suitable for all persons, regardless of age, and is often family friendly;
(b) U/A 12+ — film suitable for persons above twelve years of age or for a person
under the age of twelve with parental guidance;
(c) U/A 15+ — film suitable for persons (adolescents) above fifteen years or for a
person under the age of fifteen with parental guidance;
(d) A—film suitable for public exhibition, but restricted to adults;
(e) C (A with Caution)—film restricted for adults with the specific purpose of cautioning
them that it has more than a reasonable amount of content such as violence, sex, nudity,
drugs and other related contents;
(f) S—film restricted to viewership by members of a profession or any class of persons,
having regard to the nature, content and theme of the film.
PART III
G
ENERAL GUIDELINES FOR CLASSIFICA TION OF FILMS
3. There are general factors that may influence a classification decision at any level
and in connection with any issue. The following factors, and the intention of the filmmaker
Amendment of
section 5B.
Amendment of
section 5C.
Omission of
section 6.
Amendment of
section 13.
Insertion of
Schedule I.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
vis-a-vis the same, are of particular importance when a film or video is a borderline case
between two stages categories, and are to be read with Part IV of the Guidelines.
(a) Context:
The Board shall ensure that a film is examined in the light of the period depicted
in the film and the contemporary standards of the country and the people to which the
film relates to. Therefore, the context in which an issue is presented within a film or
video shall be given consideration. Factors such as the setting of a work (historical,
fantasy, realistic and contemporary), the manner of presentation of the film, the apparent
intention of the film, the original production date of the work, and any special merits of
the work may influence the classification of films.
(b) Theme:
Classification of films shall take into account the theme of a work, but shall
depend significantly on the treatment of that theme, and especially the sensitivity of
its presentation. The most challenging themes (for example, drug misuse, violence,
paedophilia, sex, racial or communal hatred or violence) are unlikely to be appropriate
at the most junior levels of classification.
(c) Tone and Impact:
The Board shall ensure that a film is judged in its entirety from the point of view
of its overall impact. The tone of the film may be an important factor in deciding the
influence it may have on various groups of people. Thus, films that have a dark and
unsettling tone may receive a higher classification. Other tonal considerations that
might have an influence on classification include the extent to which the film presents
a view of the world that in anti-life, pessimistic, or despairing or the extent to which
transgressive or harmful behaviour is condoned or made to appear normal.
(d) Target Audience:
The classification of the film shall also depend upon the target audience of the
work and the impact of such work on such audience.
PART IV
C
ATEGORIZATION GUIDELINES
4. This Part of Guidelines provides the specific approach the Board shall take for
various categories of certification from U to A-C.
(a) U
Films classified as 'U' shall be suitable for all audiences of all ages, set within a
positive framework and should offer reassuring counterbalances to any violence,
threat or horror and shall take into account:—
(i) Discrimination—Discriminatory language or behaviour shall not be
acceptable unless clearly disapproved of in the film;
(ii) Psychotropic Substances, Liquor, Smoking, Tobacco—References to
illegal drugs, or misuse of drugs, cigarettes, liquor shall be infrequent and
innocuous, or have a clear educational purpose or anti-drug message suitable
for young children;
(iii) Imitable behaviour—Potentially dangerous or anti-social behaviour
which young children may copy shall be clearly disapproved of and no emphasis
on realistic or easily accessible weapons such as knives shall be made thereto;
(iv) Language—Infrequent use only of very mild offensive language;
(v) Nudity—The work may have infrequent nudity but with no sexual
context;
(vi) Six—The work may have only very mild sexual behaviour such as
kissing, and references to such behaviour;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(vii) Fear, Threat & Horror—Scary or potentially unsettling sequences
should be mild, brief, and unlikely to cause undue anxiety to young children and
the outcome should be reassuring; and
(viii) Violence—Violence should generally be very mild and acceptable if
it is justified by context (for example, comedic animated, wholly unrealistic.
(b) U/A-12+
Films classified as 'U/A-12+' shall not unsettle a child aged around twelve or
older. Unaccompanied children of any age may watch, but parents are advised to
consider whether the content may upset younger, or more sensitive children taking
into account:—
(i) Discrimination — Discriminatory language or behaviour shall not be
acceptable unless clearly disapproved of, or in an educational or historical context,
or in a particularly dated work with no likely appeal to children. Discrimination
by a character with whom children may readily identify is unacceptable;
(ii) Psychotropic Substances, Liquor, Smoking, Tobacco — References
to illegal drugs, or misuse of drugs, cigarettes, liquor shall be infrequent and
innocuous, or have a clear educational purpose or anti-drug message suitable
for young children;
(iii) Imitable behaviour — No detail of potentially dangerous behaviour
that young children are likely to copy, if that behaviour is presented as safe or
fun. No glamorization of realistic or easily accessible weapons such knives. No
focus on anti-social behaviour which children are likely to copy;
(iv) Language — Infrequent mild offensive language use only, provided
that the theme calls for the same;
(v) Nudity — There may be nudity with no sexual context;
(vi) Sex — Sexual activity may be implied, but shall be discreet and
infrequent. Mild sex references and innuendos only;
(vii) Fear, Threat & Horror — Frightening sequences or situations where
characters are in danger shall not be prolonged or intense and fantasy settings
may be a mitigating factor; and
(viii) Violence — Violence will usually be mild. However, there may be
moderate violence, without detail, if justified by its context (for example, history,
comedy or fantasy).
(c) U/A- 15+
Films classified as U/A-15+ contain material that is generally not suitable for
children aged under fifteen but may be viewed by adolescents. No one younger than
fifteen may see a U/A-15+ film in a cinema unless accompanied by an adult. Adults
planning to take a child under fifteen to view a U/A-15+ film shall consider whether the
film is suitable for that child taking into account:—
(i) Discrimination — Discriminatory language or behaviour shall not be
endorsed by the work as a whole. Aggressive discriminatory language or
behaviour shall not be acceptable unless clearly condemned;
(ii) Psychotropic Substances, Liquor, Smoking, Tobacco — Misuse of
drugs, cigarettes, liquor, shall be infrequent and shall not glamorized or give
instructional detail;
(iii) Imitable behaviour — No promotion of potentially dangerous
behaviour which children are likely to copy. No glamorization of realistic or
easily accessible weapons such as knives;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(iv) Language — There may be moderate language. Abuse, vulgar and
sadistic expression may be permitted, depending on the manner in which it is
used, who is using the language, its frequency within the work as a whole and
any special justification;
(v) Nudity — There may be nudity, but very discreet sexual context;
(vi) Sex — Sexual activity may be discreetly portrayed. Moderate sex
references are permitted, provided that they have a place in the context of the
narrative of the film;
(vii) Fear, Threat & Horror — There may be moderate physical and
psychological fear inducing and horror sequences. Although some scenes may
be disturbing, the overall tone should not be so. Horror sequences shall not be
frequent or sustained;
(viii) Violence — There may be moderate violence but it shall not dwell on
detail. There shall be no emphasis on injuries or blood, but occasional gory
moments may be permitted if justified by context. Sexual violence may only be
implied or briefly, and discreetly indicated, and its depiction shall be justified by
context;
(d )  A
Films classified as 'A' are suitable only for persons of the age of eighteen years
and above taking into account:—
(i) Discrimination — While there may be discriminatory themes and
languages in the film, the film as a whole shall not endorse or glorify
discriminatory language or behavour;
(ii) Psychotropic Substances, Liquor, Smoking, Tobacco — Imbibing of
these elements may be shows, but the work as a whole shall not promote or
encourage misuse of the same. The misuse of easily accessible and highly
dangerous substances (for example, aerosols or solvents) is not acceptable;
(iii) Imitable behaviour — Dangerous behaviour (for example, committing
suicide or inflicting self-harm) shall not be shown in detail that could be copied
by others. Context, realism and setting shall determine the acceptability of
depiction of easily accessible weapons;
(iv) Language — Very strong language, including abuse and vulgar words
is permitted;
(v) Nudity—There may be nudity, even in a sexual context, but without
explicit detail;
(vi) Sex—Sexual activity may be portrayed but without strong detail.
References to sexual behaviour is permitted, but very strong reference can only
be justified in context. Works whose primary purpose is sexual arousal or
stimulation is not acceptable;
(vii) Fear, Threat & Horror—There may be strong threat and horror. A
sustained focus on sadistic or sexual threat is not acceptable;
(viii) Violence—Strong violence is permitted, but explicit gory images are
not acceptable. Strong sadistic violence is not acceptable, there may be detailed
verbal references to sexual violence but the depiction of sexual violence must be
discreet and justified by context.
(e) A-C
(i) Films categorizes as A-C are suitable only for adults above the age of
18 years, with the caution that the film has more than a reasonable amount of
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
content falling under restricted categories such as violence, sex, nudity and
drugs;
(ii) Films under this category shall not qualify for certification in the event
of the following—
(1) Where the material is in breach of criminal law, or has been
created though the commission of a criminal offence;
(2) Where material or treatment appears to the Board to risk harm to
individuals;
For example, the detailed portrayal of violent or dangerous acts, or
of illegal use of psychotropic substances, which may cause of public harm
or morals. Other examples may include portrayals of sadistic or sexual
violence that make this violence looking appealing; reinforce the
suggestion that victims enjoy sexual violence; or films that invite viewer
complicity in sexual violence or other harmful violent activities;
(3) Where the work is pornographic in nature and or compromises
explicit sexual activity or dialogue that is non-contextual in nature. However,
any sexually explicit material for educational purposes shall be allowed;
(4) Where the work involves sadistic or sexual violence with children;
(5) Where the work, including its dialogues, are likely to encourage
an interest in sexually abusive activity which may include adults role-
playing as non-adults.
(f) S
Films categorized as S are meant for viewership for members of a profession or
any class of persons, having regard to the nature, content and theme of the film, fall
under this category.
PART V
C
LASSIFICA TION OF A FILM BY BOARD
5. (i) When an applicant producer or distributor submits the final cut of the film to the
Board, he shall specify his target audience and the classification sought. If the Board is of
the view that the film can be certified by them as per the preceding guidelines for certification,
the Board shall inform the producer/distributor about the likely classification the work will
receive and reasons for such decision.
(ii) If the applicant producer/distributor does not accept a particular classification
given to its film, he shall have the liberty to effect changes to the film and resubmit the
same to the Board for achieving the desired category.
(iii) The Board shall not propose or make any cuts, revisions or modifications to
the film to meet any of the classification categories.
(iv) The Board may, in the event that it is of the view that the film does not merit
classification under any category in accordance with the Guidelines contained herein,
refuse to accord certification under any of the above categories, and record its reasons
in writing for such decision.
(v) The Board shall, while refusing the certification, communicate the reasons for
so doing to the applicant producer or distributor and due opportunity shall be given to
him to be heard before such an order is passed, in which reasons for refusal of
certification shall be recorded in detail by the concerned authority:
Provided that the applicant shall be given a period of fifteen days, from the date
of communication of reasons, to respond and submit his argument in favour of the
classification sought.".
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The freedom of speech and expression guaranteed to all citizens of India under article
19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India is a fundamental basis for the manifestation of all forms
of liberties.
Artistic freedom is an essential part of the freedom of speech and expression, the
pursuit of art is integral to the cultural development of our country. Artists, particularly film
makers should have a wide scope of freedom to express their various ideas and skills. The
State may regulate artistic freedom only under the grounds enumerated under article 19(2) of
the Constitution, not due to disagreement with the content of the film.
The exceptions to the freedom of speech and expression must be interpreted and read
in a strict and narrow manner. The power to regulate cinema must be exercised in exceptional
situations, and only due to an overriding compelling public interest.
The pre-censorship powers of the Central Board of Film Certification and the revisional
powers of the Union Government constitute a paternalistic policy, which is incompatible
with the polity of a mature democracy. The mandate of the Central Board of Film Certification
should be strictly confined to the certification of films. The power to certify a film should rest
exclusively with the Central Board of Film Certification and should not be supplanted by
another entity. The power to certify a film should not be exercised in an arbitrary fashion, but
in accordance with reasonable statutory guidelines.
The State has the positive mandate to uphold the space for free speech as guaranteed
by the Constitution, and ensure strict action is taken against lawless elements which try to
disrupt the free flow of cinematic expression. The State should only resort to the power of
suspension of films as a last resort in order to maintain public order, after taking all necessary
steps to prevent the disruption of public order. It is necessary that these principles are
reflected in the Cinematograph Act, 1952.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHASHI THAROOR
January, 30, 2018.
7

ANNEXURE
(EXTRACT FROM THE CINEMA TOGRAPHY ACT, 1952)
(ACT NO. 37 OF 1952)
* * * * * * *
4. (1) Any person desiring to exhibit any film shall in the prescribed manner make an
application to the Board for a certificate in respect thereof, and the Board may, after examin-
ing or having the film examined in the prescribed manner,—
(i) sanction the film for unrestricted public exhibition:
Provided that, having regard to any material in the film, if the Board is of the
opinion that it is necessary to caution that the question as to whether any child below
the age of twelve years may be allowed to see such a film should be considered by the
parents or guardian of such child, the Board may sanction the film for unrestricted
public exhibition with an endorsement to that effect; or
(ii) sanction the film for public exhibition restricted to adults; or
(iia) sanction the film for public exhibition restricted to members of any profes-
sion or any class of persons, having regard to the nature, content and theme of the
film; or
(iii) direct the applicant to carry out such excisions or modifications in the film as
it thinks necessary before sanctioning the film for public exhibition under any of the
foregoing clauses; or
(iv) refuse to sanction the film for public exhibition.
(2) No action under 1 [the proviso to clause (i), clause (ii),  clause (iia), clause (iii) or
clause (iv)] of sub-section (1) shall be taken by the Board except after giving an opportunity
to the applicant for representing  his views in the matter.
* * * * * * *
5B. (1) * * * * * *
(2) subject to the provisions contained in sub-section ( 1), the Central Government
may issue such directions as it may think fit setting out the principles which shall guide the
authority competent to grant certificates under this Act in sanctioning films for public
exhibition.
* * * * * * *
5C. (1) Any person applying for a certificate in respect of a film who is aggrieved by
any order of the Board—
(a) * * * * * *
(b) * * * * * *
(c) * * * * * *
(d) * * * * * *
(e) * * * * * *
may, within thirty days from the date of such order, prefer an appeal to the Tribunal:
Provided that the Tribunal may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the aforesaid period of thirty days, allow such
appeal to be admitted within a further period of thirty days.
* * * * * * *
Examination
of films.
Principles of
guidance in cer-
tifying films.
Appeals.
8

9
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, the Central Government [may,
of its own motion, at any stage,] call for the record of any proceeding in relation to any film
which is pending before, or has been decided by, the Board, or, as the case may be, decided
by the Tribunal (but not including any proceeding in respect of any matter which is pending
before the Tribunal) and after such inquiry, into the matter as is considers necessary, make
such order in relation thereto as it thinks fit, and the Board shall dispose off the matter in
conformity with such order:
Provided that no such order shall be made prejudicially affecting any person applying
for a certificate or to whom a certificate has been granted, as the case may be, except after
giving him an opportunity for representing his views in the matter:
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall require the Central Government
to disclose any fact which it considers to be against public interest to disclose.
(2) Without prejudice to the powers conferred on it under sub-section (1), the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that—
(a) a film which has been granted a certificate shall be deemed to be an uncertified
film in the whole or any part of India; or
(b) a film which has been granted a "U" certificate [or a "UA" certificate or a "S"
certificate] shall be deemed to be a film in respect of which an "A" certificate has been
granted; or
(c) the exhibition of any film be suspended for such period as may be specified
in the direction: Provided that no direction issued under clause (c) shall remain in force
for more than two months form the date of the notification.
(3) No action shall be taken under clause ( a) or clause (b) of sub-section (2) except
after giving an opportunity to the person concerned for representing his views in the matter.
(4) During the period in which a film remains suspended under clause ( c) of
sub-section (2), the film shall be deemed to be an uncertified film.
* * * * * * *
13. (1) The Lieutenant-Governor or, as the case may be, the Chief Commissioner, in
respect of the whole or any part of a Union territory, and the District Magistrate in respect of
the district within his jurisdiction, may, if he is of opinion that any film which is being
publically exhibited is likely to cause a breach of the peace, by order suspend the exhibition
of the film and during such suspension the film shall be deemed to be an uncertified film in
the State, part or district, as the case may be.
* * * * * * *
Revisional
powers of the
Central
Government.
Power of
Central
Government
or local
authority to
suspend
exhibition of
films in
certain cases.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952.
————
(Dr. Shashi Tharoor, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4022LS(S3)—05-03-2018.