AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

‘3 DEC 204

Bill No. 78 of 2004

THE BAN ON WITCHCRAFT BILL, 2004
By
SHRIMATI KARUNA SHUKLA, M.P.

A
BILL
to provide for ban on witchcraft in any form in the country.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called the Ban on Witchcraft Act, 2004.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as, the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

s (3) it extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—

(a) ‘advertisement’ means any notice, circular, lable, wrapper or other document
and includes any visible representation of witchcraft by means of any light or sound but
does not include any publication which is of any interest in the field of science, literature, art

10 or learning or of general concern;

(७) prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and

(c) ‘witchcraft’ means an act of magic, casting spells or sorcery or voodoo which is.
practised with a view to help or harm other persons,

Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

Definitions.


Banning of
witchcraft,

Ban on
advertisement
of witchcraft
in any form.

Punishment,

Offences
committed
under this Act
are
cognizable
and non-
tailable,

Overriding
‘effect of the
Act.

Power to
make rules,

2
3. Notwithstanding. anything to the contrary contained in any custom of any |
tribe or religion there shall be a complete ban on the practice of witheraft in any form.

4. No person shall practise or cause to be Practised, promote or cause to be prot
advertise or cause to be advertised any act of witchcraft in any form.

5. Any person who contravenes the Provisions of this Act shall be punishable
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall be not less than five years,

6. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the
being in force, any offence punishable under this Act shall be deemed to be a cognizable:
non-bailable offence,

7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsi
Contained therein to any other law for the time being in force.

f. The Central Government may, by notification inthe Official Gazette, makes rules
carrying out the purposes of the Act.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS:

The United Nations Organisation has released a comprehensive report in which it has
expressed its concern at the number of murders ascribed to witch-hunting. India has been
named alongwith other underdeveloped countries as a high incidence zone for witchcraft
related killings. Generally, women are branded as ‘witch’ and they are harassed, tortured,
insulted and even murdered in the name of witchcraft by their relatives or so called witchhunters
in cold blood. These victims undergo a traumatic experience and suffer a lot throughout their
lives. Such incidents are occurring throughout the country particularly in the tribal areas.
Due to the absence of any specific legislation to deal with the crimes of witchcraft, the
assailants are booked under existing ordinary laws. All this results in easy acquittal of guilty
persons.

Itis, therefore, necessary to enact a law to put a blanket ban on the practice of witchcraft
and to provide for rigorous punishment for practising or promoting or advertising witchcraft
in any form, It will also help to prevent the atrocities committed on women in the name of
witchcraft.

Hence this Bill.

New Detui; KARUNA SHUKLA
July 27,2004


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of
legislative power is of anormal character.

to make rules for carrying |
f detail only, the delegation of


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
to provide for ban on witchcraft in any form in the country,

(Shrimati Karuna Shukla, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—2343LS—29.09.2004,