As introduced in Lok Sabha
 
Bill No. 78 of 2025
THE HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS AND CLINICAL 
ESTABLISHMENTS (PREVENTION OF VIOLENCE)  
BILL, 2025
By
Dr. Bachha v Shobha Dinesh, M.P.
a
BILL
to provide for the protection of healthcare professionals and clinical establishments 
from violence, harassment, and damage or loss to property in the course of their  
duty and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
 Whereas, acts of violence causing injury or danger to life of healthcare 
professionals and damage or loss to the property of clinical establishments are on 
the increase in the country creating unrest among healthcare professionals resulting 
in hindrance to healthcare services in the country;
And Whereas, to protect healthcare professionals and clinical establishments 
from violence, it has become necessary to prohibit such acts of violence, to provide 
for punishment by making such acts of violence as cognizable and non-bailable 
offence and to provide compensation for injury to healthcare professionals or for 
causing damage or loss to the property of clinical establishments;

5
10
15
20
25
2
30
Definitions.
35
40
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called Healthcare Professionals and Clinical 
Establishments (Prevention of Violence) Act, 2025.
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “by-stander” means an observer, on-looker, spectator or any other 
person ordinarily present at ‘locus-delicti’ irrespective of his affinity to the 
doctor, medical professional or the medical institution in question; and suffers 
any loss or damage by virtue of his presence at the place of offence; 
(b) “clinical establishment” means the clinical establishment as defined 
under clause (c) of section 2 of the Clinical Establishments (Registration and 
Regulation) Act, 2010;
(c) “damage” includes loss or harm to property, whether in whole or in 
part, without taking possession of the property that renders it inadequate for its 
designated purpose or wholly or partially incapable of performing its function;
(d) “healthcare professional” means a registered medical or dental or 
alternative medicine practitioners including those having provisional registration 
by any recognized body by the Government of India as well as all those persons 
who practice or profess services associated to medical profession including 
those of nurses, radiologists, technicians, medical social workers, pharmacists, 
medical administrators, para-medical staff and practitioners including those 
seeking or imparting medical education, as the case may be;
(e) “patient” means any recipient of healthcare services;
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) “property” means any property movable or immovable, medical 
equipment or machinery; owned by or in possession of or under the, control of 
any healthcare professional or clinical establishment; and
(h) “violence” means includes any of the following acts committed by any 
person or persons against healthcare professional in the course of their duty, 
which causes, may cause or attempts to cause,—
(i) physical or mental harm, injury, intimidation, threat to life, including 
verbal abuse;
(ii) acts inciting online or digital harassment, including doxxing, 
trolling, threats, or coordinated campaigns inciting violence;
(iii) endangers the safety of or causes obstruction or hindrance to 
any healthcare professional in discharge of their duties either within the 
premises of a healthcare institution or otherwise; and 
(iv) loss or damage to any property or documents in the custody of, or 
in relation to, such healthcare professional or clinical establishment.
3. No person shall indulge in any act of violence against a healthcare professional 
or cause any damage or loss to property owned by or under the care of healthcare 
professional or in connection with or incidental to their activities in a clinical 
establishment.
Prohibition 
of violence or 
damage to 
property.
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 
23 of 2010
45

3
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
4. Any offence committed under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable 
and triable by the Court of Judicial Magistrate of the First Class. 
5. (1) Whoever, commits or attempts to commit or abets or incites the 
commission of any act of violence in infringement of the provisions of section 3, 
shall be punished with imprisonment which shall not be less than three years but 
which may extend up to ten years and with fine which shall not be less than rupees 
fifty thousand but which may extend upto rupees twenty lakh in addition to recovery 
of the entire damage to the property or belonging of all concerned including the  
by-standers if any, in actual.
(2) Whoever, commits or attempts to commit or abets or incites the commission 
of any act of violence causing grievous hurt or death of healthcare professional, 
shall be punished with imprisonment which shall not be less than seven years but 
which may extend to life imprisonment, and with fine which shall not be less than 
rupees five lakh but which may extend upto rupees fifty lakh in addition to recovery 
of the entire damage to the property or belonging of all concerned including the  
by-standers if any, in actual.
(3) If the convicted does not pay or is financially incompetent to pay the penalty 
at that time it shall be recovered as if it were an arrear of land revenue under the 
Revenue Recovery Act, 1890.
 6.  Where it is established at any stage that no violation of the provisions of 
this Act was committed and the charge levied against the accused was false and 
malicious, the person levelling such false charge shall be prosecuted under the 
relevant provisions of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
 7.  In addition to any other responsibility of a clinical establishment or a 
healthcare professional under any law for the time being in force, it shall be the 
responsibility of each clinical establishment to,—
(a) take all necessary measures to prevent violence and harassment against 
healthcare professionals in the course of their duty, which includes measures 
such as to install CCTV surveillance, emergency alarms, trained security 
personnel, or other such security measures;
(b) establish a mechanism for reporting incidents of violence and harassment 
against healthcare professionals; and
(c) provide necessary support and assistance to healthcare professionals 
who are victims of violence or harassment in the course of their duty.
8. The Central Government shall, —
(a) establish a National Helpline for reporting violence against 
healthcare professionals and clinical establishments;
(b) create awareness about mental health and illness and for reducing 
the stigma associated with mental illness among healthcare professionals;
(c) encourage healthcare professionals to seek support and care for their 
mental health, to help such professionals identify risk factors associated 
with suicide and mental health conditions, and to help such professionals 
learn to respond to such risks, with the goal of preventing suicide and 
mental health conditions under the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017;
(d) set up peer support groups among healthcare professionals and 
provide mental healthcare and follow-up services, as appropriate; and 
(e) conduct a review on improving healthcare professionals’ mental 
health and the outcomes of programs authorized under this Act.
Punishment for 
false charge.
Responsibilities 
of clinical 
establishments.
Measures for 
supporting 
healthcare 
professionals.
Penalty and 
compensation.
Cognizance of 
offence.
1 of 1890
45 of 2023
45

4
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the 
time being in force.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of 
any other law for the time being in force. 
11. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide, from time to time, adequate funds 
for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
12. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be 
necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a 
period of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament. 
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
Central 
Government to 
provide funds.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties.
Power of 
Central 
Government to 
make rules.
Act to have 
overriding 
effect.
Act to 
supplement 
other laws. 5
10
15
20
25

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Access to quality health services is a right of every Indian citizen, with 
investments made in medical education, and medical facilities. Since independence, 
health services have made tremendous progress in India. India’s healthcare workforce 
has already exceeded 6 million as of 2024, and anticipated to experience further 
growth. Yet the issues faced by the healthcare workers: doctors, nurses and medical 
practitioners alike, have been rarely addressed. The Indian healthcare workforce 
is in a state of deep crisis, characterised by extremely long working hours, low 
income, severe lack of safety and general apathy from the public.  
The Indian Medical Association (IMA) estimates that 75 percent of all doctors 
face some form of verbal and physical abuse during their service, with cases of 
violence severely underreported. High risk of violence makes it difficult for our 
medical staff to provide care, thereby, reducing healthcare access for the common 
man. The increasing violence against healthcare professionals must be addressed 
on a priority basis.
Existing, legislative framework, including the central level and State level laws, 
including the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and Bhartiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 
2023, fail to comprehensively addresses this issue. While ‘Health’ and ‘Law and 
Order’ are State subjects, the Parliament is competent to legislate on matters related 
to ‘Legal, Medical and other professions’ as listed in Entry 26, List 3 (Concurrent 
List) of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. 
This, therefore, necessitates a comprehensive central legislation to provide for 
safety and security of healthcare professionals in the country.
The proposed Bill would enable for the establishment of a mechanism for the 
protection and compensation of healthcare professionals who are victims of violence 
or harassment, and imposes obligation on clinical establishments to prevent and 
report such incidents.
By creating a framework that prevents violence, supports victims, and holds 
offenders accountable, this Bill not only enhances the quality of healthcare services 
but also protects the fundamental rights and safety of those working in the healthcare 
sector.
Hence this Bill.
  New Delhi;                                                          BACHHA V SHOBHA DINESH
July 4, 2025.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 8 of the Bill provides for special measures for supporting healthcare 
professionals such as establishment of a National Helpline for reporting of 
violence against healthcare professionals and clinical establishments and 
creating awareness about mental health and illness and reducing the stigma 
associated with mental illness among healthcare professionals. Clause 11 
provides that the Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide, from time to time, adequate funds for 
carrying out the purpose of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted and brought 
into operation, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of estimated a sum of rupees one 
hundred crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also 
likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail 
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to provide for the protection of healthcare professionals and clinical establishments 
from violence, harassment, and damage or loss to property in the course of their  
duty and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Dr. Bachhav Shobha Dinesh, M.P .) 