1
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of section 6.
Bill No. 78  of  2010
THE MAHATMA GANDHI NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT
GUARANTEE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
By
SHRI HANSRAJ GANGARAM AHIR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
Act, 2005
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 6 of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
Act, 2005, in sub-section (1), in the second proviso, for the words "sixty rupees per day",
the words "one hundred and fifty rupees per day" shall be substituted.
42  of  2005.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 is being
implemented in the selected districts of the country wherein every household in rural areas
is being provided with unskilled manual work for not less than one hundred days in a
financial year. Under section 6 (1) of Chapter III of the Act, the wage rate has been fixed at not
less than rupees sixty per day. Any worker who is provided with work for one hundred days
in a financial year can earn a maximum wage of rupees six thousand only. It means that the
family of the worker would be surviving on just rupees five hundred per month.
Keeping in view the rising prices of essential commodities and changing lifestyle, it is
virtually impossible for any household to have a decent standard of living on a monthly
income of five hundred rupees. It is imperative to increase this amount. It is impossible to
ensure nutritious diet etc. at such a meagre wages for the poor families of agricultural
workers, tribals engaged in agricultural work. For want of nutritious diet, 75 per cent. of
children are underweight in the country. Further, in the absence of nutritious diet, the rural
populace is becoming victim to infectious diseases. Hence, the wages provided under the
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 appears meagre and there
is an urgent need to increase the wages so as to enhance their purchasing power and intake
of nutritious food. In order to enable a respectable livelihood and an increase in the intake of
nutritious diet of the rural household, it appears reasonable that the daily wage be fixed at
least at rupees one hundred and fifty per day under this Act.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; HANSRAJ  GANGARAM  AHIR
July 10, 2010.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for increasing the daily wages from rupees sixty to
rupees one hundred and fifty. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be
involved.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE MAHATMA GANDHI NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE  ACT,  2005
(ACT  NO. 42 OF 2005)
CHAPTER  III
* * * * * * *
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, the
Central Government may, by notification, specify the wage rate for the purposes of this Act:
Provided that different rates of wages may be specified for different areas:
Provided further that the wage rate specified from time to time under any such
notification shall not be at a rate less than sixty rupees per day.
* * * * * * *
4
11 of 1948.Wage rate.

GMGIPMRND—3099LS(S3)—03-08-2010.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
Act, 2005.
————
(Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir , M.P .)