THE LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follow:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Life Insurance Corporation  (Amendment) Act, 2008.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act) for section 5, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
"5. The paid up equity capital of the Corporation shall be one hundred crore of
rupees provided by the Central Government after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law for the purpose and which may be enhanced to such an amount as the Central
Government may, by notification, determine.".
Short title and
commencement.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 5.
Capital of
Corporation.
31 of 1956.
Bill No.  78  of  2008
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. In section 18 of the principal Act, sub section (4) shall be omitted.
4. In section 26 of the principal Act, for the words "once at least in every two years",
the words "every year" shall be substituted.
5. For section 28 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"28. (1) If as a result of any investigation undertaken by the Corporation under
section 26, any surplus emerges,—
(a) ninety per cent. or more such surplus, as the Central Government may
approve, shall be allocated to or reserved for the life insurance policy-holders of
the Corporation;
(b) such percentage of remaining surplus as the Central Government may
approve shall be credited to separate account maintained by the Corporation;
and
(c) the remainder shall be paid as dividend.
(2) The funds available in the account maintained by the Corporation under
clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall be utilised for such purpose and in such manner as
the Central Government may determine.”.
6. In section 37 of  the principal Act, for the words "by the Central Government", the
words "to the extent as the Central Government  may, by order, from time to time, determine"
shall be substituted.
7. In section 44 of  the principal Act, clause (b) shall be omitted.
8. In section 48 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (cc), the words “and
agents" occurring at both the places, shall be omitted.
9. In section 49 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(i) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(b) the method of recruitment of employees and agents of the Corporation
and the terms and conditions of the agents;".
(ii) clause (j) shall be omitted.
Amendment
of section 18.
Amendment
of section 26.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 28.
Surplus from
life insurance
business, how
to be utilised.
Amendment
of section 37.
Amendment
of section 44.
Amendment
of section 48.
Amendment
of section 49.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 (the LIC Act) nationalised the life insurance
business in India by transferring all life insurance business to a Corporation, namely, the Life
Insurance Corporation of  India (LIC), established for the purpose. This Act also provided
for the regulation and  control of the insurance business of the LIC. The Insurance Act, 1938,
however, remained as the principal law to regulate and exercise supervision over all entities
transacting insurance business in India. With the enactment of the Insurance Regulatory
and Development Authority Act, 1999, the insurance business was opened up to the private
sector, as a result of which, in addition to LIC, presently twenty private sector companies
have started transacting life insurance business in our country.
2. The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) while recommending
amendments to the Insurance Act, 1938, the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
Act, 1999 and the General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 also made
recommednations for amendment in the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 in order to
bring this Act in consonance with the Insurance Act, 1938. The Government, in consultation
with the LIC, finalised amendments to the LIC Act.
3. The Life Insurance Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2008 proposes to amend the LIC
Act, inter alia, to:—
(i) provide for raising  of minimum capital of the Life Insurance Corporation of India
from five crore of rupees to one hundred crore of rupees which can further be
enhanced to such amount as the Central Government may, by notification,
determine;
(ii) provide sovereign guarantee to the policies of LIC to the extent to be determined,
by order, by the Central Government from time to time; and
(iii) allocate ninety per cent. or more of such surplus, as the Central Government may
approve, for the life insurance policy-holders of the LIC and to credit such
percentage of remaining surplus, as the Central Government may approve, to a
separate account maintained by the Corporation, to be utilised for such purpose
as the  Central Government may determine, and pay the remainder as dividend.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; PAWAN KUMAR BANSAL.
The 4th December, 2008.
————
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 OF AND 274 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
————
[Copy of letter No. H-12018/1/2006-Ins.IV, dated the 12th December, 2008 from
Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal, Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance to the Secretary-
General, Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the proposed Life Insurance
Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2008 recommends under clause (1) of article 117 and clause
(1) of article 274 of the Constitution the introduction of the above Bill in Lok Sabha.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Life Insurance Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2008 seeks to raise the
minimum capital of the Life Insurance Corporation of India from five crore of rupees to one
hundred crore of rupees which may be enhanced to such amount as the Central Government
may, by notification, determine. The Bill, if enacted, will involve enhancement of share capital
by ninety-five crore of rupees to be provided by the Government of India  after due
appropriation made by Parliament, by law, for the said purpose.
The provisions of the Bill do not involve any other recurring or non-recurring
expenditure.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION ACT, 1956
(31 OF 1956)
*****
5. (1) The original capital of the Corporation shall be five crores of rupees provided by
the Central Government after due appropriation made by Parliament by law for the purpose,
and the terms and conditions relating to the provision of such capital shall be such as may be
determined by the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government may, on the recommendation of the Corporation, reduce
the capital of the Corporation to such extent and in such maner as the Central Government
may determine.
*****
CHAPTER V
M
ANAGEMENT
18. (1) * * * * *
(4) There may be established as many divisional offices and branches in each zone as
the Zonal Manager thinks fit.
*****
26. The Corporation shall, once at least in every two years, cause an investigation to
be made by actuaries into the financial condition of the life insurance business of the
Corporation, including a valuation of the liabilities of the Corporation in respect thereto, and
submit the report of the actuaries to the Central Government.
*****
28. If as a result of any investigation undertaken by the Corporation under section 26
any surplus emerges, ninety-five per cent. of such surplus or such higher percentage thereof
as the Central Government may approve shall be allocated to or reserved for the life insurance
policy-holders of the Corporation and after meeting the liabilities of the Corporation, if any,
which may arise under section 9, the remainder shall be paid to the Central Government or, if
that Government so directs, be utilised for such purposes and in such manner as that
Government may determine.
*****
37. The sums assured by all policies issued by the Corporation including any bonuses
declared in respect thereof and, subject to the provisions contained in section 14, the amounts
assured by all policies issued by any insurer the liabilities under which have vested in the
Corporation under this Act, and all bonuses declared in respect thereof, whether before or
after the appointed day, shall be guaranteed as to payment in cash by the Central Government.
*****
44. Nothing contained in this Act shall apply in relation to—
* * * * *
(b) any insurer to whom the Insurance Act does not apply by reason of the
provisions contained in section 2E thereof;
*****
5
Capital of the
Corporation.
Officers,
branches and
agencies.
Actuarial
valuations.
Surplus from
life insurance
business how
to be utilised.
Policies to be
guaranteed by
Central
Government.
Act not to
apply in
certain cases.

6
Power to
make
regulations.
Power to
make rules.
48. (1) * * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
*****
(cc) the terms and conditions of service of the employees and agents of the Corporation,
including those who became employees and agents of the Corporation on the appointed day
under this Act.
*****
49. (1) * * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for—
*****
(b) the method of recruitment of employees and agents of the Corporation;
*****
(j) the form and manner in which policies may be issued and contracts binding
on the Corporation may be executed;
*****

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
Bill
further to amend the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956.
————
(Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal, Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance )
GMGIPMRND—4419LAW(S-1)—16-12-2008.