1
THE SANSKRIT LANGUAGE (COMPULSORY TEACHING
IN SCHOOLS) BILL, 2012
By
DR. BHOLA SINGH, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of Sanskrit language in schools and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1)  This Act may be called the Sanskrit Language (Compulsory Teaching in Schools)
Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; and
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 78 of  2012
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
3. From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette specify, the Sanskrit language shall be taught as a compulsory subject in all schools.
4. The appropriate Government shall, immediately after issuance of the notification
under section 3, issue directions for compulsory teaching of Sanskrit language in all schools
from such class onwards as it may determine, within its jurisdiction.
5. Subject to such rules, as may be prescribed, the appropriate Government shall
ensure appointment of such number of teachers with such qualifications, as may be specified,
for teaching Sanskrit language in schools.
6.  Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall
apply to minority institutions only if the management of such institutions convey to the
appropriate Government their willingness to include the Sanskrit language in their school
curriculum.
7. The appropriate Government shall derecognize such schools, which do not comply
with the provisions of section 4, after giving such institution a reasonable opportunity of
being heard.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the States for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Compulsory
teaching of
Sanskrit
language in
schools.
Act to apply
to minority
educational
institutions in
certain
situation.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
make rules.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Appropriate
Government
to issue
directions for
compulsory
teaching of
Sanskrit
language in
schools.
Appointment
of Sanskrit
language
teachers.
Derecognition
of schools for
non-
compliance of
the provisions
of the Act.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Sanskrit language represents the soul of India. It has been the vehicle of Indian
thoughts for millions. Sanskrit contains literature of exemplary value and the finest Indian
minds found the expression in it.
It is indeed very sad that such a language has suffered utter neglect. Although, it is
included in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution, enough has not been done to promote
it. In a situation where the new generation is running away from its own roots and has
developed a contempt for the cultural traditions of our country, the importance of teaching
Sanskrit becomes a matter of crucial importance. The time has come when we must make
sincere efforts to make the new generation aware of the great traditions of India. Teaching of
Sanskrit in schools will enable our children to identify themselves with noble traditions and
thoughts of our country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHOLA  SINGH
July 23, 2012.
3

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for appointment of Sanskrit language teachers in all
schools. Clause 8 provides for payment of adequate funds to the States for carrying out the
purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten
crore will be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of Sanskrit language in schools and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Bhola Singh, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1988LS(S3)—14.08.2012.