BID No. " 0' ItS'. 
THE FINANCE (No. 3) BILL, 1956 
(nm INTRODUCED IN LOOK SABRA) 

Bill No. 79 of 1956. 
THE FINANCE (No.3) BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
Bll.L 
further to amend the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, for the purpose 
of imposing a tax on capital gains and for certain other purposes 
and to prescribe the rate of super-tax on companies for the 
financial year 1957-58. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Finance (No.3) Act, 1956. 
(2) It shall come into force on the 1st day of April, 1957. 
Short title 
and com-
mencement. 
S 2. In section 2 of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (hereinafter AmeD~nt 
referred to as the principal Act), in the Explanation to clause (6A) , of sectIOn 2. 
the following shall be inserted at the end, namely:-
"and before the 1st day of April, 1956." 
3. After sub-section (2A) of section 10 of the principal Act, the Amendment 
10 following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:- of lection 10-
"(2B) Where for the pUrpoSe of computing under this sec-
tion the profits or gains of, a company for any previous year an 
allowance is made under clause (vi), clause (via), clause (vib) 
IS or clause (vii) of sub-section (2) an amount equal to the sum 
of all the allowances so made shall be included in the total 
income of the previous year as "profits and gains" unless the 
company deposits with the Central Government before the 30th 
day of June of the year succeeding the previous year-
such percentage, not exceeding twenty-five, as may, from time 
to time, be notified by the Central Government, of the accu-
mulated profits and reserves of the company as at the end of 
the year preceding the previous year, to the extent to which 
such profits and reserves are not represented by the fixed ,assets 
of the company, plu.s 
such percentage, not exceeding seventy-five, as may, from 
time to time, be notified by the Central Government, of the 
amount by which the sum of the following amounts, namely:-
(a) the total income of the company for the previous 
year, as reduced by the amount of income-tax and super-tax 
payable in respect thereof. and by the dividends, if any 
declared during the previous year, and 

Substitution 
of new 
ICCtion for 
lCCtion I2B. 
Capital gains. 
2 
(b) the sum of the allowances made under the· clauses 
aforesaid 
exceeds the sum of rupees one lalm. 
(2C) The Central Government may make rules providing 
for the manner in which the deposits referred to in sub-section , 
(2B) may be made, the time when and the manner in which 
refunds of any such deposit shall be made whether with or 
without interest, and in particular the r~fund at any time of any 
such deposit or part thereof where the refund is claimed for 
carrying out any such purpose connected with the business of 10 
the company as is approved by the Central Government." 
4. For section 12B of the principal Act, the following shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"12B. (1) The tax shall be payable by an assessee under the 
head "Capital Gains" in respect of any profits or gains arising IS 
from the sale, exchange, relinquishment or transfer of a capital 
asset effected after the 31st day of March, 1956, and such profits 
and gains shall be deemed to be income of the previous year 
in which the sale, exchange, relinquishment or transfer took 
place: I , ..... ,20 
Provided that any distribution of capital assets on the total 
or partial partition of a Hindu undivided family or under a deed 
of gift, bequest or will shall not for the purposes of this section 
be treated as a sale, exchange, relinquishment or transfer of 
the capital assets: 2S 
Provided further that the transfer of a capital asset by a 
company to a subsidiary company, the whole of the share capital 
of which is held by the parent company or by the nominees 
ther!,?of, shall not be treated as a sale, exchange or transfer 
within the meaning of this section where the subsidiary company 30 
is resident in the taxable territories and is registered under the 
Indian Companies Act, 1956, so howev~r that for the purposes 
of clause (vi) or clause (vii) of sub-section (2) of section 10, 
the cost or the written down value, as the case may be, of the 
transferred capital asset shall be taken to be the same as it 35 
would have been if the parent company had· continued to hold 
the capital asset for the purposes of its business. 
(2) The amount of a capital gain shall be computed after 
making the following deductions from the full value of the 
consideration for which the sale, exchange, relinquishment or 40 
transfer of the capital asset is made, namely:-
"Ci) expenditure incurred solely in conne~tion with 
such sale, exchange, relinquishment or transfer; 
(ii) the actual cost to the assessee of the. capital asset, 
including any expenditure of a capital nature incurred and 4S 
borne by him in making an): additions or alterations thereto, 
but e~cluding any expenditure in respect of which any 
allowance is admissible under any provision of seotions 8, 9, 
10 and 12: 
. Provided that where a person who acquires 8 capital asset So 
from the assessee, whether by sale, exchange, relinquishment or 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
35 
45 
50 
3 
tt:ansfer is a person with whom the assessee is directly or in-
directly connected, and the Income-tax Officer has reason to 
believe that the sale, exchange, relinquishment or transfer was 
effected with the object of avoidance or reduction of the liability 
of the assessee under this section, the full value of the consi- • 
deration for which the sale, exchange, relinquishment or transfer 
is made shall, with the prior approval of the Inspecting Assistant 
Commissioner of Income-tax, be taken to be the fair market 
value of the capital asset on the date on which the sale, exchange, 
relinquishment or transfer took place: 
Provided further that where the capital asset is an asset in 
respect of which the assessee has obtained depreciation allow-
ance in any year, the actual cost of the asset to the assessee 
shall be its written down value, as defined in section 10, increas-
ed or diminished, as the case may be, by any adjustment made 
under clause (vii) of sub-section (2) of that section: 
Provided further that where the capital asset became the 
property of the assessee, or of the previous owner where the 
cost of the capital asset to the previous owner is to be taken in 
accordance with sub-section (3), before the 1st day of January, 
1954, he may, on proof of the fair market value thereof· on the 
said date to the satisfaction of the Income-tax Officer, substitute 
for the actual cost such fair market value which shall be deemed 
to be the actual cost to him of the asset, and which shall be 
reduced by the amount of depreciation, if any, allowed to the 
assessee after the said date and increased or diminished, as the 
case may be, by any adjustment made under claUse (vii) of 
sub-section (2) of section 10: 
Provided further that where the capital asset was on any 
previous occasion the subject of negotiations for its sale, ex-
change, relinquishment Or transfer, any option or other money 
received and retained by the assessee in respect of such nego-· 
tiations shall be deducted in computing the actual cost to him 
of. such asset. 
(3) Where any capital asset became the property of the 
assessee by succession. inheritance Or devolution or on any 
distribution of capital assets on the total or partial partition of 
a Hindu undivided family or on the dissolution of a firm or 
other association of persons or on the liquidation of a company 
or under a deed of gift. or transfer on irrevocable trust, its 
actual cost allowable to him for the purposes of this section shall 
be its actual cost to the previous owner thereof, and the provi-
sions of sub-section (2) shall apply accordingly; and where the 
actual cost to the previous owner cannot be ascertained, the 
fair market value at the date on which the capital asset became 
the property of the previous owner shall be deemed to be the 
actual cost thereof: 
Provided that where the capital asset became the property 
of the assessee-
(i) before the 1st day of April, 1956. under a deed of 
gift or on the partition of a Hindu undivided family, the 
actual cost allowable to him shall be the fair market value 
of the capital asset on the date of the gift or the date of the 

Amendment 
of lec:tion 17. 
, 
partition, as the caSe may be, if such value is greaier than 
the actual cost to the previous owner or the fair market 
value thereof on the 1st day of· January, 1954, where the 
third proviso to sub-section (2) applies; 
(ii) on or after the 1st day of April, 1956, on the parti- , 
tion of a Hindu undivided family. the cost allowable to him 
shall be the fair market value on the date of the partition. 
(4) Notwithstandin~ anything contained in sub-section (1), 
where a capital gain arIses from the sale, exchange, relinquish-
ment Or transfer of a capital asset being property the income 10 
of which is chargeable under section 9 which in the two years 
immediately preceding the date on which the sale, exchange, 
relinquishment or transfer took place, was being used by the 
assessee or a ~arent of his mainly for the purposes of his own 
or the parent s own residence, and the assessee has within a IS 
period of one year before or after that date purchased a new 
property for the purposes of his own residence, then instead of 
the capital gain being charged to tax as income of the previous 
year in which the sale, exchange, relinquishment or transfer 
took place, it shall, if the assessee so elects in writing before the 20 
assessment is made, be dealt with in accordance with the follow-
ing proviSions of this sub-section, that is to say,-
(a) if the amount of the capital gain is greater than the 
cost of the new asset, the difference between the amount 
of the capital gain and the cost of the new asset shall be 25 
ch8lged under this section as income of the previous year, or 
(b) if the amount of the capital gain is equal to or less 
than the cost of the new asset, the capital gain shall not be 
charged under this section." 
5. In section 17 of the principal Act,-
(a) for clause (ii) of sub-section (6), the following clause 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"(ii) on the whole amount of such inclusion, income-tax 
equal to the amount which bears to the income-tax which 
would have been payable on his total income as reduced by 35 
two-thirds of the amount of such inclusion the same pro-
portion as the whole amount of such inclusion bears to such 
reduced total income: 
Provided that where the amount of such inclusion does 
not exceed the sum of five thousand rupees or the total 40 
income does not exceed the sun:t of ten thousand rupees 
such income-tax shall be nil and in any other case such 
income-tax shall not exceed one-half 'of the amount by 
which the amount of such inclusion exceeds the sum of five 
thousand rupees;" 4S 
(b) for sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:- . 
"(7) Where the total income of a company includes any 
income chargeable under the head "Capital Gains", the 
super-tax payable by it shall be calculated on its total income 50 
as reduced by the amount of such inclusion." 

10 
20 
35 
45 
• 
I. In section 23A of the principal Act,- ~=! 
Ca) in sub-section (1) for the words "at the rate of fo.ur :a3A. 
annas in the rupee", the words "at the rate of six annas in the 
rupee" shall be substituted. 
(b) after the proviso to sub-section (1), the following fur-
ther proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided further that in the case of a company referred 
to in sub-section (4), this section shall app1r as if for the 
words "sixty per cent. of the total income' and "fifty-five 
per cent. of its total ,income" wherever they occur,. the words 
"fifty per cent. of the total income" and "forty-five per cent. 
of its total income" respectively had been substituted." 
(e) in clause <i) of sub-section (2), for the words "in 
clause (a> of the proviso to that sub-section", the words "in 
clause <a) of the first proviso to that sub-section shall be 
substituted. 
7. In section 24 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (2B), the words "so however . 
loss shall be so carried forward for more than six 
be omitted; 
(b) For the proviso to sub-section (2B) , 
proviso shall be substituted, namely:-, 
"Provided that where the loss sustained by' 
such 
shall 
not being a company, in any previous year ·exceed 
five thousand rupees, it shall not be carried forward." 
Amc:DdmcDt 
of lec:tiOO 34. 
I. For the year ending on the 31st day of March, 1958, the rate Ra,:~f fU~ 
of super-tax for the purposes of section 55 ot the principal Act shall, ~anic:1 0 
in the case of every company, be as follows:- f~ the ftnaD-
Clal Jeu 
On the whole of Eight annas and nine 19J7-". 
the total income pies in :the rupee: 
Provided that-
(i) a rebate at the rate of seven annas per ,rupee of the 
total income shall be allowed in the case of any company which-
(a> in respect of its profits liable to tax under the In-
come-tax Act for the year ending on the 31st day of M~rch, 
1958, has made the prescribed arrangements :for the declara-
tion and payment within India, of the dividends payable out 
of such profits and for the deduction of super-tax from 
dividends in accordance with the proyisions of .sub-section 
(3D) of section 18 of that Act, and 
(b> is such a company as is referred to in sub-section 
(9) of section 23A of the Income-tax Act, with total income 
not exceeding Rs. 25,000. 
(ii) a rebate at the rate of six annas per rupee of the total 
income' shall be allowed in the case of any company which 
satisfies condition <a) but not condition (0), of the preceding 
clause; and 

• 
(iii) a rebate at the rate of five annas and six pies per rupee 
on so much of the total income as consists of dividends from a 
subsidiary Indian company and a rebate at the rate of, three 
annas per rupee on any other income included in the total 
income shaH be allowed in the case of any company not entiUed 5 
to a rebate under either of the preceding clauses: 
Provided further that-
(i) the amount of the rebate under clause (i) or clause (ii), 
as the case may be, of the preceding proviso shall be reduced 
by the sum, if any, equal to the amount or the aggregate of the 10 
amounts, as the case may be, computed as hereunder:-
(a) on that part of the sum 
arrived at in accordance with clause 
(i) of the second proviso to para-
graph D of Part II of the First 
Schedule to the Finance Act, 1956, 
as has not been deemed to have 
been taken into account, in accord-
ance with clause (ii) of the said 
pro"', for the purpose of reducing 
theiN'bate mentioned therein to nil; 
,(b) on the amount representing 
the face value of any bonus shares 
or the amount of any bonus issued 
to its shareholders during the 
preWous year with a view to 
increasing the paid-up capital, 
except to the extent to which such 
bonus shares or bonus have been 
.issued out of· premiums received 
in cash on the issue of its shares; 
and 
( c) in addition, in the case of a 
company referred to in clause (ii) 
of the preceding proviso which 
has distributed to its shareholders 
during the previous year dividends 
in excess of six per cent. of its 
paid-up capital, not being divi-
dends payable at a fixed rate-
on that part of the said divi-
dends which exceeds 6 per cent. 
but does not exceed 10 per cent. 
of the paid-up capital: 
on that part of the said divi-
dends which exceeds 10 per cent. 
but does not exceed 18 per cent 
of the paid-up capital; 
on that part of the said divi-
dends which exceeds 18 per cent. 
of the paid-up capital. 
The whole amount 
of such part. 
at the rate of two 
annas per rupee. 
at the rate of two 
annas per rupee. 
20 
30 
3S 
40 
at the rate of four 45 
annas per rupee, 
at the rate of six 
annas per rupee. 50 

, 
(ii) Where the sum arrived at in accordance with clauae 
(i) of this proviso exceeds the amount of the rebate arrived at 
in accordance with clause (i) or clause (ii), as the case may be, 
of the preceding proviso, only so much of the amounts of 
5 reduction mentioned in sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c) of clause 
(i) of this proviso as is sufficient, in that order, to reduce the 
rebate to nil shall be deemed to have been taken into account 
for the purpose: 
Provided further that the super-tax payable by ,a company the 
10 total income of which exceeds rupees twenty-five thousand shall 
not exceed the aggregate of-
(a) the super-tax which would have been payable by the 
company if its total income had been rupees twenty-five 
thousand, and 
15 (b) half the amount by which its total income exceeds 
20 
35 
rupees twenty-five thousand. 
ExpZanation.-For the purposes of this section-
(i) the expression "paid-up capital" means the paid-up 
capital (other than capital entitled to a dividend at a fixed rate) 
of the company as on the first day of the previous year relevant 
to the assessment for the year ending on the 31st day of March, 
1958, increased by any premiums received in cash by the com-
pany on the issue of its shares, standing to the credit of the 
share premium account as on the first day of the previous year 
aforesaid; 
(ii) the expression "dividend" shall be deemed to include 
any distribution included in the expression "dividend" as 
defined in clause (6A) of section 2 of the principal Act; 
(iii) where any portion of the profits and gains of the 
company is not included in its total income by reason of such 
portion being exempt from tax under any provision of the prin-
cipal Act, the "paid-up capital" of, the company, the amount 
distributed as dividends (not being dividends payable at a 
fixed rate), the amount representing the face value of any bonus 
shares and the amount of any bonus issued to the shareholders, 
shall each be deemed to be such proportion thereof as the total 
income of the company for the previous year bears to its total 
profits and gains for that year other, than capital receipts, 
reduced by such allowances as may be admissible under the 
Income-tax Act which have not been taken into account by the 
company in its profit and loss account for that year. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of this Bill is to revive, with effect from the financial 
year 1957-58, the taxation of "Capital Gains", to prescribe the rate 
of super-tax applicable to companies for the financial year 1957-58 
and to provide for a few COnDected matters. 
NO'D&uu; 
The 30th November, 1956. T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 

Note, on Clau.ses. 
Clause 2 amends the definition of "dividends" in clause (6A) of 
section 2 of the Income-tax Act, and provides that capital gains 
arising on and from the 1st April, 1956 will also come within the 
scope of "accumulated profits" of the company. 
Clau.se 3 inserts a new sub-section (2B) in section 10 of the 
Income-tax Act, and provides that development rebate and depre-
ciation allowances due to be allowed in the computation of income 
of companies will be added back, unless the companies deposit with 
the Government a certain amount as prescribed. Sub-section (2C) 
empowers the Central Government to make rules for refund of 
deposits and other connected matters. 
Clause. 4 re-enacts section 12B of the Income-tax Act with 
modifications and provides that capital gains arising on or after the 
1st April, 1956, on the sale, exchange, relinquishment or transfer 
of a capital asset, will be charged to income-tax. 
Clause 5 amends section 17 of the Income-tax Act, and provides 
the basis of computation of tax on the capital gains included in the 
total income and on the remainder of the total income. 
Clause 6 amends section 23A of the Income-tax Act, and provides 
for the increase of the rate of additional super-tax applicable to a 
non-investment company which has not distributed the minimum 
dividends, to six anoas per rupee with effect from the financial year 
1957-58. The minimum distribution in the case of an industrial 
company will be reduced to 50 per cent. of the distributable profits, 
as against 60 per cent. applicable to other non-investment companies. 
Clause 7 amends section 24 of the Income-tax Act, and provides 
for the carry forward of capital losses arising after 1st April, 1956 
indefinitely for purposes of set off against capital gains arising in 
subsequent years. 
Clau.se B prescribes the rate of super-tax applicable to all com-
panies for tke financial year 1957-58. 

EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED 
LEGISLATION 
Clause 3 of the Bill proposes to empower the Central Government 
to make rules in respect of the following matters-
(i) to prescribe, from time to time, subject to certain limits, 
the percentaees for the calculation of the amount to be deposited. 
(ii) to prescribe the manner in which the deposits may be 
made, 
(iii) to prescribe the time when and the manner in which 
refunds of deposits may be made, and 
(iv) to prescribe the rate of interest, if any, for the amounts 
deposited. 
The delegation is of a normal character. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTP.ACTS FROM THE INDIAN INCOME-TAX ACT, 1922 (No. 11 OF 1922). 
2. (1) • • • Definitions. 
(6A) "dividend" includes-
(a) any distribution by a company of accumulated profits 
whether capitalised or not, if such distribution entails the release 
by the company to its shareholders of all or any part of the 
assets of the company. 
(b) any distribution by a company of debentures debenture-
stock or deposit certificates in any form, whether with or without 
interest, to the extent to which the company possesses 
accumulated profits, whether capitalised or not; 
(c) any distribution made to the shareholders of a company 
on its liquidation, to the extent to which the distribution is 
attributable to the accumulated profits of the company 
immediately before its liquidation, whether capitalised or not; 
(d) any distribution by a company on the reduction of its 
capital to the extent to which the company possesltes accumulated 
profits which arose after the end of the previous year ending 
next before the 1st day of April, 1933, whether such accumulated 
profits have been capitalised or not; 
(e) any payment by a company, not being a company in 
which the public are substantially interested within the meaning 
of section 23A, of any sum (whether as representing a; part of 
the assets of the company or otherwise) by way of advance 01 
loan to a shareholder or any payment by any such company 
on behalf or for the individual benefit of a shareholder, to the 
extent to which the company in either case possesses accumulat-
ed profits; 
but 'dividend' does not include-
(i) a distribution made in accordance with sub-clause (c) or 
sub-clause (d) in respect of any share issued for full cash con-
sideration where the holder of the share is not entitled in the 
event of liquidation to participate in the surplus assets; 
(ia) any advance or loan made to a shareholder by a 
company in the ordinary course of its business where the lending 
of money is a substantial part of the business of the company; 
(ii) any dividend paid by a company which is set 011 by the 
company against the whole or any part of any sum previously 
paid by it and treated as a dividend within the meaning of 
clause (e), to the extent to which it is so set off. 
Explanation.-The expression "accumulated profits", wkerever it 
occurs in this clause, shall not include capital gains arising before 
the 1st day of April, 1946, or after the 31st day of March, 1948 
• • • • • 
11 

CHAPI'ER m.-TAXABLE INCOME 
• • • • • 
10(1). • • • Businesl. 
• • • • • 
(2) Such profits or gains shall be 
following allowances, namely:-
computed after making the 
• • • • • 
(vi) in respect of depreciation of such buildings, machinery, 
plant, or furniture being the property of the assessee, a sum 
equivalent, where the assets are ships other than ships 
ordinarily plying on inland waters, to such percentage on the 
original cost thereof to the assessee as may in any case or class 
of cases be prescribed and in any other case, to such percentage 
on the written down value thereof as may in any case or class 
of eases be prescribed: 
• • • • • 
(via) in respect of depreciation of buildings newly erected, 
or of machinery or plant being new which has been -installed, 
after the 31st day of March, 1948, a further sum (which shall 
be deductible in determining the written down value) equal to 
the amount admissible under clause (vi) (exclusive of the extra 
allowance for double or mUltiple shift working of the machinery 
or plant and the initial depreciation allowance admissible under 
that clause for the first year of erection of the building or the 
installation of the machinery or plant) in not more than five 
successive assessments for the financial years next following the 
previous year in which such buildings are erected and such 
machinery and plant installed and falling within the period 
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1949, and ending on the 
31st day of March, 1959. 
(vib) in respect of machinery or plant being new, which 
has been installed after the 31st day of March, 1954, and· which 
is wholly used for the purposes of the business carried on by 
the assessee, a sum by way of development rebate in respect 
of the year 'of installation equivalent to twenty-five per cent. 
of the actual cost of such machinery or plant to the assessee: 
Provided that no allowance under this clause shall be made 
unless the particulars prescribed for the purpose of clause (vi) 
have been furnished by the assessee in respect of such machinery 
or plant. 
[(vii) in respect of any such building, machinery or plant 
which has been sold or dijre8rded or demolished or destroyed, 
the amount by which the written down value thereof exceeds 
the amount for which the building, machinery or plant, as the 
case may be, is actually sold or its scrap value: 

Provided that such amount is actually written off in the 
books of the assessee: 
• • • • • 
12B. (1) The tax shall be payable by an assessee under the head 
"Capital gains" in respect of any profits or gains arising from the 
sale, exchange or transfer of a capital asset effected after the 31st 
day of March, 1946, and before the 1st day of April, 1948; and such 
profits and gains shall be deemed to be income of the previous year 
in which the sale, exchange or transfer took place: 
Provided that where the amount of capital gains in the previous 
year does not exceed fifteen thousand rupees, the tax shall not be 
payable by the assessee and such amount shall not be included in his 
total income: 
Provided further that the tax shan not be payable by an assessee 
in respect of any profits or gains arising from the sale, exchange or 
transfer of a capital asset, being property the income of which is 
chargeable under section 9 and which has been possessed by the 
assessee or a parent of his for not less than seven years before the 
date on which the sale, exchange or transfer took place; and the 
amount of such profits or gains shall not be included in his total 
income: 
Provided further that any transfer of capital assets by reason of 
the compulsory acquisition thereof under any law for the time being 
in force relating to the compulsory acquisition of property for public 
purposes or any distribution of capital assets on the total or partial 
partition of a Hindu undivided family, or on the dissolution of a firm 
or other association of persons, or on the liquidation of a company, 
or under a deed of gift, bequest, will or transfer on irrevocable trust 
mall not, for the purposes of this section, be treated as sale, exchange 
or transfer of the capital assets: 
Provided further that the transfer of a capital asset by a company 
to a subsidiary company, the whole of the share capital of which is 
held by the parent company or by the nominees thereof, shall not be 
treated as a sale, exchange or transfer within the meaning of this 
section where the subsidiary company is resident in the taxable 
territories and is registered under the Indian Companies Act, 1913. 
so however that for the purposes of clause (vi) or clause (vii) of 
sub-section (2) of section 10, the cost or the written down value, as 
the case may be, of the transferred .capital asset shall be taken to 
be the same as it would have been if the parent company had conti-
nued to hold the capital asset for the purposes of its business. 
(2) The amount of a capital gain shall b~ computed after making 
the following deductions from the full value of the consideration for 
which the sale, exchange or transfer of the capital asset is made, 
namely:-
(i) expenditure incurred solely in connection with such sale, 
exchange or transfer; 
(ii) the actual cost to the assessee of the capital asset, includ-
ing any expenditure of a capital nature incurred and borne by 
him in making any additions or alterations thereto, but excluding 

any expenditure in respect of which any allowance is admisSible 
under any provision of sections 8, 9, 10 and 12: 
Provided that where a person who acquires a capital asset from 
the assessee, whether by sale, exchange or transfer, is a person with 
whom the assessee is directly or indirectly connected, and the 
Income-tax Officer has reason to believe that the sale, exchange or 
transfer was effected with the object of avoidance or reduction of the 
liability of the assessee under this section, the full value of the con-
sideration for which the sale, exchange or transfer is made shall, 
with the prior approval of the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner of 
Income-tax, be taken to be the fair market value of the capital asset 
on the date on which the sale, exchange or transfer took place: 
Provided further that where the capital asset is an asset in respect 
of which the assessee has obtained depreciation allowance in any 
year, the actual cost of the asset to the assessee shall be its written 
down value, as defined in section 10, increased or diminished, as the 
case may be, by any adjustment made under clause (vii) of sub-
section (2) of that section: 
Provided further that where the capital asset became the property 
of the assessee or of the previous owner where the cost of the 
capital asset to the previous owner is to be taken in accordance with 
sub-section (3) before the 1st day of January, 1939, he may, on 
proof of the fair market value thereof on the said date to the satis-
faction of the Income-tax Officer, substitute for the actual cost such 
fair market value which shall be deemed to be the actual cost to him 
of the asset, and which shall be reduced by the ambunt of the depre-
ciation, if any, allowed to the assessee after the said date and increas-
ed or diminished, as the case may be, by any adjustment made under 
clause (vii) of sub-section (2) of section 10: 
Provided further that where the capital asset was on any previous 
occasion the subject of negotiations for its sale, exchange or transfer, 
any option or other money received and retained by the assessee in 
respect of such negotiations shall be deducted in computing the actual 
cost to him of such asset. 
(3) Where any capital asset became the property of the assessee 
by succession, inheritance or devolution or under any of the circum-
stances referred to in the third proviso to sub-section (1), its actual 
cost allowable to him for the purposes of this section shall be its actual 
cost to the previous owner thereof, and the provisions of sub-section 
(2) shall apply accordingly; and where the actual cost to the previous 
owner cannot be ascertained, the fair market value at _the date on 
which the capital asset became the property of the previous owner 
shall be deemed to be the actual cost thereof: 
Provided that where the capital asset became the property of the 
assessee--
(i) before the 1st day of April, 1947, under a deed of gift or 
on the partition of a Hindu uhdivided family, the actual cost 
allowable to him shall be the fair market value of the capital 
asset on the date of the gift or the date of the partition, as the 
case may be, if such value is greater than the actual cost to the 
previous owner or the fair market value thereof on the 1st day 

15 
of January, 1939, where the third proviso to sub-section (2) 
applies; 
(ii) on or after the 1st day of April, 1947, on the partition of 
a Hindu undivided family, the cost allowable to him shall be the 
fair market value on the date of the partition. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
where a capital gain arises from the sale, exchange or transfer of a 
capital asset which immediately before the date on which the sale, 
exchange or transfer took place was being used by the assessee for 
the purposes of his business, profession or vocation, or which in the 
two years immediately preceding that date was being used by him 
or a parent of his mainly for the purposes of his own or the parent's 
own residence, and the assessee has within a period of one year before 
or after that date purchased a new capital asset.for the same purposes 
of his business, profession or vocation or, as the case may be, for the 
purposes of his own residence, then instead of the capital gain being 
charged to tax as income of the previous year in which the sale, 
exchange or transfer took place, it shall, if the assessee so elects in 
writing before the assessment is made, be dealt with in accordance 
with the following prOvisions of this sub-section, that is to say,-
(a) if the amount of the capital gain is greater than the cost 
of the new asset,-
(i) the difference between the amount of the capital'gain 
and the cost of the new asset shall be charged under this 
section as income of the previous year, and 
(ii) for the purposes of computing in respect of the new 
asset any allowance under clause (vi) or clause (vii) of sub-
section (2) of section 10 or the amount of any capital gain 
arising from its sale, exchange or transfer, the cost or the 
written down value, as the case may be, shall be nil, or 
(b) if the amount of the capital gain is equal to or less than 
the cost of the new asset,-
(i) the capital gain shall not be charged under this 
section, and • 
(ii) for the purposes of computing in respect of the new 
asset any allowance under the said clause (vi) or any allow-
ance or adjustment under the said clause (vii) or the 
amount of any capital gain arising from its sale, exchange or 
transfer the cost or the written down value, as the case may 
be, shall be reduced by the amount of the capital gain: 
Provided that where in respect of the purchase of a new capital 
asset consisting of plant or machinery the assessee satisfies the 
Income-tax Officer that despite the exercise of due diligence it has 
not been possible to make the purchase within the period specified 
in this sub-section, the Income-tax Offtcer may, with the prior 
approval of the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner of Income-tax, 
extend the said period to such date as he considers reasonable . 
• • • • • • 

17. (1) • • • 
11 
• Determina-
tiOD of to 
(6) Where the total income of an assessee, not being a company, rc:r~e • ~ 
includes any income chargeable under the head "Capital gains", the cia! cues. pe 
tax, including super-tax, payable by him on his total income shall 
be--- . 
(i) income-tax and super-tax payable on his total income as 
reduced by the amount of such inclusion, had such reduced in-
come been his total income plus 
(ii) income-tax on the whole amount of such inclusion at 
the following rates, namely:-
where such amount 
exceeds Rs. 15,000 but does not exceed Rs. 50,000 
--One anna in the rupee, 
exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does not exceed Rs. 2,00,000 
-Two annas in the rupee, 
exceeds Rs. 2,00,000 but does not exceed Rs. 5,00,000 
-Three annas in the rupee, 
exceeds Rs. 5,00,000 but does not exceed Rs. 10,00,000 
-Four annas in the rupee, 
exceeds Rs. 10,oo,OOO-Five annas in the rupee: 
Provided that where owing to the fact that the amount of such 
inclusion has exceeded a certain limit, income-tax thereon is payable 
or is payable at a higher rate, the amount of income-tax so payable 
shall be reduced so as not to exceed-
(a) the amount which would have been payable if the 
amount of such inclusion had not exceeded that limit, plus 
(b) one-half of the amount by which the amount of such in-
clusion exceeds that limit. 
(7) Where the total income of a company includes any income 
chargeable under the head "Capital gains", the super-tax payable 
by the company in any year shall be reduced by an amount computed 
on that part of its total income which consists of such inclusion at 
the rate of super-tax (excluding the rate of additional super-tax, if 
any) specified in the case of a company by the annual Central Act 
fixing the rate or rates of tax for that year . 
• • • • • 

CHAPTER IV.-DmucTIoNs AND AssEssMENT 
• • • • • 
23A. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4), Power to 
where the Income-tax Officer is satisfied that in respect of any pre- =: toCO:: 
vious year the profits and gains distributed as dividends by any per-ta on 
company within the twelve months immediately following the expiry UDdi~bu­
of that previous year are less than sixty per cent. of the total income f:1 :;r::e 
of the company of th~ previous year as reduced by- CIlIa. 
(a) the amount of income-tax and super-tax payable by 
the company in respect of its total income, but excluding the 
amount of any super-tax payable under this section; 
(b) the amount of any other tax levied under any law for 
the time being in force on the company by the Government or 
by a local authority in excess of the amount, if any, which has 
been allowed in computing the total income; and 
(c) in the case of a banking company, the am6unt actually 
transferred to a reserve fund under section 17 of the Banking 
Companies Act, 1949 (X of 1949); 
the Income-tax Officer shall, unless he is satisfied that having regard 
to losses incurred by the company in earlier years or to the smallness 
of the profits made in the previous year, the payment of a dividend 
or a larger dividend than that declared would be unreasonable, make 
an order in writing that the company shall, apart from the sum deter-
mined as payable by it on the basis 'of the assessment under section 
23 be liable to pay super-tax at the rate of eight annas in the rupee 
in the case of a company whose business consists wholly or mainly 
in the dealing in or holding of investments, and at the rate of four 
ann,as in the rupee in the case of any otper company on the undis-
tributed balance of the total income of the previous year, that is to 
say, on the total income reduced by the amounts, if any, referred to 
in clause (a), clause (b) or clause (c) and the dividends actually 
distributed, if any: 
Provided that-
(a) in the case of a company whose business consists wholly 
or mainly in the dealing in or holding of investments; and 
(b) in the case of. any other company where the accumu-
lated profits and reserves (including the amounts capitalised 
from the earlier reserves) representing acc·J.IDulations of past 
profits which have not been the subject of an order under this 
sub-section, exceed either the aggregate of-
(i) the paid up capital of the company exclusive of the 
capital, if any, created out of its profits and gains which 
have not been the subject of an order under this sub-section, 
and 
(ii) any loan capital which is the property of the share-
holders, 
17 

18 
or the actual cost of the fixed assets of the company, whichever 
of these is greater, 
this section shall apply as if for "the words "sixty ~r cent, of the 
total income," wherever they occur, the words • the whole of the 
total income" had been substituted. 
(2)" No order under sub-section (1) shall be made-
(i) in the case of a company referred to in clause (a) of the 
proviso to that sub-section, which has distributed not less than 
ninety per cent. of its total income as reduced by the amounts, 
if any, referred to in clause (a), clause (b) or clause (c) of that 
sub-section, or 
(ii) in the case of any other company which has distribufed 
110t less than fifty-five per cent. of its total income as reduced 
"1y the amounts, if any, aforesaid, or 
(iii) in any case where according to the return made by a 
company under section 22, it has distributed not less than sixty 
per cent. of its total income as reduced by the amounts if any, 
aforesaid, but in the assessment made by the Income-tax Officer 
under section 23 a higher total income is arrived at, and the 
difference in the total income does not arise out of the application 
of the proviso to section 13 or sub-section (4) of section 23 or the 
omission by the company to disclose its total income fully and 
truly, 
unless the company, on receipt of a notice from the Income-tax 
Officer that he proposes to make such an order, fails to make within 
three months of the receipt of s1,lch notice a further distribution of 
its profits and gains so that the total distribution made is not less 
than sixty per cent. of the total income of the company of the rele-
vant previous year as reduced by the amounts, if any, aforesaid . 
• • • • • 
24. '( 1) Where any assessee sustains a loss of profits or gains in Set off of 
any year under any of the heads mentioned in section 6, he shall be los,. in com-
entitled to have the amount of the loss set off against his income," pu~n:­
profits or gains under any other head in that year: ga e • 
• • • • • 
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
where the loss sustained is a loss falling under the head "Capital 
gains", such loss shall not be set off except against any profits and 
gains falling under that head. 
(2B) Where an assessee sustains a loss such as is referred to in 
sub-section (2A) and the loss cannot be wholly set off in accordance 
with the provisions of that sub-section, the portion not so set off shall 
be carried forward to the following year and set off against capital 
gains for that year, and if it cannot be so set off, the amount thereof 
not IiO set off shall be carried forward to the following year and so 
on, so however, that no such loss shall be so carried forward for more 
than six years: 
Provided that where the loss sUstained in any previous year does 
not exceed fifteen thousand rupees, it shall not be carried forward. 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, for the 
purpose of imposing a tax on capital gains and for certain 
other purposes and to prescribe the rate of super-tax on 
companies for the financial year 1957-58. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article II7 
and clause (I) of article 274 of the Constitution of India, 
recommended to the Lok Sabha, the introduction of the 
Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri T. T. Krishnamacha,i. 
Minister for Finance) 