THE CONSTITUTION (EIGHTH 
AMENDMENT) BILL.1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lox" SABHA 
ON 16tH NOVEMBER, 1959) 

''''',0/ \. 
. ' .. 
, '. 
BiU No. 79 of IU9 
THECONST~TUTION (EIGHTH AM:ENDMENT) BILL, 
19S9 
(As nmlODUCBD IN Lo~ SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to !lTnend the Constitution of Indi!l, 
, BE it enac,teq by P~rlia~ent in the Ten,th Year qf the Republic 
of India as follows:~ ,.. ... : ' ' 
1. This Act may be. called the Constitution (Eighth' Amendment) Sh ' I ., . ort tit e. 
Act, 1959. 
5 . ,2. (1) IQ,article 333 of the Constitution, for the words "nominate Amendment 
such number of members of the community to the Assembly' as lte of Articfe . '., '. 333-
considers appropriate", the words--
"nominate, in the case of the State of West Bengal, not more 
than two members, and, in the case of any other State. one 
[0 member, of the community to the Assembly" 
shall be substituted. 
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall affect any repre-
sentation of the Anglo-Indian community in the Legislative Assembly 
of any State existing at the commencement of this Act until the 
15 dissolution of that Assembly. 
3. In article 334 of the Constitution, for the words "ten years" Alundmen.t 
QfAnicIc the words "twenty years" shall be substituted, 334 
" 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Article 334 of the Constitution lays down that the provisions of 
tht' Constitution relating to the reservation of seats for the Sche. 
duled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and the representation of the 
Anglo-Indian community by nomination in the House of the People 
and the Legislative Assemblies of the States shall cease to have 
effect on the elQ)iration of a period of ten years from the commence~ 
ment of the Constitution. Although the Scheduled Castes and . '. ,," ',... .. '. . . 
Scheduled Ttfbes haVe 'rnade c~Siderable progress in 'the last ten 
years, the reasons which weighed with the Constituent Assembly in 
making provision fot' t}u~' 8foreSaid'resemtion of seat& and nomina~ 
tion of members have not ceased to exist. It is, therefore, proposed 
to continue the reservation and t~ representation of Anglo-Indians 
by nomination for a further period of ten years. 
In extending the period of nomination of members of the Anglo~ 
Indian community, it is propOsed to fix the number of such members 
who may be nominated by Governors to State Assemblies and an 
amendment oJ. article 333 is· accordingly propo8ed. 
NEW' Da1D; G. B, PANT. 
The 18th s~, lD~. 
I 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM '!HE CONSTITUTION. OF INDIA 
• * • • 
us. Notwithstanding anything in article 170, the Governor of a Rcpreaen-
'f h ' f " th th An I I d' tatioD of the State may, 1 e 15 0 opmlon at e g 0- n Ian community Aqlo-
eds ., th T':"gisl t' Asse bi f th S d Indian com-ne representatlon m e.a...c: a lve m y c e tate an munity in 
is not adequately represented therein, nominate such number of ~:c l:::~ 
members of the community to the Assembly as he considers appro- ~:;:. the 
priate. 
3M. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing prOvisions of thil> Resenation oflcatl aQd 
Part, the provisions at this Constitution relating to-- special ~­
prelCDtatlOft 
(4) the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and to cease after ten ycan. 
the Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People and in the 
Legislative Assemblies of the States; and 
(b) the representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the 
House of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the 
States by notnmatioil, 
shall cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of ten years 
frorr.. the commencement of this Constitution: 
Provided that nothing in this article shall affect any representa-
tion in the House of the People or in the Legislative Assembly of 
a State until the dissolution of the then existing House or Assembly, 
as the case may be. 
• • • 
it 
. '. 

LOK SABHA 
1\ 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitu~iOQ9f.Iudia. . 
• , J 
GMGIPND-II36 (B)LS-IO-II-S9- J 700 
(:-;1 . ,. I ' • ... 
(Shri Goo;nd BaHabh Pant, 
M!'nister of Home Affairs.) 