Bill No 79 of 1902
THE ARMY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1992.
A
BILL

further to amend the Army Act, 1950.

py Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic

4. This Act may be called the Aimy (Amendment) Act, 1992.

2, In the Army Act, 1950 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
sections 75 and 76 shall be omitted.

section 77 of the principal Act. the words “,field punishment”

५ tw’section 80 of the principal Act, clause (j) shall be omitted.



=
ment of
section

Amend-
ment of

91.

Amend-
ment of
section
122,

oe.

(ti) in sub-section (4), for the brackets, letters and word “(a),
(०), (० and (j)”, the brackets, letters and word “(a), (b), and
(०१ shall be substituted,

6. In section 85 of the principal Act, for the portion beginning with
the words “and award the punishment” and ending with the words “of 5

which he is convicted is made good”, the following shall be substituted,
namely:—

“and award one or more of the following punishments that is
to say,— .

(i) severe reprimand or reprimand; aT

(ii) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or
damage occasioned by the offence of which he is convicted
is made good:

Provided that the punishment specified in clause (i) shall
not be awarded if the commanding officer or such other officer 1
is below the rank of Colonel”.

7. In section 90 of the principal Act—

(i) in clause (९), the words and figures “or an officer exercising
authority under section 85” shall be omitted;

(ii) in clause (i), after the words “Central Government”, the
words “or any prescribed officer” shall be inserted.

8. In section 91 of the principal Act—

(3) in clause (a), the words “or of field punishment awarded
by a court-martial or such officer” shall be omitted;

(i) in clause (0), the words “or field punishment” shall be
omitted. }

«
9. In section 122 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the

words “from the date of such offence”, the following shall be substitu-

ted, namely: —

“ana such period shall commence—
(a) on the date of the offence; or

(b) where the commission of the offence was not known
tu the person aggrieved by the offence or to the authority com-
petent to initiate action, the first day on which such offence
comes to the knowledge of such person or authority, which-
ever is earlier; or

(०) where it is not known by whom the offence was com-
mitted, the first day on which the identity of the offender is
known to the person aggrieved by the offence or 10 the autho-
rity competent in initiate action, whichever is earlier”.


= 4 a

10. In section 123 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the
words “within six months after he had ceased to be subject to this
Act”, the following shall be substituted, niamely:—

“within a period of three years after he had ceased to be sub-
ject to this Act; and in computing such period, the time during
{vhich such person has avoided arrest by absconding or concealing
himself or, where the institution of the proceeding in respect of the
offence has been stayed by an injunction or order, the period of
the continuance of the injunction or order, the day on which it was

issued or made, and the day on which it was withdrawn, shall be
excluded.”.

जा, Section 127 of the principal Act shall be omitted.

12. In section 135 of the principal ‘Act, in sub-section (1), after the
word “court-martial”, the words “or courts of inquiry” shall be inserted.

15 13, In section 137 of the principal Act—

(a) in sub-section (3), for the words and figures “Code of Cri-
minal Procedure 1898”, the words and figures “Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973” shall be substituted;

(b) in subsection (4), for the words and figures “Chapter ‘XL of
20 the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898”, the words and figures “Chap-
ter XXII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973” shall be sub-
stituted,

14, In sections 139, 151 ans 174 of the principal Act, for the words and
figures “Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898”, the words and figures “Code
25 of Criminal Procedure, 1973”, wherever they occur, shall be substituted.

15. In section 142 of the principal Act, in sub-section (7). after the
words “Assistant Chemical Examiner to Government”, the words “or
any of the Government scientific experts. namely, the Chief Inspector
of the Explosives; the Director of the Finger Print Bureau; the Director,
Haffkeine institute. Bombay; the Director of a Central Forensic Science
Laboratory or a State Forensic Science Laboratory and the Serologist
to the Government” shall be inserted.

46. In section 152 of the principal Act, for the words and figures

vigections 480 and 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 1998”, the
35 words and figures “sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal Pro-
* cedure, 1973” shall be substituted,

Amend-
ment of
section
123.

Omis-
sion of
section
127.

Amend-
ment of

section ©

135.

Amend-
ment of
section
137.

Amend-
ment of
sections
139, 151.

and 174.

Amend~
ment of
section
142,

Amend-
ment of
section
152,

z


Inser-
tion of
new
section
1694.

Period of
custody
unaer-
gone by
the
oMtcer
or
Person
to be set
off
against
the im-
prison
ment.

Amend-
ment of
section
191.

Omission
of Chap-
ter XVI.

17. After section 169 of the principal Act, the following |
shall be inserted, namely:—

“169A. When a person or officer subject to this Act is sentencs
by a court-martial to a term of imprisonment, not being an impri-
sonment in default of payment of fine, the period spent by him in
civil or military custody during investigation, inquiry or trial of the
same case, and before the date of order of such sentence, shall be set
off against the term of imprisonment imposed upon him, and th
liability of such person or officer to undergo imprisonment on such
order of sentence, shall be restricted to the remainder, if any, of the
term of imprisonment imposed upon him.”.

18. In section 191 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), clause (०)
shall be cmitted.

19. Chapter XVI of the principal Act and the heading relating there-
to shall be omitted.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

| Army Act 1950 came into force on 22.7,1950. This Act was
essentially on the lines of Army Act 1911, incorporating additional pro-
visions to bring it in conformity with the Constitution of India.
Till date, no major amendments have been made to the Army Act, 1950.
Thus, the basic structure of the Act has remained as it was in 1950.

2. In the changed circumstances, the Army Act 1950 is proposed to
be amended with a view to removing certain archaic and obsolete pro-
visions, incorporating certain provisions to bring the Act in conformity
with the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in certain aspects and pro-
viding fixibility.

3. Accordingly, the Bill seeks to provide, inter-alia, the following
amendments in the Act namely:—

(a) field punishment, which is in the nature of personal re-
straint and hard labour and which is clearly an archaic punitive
system. is intended to be abolished;

(b) the provision regarding second trial of a person by a cri-
minal court after conviction or accquittal by a court-martial is
sought to be omitted;

(c) power to give reprimand and severe reprimand is proposed
to be conferred on commanding officers for dealing with minor
offences expeditiously; is

(१) provisions similar to those as existing in the Code of Cri-
minal Procedure, 1973 relating to the commencement of the period
of limitation for trial are sought to be incorporated in the Act;

(e) provision allowing the period of detention undergone by an
accused person before conviction to be set off against the sentence
of imprisonment is sought to be made;

(0 provision enabling the authorities to use reports of certain
Government scientific experts as evidence in any proceeding under
the Act, as provided in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, is
also proposed to be incorporated;

(g) under the existing provisions of the Act, a trial can
commence within six months after the offender has ceased to be
subject to the Act. It has been noticed that in some cases offenders
have evade trial due to this short period of limitation. It is, there-
fore, proposed to enhance this period to three years and in comput-
ing the period, the period of any stay granted by court is sought to
be excluded;


7 6
(h) power to a Court of Inquiry to issue summons requii

attendance of any person to give evidence or to produce any dc
ment is sought to be given;

(i) certain formal and consequential amendments are
sought to be made in the Act,

4. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects.

New DEtut; 5. KRISHNA KI
The 10th April, 1992.



ANNEXURE

Exrracts From THE Army Act, 1950
(46 oF 1950)

* * * * *

75. Where any person subject to this Act and under the rank of
arrant officer commits any offence on active service, it shall be lawful
or a court-martial to award for that offence any such punishment as is
scribed as a field punishment. Field punishment shall be of the
character of personal restraint or of hard labour but shall not be of a
nature to cause injury to life or limb and shall not include flogging.

_ 76. Field punishment shall for the purpose of commutation be deem-
ed to stand next below dismissal in the scale of punishments specified
in section 71,

™. A warrant officer or a non-commissioned officer sentenced by a
urt-martial to transportation, imprisonment, field punishment or dis-
\issal from the service, shall be deemed to be reduced to the ranks.

80. Subject to the provisions of section 81, a commanding officer or
such other officer as is, with the consent of the Central Government,
specified by the Chief of the Army Staff, may, in the prescribed manner,
eed against a person subject to this Act otherwise than as an officer,
jimior commissioned officer or warrant officer who is charged with an
offence under this Act and award such person, to the extent prescribed,
or more of the following punishments, that is to say,—

* * * * *

(j) any prescribed field punishment up to twenty-eight days,
in the case of a person on active service.

81. (1) An award of punishment under section 80 shall not include
field punishment in addition to one or more of the punishments speci-
ied in clauses (a), (b) ani (c) of that section.


8

(6) The punishments specified in clauses (a), (b), (०) and 0) of
section 80 shall not be awarded to any person who is of the rank of
non-commissioned officer or was, at the time of committing the offence
for which he is punished, of such rank.

* * * * *

85, A commanding officer or such other officer as is, with the con-
sent of the Central Government, specified by the Chief of the Army
Staff may, in the prescribed manner, proceed against a junior commis- ji
sioned officer who is charged with an offence under this Act and award
the punishment of stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved
loss or damage occasioned by the offence of which he is convicted is
made good.

* * * * *

CHAPTER VIL

PENAL DEDUCTIONS

20. The following penal deductions may be made from the pay
and allowances of an officer, that is to say,—

* * * * *

(०) all pay and allowances ordered by a court-martial or an
officer exercising authority under section 85 to be forfeited or
stopped;

® * * * *

(i) any sum required by order of the Central Government to
be paid for the maintenance of his wife or his legitimate or illegiti-
mate child of towards the cost or any relief given by the said
Government to the said wife or child,

91. Subject to the provisions of section 94 the following penal deduc-
tions may be made from the pay and allowances of a person subject to
this Act other than an officer, that is to say,—

(a) all pay and allowances for every day of absence either on
desertion or without leave, or as a prisoner of war, and for every
day of transportation or imprisonment awarded by a criminal court,
a court-martial or an officer exercising authority under section 80,
or of field punishment awarded by a court-martial or such officer;

(0) all pay and allowances for every day while he is in custody
on a charge for an offence of which he is afterwards convicted by
a criminal court or a court-martial, or on a charge cf absence without
leave for which he is afterwards awarded imprisonment or field

punishment by an officer exercising authority under section 80;

* * * * *

122. (1) Except as provided by sub-section (2), no trial by court-
martial of any person subject to this Act for any offence shall be com-
menced after the expiration of a period of three years from the date of

such eftence.
* * * * *


0) * . * . .

(2) No such person shall be tried for an offence, unless his trial
oinm within six months after he had ceased to be subject to this
4 | om.
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to the
al of any such person for an offence of desertion or fraudlent
nt or for any of the offences mentioned in section 37 or shall
the jurisdiction of a criminal court to try any offence triable by
court as well as by a court-martial.

127. (1) A person convicted or acquitted by a court-martial may,
ith the previous sanction of the Central Government, be tried again
by a criminal court for the same offence, or on the same facts.

(2) If a person sentenced by a court-martial under this Act or
ur under any of the sections 80, 83, 84 or 85 is afterwards tried
convicted by a criminal court for the same offence, or on the same
that court shall, in awarding punishment, have regard to the
Shment he may already have undergone for the said offence.

* * * के *

_ 135, (1) The convening officer, the presiding officer of a court-
a | the judge advocate or the commanding officer of the accused
on may, by summons under his hand, require the attendance, at a
and place to be mentioned in the summons, of any person either

give evidence or to produce any document or other thing.

. . * . *
17.1) * . . . .
(3) The magistrate or officer to whom the commission is issued, or,
‘he is the district magistrate, he or such magistrate of the first class
he appoints in this behalf, shall proceed to the place where the wit-
ss is or shall summon the witness before him and shall take down his
e in the same manner, and may for this purpose exercise the
powers, as in trials of warrant-cases under the Code of Criminal
lure, 1898, or any corresponding law in foree in the State of

(4) When the witness resides in a tribal area or in any place outside
dia, the commission may be issued in the manner specified in Chapter
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, or of any corresponding
in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

. . . . *

s
139. (1) A person charged before a court-martial with desertion
y be found guilty of attempting to desert or of being absent without

(2) A person charged before a court-martial with attempting to
ssert may be found guilty of being absent without leave.

_ (3) A person charged before a court-martial with using criminal
orce may be found guilty of assault.

5 of 1898.

5 of 1898.


6 of 1898,

5 of 1898,

10

(4) A person charged before a court-martial with using threat
language may be found guilty of using insubordinate language.

nal Procedure, 1898, were applicable.

(7) A person charged before a court-martial with any offence
this Act, may, on failure of proof of an offence having been |

(8) A person charged before a court-martial with any offence unt
this Act, may be found guilty of having attempted or abetted the
mission of that offence, although the attempt or abetment is not separatel;
chorged.

* + * + 8
W212) # * * * *

(7) Any document purporting to be a report under the hand of
Chemical Examiner or Assistant Chemical Examiner to Government
upon any matter or thing duly submitted to him for examination or
analysis and report may be used as evidence in any proceeding une

1

this Act. ’ }

martial, or any authority superior to such officer, or, in the case of
court-martial whose finding or sentence does not require confirmation,
the officer commanding the army, army corps, division or brigade within
which the trial was held, may make such order as it or he thinks fit f

the disposal by destruction, confiscation, delivery to any person claiming

Which any offence appears to have been committed or which has been
used for the commission of any offence.

order to be carried into effect as if it were an order passed by him |
under the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, or any —
corresponding law in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir


|

appointment.

i

(3) In this section the term “property” includes, in the case of
Property regarding which an offence appears to have been committed,
not only such property as has been originally in the possession or under
the control of any person, but also any property into or for which the
same may have been converted or exchanged, and anything acquired
by such conversion or exchange whether immediately or otherwise.

152. Any trial by a court-martial under the provisions of this Act
shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of
sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code, and the court-martial shall
be deemed to be a court within the meaning of sections 480 and 482 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.

* * . * *

174. When a sentence of fine is imposed by a court-martial under
section 69 whether the trial was held within India or not, a copy of such
sentence, signed and certified by the confirming officer, or where no
confirmation is required, by the officer holding the trial may be sent
to any magistrate in India, and such magistrate shall thereupon cause
the fine to be recovered in accordance with the provisions of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1898, or any corresponding law in force in the
State of Jammu and Kashmir for the levy of fines as if it were a
sentence of fine imposed by such magistrate.

* * * * *
CHAPTER XV
RULES
191. (7) * * * * *

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the power conferred by
sub-section (1), the rules made thereunder may provide for—
* ® * * .

(c) the specification of the punishments which may be awarded
as field punishments under sections 75 and 80;

* * * * =

CHAPTER XVI
TRANSITORY PROVISIONS

195. (1) In this Chapter “British officer” means a person of non-
Indian domicile holding a commission in His Majesty's Land Forces or in
the Royal Marines or in the Territorial Army and serving in the regular

Army. H

(2) The expression “superior officer” in this Act shall be deemed to
include a British officer.

=, 196. A British officer shall have all the powers conferred by this
Act on an officer of corresponding rank or holding a corresponding
| !

45 of 1860.
5 of 1898.

5 of 1888.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Army Act, 1950.

(Shri S. Krishna Kumar, Minister of State in the
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and
Ministry of Defence.)