8m No. 79 or 1957 
THE PROBATION OF OFFENDERS 
BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

BUlNo. 19 of 1'5% 
THE PROBATION OE OFFENDERS BILL, 1957 
A 
BILL 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE LoK SABHA) 
to provide for the release of offender. Oft probation. or aft..,. clue 
admonition and for matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Probation of Offenders Act, Short title. 
1957. . estcnt and com .. ence-
S (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu 
and Kas~ 
(J) It shall come into force in a State on such date as the State 
Government may, by notification in the Oftlclal Gazette, appoint, and 
different dates may be appointed for different parts of the State. 
10 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Code" means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898; 
(b) "probation offtcer" means an offteer appointed to be a 
probation offtcer or recognised as such under section 11; 
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under 
IS this Act; 
(d) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act 
and defined in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, shall have 
the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Code. 
IlMUt. 

Power of 
coun to 
release 
certain 
offenders 
after ad-
monition. 
Power or 
court to 
releue 
certain 
offender. on 
probation 
~D=. 
a 
3. When any person is found guilty of having committed an 
offence punishable under section 379 or section 380 or section 381 
or section 403 or section 420 of the Indian Penal Code or any offence 
punishable with imprisonment for not more than two years, or with 
fine, or with both, under the Indian Penal Code or any other law, 5 
and no previous conviction is proved against him and the court by 
which the person is found guilty is of opinion that, having regard 
to the circumstances of the case including the nature of the offence 
and the character of the offender, it is expedient 80 to' do, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 10 
being 'in"force, the court may, instead of sentencing him to any 
p\Ulishment or releasing him on probatio~ of good conduct under 
section 4, release him' after due admonition. 
4. (1) When any person is found guilty of having committed an 
offence not punishable with death or imprisonment for ltfe and the 15 
court by which the person is found guilty is of opinion that, having 
regard to the circumstances of the case including the nature of the 
offence and the character of the offender, it is expedient to release 
h!m on' 'probation of ftOd conduct, then, notwithstanding anything 
contained in' any' other law for tbetime being in fOl'ce, the court 20 
may, instead of sentencing him at once to any punishment, direct 
that he 'be released on his entering into a bond, with or without 
sureties, to appear and receive sentence when called upon during 
such p2riod, not exceeding three years, as the court may direct, 
and in the meantime to keep the peace and be of good behaviour: 25 
Provided that the court shall not direct such release of an offen-
der unleSl 1t is latisfted. that the offender or bts surety, il any, has 
a fixed place of abode or regular occupation in the place-OYer which 
the court exercises jurisdiction or in which the oftender is likely to 
live c.turtilgtbe 'period for whieh he enters into the bonet. 30 
(2) Before making any order .under sub-section (1), the court 
shall take into consideration the report, if any, of the probation om-
cer concerned in 'relation to the case· 
(J) When an order under Bub-section (1) is made, the court 
may, if it is of opinion that in the interests of the offender and of 35 
the public itia expedient 10 to do, in addition pass a supervision 
order direeting -that the offender shall remain under~the supervision 
of a probation officer named in the order during such period, not 
be1ng tess than one year,as may be speCified therein, and may In 
such supervision order impose such conditions as it deems necessary 40 
for the due supervision of the offender. 
(4) The oourt making a supervision order under sub-section (3) 
shall require the offender, before he is released, to enter into a bond, 
4S of 1860. 

J 
With or without sureties, to observe the· conditions spec1fted·in such 
order and such additional conditions with respect to residence, 
abEtention from intoxicants and any other matters as the court may, 
having regard to the particular circumatances, consider fit to impose 
5 for preventing a repetition of the same offence or a commission of 
other offences by the offender . • 
(5) The court making a supervision order under: sub-section (3) 
.hall explain to the offender the terms and conditions of the order 
and shall forthwith furnish one copy of the supervision order to 
10 each of the offenders, the sureties, if any, and the probation officer 
ccmeemed. . .":"""",~, 
5. (1) The court directing the release of an offender under sec- Power of 
tion 3 or section 4, may, if it thinks fit, make at the same time a fur- :Ireto 
ther order. directing him to pay- refuted offenders to 
15 (a) such compensation as the court thinks reasonable for g~8~~i!!~ 
loss or injury caused to any person by the commission of the and. costs. 
offence; and 
(b) such costs of the proceedings as the court thinks reason-
able. 
20 (2) The amount ordered to be paid under sub4ection (1) may 
be '1'eCovered as a fine in aceordanee witbthe provisions of aectioas 
386 and 387 of the Code. 
(3) A civil court trying oy suit, arising out of the same matter 
for which the offender is prosecuted, shall take into account any 
2S amount paid or recovered as compensation qn.der sub-section (1) 
in awarding damages. 
6. (1) If, on the application of a probation ofticer, any court vandi'~t!o[l orof . con nons 
which passes an order under sectIon 4 in respect of an offender is probation. 
of opinion that in the interests of the offender and the public it 
30 is expedient or necessary to vary the conditions of any bond enter-
ed into by the offender, it mny, at any time during the period when 
the bond is effective, vary the bond by extending or diminishing 
the duration thereof so, however, that it shall not exceed three years 
from the date of the. original order or by altering the conditions 
3S thereof or by inserting additional conditions therein: 
Provided that no such variation shall be made without giving 
the offender and the surety or sureties mentioned in the boftd . an 
opportunity of being heard. 
(2) If any surety refuses t~ consent to any vari,ation proposed 
40 to be made under sub-section (1), the court may require the offender 

.. 
to enter into a fresh- bond and' if the offender refuses or fails to do 
so, the court may sentence him for the offence of which he was found 
guilty. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, the court 
which passes an order under section 4 in respect of an offender may, S 
if it is satisfied on an application made by the probation officer, that 
the conduct of the offender has been such as to make it unnecessary 
that he should be kept any longer under supervision, discharge the 
bond or bonds entered into by him. 
R.ellmtric~ons 7. (1) When 6I1y person under twenty-one years of age is found 10 on pnSOD-
ment of guilty of having committed an offence punhhable with imprison-
offend der ~ ment (but not with imprisonment for life), the court by which the un e ... CD-
ty-one years person is found guilty shall not sentence him to imprisonment un-
of &Ie. less it is satisfied that, having regard to the circumstances of the 
case including the nature of the offence and the character of the IS 
offender, it would not be desirable to deal with him under section 3 
or section 4, and if the court passes any sentence of imprisonment on 
the offender, it shall record its realons for doing so. . 
(2) Before passing a sentence of imprisonment on any offender 
~erred to in sub-section (1), the court shall call for a report from 20 
the probation officer and consider the report, if any, and any other 
information available to it relating to the character and physical 
and mental condition of the offender. 
(3) The report of the probation officer referred to in sub-section 
(2) shall be treated as confidential: 25 
Provided that the court may, if it so thinks fit, communicate the 
substance thereof to the offender and may give him an opportunity 
of producing such evidence as may be relevant to the matter stated 
in the report. 
Procedure in 8. (1) If the court which passes an order under section 4 in res- 30 
:ftndfr pect of an offender or any court which could have dealt with the 
f.mng offender in respect of his original offence has reason to believe, on 
:~:Id:: the report of a probation officer or otherwise-, that the offender has 
of bond. failed to observe any of the cooditlons of the bond or bonds entered 
into by him, it may issue a warrant for his arrest or may, if it thinks 35 
fit, issue a summons to him and his sureties, if any, requiring him 
or them to attend before it at such time as may be specified in the 
summons. 
(2) The court before which an oftender is so brought or appears 
may either remand him. to custody until the case is concluded or it 40 
may grant him bail, with or without surety, to appear on the date . 
which it may fix for hearing. 

., 
(3) If the court, after hearing the case, is satis6ed that the offen-
der has failed to observe any of the conditions of the bond or bonds 
entered into by him, it may forthwith-
(a) sentence him for the original offence; or 
S (b) where the failure is for the first time, then, without 
'prejudice to the continuance in force of the bond. impose upon 
him a penalty not exceeding fifty rupees. .. 
(4) If a penalty imposed under clause (b) of sub-section (3) is 
not paid within such period as the court may fix, the court may 
10 selltence the offender for the original offence. 
t. The provisions of sections 122, 126, 126~ 406A, 514, 514A, 514B Provilion 
and 515 of the Code shall, so far as may be, apply in the case of ~:~es. 
bonds and sureties given under this Act. 
10. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code or any Courts 
IS other law, an order under this Act may be made by any court em- competent . . to make ordon powered to try and sentence the offender to unpnsonment and also uncler the 
by the High Court or any other court when the case comes before Actd, aPJ?calj . . an reVIS on it on appeal or m reviSIon. and powers 
of courts in 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, where an appeal and 
20 order under section 3 or section 4 is made by any court trying the revision. 
offender (other than a High Court), QD. appeal shall lie to the court 
to which appeals ordinarily lie from the sentences of the .former 
court. 
(3) In any case where any person under twenty-one years of 
25 age is found guilty of having committed an offence and the court 
by which he is found guilty declines to deal with him under section 
3 or section 4, and passes any sentence of imprisonment on the offen-
der from which no appeal lies or is preferred, then notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code or any other law, the court to 
30 which appeals ordinarily lie from the sentences of the former court 
may, either of its own motion or on an application made to it by 
the convicted person or the probation officer, call for and examine 
the records of the case and set aside the sentence and in lieu there-
of make an order under section 3 or section 4. 
3S (4) When an order has been made under section 3 or section 4 
in respect of an offenders, the Appellate Court or the High Court 
in the exercise of its power of revision may set tiide such order and 
in lieu thereof pass sentence on such offender according to law: 
Provided that the Appellate Court or the High Court in revision 
.;.0 shall not inflict a greater punishment than might have been inflict-
ed by the court by which the offender was found guilty. 

Probation 
officers. 
Duties of 
probation 
deen. 
Removal 
of disquali-
lication 
attaching to 
conviction. 
6 
11. (1) A prelNatiOB oftleer mul8I' tWa Act 1IaaII· __ 
(a) a person appointed to be a probation oSCel' by the 
State Government or recopised as such by the State Govern-
Dlent; or 
(b) a person provided for this purpose by a society l'eCOI- S 
D.ised in this behaU by the State Government; or 
(c) in, aay, e:ueptioaal case, any other peI'8GD who, in the 
opiniaD. of. the court, ia fit to act .. a p!'Obation 08lcer iD tIM 
special circumstances of the cue. 
(2) A court which passes an order under section 4 or the·district 10 
magistrate of the district in which the offender for the time beini 
resides may, at any time, appoint any probation officer in the place 
of the person named in the supervision order. 
ErpZanation.-For the purposes of this section, a presidency town 
shall be deemed to be a district and chief presidency map;trate shall IS 
be deemed to be the district magistrate of that district. 
(3) A probation officer, in the exercise of his duties under any 
supervision order, shall be subect to the control of the district magis-
trate of the district in which the offender for the time being resides. 
12. A probation officer shall, subject to such conditions and res- 20 
trictions, as may be prescribed. 
<a) inquire, in accordance with any directions of a court, 
into the circumstances or home surroundings of any person 
with a view to assist the court in determining the most suitable 
method of dealing with him; 25 
(b) supervise probationers and other persons placed under 
his supervision and, where neceasary, endeavour to find them 
suitable employment; 
(c) advise and assist offenders in the paY.Dlent of compen-
sation or costs ordered by the court; 30 
(d) advise and assist, in such cases and in such maDner as 
may be prescribed, persons who have been released under 
section 4; and 
(e) perform such other duties as may be prtllCribeci. 
13. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, a person 3S 
foun' guilty of an offence and dealt with under the provisions of 
section 3 or section 4 shall not suffer disqualification, if any, attach-
ing to a conviction of an offence· under such law: 

7 
Provided that nothing in this. section shall apply to a person who. 
after his release under section 4, is subsequently sentenced for the 
original offence. 
14. Every probation officer or any other officer appointed in pur. ~bation 
5 suance of this Act shall be deemed to be a public servant within the be ;bli~o 
45 of 1861>. meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. servant •. 
8 of 1897. 
104 of 1956. 
15. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the State ~~~~f 
Government or any probation officer or any other officer appointed in good faith. 
under, this Act in respect of anything which is in good faith done or 
10 intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of Gny rules or 
orders made thereunder. 
16. (1) The State Government may, with the approval of the P~~r lle° m-", ru 8. 
Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, ,make 
rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
15 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
20 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of th~ 
following matters, namely:-
(a) appointment of probation officers, the terms. and condi-
tions of their service and the area within which they are to 
exercise jurisdiction; 
(b) duties 9f probation officers under this Act and the sub-
mission of reports by them; 
(c) the conditions on which societies may be recognised for 
the purposes of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 11; 
(d) the payment of remuneration and expenses to probation 
oftlcers or o! a subsidy to any society which provides probation 
oftlcers; and 
(e) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) All rules made under this section shall be subject to the 
30 condition of previous publication. 
17. Nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions of section 31 of savinL of 
Reformatory Schools Act, 1897, or the Suppression of Immoral ~ 
Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 1956, or of any law in force in anyenctmepts. 
State relating to juvenile offenders or borstal schools. 
3S 18. Section 562 of the Code shall cease to apply to the States or :~':,'; the 
parts thereof in which this Act is brought into force. Code Dlot . t(UPP y ID 
certain areas. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The question of release of offenders on probation of good conduct 
instead of sentencing them to imprisonment has been uncic' 
consideration for some time. In 1931, the Government of India 
prepared a draft of Probation of Offenders Bill and circulated it to 
the then Local Governments for their views. However, owing to' 
pre-occupation with other more important matters, the Bill could 
not be proceeded with. Later in 1934, the Government of lncUa 
informed Provincial Governments that there was no prospect of 
Central legislation being undertaken at the time and there would 
be no objection to the Provinces undertaking such legislation them-
selves. A few Provinces accordingly enacted their own probation 
laws. 
2. In several States, however, there are no separate probation 
laws at all. Even in States where there are probation laws, they 
are not uniform nor are they adequate to meet the present require-
ments. In the meantime, there has been an increasing emphasis on 
the reformation and rehabilitation of the offender as a useful and 
self-reliant member of society without subjecting him to the deleter-
ious effects of jail life. In view of the wide-spread interest in the 
probation system in the country, this question has been re-examined 
and it is proposed to have a Central law on the subject which should 
be unifor~ally applicable to ~ll the States. 
3. It is propoRed to empower Courts to release an offender after 
admonition in respect of certain specified offences. It is also pro-
posed to empower Courts to release on probation, in all suitaU~ 
cases, an offender found guilty of having committed an offence not 
punishable with death or imprisonment for life. Ifi respect of 
offenders under 21 years of age, special provision has been made 
putting restrictions on their imptisonment. D~g the period of 
probation, offenders will remain under the supervision of probation 
officers in order that they may be reformed and become usefuJ 
members of society. The Bill seeks to achieve these objects. 
G. B. PANT. 
NEW Dr.IJu; 
The 19th September, 1957. 
8 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 16 of t.he Probation of Offenders Bill, 1957, empowers the 
State Governments to make rules in respect of matters specified 
therein. They relate inter alia to the appointment of probation 
officers. their duties and terms and conditions of service, submission 
of reports by them, conditions on which societies may be recognised 
for the purpose of providing probation officers and payment of sub-
sidy to any such recognised societies and of remuneration and 
expenses to probation officers. The matters in respect of which 
rules may be made are of a routine and administrative character. 
Moreover, the rules to be made by State Governments are subject 
to the approval of the Central Government. The delegation of 
legislative power is thus of a normal character. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 11 of the Probation of Offenders Bill, 1957, contemplates 
the appointment by the State Governments of Probation Officers for 
discharging the various duties specified in the Bill. Some staff may 
also be required to '.lssist the probation officers. 
2. The expenditure on the probation officers and staff to be 
appointed by the State Governments will be borne by those Gov-
ernments. The Central Government will be' responsible only for 
the expenditure on the probation officers and their staff in the 
Union territories. A Probation Act is already in force in Delhi and 
little additional expenditure will be required on account of this 
legislation. In the other Union territories. which are small, the 
problem of crime and crimiools is not acute and consequently the 
expenditure on the probation officers and their staff is not expected 
to be appreciable. 
10 
~.\ ._ J. •.. , .. 
.' . 
GMGlPND-LS 1-1368 L5-8-II-S7-1700 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the release of offenders on probation or after 
due admonition and for matters connected therewith. 
(Shri Govind Ballabh Pant, 
Minister of Home Affairs.) 