THE INDllStRIAL Dlspu'rEs (BANKING COMPANIES) 
DECISION AMENDMENT HILL, I9~8 
. p.~.--
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

Bill No." of J,JI.; 
THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES (BANKING COMPANIES) 
DECISION AMENDMENT BILL, 19~8 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Industrial Disputes (Banking Companies) 
Decision Act, 1955. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Industrial Disputes (Banking Short title, 
Companies) Decision Amendment Act, 1958. 
2. In the Industrial Disputes (Banking Companies) Decision AmeIldment 
Act, 1955, in section 3, after sub-section (4), the following sub- of 8ection 3· 
section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing 
provisions of this section, the Central Government may, from 
time to time by notification in the Official Gazette, make in lieu 
of the adjustment of the dearness allowance recommended in 
clause 1 (e) of Chapter XI of the Report of the Bank Award 
Commission, such adjustment thereof as it thinks fit for any 
period subsequent to the 31st December, 1957, with reference to 
the rise or fall, as compared to 144 (19440 -100), of the average 
all-India cost of living index for any period immediately preced-
ing that period; and upon the issue of such notification the 
adjustment of dearness allowance so made for any period shall 
be deemed to have been recommended in clause 1 (e) of the 
Report of that Commission: 
Provided that any adjustment so made shall, so far as may 
be, bear to the rise or fall of the cost of living index the same 
ratio as is indicated between the adjustment of dearness allow-
ance and the rise or fall of the cost of living index in the for-
mulre recommended in that clause.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bank Award Commission laid down certain formul;e for 
the adjustment of the dearness allowance payable to bank employees 
for variations in the cost of living index. The formul~ provided 
for changes after intervals of six months and after a fall or rise of 
not less than ten points in the cost of living; index level. I t has 
been represented on behalf of the employees that the interval of 
six months is too long a period. Further, a considerable amount of 
hardship is caused to the workers if the index level rises consider-
ably, but does not actually reach ten points. An agreement has 
been arrived at between the State Bank of India and its employees 
to solve the above difficulties. The two associations of banks are 
agreeable to follow suit. The matter has been examined and it is 
proposed. to vest the Government with powers to modify the for-
mulle within the ratio laid down in the original formulle of the 
Bank Award Commission. This Bill seeks to give effect to this 
proposal. I 
NEW DELHI; 
The 4t~ Ju.ne, 1958. 
G. L. NANDA. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES (BANKING COMPANIES) 
DECISION ACT, 1955 
(41 OF 1955) 
/: 
• • • • 
3. (1) The appellate decision shall have effect as if the modifi- AppdJ He 
cations recommended in Chapter XI of the Report of the Bank g~~:i~~~ 
Award Commission, dated the 25th day of July, 1955, had actually subjrct ~o 
been made therein, and the appellate decision as so modified shall !r:D~~:: 
be the decision of the Appellate Tribunal within the meaning of mended by 
the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950, and the ~:!d~m-
award shall have effect accordingly. mission. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
recommendations in Chapter XI of the Report of the Bank Award 
Commission in relation to the banking companies incorporated in 
the former State of Travancore-Cochin specified in that Chapter 
shall be modified and shall be deemed to have been modified-
(a) with effect from the 1st January, 1955, in relation to the 
C Class banks known as the South Indian Bank Limited, 
Trichur, and the Catholic Syrian Bank Limited, Trichur, as if-
(J) in clause (I) of the said recommendations-
(i) under the heading "C Class", after the entry 
"(viii), Travancore' Bank", the entries" (ix) , South 
Indian Bank, Trichur" and" (x), Catholic Syrian Bank, 
Trichur", had been inserted; 
(ii) items (i) and (ii) under sub-clause (b) had 
been omitted; and 
(2) in clause (2) thereof, after the words "Travancore 
Bank", the words "the South Indian Bank, Trichur, and 
the Catholic Syrian Bank, Trichur" had been inserted; lind 
(b) with' effect from the 1st January, 1956, in relation to 
the C Class banks known as the Palai Central Bank Limited, 
Palai, and the Travancore Forward Bank Limited, Kottayam, 
and the D Class banks, as if in clause (J) of the said recom-
mendations, items (i) and (ii) under sub-clause (b) had been 
omitted. 
3 

. 
(3) The arrears of emoluments payable to the workmen of the 
banking companies specified in sub-section (2) by reason. of the 
modifications effected by that sub-section shall be paid as follows: --
(a) .in the case of the banking companies specified in clause 
(a) of that sub-section-
(i) the arrears for the year 1955 shall be paid in two 
equal instalments of which the first shall be paid within 
thirty days from the commencement of the Industrial Dis-
putes (Banking Companies) Decision Amendment Act, 
1957, and the second within six months after such com-
mencement; and 
(ii) the arrears for the period from the 1st January, 
1956, to such commencement shall be paid within thirty 
days thereof; 
(b) in the case of the banking companies specified in 
clause (b) of that sub-section, the arrears for the period from 
the 1st January, 1956, to such commencement shall be paid 
within thirty days thereof. 
(4) For the purposes of this section, the expression "the former 
State of Travancore-Cochin" means the State of Travancore-Cochin 
as it existed immediately before the 1st November, 1956 . 
• • • • • 

tol{ SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Industrial Disputes (Banking Companies) 
Decision Act, 1955. 
(Shri Gulzarilal Nanda, 
Minister of Labour a12d Employment and Plannin,?) 