As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
BIU No. 79 of I'" 
THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND BANK 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1969 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the International Monetary Fund and Bank Act, 1945. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the International Monetary Fund and 
Bank (Amendment) Act, 1969. 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
10 
15 
may, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In section 2 of the International Monetary Fund and Bank Act, 1945 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) for the words "There shall be paid out of the ConsoUdated 
Fund of India". the words "There shall be paid, after dUe appropria-
tion made hy Parliament by law in this behalf, out of the Consolidat-
ed FaDd. of India" shaD be substituted; 
(b) in clause (c), after'the words and figures "under section 8 of 
Article V", the words and figures ", or under seetion 2, section 3 or 
section 5 of Article XXVI," shall be inserted; 
Short title 
&ad com-
mence-
ment. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 2. 

Insertion 
of new 
lecticm 3A. 
Reserve 
Bank to 
use, re-
ceive, 
acquire, 
etc., specia~ 
drawing 
richts on 
bebaJ1 of 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
(c) after dause (d), the followt .... elause shall be iDaertetI, ..... 
1,:-
"(del) any assessments required to be paid by the c.tral 
Govel'DJllent to the Intematioaal Fund under section , or seetlon 
5 of Article XXVI of the Fund AlP'eement;". 
3. After section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
5 
"3A. The Reserve Bank may, on behalf of the Central Govern-
ment, use, receive, acquire, hold, transfer or operate the spceial 
drawing riahts of that Government in the International Fund and J 0 
perform all acts suppl@mental or incidental thereto.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Re-
construction and Development were brought into existence through an 
international agreement concluded at the U.N. Monetary and Financial 
Conference held in 1945, and India became one of the original members 
of the,c;e institutions by signing the respective Articles of Agreement. An 
Ordinance called "the International Monetary Fund and Bank Ordinance, 
1945", was promulgated in December, 1945, to implement the agreements 
under which these two institutions were established. In 1959, the Board 
of Governors of the International Bank decided on an increase in the 
authorised capital stock of the Bank and a general 100 per cent. increase 
in the subscriptions cf all member countries. Since the Ordinuce did 
not authorise payment in respect of increase in our subscription on ac-
count of increase in the authorised capital stock of the Bank, it became 
necessary to amend the Ordinance and provide for such authority. The 
Ordinance was accordingly amended and at the same time converted into 
the International Monetary Fund and Bank Act, 1945. 
2. The Board of Governors of the International Monetary Fund have 
now approved certain amendments to the Articles of Agreement of the 
Fund providing inter alia for the establishment of a facility based on the 
Special DraWing Rights Scheme to meet the need, as and when it arises, for 
a supplement to the existing monetary reserve assets. With the establish-
ment of the Special Drawing Rights Scheme it will be open to members 
of the Fund to participate in the scheme. Participants in the scheme will, 
when it is activated. be entitled to allocation of Special Drawing Rights 
which could be used 8S a supplement to the foreign monetary reserve 
auets of the member, in accordance with the provisiOns in the Articles. 
In this connection certain charges for the use of Special Drawing Rights 
and assessments to meet the expenses of working the scheme would be-
come payable by participating members. 
3. The existing provisions of the International Monetary Fund and 
Bank Act, 1945, which provide for the payment of charges under the 
nonnal operations of the Fund will need amendment to provide for the 
payment of charges or assessments in connection with the Special Draw-
ing Rights Scheme. It is also necessary to empower the Reserve Bank of 
India to act on behalf of the Government in regard to this scheme. 
Hence the Bill seeks to amend the International Monetary Fund and 
Bank Act, 1945, to provide for the payment of charges and aRSessments 
in connection with the Special Drawing Rights Scheme and also to 
empower the Reserve Bank of India to act as designated authority on be-
half of the Government to receive, acquire, hold, tran.ct and operate 
Special Drawing Rights and to perform all acts incidental thereto. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 23rd August, 1969. P. C. SETHI. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend section 2 of the International 
Monetary Fund and Bank Act, 1945, with the object of enabling the Cen-
tral Government, after due appropriation, to payout of the Consolidated 
Fund of India such sums as may from time to time be necessary for the 
payment of charges and assessments on the use of the Special Drawing 
Rights that may be created by the Fund. It is not possible to estimate 
at this smge thc payments which will have to be made as the :lctivation 
and operation of the Special Drawing Rights Scheme will depend on deci-
sions to be taken by the Board of Governors of the Fund in ,iccordance 
with the amended Articles of the Fund. The quantum of allocation of 
Special Drawing Rights and the period over which the allocetion will 
be made are also decisions yet to be taken by the Board of Governors. It 
is proposed in the amendments to the Articles of the Fund that participat-
ing members in the Scheme should pay charges on the net cumulative 
use of Special Dmwing Rights. Assessments are payable by participants 
to meet the administrative caSts of operating the Special Drawing Ac-
count. The rate of charges is initially fixed at 1.5 per cent. on the use of 
Special Drawing Rights. Appropriate assessments as decided by the Fund 
will be payable at a rate not greater than 2-per cent. or the rate of remu-
neration decided under Article V, Section 9t whichever is higher 'and not 
smaller than 1 per cent. or the rate of remuneration decided under Article 
V, Section 9, whichever is lower, to the Gellenll Account of the Fund· for 
meeting the cost of operations of the S~al Drawing Account. These 
charges and assessments will be paid in Special DrawfngRightf!' Apart 
from these payments that may arise from time to time in the future, flO 
other recurring or non-recurring expenditure is involved. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM TilE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND BANK ACT, 1945 
• • • • • 
2. (1) There shall be paid out of the Consolidat1!d Fund of India all Pay mente 
such sums as may from time to time be required for the purpoSE' of to Interns-
paying- tlonal 
Fund 
• • • • • 
(c) any charges payable by the Central Government to the In· 
ternational Fund under section 8 of Article V of the Fund Agreement; 
• • • • • 
and Bank . 

" .. .., . 
. ~. -' .-,.,. ,:,~ 
~ , "',. f ,"'.,.... ,~., _. 
LOK SABHA 
. , 
A 
BILL 
:, 
funher to a111end the International Monetary Fund and Bank ACt, 1945. 
, . 