1
THE ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION (CONTROL OF
NON-BIODEGRADABLE GARBAGE) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI SHARAD TRIPA THI, M.P.
A
BILL
to prevent throwing or depositing non-biodegradable garbage in public drains, roads
and places open to public view so as to protect the environment from being polluted by
such garbage and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS decisions were taken at the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment held at Stockholm in June, 1972, in which India participated, to take appropriate
steps for the protection and improvement of human environment;
A
ND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to implement the decisions aforesaid to protect
the environment from the ill-effects of non- biodegradable garbage;
AND WHEREAS article 48A of the Constitution enjoins upon the State to endeavour to
protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wildlife of the
country.
Bill No. 79 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Environment Protection (Control of
Non-biodegradable Garbage) Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "biodegradable garbage" means the garbage or waste material capable of
being destroyed by the action of living beings or microorganisms;
(c) "house gully" means a passage or strip of land constructed, set apart or
utilized for the purpose of serving or carrying a drain or affording access to the latrine,
urinal, cesspool or other receptacle for filth or other polluted matter, by persons
employed in the clearing thereof or in the removal of such matters therefrom;
(d) "local self-Government" means a Panchayat, Municipality or a Cantonment
Board or any such authority by whatever name called;
(e) "market" includes any place where people assemble or which is exposed for
sale of meat, fish, fruits, vegetables, food, or any other articles for human use or
consumption with or without the consent of the owner of such place or any other
person or authority empowered to regulate such activities;
(f) "municipal area" means a territorial area within the jurisdiction of local self-
Government:
(g) "non-biodegradable garbage" means the garbage or waste material which is
not biodegradable and includes polythene, nylon and other plastic goods such as
Polyvinyl Chloride, Polypropylene and Polystyrene;
(h) "occupier "includes—
(i) any person who for the time being is paying or is liable to pay to the
owner the rent or any portion of the rent of the land or building in respect of
which such rent is paid or is payable;
(ii) an owner in occupation of or otherwise using his land or building;
(iii) any person in occupation of a land or building without payment of
any rent or other consideration; and
(iv) any person who is liable to pay to the owner damages for the use and
occupation of any land or building;
(i) "owner" includes a person who for the time being is receiving or is entitled to
receive, the rent of any land or building, whether on his own account or on account of
himself and others or as an agent, trustee, guardian or receiver for any other or who
should so receive the rent or be entitled to receive it if the land or building or part
thereof were let to a tenant;
(j) "place" means any land or building or part of a building and includes garden,
ground and out houses, if any, pertaining to a building or part of a building;
(k) "place open to public view " includes any private place or building, monument,
fence or balcony visible to a person being in, or passing along, any public place;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(l) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(m) "public place" means any place which is open to use and enjoyment of the
public whether it is actually used or enjoyed by the public or not and includes a road,
street, market, house gully or way, whether a thoroughfare or not, and landing place to
which public are granted access or have a right to resort or over which they have
a right to pass.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the appropriate Government shall, in order to protect the environment, ensure that no person,
by himself or through another, shall knowingly or otherwise throw or cause to be thrown in
any drain, ventilation shaft, pipe and fittings, connected with the private or public drainage
works, any non-biodegradable garbage or any biodegradable garbage in a non-biodegradable
bag or container likely to—
(a) injure the drainage and sewage system;
(b) interfere with the free flow or affect the treatment and disposal of drain and
sewage contents; or
(c) be dangerous or cause a nuisance or be prejudicial to public health or
environment.
(2) No person shall, knowingly or otherwise, place or permit to be placed, except in
accordance with such procedure and after complying with such safeguards as may be
prescribed, any biodegradable or non-biodegradable garbage in any public place or in a
place open to public view, unless,—
(a) the garbage is placed in a garbage receptacle; or
(b) the garbage is deposited in a location designated by a local self-Government
institution having jurisdiction on an area for the disposal of the garbage.
4. It shall be the duty of the local self-Government to—
(a) provide at proper and convenient places public receptacles, depots or places
for temporary deposit or collection of non-biodegradable garbage;
(b) provide separate dustbins for temporary deposit of non-biodegradable
garbage other than those kept and maintained for deposit of biodegradable garbage;
(c) provide for the removal of contents of receptacles, depots and the accumulation
at all places provided by it under clause (a); and
(d) arrange for recycling of the non-biodegradable garbage collected under this
Act.
5. It shall be the duty of every owner and occupier—
(a) to collect or cause to be collected from their respective land and buildings,
the non-biodegradable garbage and to deposit, or cause to be deposited, in public
receptacles, depots or places provided for temporary deposit or collection of the
non-biodegradable garbage by the local self-Government institution in the area;
(b) to ensure disposal of non-biodegradable waste in separate receptacles or
dustbins in the manner prescribed by the local self-Government institution and to keep
such receptacles or dustbins in good condition.
6. The appropriate Government may, by notice in writing, require the owner or occupier
of any land or building, which has become a place of unauthorized stacking or deposit of
non-biodegradable garbage and is likely to cause a nuisance, to remove or cause to be
removed the deposited garbage so stacked or; and if, in its opinion, such stacking or deposit
of non-biodegradable waste is likely to injure the drainage and sewage system or is likely to
Prohibition
to throw
non-
biodegradable
garbage in
public drains
and sewage.
Provision for
placement of
receptacles
and places.
Duty of
owners and
occupiers to
collect and
deposit non-
biodegradable
garbage, etc.
Removal of
non-
biodegradable
garbage.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
be dangerous to life,  health and environment, it shall forthwith take such steps at the cost of
owner or occupier as it may think necessary.
7. (1) Manufacturing of soft drink bottles, shampoo and detergent bottles used with
Polyethylene Terephthalate, milk bottles, household cleaners, supermarket bags used with
high density polyethylene, bread bags used with low density polyethylene, bread bag tags,
jars and wrapping films used with polyethylene resins and mixed plastic used for making
feathers, toys, or such other items is hereby prohibited.
(2) No person shall use plastic or its derivatives for manufacturing any article for use
by infants.
8. (1) Whoever commits any act in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act
shall be punished with fine which may extend upto five thousand rupees.
(2) Whoever having been convicted of an offence under this Act is again convicted of
any offence under this Act shall be punished with fine which may extend upto ten thousand
rupees.
(3) Whoever in any manner aids or abets the commission of any offence under this Act
shall be punished with fine which may extend upto five thousand rupees.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, an
offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable and bailable.
9. (1) If the person committing an offence punishable under this Act is a Company,
every person who, at the time of the commission of the offence, was in-charge of, and
responsible to the Company for the conduct of the business of the Company, as well as the
Company shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render any person liable to any
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent commission of the offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a Company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any gross negligence on
the part of any Director, Manager, Secretary or other officer, such Director, Manager, Secretary
or officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section.—
(a) "Company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(b) "Director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.
10. All offences under this Act shall be tried in a summary way by a Judicial Magistrate
of the First Class and the provisions of sections 262 to 265 (both inclusive) of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall, as far as may be, apply to such trials.
11. Any offence punishable under this Act may, before the institution of the prosecution,
be compounded by the local self-Government institution concerned or by such officer as
may be authorized by the appropriate Government in this behalf, on payment, for credit to the
local self-Government institution concerned, of such sums not exceeding the amount of fine
fixed for that offence.
 12. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide requisite funds, from time to time for the purposes of this Act.
Prohibition of
manufacture
of plastic
products for
packaging of
certain items.
Penalties.
Offences by
Companies.
Offences to be
tried
summarily.
Central
Government
to  provide
funds.
Compounding
of offences.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.

5
13. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Savings.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Environment pollution and its ill effects have attracted the attention the world over
and ways and means to control the pollution are being thought of and implemented. In this
regard removal of garbage has become a major problem in cities and towns. Solid waste
disposal is the duty of local self government institutions. Major portion of the solid waste is
of bio-degradable nature, i.e. it can be destroyed by the action of living being and micro
organism. Such bio-degradable garbage can be converted into compost or used as a source
of energy or manure. Whereas, non-biodegradable garbage is the bane of modern civilization.
The advent of plastic made up of Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC), Polypropylene and Polystyrene
and other substances create environmental disasters leading to health hazards. Such
substance chokes gutters, drain and marine outfalls, creating nightmare for sewage
engineering. It clogs the soil, preventing the free flow of water through it and depleting it of
its fertility and water tables. The Bill seeks to control the use and disposal of such
non-bio-degradable substances.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI;  SHARAD TRIPATHI
February 25, 2016.
————
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117(3) OF THE CONSTITUTION
[Copy of letter No. 2-12/2016-HSMD dated 7 April, 2016 from Shri Prakash Javadekar,
Minister of State, of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to the
Secretary General, Lok Sabha.]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Environment Protection
(Control of Non-Biodegradable Garbage) Bill, 2015 by Shri Sharad Tripathi, Member of
Parliament, recommends to the House the consideration of the Bill under article 117(3) of the
Constitution.
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 12 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite
funds after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, from time to time for
the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees ten crore
would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
7

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
8

GMGIPMRND—5312LS(S3)—16.04.2016.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prevent throwing or depositing non-biodegradable garbage in public drains, roads and
places open to public view so as to protect the environment from being polluted by
such garbage and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Sharad Tripathi, M.P.)