1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE COMPULSORY ESTABLISHMENT OF GOVERNMENT WOMEN
COLLEGE BILL, 2019
By
SHRI AJAY MISRA ‘TENI’, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory establishment of Government Women College at block
level and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Establishment of Government Women
College Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 79 of  2019
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(c) "woman" means a woman who has received education upto intermediate
level.
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish adequate number of Government
colleges at block level to provide graduate and post-graduate level education to women.
(2) The appropriate Government may, if it deems necessary, upgrade any existing
college for carrying out the purposes of sub-section (1) in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. Every woman enrolled in a college established or upgraded under section (3) shall
be provided with the following facilities:—
(i) cost of admission and fee including all other expenditure;
(ii) books free of cost;
(iii) free hostel facility, whenever necessary; and
(iv) scholarship in appropriate cases.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite Funds, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Establishment
of
Government
Women's
College.
Facilities to
be provided to
students
enrolled in
colleges.
Power to
make rules.
Central
Government
to provide the
requisite fund.
5
10
15
20
25

3
STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS   AND  REASONS
Pivotal role of complete education of girls and boys for strengthening the social
framework by providing equal opportunity has been acknowledged in our Republic from its
inception. Presently, the female literacy rate is nearly sixty-five per cent. out of which the
percentage of higher education is appropriately twenty-four per cent. Rural areas have
witnessed a higher increase in literacy rate from the urban areas. Interest of women is
increasing in higher education but the lack of adequate number of Government Women
Colleges has become a roadblock in the upliftment of such women. Lack of Government
women colleges despite an increasing number of educated women in the country is affecting
women empowerment.
Therefore, it is proposed to establish Government Women Colleges at block level to
ensure the participation of women in the development of family, society, State and country,
and to make them self-reliant after completion of their higher education.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; AJAY MISRA ‘TENI’
June 10,  2019.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Government Colleges for women shall be
established by the appropriate Government. Clause 4 provides for certain facilities like cost
of admission, fee, books, hostel and scholarship to every woman enrolled in college. Clause
6 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to carry out the purposes
of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees Five
hundred crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
4

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory establishment of Government Women College at block
level and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Ajay Misra ‘Teni’, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—459LS(S3)—18-06-2019.