As introduced in Lok Sabha
                   
                                                       
          
Bill  No. 79 of  2024
THE AIR (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION)  
AMENDMENT BILL, 2024
By
Shri Hibi Eden, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981. 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) 
Amendment Act, 2024.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement.
5

2. In section 2 of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981, hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act,—
(a) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ba) “Air Quality Index (AQI)” means a measure of air quality that takes into 
account various air pollutants and their concentrations;”;
(b) after clause (j), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ja) “green practices” means sustainable practices that minimize the negative 
impact of human activities on the environment;”;
(c) after clause (m), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ma) “polluting industries” means industries that emit air pollutants beyond the 
permissible limits set by the Central Board;”; and
(d) after clause (n), the following clause shall be inserted:—
“(na) “public transport” means transport services provided by the Government or 
any other entity to the general public;”.
3. After section 19 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,—
“19A. ( 1) The Central Government shall prepare a National Clean Air Plan to be 
implemented by the State Governments in a  time-bound manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The National Clean Air Plan under sub-section (1), shall include the following 
measures, namely:—
(a) measures to reduce emissions from polluting industries and transportation 
sector;
(b) measures to promote the use of clean energy sources such as solar, wind, and 
hydropower;
(c) measures to promote the use of electric vehicles and public transport;
(d) measures to promote the use of non-motorized transport such as cycling and 
walking; and
(e) measures to promote green practices in various sectors of the economy.
19B. ( 1) The Central Board shall establish a network of air quality monitoring 
stations across the country in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The data from air quality monitoring stations established under sub-section (1) shall 
be made available to the public in real-time.
(3) The State Governments shall take necessary measures to ensure that the air quality 
index meets the standards set by the Central Board.
19C. (1) The State Governments shall encourage industries to adopt green practices 
by providing incentives as may be prescribed.
(2) The State Governments shall also impose penalties on polluting industries that 
violate the permissible limits of air pollutants.
19D. (1) The State Governments shall encourage the use of public transport by providing 
incentives such as reduced fares.
2
Amendment of 
section 2.
14 of 1981.
15
10
5
20
Insertion of new 
sections 19A, 
19B, 19C, 19D 
and 19E.
National clean 
air plan.
Air quality 
monitoring.
Green practices 
in industries.
Promotion of 
public transport.
25
30
35

(2) The State Governments shall also promote the use of electric vehicles in public 
transport.
19E. (1) The State Governments shall promote the use of non-motorized transport such 
as cycling and walking by providing infrastructure such as cycle tracks and pedestrian 
walkways.
(2) The State Governments shall also encourage citizens to use non-motorized transport 
by providing incentives as may be prescribed.”.
4. After section 39 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“39A. If any industry violates the provisions of section 19C of this Act, it shall be liable 
to pay a penalty as may be prescribed.”.
3
Promotion of 
non-motorized 
transport.
Insertion of new 
section 39A.
Penalty for 
polluting industry.10
5

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Air pollution is a growing concern across India, with the adverse effects of air pollution 
on human health and the environment becoming increasingly evident. The emission of 
greenhouse gases from various human activities is contributing to climate change, which 
poses a significant threat to the planet.
 The proposed Bill seeks to address these issues by promoting clean air, better air quality, 
and encouraging the adoption of green practices in various sectors of the economy. The 
need is also to establish a National Clean Air Plan, which will be implemented by the State 
Governments in a time-bound manner. The National Clean Air Plan shall include measures 
to reduce emissions from polluting industries and transportation sectors, promote the use of 
clean energy sources, electric vehicles, and public transport, and encourage the use of non-
motorized transport such as cycling and walking.
 The proposed Bill also aims to establish a network of air quality monitoring stations 
across the country and the data from these stations will be made available to the public in 
real-time. The State Governments will be required to take necessary measures to ensure that 
the air quality meets the standards set by the Central Pollution Control Board.
 The Bill further encourages industries to adopt green practices by providing incentives 
such as tax breaks and subsidies. The State Governments will also be required to impose 
penalties on polluting industries that violate the permissible limits of air pollutants.
 The Bill seeks to promote the use of public transport by providing incentives such 
as reduced fares and promoting the use of electric vehicles in public transport. The State 
Governments will also be required to promote the use of non-motorized transport such 
as cycling and walking by providing infrastructure such as cycle tracks and pedestrian 
walkways.
 The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution)                
Act, 1981 with a view to establish National Clean Air Plan and Air Quality monitoring 
Stations to promote clean air, better air quality, and encourage the adoption of green practices 
across various sectors of the economy. By doing so, it aims to contribute towards a healthier 
and more sustainable future for India.
 Hence this Bill.
       New Delhi;                                                           HIBI   EDEN    
   July 9,  2024.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 3 of the Bill vide  proposed section 19B provides for the Central Pollution 
Control Board to establish a network of air quality monitoring stations across the country in 
such manner as may be prescribed. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about 
rupees eight thousand and five hundred crore is likely to be involved per annum from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 
 A non-recurring expenditure of rupees seven hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
5

ANNEXURE 
[Extract from the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution)  Act, 1981]
(14 of 1981)
*                         *                             *             *                *
 2.   In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
 *    *          *                 *                *
(b) “air pollution” means the presence in the atmosphere of any air pollutant;
      *             *               *                    *                * 
(j) “emission” means any solid or liquid or gaseous substance coming out of any 
chimney, duct or flue or any other outlet;
     *             *               *                    *                *
(m) “occupier”, in relation to any factory or premises, means the person who has 
control over the affairs of the factory or the premises, and includes, in relation to any 
substance, the person in possession of the substance; 
(n) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act by the Central 
Government or, as the case may be, the State Government;
      *             *               *                    *                *
Definitions.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981.
————
(Shri Hibi Eden, M.P.)