1
Bill No. 79 of  2021
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
THE NA TIONAL COMMISSION FOR MINORITIES (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2021
By
DR. SANJAY JAISWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the National Commission for Minorities Act, 1992.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Minorities (Amendment)
Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the National Commission for Minorities Act, 1992 for clause (c), the
following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
Amendment
of section 2.
19 of 1992
5

2
"(c) 'minority', means,—
(i) a religious community notified as such by the Central Government; and
(ii) religious communities notified as such by the State Government based
on the demographic data calculated on the basis of the latest decadal census
data of the State concerned:
Provided that no religious community shall be notified as a minority community
in a State if the population of that community is more than twenty per cent. of the total
population of that State;".
5

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The National Commission for Minorities was established under the National Commission
for Minorities Act, 1992 with the vision of addressing the feeling of inequality and
discrimination that pervaded among some sections of the minorities. However, the term
'minority' has neither been clearly defined in the Constitution nor in the original legislation.
This has led to conflicting interpretations by the judiciary.
A minority, normatively, may be differentiated from the dominant group on the basis of
the power asymmetry. Religious minorities are sometimes not able to preserve their culture,
ethnicity and educational system on account of not being at par with the immediate majority
community. It is thus imperative that religious minorities be defined on a State-wise basis
rather than on a pan India basis. Linguistic minorities are already being defined in this
manner.
Defining religious minorities on a pan India basis has not only created a wave of
inequality across different States but has also encouraged those who do not belong to
religious minorities and to convert for social, political and economic benefits.
Further, the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National
or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities of 18 December, 1992 had called for protecting
minorities within their respective territories. This would be possible only if minorities are
defined State-wise.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the National Commission for Minorities Act, 1992
with a view to provide that a religious community shall be a 'minority' community for the
purposes of this Act only if,—
(a)      notified as such by the Central Government; or
(b)   notified as such by the State Governments based on the demographic data
calculated on the basis of the latest decadal census data of the State concerned
only if population of such religious community is less than twenty per cent. of the
total population of that State.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI; SANJA Y JAISWAL
February 23, 2020
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE NA TIONAL COMMISSION FOR MINORITIES ACT , 1992
(NO. 19 OF 1992)
* * * * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) * * * * *
(c) 'minority', for the purpose of this Act, means a community notified as such by
the Central Government.
* * * * * * *
4
Definitions.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the National Commission for Minorities Act, 1992
————
(Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal, M.P.)