As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 79 of 2025
THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025
By
Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Code on Social Security, 2020. 
 B e it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- sixth Year of the Republic of India as  
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code on Social Security (Amendment) Act, 
2025. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Code on Social Security, 2020 (hereinafter referred to as 
principal Act),–
(a) for sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:–
“(2) “aggregator” means a digital intermediary for a buyer of goods or user 
of a service to connect with the seller or the service provider, and includes any 
entity that coordinates with one or more aggregators for providing the services;
(2A) “anonymous feedback platform” means an online or offline platform 
through which Gig workers may submit their feedback without being required to 
Short title and 
commencement.
5
10
Definitions.

share any identifying information, such as their name or a unique identification 
number;”;
(b) after sub-section (4), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4A) “automated monitoring and decision making systems” means  
systems which make decisions solely by automated means without human 
intervention;”;
(c) after sub-section (5), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
 “( 5A) “Board” means the Platform-Based Gig Workers Welfare Board 
established under section 114A;”;
(d) after sub-section (34), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(34A) “Fund” means the Platform-Based Gig Workers Social Security and 
Welfare Fund established under sub-section (1) of section 114V;”;
(e) for sub-section ( 35), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, 
namely:—
“(35) “gig worker” means a person who performs work or participates in a 
work arrangement that results in a given rate of payment, based on terms and 
conditions laid down in such contract and includes all piece-rate work, and 
whose work is sourced through a platform;”;
(f) after sub-section (56), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(56A) “personal contact information” means any information that may be 
used by a customer to identify and contact a gig worker, such as their full name, 
phone number or email address;”;
(g) after sub-section (59), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(59A) “platform” means any arrangement providing a service through electronic 
means, at the request of a recipient of the service, involving the organization of work 
performed by individuals at a certain location in return for payment, and involving 
the use of automated monitoring and decision making systems;
(h) after sub-section (83), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(83A) “terminate” or “termination” means materially restricting a platform 
based gig worker access to the digital platform, including blocking such 
workers’ access to the digital platform, suspending a platform based gig worker, 
or making the platform based gig worker ineligible to provide services on the 
digital platform;”; and
(i) after sub-section (84), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
 “( 84A) “Unique ID” means the unique Identification number issued to 
platform based Gig worker registered under sub-section (a) of section 1144E;”.
3. After Chapter IX of the principal Act, the following Chapter and sections 
thereunder shall be inserted, namely:–
“CHAPTER IXA 
PLATFORM AND GIG WORKERS’ WELFARE
 114A. (1) The Central Government shall, with effect from such date as it 
may appoint, establish a Board to be known as the Platform Based Gig Workers 
Welfare Board to exercise the powers conferred on, and perform the duties and 
functions assigned to it, under this Act.
2
Insertion of 
new Chapter 
IXA.
Establishment 
of Gig 
Workers 
Welfare Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

 (2) The Central Government may, as and when necessary, notify general or 
sector specific social security and other benefits that shall be implemented by the 
Board.
 ( 3) The headquarters of the Board shall be at Mumbai in the State of Maharashtra 
and the Board shall establish its branches in all other States and Union territories at 
conspicuous places as the Board may deem fit and necessary. 
 ( 4) The Board shall be a body corporate with the name aforesaid, having 
perpetual succession and common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of 
property, and to contract, and may by that name, sue or be sued.
      114B. (1) The Board shall consist of,–
(a) the Minister in-charge of the Union Ministry of Labour and Employment 
– ex-officio Chairperson; 
(b) an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary in the Union Ministry 
dealing with the administration of this Act to be appointed by the Central 
Government– ex-officio Member;
(c) the Commissioner, Department of Revenue or his nominee not below 
the rank of Joint Commissioner - ex-officio Member;
(d) a Chief Executive Officer appointed by the Central Government shall be 
Executive in-charge of day to day functioning of the Board and carry out duties 
on behalf of the Board - ex- officio Member Secretary;
(e) four representatives of the gig workers to be nominated by the 
Central Government, at least one of whom shall be female – ex-officio 
Member;
 (f) two representatives of aggregators to be nominated by the Central 
Government– Member;
(g) one representative from civil society to be nominated by the Central 
Government who has experience of working in the field or a subject matter 
expert that works in field – Member,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed.
 ( 2) The Board may also invite a technical expert in the field of data collection 
and Information Technology (IT) system as and when necessary to provide inputs.
 ( 3) The nominated members of the Board shall have a term of three years:
 Provided that the Central Government may extend their tenure for another one 
year if it deems appropriate.
 ( 4) In the event of any vacancy occurring on account of death, resignation, 
disqualification or removal under sub-section (5), such vacancy shall be filled by 
the Central Government by fresh nomination for the remaining term.
 ( 5) Any nominated member of the Board may at any time resign from his office 
by writing under his hand addressed to the Chairperson, and his office shall, on 
acceptance of resignation, become vacant.
 ( 6) No person shall be chosen as, or continue to be, a nominated member of the 
Board who,–
(i) is a salaried officer or an employee of the Board; or
3
Composition 
of the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

(ii) is or at any time has been adjudged insolvent; or
(iii) is found to be a lunatic or is of unsound mind and stands so  declared 
by a competent Court; or
(iv) is or has been convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude; or
 (v) is absent without leave of the Board for more than three consecutive 
meetings of the Board.  
  (7) The nominated members of the Board shall be entitled for allowances for 
attending the meetings of the Board, at such rates as may be prescribed.
 114C. (1) The Board shall meet at such time and place and observe such rules 
of procedure for transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed:
 Provided that, the Board shall meet at least once in three months:
 Provided further that, the Chairperson may convene a meeting of the Board 
upon a written request from at least six members of the Board.
 ( 2) The Chairperson; or, if for any reason he is unable to attend any meeting of 
the Board, any other member as decided by members present, shall preside over the 
meeting.
 ( 3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board shall be 
decided by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, and in the event 
of equality of votes, the Chairperson, or in his absence, the person presiding, shall 
have a second or a casting vote.
 ( 4) The quorum for the meeting of the Board shall be fifty percent of the total 
members.
 114D. The Board shall,–
(a) ensure registration of gig workers in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act;
(b) ensure registration of aggregators operating in the country in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act;
(c) set up a monitoring mechanism to certify that welfare fee is being duly 
collected;
(d) ensure implementation of general and specific social security schemes 
based on contributions made as may be notified by the Central Government 
and disburse the social security benefits through the individual social security 
accounts linked to the Unique IDs allocated to platform based Gig workers.
(e) monitor the schemes for social security of registered platform based 
Gig workers and provide recommendations to the Central Government for 
administering such schemes;
(f) ensure that gig workers have access to the benefits as per the schemes 
formulated by the Central Government and to provide proactive facilitation to 
them in their engagement with concerned aggregator;
(g) engage with workers associations working with gig workers and hold 
regular open consultations with them;
(h) constitute a Committee for providing the recommendations to the Central 
Government for formulation, review and implementation of the schemes meant 
for the welfare of gig workers;
Meeting of the 
Board.
Functions of 
the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
4

(i) make social security schemes for specific groups of gig workers such as 
women and persons with disabilities; and
(j) seek aggregated data from the aggregators and platforms on the work 
done via their platform.
 114E. A platform based gig worker shall have the right to,–
(a) be registered with the Central Government on being on boarded on any 
platform, irrespective of the duration of the work, and be provided a Unique ID 
applicable across all platforms;
(b) have access to general and specific social security schemes based on 
contributions made by them as may be notified by the Central Government; and
(c) access to grievance redressal mechanism as specified under section 23:
Provided that nothing in this Act shall affect any benefit or protection 
accorded to platform based gig workers under any other law for the time being 
in force.
 114F. The officers and employees working with National Social Security Board 
shall be considered to be officers and employees of the platform based Gig Workers 
Welfare Board for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
 114G. (1) The aggregator shall provide to the Board its database of all gig 
workers on boarded or registered with them within sixty days from the date of 
commencement of this Act in such manner as may be specified in the regulations.
 ( 2) All platform based gig workers on boarded or registered with any platform 
after the commencement of this Act shall be electronically registered by the Board, 
within sixty days of their being so on boarded or registered. 
 ( 3) The aggregator shall update the Board about any changes including increase 
or decrease in numbers of gig workers in the data provided under sub-section (1) in 
such manner as may be specified in the regulations.
 ( 4) The Board shall maintain a database of gig workers in the country along with 
the details of their employment with one or more aggregators, and notwithstanding 
the duration or time of engagement with any platform.
 ( 5) The Board shall register and generate a unique ID to every gig worker who 
is on-boarded by one or more aggregators operating in the country.
 114H. (1) Every aggregator shall register with the Board within sixty days from 
date of commencement of this Act in such manner as may be prescribed.
 ( 2) The Board shall maintain a register of aggregators operating in the country 
along with the name and designation of an officer authorized by the Central 
Government responsible for carrying out obligations under this Act.
 ( 3) The Board shall publish the register of aggregators on its web portal in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
 114I. (1) All contracts entered into between aggregators and platform based gig 
workers shall comply with the provisions of this Act.
 ( 2) The contracts under sub-section (1) shall be written in simple language easily 
comprehensible and shall be available in Hindi, English or any other language listed 
in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution known to the platform based gig worker.
Rights of 
platform based 
Gig Worker.
Officers and 
employees of 
the Board.
Registration of 
gig workers.
Registration of 
aggregators.
Obligation to 
enter into fair 
contracts.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5

 (3) The aggregator shall, once the contract has been entered into, notify the 
platform based gig worker of any change in the terms of the contract not less than 
fourteen days before the proposed change, and the platform based gig worker 
shall have the option to terminate the contract accordingly, without any adverse 
consequences for their existing entitlements under the previous contract.
 ( 4) A platform based gig worker may refuse or reject, with reasonable cause, 
a specified number of gig work requests per week, as shall be provided in the 
contractual agreement between the platform based gig worker and the aggregator, 
without any adverse consequences.
 ( 5) A platform based gig worker may take up employment with other employers 
besides the aggregator without any adverse consequences:
        Provided that if the employment of a gig worker is subject to a probationary 
period such period shall not exceed three months.
 114J. (1) The Board shall fix,–
(a) a minimum rate of wages for time work;
(b) a minimum rate of wages for piece work.
for various categories of gig work under this Act.
 ( 2) While fixing or revising minimum rates of wages under this section, different 
minimum rates of wages may be fixed for,–
(a) different categories of gig work;
(b) different classes of work in the same category of gig work; and
(c) different localities.
 ( 3) The Board shall fix a minimum allowance for gig workers working in 
hazardous conditions.
 ( 4) The Board shall review at such intervals as it may think fit, such intervals 
not exceeding five years, the minimum rates of wages and allowance so fixed and 
revise the minimum rates and allowance, if necessary.
 114K. (1) The aggregator shall inform gig workers of the following:-
(a) if the work pattern is entirely or mostly predictable, the length of the 
worker’s standard working day or week and any arrangements for overtime and 
its remuneration and, where applicable, any arrangements for shift changes;
(b) if the work pattern is entirely or mostly unpredictable,–
(i) the principle that the work schedule is variable, the number of 
guaranteed paid hours and the remuneration for work performed in addition 
to those guaranteed hours;
(ii) the reference hours and days within which the worker may be 
required to work; and
(iii) the minimum notice period to which the worker is entitled before 
the start of a work assignment.
 ( 2) When a work pattern is entirely or mostly unpredictable, the gig worker shall 
not be required to work by the aggregator unless both of the following conditions 
are fulfilled,–
(a) the work takes place within predetermined reference hours and days as 
referred to in sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) of sub-section (1); and 
Fixing of 
minimum rate 
of wages.
Regulation 
of working 
hours.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
6

(b) the gig worker is informed by his or her employer of a work assignment 
within a reasonable notice period as established in sub-clause (iii) of clause (b) 
of sub-section (1):
 Provided that where one or both of the aforementioned requirements is not 
fulfilled, a gig worker shall have the right to refuse a work assignment without 
adverse consequences.
 114L. (1) It shall be the duty of every aggregator to inform gig workers of 
the deadline within which the aggregator may cancel a work assignment after the 
assignment has been confirmed.
 ( 2) If an aggregator cancels a work assignment previously agreed with a gig 
worker, the worker shall be entitled to receive a cancellation compensation fee 
equivalent to not less than half the wage which he would have received if he had 
completed the work assignment.
 114M. (1) If an aggregator requires a gig worker to undergo any form of training 
prior to the commencement of his duties, the aggregator shall ensure that,–
(a) the costs of such training shall not be charged to the gig worker or 
withheld or deducted from his remuneration; and
(b) the training shall be conducted during the  regular working hours of 
the gig worker, unless otherwise mutually agreed by the gig worker and the 
aggregator.
 114N. (1) The Central Government shall publish sector specific guidelines for 
contracts between the gig workers and the aggregators, from time to time, in such 
manner as may be prescribed.
 ( 2) The Central Government may review contract templates sent by aggregators, 
on request, in order to ensure fair contracts with platform based gig worker.
 114O. ( 1) The aggregator shall communicate the following information 
regarding the respective platform based gig worker, in writing, in Hindi, English or 
any other language listed in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution known to the 
platform based gig worker, as and when sought by him–
(a) the main parameters which, either individually or collectively, are the 
most important for determining the allocation of work, the distribution of work, 
the assessment of work carried out, and the grounds for denial of work
(b) the rating system, if any, set up by the aggregator;
(c) categorisation of gig workers, on the basis of the quality of service 
rendered, log-in time, or any other criteria, where such categorisation is 
employed by the aggregator;
(d) the personal data of the respective gig worker available with the 
aggregator, such personal data which is processed by the aggregator, including 
the purposes for which such personal data is processed; and
(e) any other information that may be prescribed by the Central Government.
 ( 2) The aggregator shall inform the platform based gig worker, in simple 
language and in Hindi, English or any other language listed in the Eighth Schedule 
of the Constitution known to the Gig worker, regarding the procedure to seek 
information in respect of the automated monitoring and decision making systems 
Compensation 
for Cancellation 
of Agreed Work 
Assignments.
Training of gig 
workers.
Contract 
guidelines and 
templates.
Transparency 
in respect of 
Automated 
Monitoring 
and Decision 
Making 
Systems.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
7

em ployed/formulated by the aggregator, which have an impact on their working 
conditions, including fares, earnings, customer feedback and allied information.
 ( 3) The aggregator shall take measures to prevent discrimination on the basis 
of religion, race, caste, gender, or place of birth by the automated monitoring and 
decision making systems employed by it.
 114P. ( 1) The contractual agreement entered into between the aggregator 
and the platform based gig worker shall contain an exhaustive list of grounds for 
termination of contract by the aggregator or deactivation by the Gig worker from 
the platform.
 ( 2) An aggregator shall not terminate a gig worker without giving valid reasons 
in writing with prior notice of fourteen days.
 114Q. (1) In the cases of payment deductions, the aggregator shall inform the 
platform based gig worker about the reasons for such deductions before the invoice 
is raised for the work performed by the platform based gig worker.
 ( 2) The aggregators must compensate the platform based Gig workers on a 
weekly basis without delay in disbursal of pay.
 114R. (1) The aggregator shall provide and maintain, as far as is reasonably 
practicable, a working environment that is safe and without risk to the health of the 
platform based gig worker. 
 ( 2) The aggregator shall strictly comply with the applicable, sector-specific 
occupational safety and health standards as may be prescribed.
 114S. (1) Every aggregator shall,–
(a) allow gig workers to opt into real-time location tracking, with location 
sharing enabled for emergency contacts designated by the gig worker;
(b) integrate Emergency Buttons into their application;
(c) provide mandatory safety training to gig workers, covering risk 
identification, de-escalation techniques, and emergency responses.
(d) ensure that customer communications with gig workers are routed 
through the platform’s internal communication channels and refrain from 
disclosing gig workers’ personal contact information to the customer;
(e) ensure that gig workers have access to an anonymous feedback platform 
to report safety concerns regarding clients, locations or routes;
(f) ensure that the platform shall allow for incident-specific reports, 
including but not limited to harassment, aggression, unsafe environments, or 
other risks that could threaten the physical or mental well-being of  gig workers;
 ( 2) The aggregators shall review incident-specific reports under clause (f) of 
sub-section (1) and take appropriate action, including the suspension or removal of 
a client from the platform, re-routing of affected workers and the classification of 
areas or routes as high-risk.
 ( 3) The aggregators shall ensure that the gig workers are notified of high-risk 
areas in advance of accepting such work requests and the gig workers on receipt of 
such notification may refuse or reject Gig work requests in high-risk areas without 
any adverse consequences.
Termination of 
work.
Income 
security.
Reasonable 
working 
conditions.
Safety 
regulations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
8

 114T. (1) The aggregator shall ensure that information on the grievance redressal 
mechanism under section114ZA is easily accessible on their platform.
 ( 2) The aggregator shall ensure that information on the dispute resolution 
mechanism under section 114ZB is easily accessible on their respective platform.
 114U. (1) Each platform based gig worker shall be provided with a human point 
of contact for all clarifications under the provisions of this Act:
 Provided that the aggregator may maintain physical spaces where platform 
based gig workers may seek clarifications under the provisions of this Act.
 ( 2) Every gig worker shall have the option of communicating with the point of 
contact in Hindi, English or any other language listed in the Eighth Schedule of the 
Constitution known to the platform based Gig worker.
 ( 3) The contact information of the point of contact shall be provided on the 
respective platform based Gig workers’ accounts on the platform application.
 114V . (1) The Central Government shall establish a Fund to be called the 
Gig Worker’s Social Security and Welfare Fund for the benefit of registered 
platform based gig workers.
 ( 2) The Fund shall consist of,–
(i) all sums received from welfare fee levied under this Act;
(ii) all contributions made by individual platform based gig workers;
(iii) all sums received as grant-in-aid from Central Government and 
State Governments;
(iv) all sums received by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, 
bequests or transfers; and
(v) all sums received from any other sources as may be prescribed.
 ( 3) The Fund shall be utilised and managed in such manner as may be 
prescribed under section 114W:
 Provided that if any question arises whether any particular expenditure 
is or is not debitable to the Fund, the matter shall be referred to the Central 
Government whose decision thereon shall be final.
 114W. (1) The Fund shall vest in, and be held and applied by, the Board as 
trustees, subject to the provisions, and for the purposes of this Act. 
 ( 2) The moneys in the Fund shall be utilised by the Board to defray the cost of 
carrying out measures which may be specified by the Government, from time to 
time, to promote the welfare of gig workers and of their dependents. 
 ( 3) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-sections (1) and 
(2), moneys in the Fund may be utilised by the Board to defray expenditure on the 
following activities, namely:-
(a) health insurance coverage for gig workers;
(b) income support to gig workers during periods of inactivity due to injury, 
illness, pregnancy, or other incapacitating circumstances;
(c) emergency financial aid to Gig workers affected by accidents, natural 
disasters, or other unforeseen crises;
Disclosure 
obligations.
Nomination 
of Point of 
Contact for 
Enquiries.
Fund for Gig 
workers.
Vesting and 
application of 
fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
9

(d) setting up rest stations for Gig workers;
(e) vocational training;
(f) legal aid for Gig workers in disputes relating to workplace safety, 
discrimination, or contractual matters; and
(g) cost of administering this Act including the salaries and allowances of 
the staff appointed for the purposes of this Act.
 114X. (1) There shall be charged, from an aggregator, a welfare fee known as 
the Platform Based Gig Workers Welfare Fee, which shall be at such rate (percent) 
of the pay of the platform based Gig worker in each transaction or on the annual 
turnover as may be notified by the Central Government.
 ( 2) The welfare fee under sub-section (1) shall be collected by the Central 
Government in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed.
 ( 3) The aggregator shall deposit the welfare fee levied under this Act, at the end 
of each quarter in such manner as may be prescribed.
 114Y . (1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts. and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts, including a balance-sheet in such form 
as may be prescribed.
 ( 2) The accounts of the Fund shall be audited annually by the office of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
 ( 3) The accounts of the Fund certified by the auditor, together with the audited 
report thereon shall be submitted annually to the Central Government before such 
date as may be prescribed.
 ( 4) The Board shall comply with such directions as the Central Government 
may, after perusal of the report of the auditor, think fit to issue.
 ( 5) The cost of the audit, as determined by the Central Government, shall be 
paid out of the Fund.
 ( 6) All monies forming part of the Fund shall be kept in current or deposit 
account with any Nationalized Bank.
 114Z. ( 1) All payments generated on platforms shall be mapped on to 
a Central Transaction Information and Management System (CTIMS) 
administered by the Central Government and monitored by the Board.
 ( 2) Every payment made to gig workers and the welfare fee deducted shall be 
recorded on the Central Transaction Information and Management System (CTIMS) 
for each transaction relating to platform based Gig worker in such manner as may 
be prescribed.
 ( 3) The details of welfare fee collected and spent at the Gig workers shall 
be disclosed and made available on the Central Transaction Information and 
Management System (CTIMS).
 114ZA. (1) A platform based Gig worker registered under this Act may file a 
petition in person before a grievance redressal officer as notified by the Central 
Government, or make a petition through web portal, in relation to any grievance 
arising out of entitlements, payments and other benefits provided under this Act:
 Provided that the link to such web portal shall be provided on the platform 
application of every aggregator registered under this Act.
Gig Workers 
Welfare Fee.
Accounts and 
audit.
Central 
Transaction 
Information 
Management 
System.
Redressal of 
grievances.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
10

 ( 2) The procedure for the disposal of the petition filed under sub-section (1) 
shall be such as may be prescribed.
 ( 3) The grievance redressal officer so authorized under sub-section (1), shall 
upon inquiries, dispose of the said petition within a time limit by passing an order 
of redressal.
 ( 4) An appeal against the order under sub-section (3), shall lie within ninety 
days from the date of order before the Appellate Authority, as prescribed by the 
Central Government:
 ( 5) The Appellate Authority shall dispose of the appeal in accordance with such 
procedure as may be prescribed.
 114ZB. ( 1) Every aggregator shall, with more than fifty platform workers 
registered on their platform, constitute an Internal Dispute Resolution Committee 
for the resolution of disputes specified in Schedule II.
 ( 2) The composition and procedures of the Internal Dispute Resolution 
Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
 ( 3) The Internal Dispute Resolution Committee shall complete its proceedings 
within thirty days on receipt of a written complaint by or on behalf of the aggrieved 
party.
 Provided that, either party may take up the process of arbitration to resolve the 
dispute among them.
 ( 4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, a platform based Gig 
worker may seek resolution of his disputes through the mechanism under the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act 14 of 1947).”.
 114ZC. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, if an aggregator 
contravenes any of the provisions of the Act or rules or regulations or any of standards 
made thereunder or of any order in writing given under the Act or such rules or 
regulations or standards, the aggregator shall be liable to penalty which shall not be 
less than five thousand rupees but which may extend up to one lakh rupees, and if 
the contravention is continued after the conviction, then, with further penalty which 
may extend to five thousand rupees for each day till such contravention continues.
 114ZD. (1) Where an offence under this Chapter has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge 
of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct, of the business of the 
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
 Provided that, nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person 
liable to any punishment, if he provides that he had exercised all due diligence to 
prevent the commission of such offence.
 ( 2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence 
under this Act has been committed by a company, and it is proved that the offence 
has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any 
neglect on the part of any director, manager, company secretary or other officer of 
the company, such director, manager, company secretary or other officer shall be 
deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly.          
Resolution 
of disputes 
against 
aggregator.
General 
penalty for  
offences.
Offences by 
companies.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
11
45

 Explanation.– For the purposes of this section,
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other 
association of individuals; and
(b) “director” means,
(i) in relation to a firm,  partner thereof; or
(ii) any of its members
(iii) in case of association of individuals other than specified in sub-
Clause (ii), any of its members.
 114ZE. No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Chapter.
 114ZF. (1) Any offence punishable under this Chapter  may, either before or 
after the institution of the prosecution, on an application by, the alleged offender, be 
compounded payment of compounding amount not more than fifty percent by such 
officer or authority as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify in this behalf:
 Provided that, the appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, amend the said specified compounding amount:
 Provided further that, the offences of the same nature committed by the same 
offender for more than three occasions shall not be compoundable:
 Provided also that, such offences shall be compounded only after the alleged 
offender has acted to the satisfaction of such officer or authority that such offence is 
not continued any further:
 ( 2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub-section (1), no further 
proceedings shall be taken against the offender in respect of such offence.
 114ZG. No right or entitlement provided for under this Act shall affect any 
benefit or protection accorded to platform based Gig workers under any other law 
for the time being in force.
 114ZH. The aggregators shall submit quarterly returns in such form as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.
 114ZI. (1) The Board shall prepare a report every year of its activities under this 
Act during the year and submit the report to the Central Government.
 ( 2) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after the receipt of report 
under sub-section (1), cause the same to be laid before the each of the Houses of 
Parliament.
 114ZJ. ( 1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the 
purposes of this Chapter.
 ( 2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:
(i) any additional information regarding the automated monitoring and 
decision making systems that may be sought by the Gig worker from the 
aggregator sub-section (2) of section 114O;
(ii) sector specific occupational safety and health standards under sub- 
section (2) of section 114R;
Cognizance of 
offences.
Compounding 
of offences.
Entitlement to 
more than one 
benefit.
Submission 
of Quarterly 
Returns.
Annual 
Report.
Power to make 
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
12

(iii) the contributions from the aggregator and the Gig worker for access to 
general and specific social security schemes;
(iv) the rate (percent) of the value of each transaction chargeable as welfare 
fee as per sub-section (1) of section 114X;
(v) the format in which the quarterly return referred to in section 30 shall 
be submitted.
(vi) the time, place and procedure for meetings of the Board as required 
under section114C;
(vii) the salary and allowances of nominated members as required under 
sub-section (6) of section 114B;
(viii) the manner in which proper accounts, annual statements of  
accounts including balance sheet and other relevant records maintained under 
sub-section (1) of section 114Y;
(ix) the format for payment of welfare fee under sub-section (3) of section 
114X; and
(x) the form in which payment made to platform based Gig workers and the 
welfare fee deducted shall be recorded on the Central Transaction Information 
and Management System (CTIMS) for each transaction under section 114Z.
 114ZM. (1) Every rule made under this Chapter shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after they are made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for 
a period of not less than fourteen days which may be comprised in one session or 
in two successive sessions and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so 
laid or of the sessions immediately following, the House of Parliament makes any 
modification in the rule or resolves that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done thereunder.
 ( 2) Every rule made under this Chapter shall be published in the Official Gazette.
 114ZK. The Board may make regulations to provide for the following matters 
under this Act,–
(a) the manner of registration of aggregators as per sub-section (1) of 
section 114H;
(b) the manner in which the aggregators shall provide the database of  
all Gig workers on boarded or registered with them to the board under  
sub-section (1) of section 114G; and
(c) the manner in which the latest data of all platform based Gig workers 
engaged by aggregators shall be shared as per sub-section (2) of section 114G.
 114ZL. The Central Government shall have the power to conduct inspections 
and reviews of contracts, automated monitoring and decision making systems, 
occupational safety standards and working standards adopted by aggregators to 
check compliance with the Act and rules thereunder, by such officer as may be 
designated.
Power to make 
Regulations.
Power of 
inspection.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
13

14
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The emergence of platform-based work has fundamentally transformed the 
nature of employment, creating new economic opportunities while simultaneously 
exposing workers to vulnerabilities that traditional employment laws fail to address.
 An estimated 23.5 million of India’s citizens are projected to be gig workers 
by 2029-30. Despite their critical contributions to the economy, they lack social 
security, fair wages, workplace protections, and grievance redressal mechanisms.
 The present Bill seeks to amend the Code on Social Security, 2020 with a 
view to recognize platform-based gig workers as a distinct category of workers 
and ensure their access to social security benefits, fair working conditions, and 
equitable contracts. It proposes the establishment of a Platform-based Gig Workers 
Welfare Board to regulate platform work, register workers and aggregators, ensure 
fair wages, and implement social security schemes. It also introduces transparency 
in automated decision-making, mandates fair contracts, and protects workers from 
arbitrary termination and wage deductions.
 The Bill further provides for the creation of a Gig Workers’ Social Security 
and Welfare Fund, financed through contributions from aggregators, government 
grants, and worker contributions. The Fund shall be utilized for health insurance, 
income security during periods of inactivity, and other welfare measures.
 Additionally, the Bill seeks to introduce minimum wages for gig workers, 
regulate working hours, and mandate safety provisions, including emergency 
response measures. It also provides for an independent grievance redressal 
mechanism and dispute resolution framework to ensure accountability.
 By addressing these critical gaps, this Bill will create a fairer and more 
sustainable gig economy in India, balancing the flexibility of platform-based work 
with the fundamental rights and protections that all workers deserve.
 Hence this Bill.
  New Delhi;                                 S U P R I Y A  S U L E  
February 21, 2025.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed section 114A provides for the establishment 
of Board to be known as the Platform Based Gig Workers Welfare Board to exercise 
the powers conferred on, and perform the duties and functions assigned to it, under 
this Act. It also vide proposed section 114V provides for the constitution of the 
Gig Worker’s Social Security and Welfare Fund to which all aggregators shall 
contribute. It also vide proposed section Clause 114Z provides for setting up a Central 
Transaction Information and Management System. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, 
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a 
recurring expenditure of one hundred crore rupees would be involved per annum.
 A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five hundred crore is also 
likely to be involved.
15

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed section 114ZJ empowers the Central 
Government to make necessary rules, by notification in the official gazette, for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. It also vide proposed section 114ZK empowers 
the Central Government to make regulations for carrying out the purposes of this 
Act. As the rules and regulations will relate to matters of details only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character.
16

ANNEXURE
[Extract from the Code on Social Security , 2020]
(Act No. 36 of 2020)
  *  *  *  *  *
 2. In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires,—
          *  *  *  *  *
  (2) “aggregator” means a digital intermediary or a market place for a buyer 
or user of a service to connect with the seller or the service provider;
  *  *  *  *  *
 (35) “gig worker” means a person who performs work or participates 
in a work arrangement and earns from such activities outside of traditional 
employer-employee relationship;
  *  *  *  *  *
 
Definitions.
17

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to amend the Code on Social Security, 2020.
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P .) 