11 VEC 2004,

AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

Bill No. 79 of 2004,

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004
by
Suri C.K, CHANDRAPPAN, M.P,
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
~ Be itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1, (/) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2004.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

5 2, वा article 23984 of the Constitution, in clause (2), in sub-clause (b), for the words
"Scheduled Castes", the words "the Scheduled Castes and the women" shall be substituted.

3. After artcle 330 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—

"330A, (1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the House of the People.

(2) As nearly as may be, one-third of the total number of seats reserved under
10 clause (2) of article 330 shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be:

Short title
and
‘commencement.

Amendment
of article
239A.
Insertion of
new article
330A,

Reservation
of seats for
‘women in the
House of the
People.


a

Provided that where the seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the |
Tribes, as the case may be, in relation to a State or Union territory is one, then, in
block comprising of three general elections to the House of the People, the seat in
first general election shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled
or the Scheduled Tribes and no seat shall be so reserved in the other two 80
elections:

Provided further that where the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or th
Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, in relation to a State or Union territory are
then, in every block comprising of three general elections to the House of the People,

(a) one seat shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in the first two general elections in such a
manner that the same constituency is not reserved for women in both the
aforesaid elections; and

(6) no seat shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes
or the Scheduled Tribes in the third general elections.

(3) As nearly as may be, one-third (including the number of seats reserved for
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) of the total number
of seats to be filled by direct election to the House of the People in a State or Union
territory shall be reserved for women and such seats may be alloted by rotation to
different constituencies in that State or Union territory:

Provided that where the seat, not being a seat reserved for the scheduled Castes
or the Scheduled Tribes, in relation to a State or Union territory is one, then, in every.
block comprising of three general elections to the House of the People, the seat in the
first general election shall be reserved for women and no seat shall be so reserved for
‘women in the other two general elections:

Provided further that where the seats, not being seats reserved for the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, in relation to a State or Union territory are two, then,
in every block comprising of three general elections to the House of the People, —

(a) one seat shall be reserved for women in the first two general elections
in such a manner that the same constituency is not reserved for women in both
the aforesaid elections; and

(6) no seat shall be reserved for women in the third general election.".

Amendment 4. Inarticle 331 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall be inserted at the end,
of article 331 ८:-
namely:—

"Provided that where such nominations are made, in relation to every block
comprising of three general elections to the House, one seat shall be reserved for
nomination of a woman of Anglo-Indian community to every House constituted after
first to general elections and no seat shall be reserved for the women of that community
in the House constituted after the third general election.".

किमी of 5. After article 332 ofthe Constitution, the following article shall be inverted, namely:—
new article

33; 2A. :

Reservation "332A. (1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the Legislative Assembly of
of seats for every State.

women in the

eS (2) As nearly as may be, one-third of the total number of seats reserved under
ae clause (3) of article 332 shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes

or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be:

Provided that where the seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes, as the case may be, in relation to a State is one, then, in every block comprising


3

of three general elections to the Legislative Assembly of that State, the seat in the first
general election shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be:

Provided further that where the seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, in relation to a State are two, then, in every dlock
comprising of three general elections to the Legislative Assembly of that State —

(a) one seat shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in the first two general elections in such a manner
that the same constituency is not reserved for women in both the aforesaid
elecions; and

(6) no seat shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes
or the Scheduled Tribes in the third general election.

(3) As nearly as may be, one-third (including the number of seats reserved for
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total
number of seats to be filled by direct election in the Legislative Assembly of every
State shall be reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to
different constituencies in that State”.

6. In article 333 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, Amendment
namely:— of article
333.

"Provided that where such nomination is made, in relation to every block

comprising of three general elections to the Assembly, the seat in the Assembly

constituted after the first general election shall be reserved for nomination of a woman

of the Anglo-Indian community and no seat shall be reserved for the women of that

community in the Assembly constituted after the second and the third general

elections.",

7. After article 334 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:— Insertion i
new article
334A,

"334A. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part or Part Reservation
VIII, the provisions of this Constitution relating to the reservation of seats for women of seats for
in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State and the Legislative Neeranes
Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi shall cease to have effect on हट... vers
expiration of a period of fifteen years from the commencement of the Constitution
(Amendment) Act, 2004:

Provided that nothing in this article shall affect any representation in the House
of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State or the Legislative Assembly of the
National Capital Territory of Delhi until the dissolution of the then existing House,
Legislative Assembly of a State or the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital
Territory of Delhi, as the case may be.”.

8. The amendments made to the Constitution, by this Act, shall not affect any Amendments
representation in the House ofthe People, the Legislative Assembly of a State or the Legislative not 10 affect
Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi until the dissolution of the House, the {he represen-

Legislative Assembly ofa State or the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory frees ee

of Delhi, as the case may be, in existence at the commencement of this Act. People or
Legislative
Assembly of
State or the
Legislative
Assembly of
the National
Capital
Territory of
Delhi.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Despite repeated attemtps, the Parliament so far, failed to provide |
guarantee for providing reservation of one third seats to women, both in Parliament and in
State Assemblies.

It may be recalled that it was through Constitutional Amendments, that one thrid.
Tepresentation to women was reserved in Panchayats at the level of village, block and
district. As this was practiced successfully, it is logical and reasonable that one third
representations are reserved for women in Parliament and State Assemblies.

Women, as they represent nearly fi
50 per cent, representat

and that is why when the fourteenth Lok Sabha has come into existence,
the least women’s representation, comparing to many earlier Lok Sabhas,

It may be noted that Bills of the same nature were introduced in Parliament: several
times before. Let the fourteenth Lok Sabha take creative, constructive and sympathetic:
attitude to this problem and take historic decision in favour of reservation of one third
to women in Parliament and State Assemblies.

Hence this Bill.

‘New Detnt;
June 8, 2004


ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* . . . .
239AA. (1) _ - MY * »
Q2)(a) * . . . *

(6) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly, the number of seats reserved
for Scheduled Castes, the division of the National Capital Territory into territorial
constituencies (including the basis for such division) and all other matters relating to the
functioning of the Legislative Assembly shall be regulated by law made by Parliament.

* * * * *

331. Notwithstanding anything in article 81, the President may, if he is of opinion that
the Anglo-Indian community is not adequately represented in the House of the People,
nominate not more than two members of that community to the House of the People.

. * * * *

333. Notwithstanding anything in article 170, the Governor of a State may, if he is of
opinion that the Anglo-Indian community needs representation in the Legislative Assembly
of the State and is not adequately represented therein, nominate one member of that
community to the Assembly.

* * . * .

Special
provisions
with respect
to Delhi

Representation
of the Anglo-
Indian
community
in the House
of the
People.

Representation
of the Anglo-
Indian
immunity
in the
Legislative
Assemblies of
the States,



1.06 SABHA.

i
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri C.K. Chandrappan, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—877LS—15.10.2004.