As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA. ON 
, 
•• No. 7 01 1984 • J _ 
THE INDUSTRIES (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) 
AMENDMENT BILL J.984 ., I 
. , 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Industries (Development and Regulatio~) 
, ;. J • Ac( '1951-
BE i~ enacted l;>y Parliament in t~e rhirty-fifth Year of the Republic 
of rndia as follows: _" " . .1 .', ' 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Industries (Development and Regu-
lation) Amendment Act '1984. ' . 
. . ' " ,r'. 
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 12th day of 
10 
IS 
January, 1984. 
2. In section 3 of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 
1951 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) ,-
1 . , 
(i) clauses (oa) and (ab) shall be re-Iettered as clauses (ab) and 
(ac) respectively. and befo.re clauSe (ab) as' so re-Iettered, the 
following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
'(00) "ancillary industrial undertaking" means an industrial 
undertaking which in accordance with the proviso to 'Sub-section 
(1) I of section lIB ~nd th~ requil'~merits speCified under that sub-
section, is entitled to be regarded' as an ancillary itidustrial 
undertaking for the purposes of, this Act;'; 
(ii) clause (j) shull be re-Iettered as clause (k), and before 
clause (k) as so re-Iettered. the follOWing clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
20 '(j) "small scale industrial und1!rtaking" means an industrial 
undertaking which, in accordance with the requirements specified 
Short 
title 
and 
conunence-
ment 
Amend-
mentof 
section 3 
of Act 
65 of 1951. 
, 

Inser-
tion of 
new\ieC-
tion lIB. 
Power 
of Cen-
tral Gov-
ernment 
to sPe-
cify the 
require_ 
ments 
which 
shall 
be com-
plied 
with by 
small 
scale 
indus-
trial 
under-
takings. 
under sub-section (1) of section 11B, is entitled to be regarded 
as a small scale industrial undertaking for the purposes of this 
Act;'. 
3. After section 11A of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely: - 5 
"l1B. (1) The Central Government may, with a view to ascertain-
ing which ancillary and small scale industrial undertakings need 
S'Upportive measures, exemptions or other favourable treatment under 
this Act to enable them .to maintain their viability and strength so 
as to be effective in- 10 
(a) promoting in a harmonious manner the industrial economy 
of the country and easing the problem of unemployment, and 
(b) securing that the ownershi~ and control of the material 
resources of the community are so distributed as best to subserve 
the common good, 15 
'Specify, having regard to the factors mentioned in su~ ~section (2), by 
notified order, the requirements which shall be complied with by an 
industrial undertaking to enable it to be regarded, for the purposes 
of this Act, as an anGillary, or a small scale, industrial undertaking 
and different requirements may be so specified for different purposes 20 
or with respect to industrial undertakings engaged in the manu-
facture or production of different articles: 
Provided that no industrial undertaking shall be regarded as an 
ancillary industrial undertaking unless it is, or is proposed to be, 
engaged in- - lZ5 
(i) the manufacture of parts, components, su.b-assemblies, 
toolings or intermediates; or 
(ii) rendering of services, o.r supplying or rendering, not 
more than fifty per cent. of its production or its total services, as 
the case may be, to other units for production of other articles. 30 
(2) The factors referred to in sub-section (1) are the following, 
namely:-
(a) the investment by the industrial undertaking in-
(i) plant and machinery, o.r 
(ii) land, buildings, plant and machinery; 
(b) the nature of ownership of the industrial undertaking; 
(c) the smallness of the number of workers. employed in 
the industrial undertaking; 
35 
(d) the nature, cost and quality of the product of the indUs-
trial undertaking; 40 
(e) foreign exchange, if any, required for the import of any 
plant or machinery by the industrial undertaking; and 
(f) SUch oth~ relevant factors as may be prescribed. 

(3) A copy of every notified order proposed to be made under 
lub·section (1) shall be laid in draft before each House of Parliament. 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and 
5 if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the ~ssion 
or the successive sessions aforesaid" both Houses agree in disapprov-
ing the issue ot the proposed notified order or both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the p.roposed notified order, the notified 
order shall not be made, or, as the case may' be, shall be made only 
JOin such modified form as may be agreed upon hy both the Houses. 
(4) Notwithstanding! anything contained in sUb-section (1), an 
industrial undertaking which, according to the law for the time being 
in force, fell, immediately before the commencement of tl;le Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 1984, under the 
IS definition of an ancillary, or small scale, industrial undertaking, 
shall, after such commencement, continue to be regarded as an 
ancillary, or small scale, industrial undertaking for the purposes of 
this Act until the definition aforesaid is altered or superseded by ary 
notified ord~r made under sub-section (1) .". 
20 4. In 'Section 24 of the p.rincipal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (i), 
for the words, brackets, figures and letter "sub-section (2) of se$ion 
29B", the words, brackets, figures and letters "sub-sections (2), (2A) , 
(2D) , (2F) and (2G) of section 29B" shall be 'Substituted. 
Amend-
ment 0If 
section 24. 
5. In section 29B of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the follow- Amend-
25 ing sub-sections shall be inserted, namely: - ment of 
30 
35 
45 
'(2A) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality oil 
the provisions of sub-tlection (1), the Central Government may. if it 
is satisfied, after considering the recommendations made to it by 
the Advisory Committee constituted under sub-section (2B), that it 
is necessary so to do for the development and expansion of ancillary, 
or small scale, industrial undertakings, by notified order, direct that 
any article or c1as~ of articles specified in the First Schedule shall, 
on and from such date as may be specified in the notified order 
(hereafter in this section referred to as the "date of reServation"), 
be resel'V'ed for exclusive production by the ancillary, or small scale, 
industrial undertakings (hereafter in this section referred. to as 
"reserved article"), 
(2B) The Central Government shall, with a view to determining 
the nature of any article or class of articles that may be reserved 
for production,by the ancillary, or'small scale, industrial undertakings, 
constitute an Advisory Committee consisting of such persons as 
have, in the opinion of that Government, the necessary expertise to 
give advice on the matter. 
(2C) The Advisory CoIIUIUttee" shall, after considering the 
following matters, communicate its recommendations to the Central 
Government, namely:-
(a) the nature of any article or class of articles which may 
be produced econoniically by the ancillary,' or small scale, indUS-
trial undf'Ttakings;" 
'3eCtion 29B 
• 

• 
4 
(b) the level of employment likely to be generated by the 
production of such article or class of articles by the ancillary, 
or small sCRle, industriai 'Undertakings; 
(c) the ~sibility of enco~raging ~d di1f~~ing entrepreneur-
ship in industry; 5 
,/ (d) tpc prev~ntiQn of, concen~ration of economic power to 
the common detriment; and 
(e) such other matters as the Advisory Committee may 
think fit. 
(2D) The productioQ of, any reserved article or class of reserved 10 
articles by any ind'.lStrial, ~dertaking (not being an allcillary, or 
small s~ale, industri,al undert~king) which, on the date of reservation, 
is engJlged in, or has taken effective steps fo.r, the production of any 
res~rvedarticle or class of reserved articles" shall, after the com-
~e~ceme,ntof the, Iruiustries (Development and Regulation) 15 
Amendment Act, 1984, or. as the case may be, the date of rese.rvation, 
whichever i. later, be subject to such conditions as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notified order, specify. 
(2E) While specifyoing any condition under sub~section (2D) , 
the Central Government may take into consideration the level of 20 
production of any reserved article or class of reserved articles 
achieved, immediately before the date of reservation, by the industrial 
undertaking refelTed to in sub-section (2D), and such other factors 
as may be relevant. 
(2F) E~ery person or authority, not being th~ Central Govern- 25 
ment, who, or which, is registered under section 10 or to whom, or 
to which, a licence has been issued or permission has been granted 
unde~ S~cti~n 11 for ~he p;rod;uction of any, article or c~ass of articles 
which has, or have, been ~ubsequently reserved for the ancillary, or 
sma~l s~ale, industrial unde,r~akings, shall produce, such registration 30 
c~ltificate, ~~cence or permis~ol\, as the case may be, ,within ~uch 
period as the Central Government may, by notified order, specify in 
this behalf, and the ~nt.ral Government may enter t~rein all or 
~y of the tonditions specified by it under su~section (2D), including 
th~ productive capacity of the industrial undertakings and other 35 
prt!scribed particulars. 
(2G) The owner of every industrial unde.rtaking (not being an 
ancillary, or small scale industrial undertaking) which, immedlately , 
befor~ the commencement of the Industries (Deyelopment and 
Regulation) Amendm~nt Act. 1964, Or the date of reservation, which~ 40 
ever is later,- . 
(a) was engaged in the production of any article or class of 
articles, which has, or have, been reserved for the ancillary, or 
small scale, industrial undertakings, or 
(b), bad before s!-u;h c,ommencement or before the date of 45 
8~h, rese,rvation. ~" the case may be, taken etlective steps :for 
commencing the production of SUch reserved article or class of 
reserved articles, 
I.,,:. I. . 
~itJu>~t being, registered under section 10 '0.1' in, resp~~t of which a 
llcence or permission has not been i'ssued under section 11, shall .so 

1 of 1984. 
5 
refrain from the production of such, ~'eserved a.rticle or class of 
. reserved articles, on and from the date of expiry of three months 
from such commencement or from the date of such reservation., 
whiche~r is later. 
5 (2H) Every notified order made under 'Sub-section (2A) shall 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 'Successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately follow-
10 ing the session or the 'successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in making any modificaUon in the notified order or both Houses agree 
that the notified order should not be made, the notified order shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
15 annulment shall he without prejudice to the valid'ty of anything 
previous!y' done under that notified order.'. 
,6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or Vali-
order of. a~y court, tribunal or other authority and notwithstanding any- dation. 
thing contained in any other law,agreement or other instrument for the 
20 time being in force, every notification made or purporting to have been 
made by the Central Government under the principal Act, on or after 
the 19th day of Februa,ry, 1970, reserving any article or class of articles 
for production by any ancillary, or small scale. industrial undertaking or 
any class of ancillary, or I>mall scale. indul".trial undertakings shall, for all 
25 pu,rposes, be, and shall be deemed, always, to have been, as valid and 
effective as if the amendments made to the principal Act by this Act 
had been in force at all materi~l times and such notification had been 
made in fun compliance with the provisions made by such amendments 
and accordingly any reservation made or purporting to have been made 
30 by such notification shall. in accordance with the tenor thereof, have, 
and be deemed always to have had, eft'ect on and from the date of such 
reservation and shall until it is altered or superseded by any fresll 
notification under the' princi~l Act as amended by this Act, continue to 
have effect. 
35 Explanat'ion.-For the ,removal of doubt~ it is hereby provided that 
Il9 ac~ or. omission on the part of any person shall be ,punishable as an 
off~nce . which wOUld not have been so punishable if this section had not 
corne into force. 
7. (1) The Industries (Development and Regulation) 
40 Ordinance, ]984, is hereby repealed. 
Amendment Repeal 
and 
saving. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended 
by this Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
One of the important policy measures adopted by the Government to 
improve the competitive strength of industrial undertakings in the small 
scale sector, is to reserve selected items for exclusive prod'Uction by such 
undertakings. Under this policy, 8·72 items are presently so reserved. 
The Government has been making such reservations since 19th February, 
1970 through the exercise of powers under section 29B of the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 which provides that the Central 
Government, having regard to the smallness of the number of workers 
employed or the amount invested in the industrial undertaking or to the 
desirability of encouraging small undertaldngs generally or to the stage 
of development of any scheduled industry, may exempt any undertaking 
from the operation of all or any of the provisions of the Act. 
As there is no specific mention in section 29B of the Act about reser-
vation of items for exclusive production by small scale undertakings, 
doubts have been raised about the competence of the Government to 
take such action. With a view to placing the matter beyond doubt, the 
President has promulgated the Industries (Development and Regulation) 
Amendment Ordinance, 1984 (No.1 of 1984) making'specific provision in 
the IndU':.--tries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, empowering the 
Government to: ':~: 
(a) specify the requirements to be complied with by an industrial 
undertaking to enable it to be regarded as an ancillary or a small 
scale industrial undertaking; 
(b) make reservation of any article or class of articles for ex-
clusive production by an ancillary or small scale industrial under-
taking; 
(c) fix the productive capacity of large and medium scale units, 
already producing such reserved items on the date of reservation; 
and 
(d) provide for all other matters incidental thereto. 
The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance. 
-No financial commitment oJ'! expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India is likely to be involved if the proposed Bill is enacted. 
The notifications whereby small scale or ancillary industrial under-
takings were defined and the notifications whereby articles were reserved 
for production by small scale Ql' ancillary industrial undertakings, which 
are proposed to be validated by the Bill, are being laid on the Table of 
each House of Parliament. 
NARAYAN DATT TIWARI. 
NEW D!:Lm; 
The Mh February, 1984. 
6 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 31 of the Bill seeks to insert new section UB in the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951. Sub-sect:on (1) of that 
section empowers the Central Government to specify, by notified order, 
the requirements which 'Shall be complied with by an industrial under-
taking in order to be regarded as an ancilla,ry, or small scale, industrial 
undertaking, and sub-section (2) thereof empowers the Central Gov-
ernment to prescribe by rules such other relevant factors which have to 
be taken into consideration in specifying the requirements aforesaid. 
Sub-section (3) of the said section 11B provides that the draft of the 
notified order proposed to be made under sub~ection (1) shall be laid 
before each House of Parliament for thirty days and such notified order 
shall not be made i~ it is disapproved hy both Houses of Parliament or 
if it is modified by both Houses of Parliament, it shall be made only in 
such modified fo.nn. 
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to insert new sUb-sections (2A) to (2H) in 
section 29B, of which-
(i) sub-section (2A) empowers the Central Government to direct, 
by notified order, that any article or class of articles specified in the 
First Schedule may be rese,rved for exclusive production by the 
ancillary, or small scale, industrial undertakin~, 
(ii) sub-section (2D) empowers the Central Government to 
5pecify, by notified order, the conditions subject to which the reserved 
articles -shall be produced. by large scale industrial undertakings 
which are already producing such rese,rved articles or have taken 
effective steps for the production of such reserved articles, 
(iii) sub-section (2F) empo~rs ,the Central Government to 
specify, by notified order, the period within which every industrial 
undertaking which is registered under section 10 or to which a . . l1cence or permission has been granted under section 11 for the pro-
duction of any articles which has subsequently been reserved for 
production by ancilla.ry or small scale industrial undertakings, to 
produce such registration certificate, licence or permission to enable 
the Central Government to .. enter therein all or any of the conditions, 
specified. by it under sub-section (20) and the productive capacity 
or other prescribed particulars. • 
The matters in relation to which the legislative power has been so 
delegated, are matters of detail. The delegation of legislative power is, 
therefore, of a normal character. 
., 
7 

Defini-
tions. 
Penalties. 
ANNEXURE 
·EXTRACTS FROM TIlE UroUSTRIES (DEvELoPMENT AND RIroULATION) 
ACT, 1951 
(65 OF 19:)1) 
• • • • 
3. In this Act. unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
24. (1) If any person contravenes or attempts to contravene or abe1;s 
the "contravention of- ' 
(i) the provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-section (4) of section 
10 or of sub-section (1) of section 11 or of section UA or of sub-
section (1) of sectftm 13 or of sub-section (2) of section 29B, or 
* * * • * 

WKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Industries (Development and Regulation) 
Act, 1951. 
(Shri Narayan Datt Tiwari, Minister of Industry) 