As INTRODUCED IN LOI( SABHA .. 
Bd1 No. 7 of I"S 
j 
THE INSURANCE (A~NDMENT) BILL, 1965 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Insurance Act, 1938. 
BE it enacted by Parli~t in the Sixteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may' be called the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1965. Short 
title. 
2. In seCtion 3 of the Insurance Act, 1938 (hereinafter referred ~end- . 
S to as the principal Act) ,- ment elf 
section 3. 
(i) after sub-section (2), the folIo~g 'Sub-sectiOD,s shall be 
inserted, namely:-
.. 
- . "(2A) If, on receipt of an application for registration and 
after making such inquiry as he deems fit, the Controller is 
10 satisfied tbat-
IS 
20 
~ 
(a) the financial condition and the general character 
of management of the, applicant are sound; 
(b) the volwne of business likely to be available to, 
and' the capital. structure and earning prospects of, the 
applicant will be adequate; 
(c) the interests of the general public will be serv-
ed if the certifica~e of registration is granted to the ap-
plicant in respect of the class or classes of insurance 
business specified in the application; and 
(d) the applicant has complied with the provisions 
of sections 2C, 5, 3lA and 32 and has fuUllled all' the 
requirements of this section applicable to him, 
the Con,troller may register the applicant as an insurer and 
grant him a certificate of n:gistration. 

· Amendment 
Of~D 
110. 
2 
(2B) Where the Controller refuses registration, he shall 
:record the reasons for such decision and shall furnish a 
copy thereof to the applicant. 
(2C) Any person aggrieved bY' the decision of the Con-
troller refusing registration may, within thirty days from S 
the date on which a copy of the decision is received by him, 
appeal to the Central Government. 
(2D) The decision of the Central Government on such· 
appeal shall he final and shall not be questioned before any 
court"'; 10 
(ii) in sub-section (3) t for the words "In the case of any 
insurer having his principal 'place of business or domicile out-
side India", the following shall be substituted, namely:-. 
~witbstanding anything contained in SUJb...eection 
(2A), in the cue of- any insurer having his prin~ place IS 
of business or domicile outside India"; 
(iii) . ~n (6) ahall be omitted. 
3. In section 110 of the principal Act, in clause (eI) of su.b-section 
(1), the words "refusing to register, or" shall bel omitted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In terms of" sub-section (6) of section. 3 of the Insurance Act, 
1938, it is mandatory on the part of the Controller of, Insunnce to 
grant a certiftc:ate of registration to an applicant if the requirements 
as to registration under the Act· are complied with. It is not,. how-
ev~r, a requilreID:ent that the Controller should satisfy himself about 
the financial condition and the general character of management of 
the applic:amt so that the interests of the polic:y holders are adequate-
ly safeguard.ed. The Government conSider that such a requirement 
is nece.ary and that the entry of new insuren should be related 
to· the vo1W1~ of business available so that un~onomic units which 
may act as 11 drag on the insurance industry are not allowed to grow. 
The Bill is intended -mainly to give effect to these objects. 
NEW J)a.HI; T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
The 19th l'eb'Ml4ry, 1965. 
3 _ ... 

Registra-
tion. 
Appeals. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INSUltANCE A~, 1938 
No.4 or 1938 
• • • • • 
3. (1) • • • • 
(3) In the case of any insurer having his principal place of business 
or domicile outside India, the controller shall withhold registration 
Or shall cancel a registration already mad~ if he is satisfied that in 
the COWltry; in which such insurer has his principal place of business 
or domicile Indian nationals a:re debarred by the law or practice of 
the coWltry relating to, or applied to insurance from carrying on 
the business of insurance, or that any requirement imposed on such 
insurer under the provisions of section 62 is not satisfied .. 
• • • • • 
(6) Subject to compliance with the provisions of sections 2C, 5, SA, 
IO(2A), 3lA and 32 and of any other order made under section 3B, 
thE!ll Controller shall, on being satisfied that the application has ful-
filled all the requirements of this section a.pplicable to him, register 
the insurer and grant him a certificate of registration. 
• • • • • 
110. (1) An appeal shall lie 10. the Court having jurisdiction iirom 
any of the following orders, namely:-
(a) an order under section 3 refusing to register, or can-
celling the registration of, an insurer; 
• • • • • 
• 
4 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BnL 
further to amend the Insurance At;t.t938. 
, 
. (sJrri T. T. K~J 
_ Minist. of Fm..c,.) 