Dot 11161. 
\ 
• 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
28TJi FEBRUARY, 1963 
Bill No. 1 of 1"3 
THE FINANCE BILL, 1963 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central Government for 
the financial year 1963-64. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Finance Act, 1963. Short title 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, sections 3, 6, 7, 9, 11, ~!cc:..m-
5 12, 13, and 21 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st ment. 
day of April, 1963. 
2. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and In~me-tas 
(5), for the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April,:C. super-
1963,-
10 (a) income-tax shall be charged at the rates specified in 
Part I of the First Schedule and,-
(i) in the cases to which Paragraphs A, B, C and E of 
that Part apply, shall be increased by a surcharge for 
purposes of the Union and, except in the cases to which the 
said Paragraph E applies, a special surcharge, calculated in 
either case in the manner provided therein; and 
(ii) in the cases to which Paragraphs A and C of the 
aforesaid Part apply, shall further be increased by an addi-
tional surcharge for purposes of the Union (hereinafter 
referred to as additional surcharge) calculated in the 
manner provided in the said Schedule; 
(b) super-tax shall, for the purposes of section 95 of the • 
Income-tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the Income-tax 
Act), be charged at the rates specified in Part II of the First 
Schedule, and, in the cases to which Paragraphs A, Band C of 
that Part apply, shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes 
2781 (8) LS-I • 

2 I 
of the Union and a special surcharge, calculated in either case in 
the manner provided therein. • 
(2) In making any assessment for the assessment year com-
mencing on the 1st day of April, 1963,-
(4) where the total income of an assessee, not being a 5 
company, includes any income chargeable under the head 
ClSalaries", the income-tax payable by the assessee on that part 
of his total income which consists of such inclusion shall be an 
amount bearing to the total amount of income-tax payable 
according to the rates applicable under the operation of the 10 
Finance (No.2) Act, 1962, on his total income the same propor- 20 of 1982. 
tion as the amount of such inclusion bears to his total income; 
(b) where the total income of an assessee, not being a 
company, includes any income chargeable under the head 
"Salaries" on which super-tax has been or might have been de- IS 
ducted under the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 192 of 
the Income-tax Act, the super-tax payable by the assessee on 
that portion of his total income which consists of such inclusion 
shall be an amount bearing to the total amount of super-tax 
payable according to the rates applicable under the operation of 20 
the Finance (No.2) Act, 1962, on his total income the same pro- 20 of 1862. 
portion as the amount of such inclusion bears to his total income. 
(3) In making any assessment for the assessment year commenc-
ing on the 1st day of April, 1963, where the total income of a company, 
other than the Life Insurance Corporation of India established under 25 
the Ufe Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, includes any profits and 31 of 1951. 
gains from life insurance business, the super-tax payable by it shall 
be the aggregate of the tax calculated-
(i) on the amount of profits and gains from life insurance 
business so included, at the rate applicable to the Life Insurance 30 
Corporation of India in accordance with Paragraph E of Part II 
of the First Schedule; and 
(U) on the remaining part of its total income, at the rate 
applicable to the company on its total income. 
(4) (4) In cases to which Chapter XII of the Income-tax Act 35 
applies, the tax chargeable shall be determined as provided in that 
Chapter, and with reference to the rates imposed by sub-section (1) 
or the rates as specifled in that Chapter, as the case may be. 
(b) In computing· under section 209 of the Income-tax Act, the 
ad.-mee tax payable by an assessee, the additional surcharge shall be 40 
included. 
(c) 'n1e amount of income-tax to be deducted at source under sub-
llectiOll (1) of section 192 of the Income-tax Act from income charge-
. able under the head "Salaries" shall include an additional surcharge • 

\ » 
equai in aJpolint to the additional surcharge which would have beeD 
leviable if the estimated income under that head had been the total 
ijDcome. 
(5) In respect of any assessment for the assessment year com-
S mencing on the 1st day of April, 1963-
10 
IS 
(i) an assessee being an Indian company or any other 
company which has made the prescribed arrangements for the 
declaration and payment of dividends within India or an assessee 
(other than a company) whose total mcome includes any profits 
and gains derived from the export of any goods or merchandise 
out of India, shall be entitled to a deduction, from the amount of 
income-tax and super-tax with which he is chargeable of an 
amount equal to the income-tax and super-tax calculated respec-
tively at one-tenth of the average rate of income-tax and of the 
average rate of super-tax on the amount of such profits and gains 
included in the total income; 
85 of liSl. 20 0 
(ii) where an assessee of the type referred to in clause (i) 
is engaged in the manufacture of any articles in an industry 
specified in the First Schedule to the Industries (Development 
and Regulation) Act, 1951 exports after the 28th day of February. 
1963, such articles out of India, he shall be entitled, in addition 
to the deduction of tax referred to in clause (i), °to a further 
30 
3S 
40 
• 
deduction of tax with which he is chargeable for the assessment 
year of an amount equal to the income-tax and super-tax calcu-
lated respectively at the average rate of such taxes on an amount 
equal to two per cent. of the sale proceeds received by him on 
such export; 
(iii) where an assessee of the t~:pe referred to in clause (0 
engaged in the manufacture of any articles in an industry specified 
in the said First Schedule sells after the 28th day of February, 
1963, such articles to any other person in India who himself 
exports them ou t of India during the previous year and evidence 
is produced before the Income-tax Officer of such articles having 
been so exported, the assessee shall be entitled to a deduction 
from the amount of income-tax and super-tax with which he is 
chargeable for the assessment year of an amount equal to the 
income-tax and super-tax calculated respectively at the average 
rate of such taxes on a sum equal to two per cent. of the sale 
proceeds received in respect of such articles by the manufacturer • 
from the exporter; 
(iv) the total of the deductions under this sub-section shall 
in no case exceed the amount of income-tax and super-tax other-
wise plyable by the assesseei 
• 

4 
(v) nothing contained in clauses (ii) and (iii) sJaU apply 
in relation to fuels, textiles (including those dyed, printed or 
otherwise processed), sugar, vegetable oils and vanaspathi, 
cement and gypsum products and cigarettes respectively speci-
fied in items, 2, 23, 25, 28,· 35 and 38 of the First Schedule to 5 
the Industries (Development and Regulation) . Act, 1951 and in 85 of 1951 . 
. relation to such other articles in any other industry specified in 
that Schedule which may be notified in the Official Gazette by 
tbe Central Government having regard to the progress achieved 
by the industry or any other relevant factors; 10 
(vi) the amount of any profits and gains derived from the 
export of any goods or merchandise out of India in respect of 
which deduction of income-tax and super-tax is admissible under 
clause (i) shall be computed in accordance with the rules made 
by the Central Board of Revenue in this behalf. IS 
(6) In cases in which tax has to be deducted under sub-section 
(2) of section 192 and sections 193 to 195 of the Income-tax Act at 
the rates in force, the deduction shall be made at the rates specified 
in Part III of the Fint Schedule. 
(7) For the purposes of this section, and of the rates of tax 30 
imposed thereby, and of section 3-
(i) the expressions "assessment year", "average rate of 
income-tax", "average rate of super-tax", "partner", "tax" and 
"total income" have the meanings respectively assigned to them 
under clauses (9), (10), (.Ll), (23), (43) and (45) of aection 2 2S 
of the Income-tax Act; 
(ii) the expression "earned income" has the same meaning 
as in section 2 of the Finance (No.2) Act, U~62. 20 of 1862 
(8) For the purposes of Paragraphs A and C of Part I of the First 
Schedule, the expression "residual income" means the amount of the 30 
total income as reduced by-
(a) the amount of the capital gains, if any, included therein; 
and 
(b) the amount of tax (exclusive of additional surcharge) 
which would have been chargeable on such reduced total income 35 
if it had been the total income no part of which had been exempt 
from tax and on no portion of which deduction of tax had been 
admissible under any provisions of the Income-tax Act or this 
Act. 
c: 

8 
3. Notwithltanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act or Additional 
sub-se~tiol1 (5~ of section 2 of this Act, i~ calculating any relief, ~~~c~~rg: 
rebate or deduction in respect of the tax payable on the total income taken into 
f h · h t" h' h' . account o an assessee w IC con ams any mcome on w IC no Income-tax 15 for pur-
5 payable or in respect of which a deduction is admissible, no account Pdosdes °t! e uc IOn, 
shall be taken of the additional surcharge. etc. 
4. In section 2 of the Income-tax Act, for clause (44), the follow- Amend-
ing clause shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, subs- :~ti~:i 
tituted, namely:-
10 "(44) 'Tax Recovery Officer' means-
(i) a Collector or an additional Collector; 
(ii) any such officer ePlpowered to effect recovery of 
arrears of land revenue OI: other public demand under any 
law relating to land revenue or other public demand for the 
15 time being in force in the State as may be authorised by the 
State Government, by general or special notification in the 
Official Gazette, to exercise the powers of a Tax Recovery 
Officer; 
.(ui) any Gazett~d Officer of the Central or a Stat~ 
20 Government who may be authorised by the Central Govern-
ment, by general or special notification in the Official Gazette, 
to exercise the powers of a Tax Recovery Officer;". 
5. In section 13 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (b), for the words Amend-
"trust or charitable institution", the words "trust for charitable pur- men tit oflS sec or.. . 
25 poses or a charitable institution" shall be, and shall be deemed always 
to have been, substituted. 
6. In section 40 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (c), before the Amend-
Explanation, the following Bub-clause shall be inserted, namely: - ~~ri~:~O . 
.. (iii) any expenditure which results directly or indirectly 
30 In the provisiOIl vi allY r~muneration, benefit or amenity to an 
employee to the extent that it exceeds five thousand rupees per 
month for any period after the 28th day of February, 1963: 
Provided that. in computing the aforesaid expenditure, any 
payments by way of gratuity or any sums comprised in the 
35 transferred balance of an employee participating in a recognised 
provident fund referred to in clause (vii) of sub-section (1) of 
section 17, or the amount of any compensation referred to in 
clause (i) or any payment referred to in clause (ii) of sub-section 
(3) of that section shall not be taken into account.". 
• 
40 7. In section 58 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (b), after the Amend-
words brackets and figure "referred to in sub-clause (i) ", the words, mect~t ofS8 , ~ ~ . 
brackets and figures "or in sub-dause (iii)" shall be inserted . 
• 
• • 

Amend-ment of 
section lie. 
• l 8. tn section 139 of the Income-tax Act,-
o 
(1) in sub-section (1), in clause (iii) (b) of the proviso, the 
words "as finally assessed" shall be, and shall be deemed always 
to have been, omitted; 
(2) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall S 
be, and shall be deemed always to have been, inserted, namely:-
"(lA) Where as a result of an order under section 154 or 
section 155 or section 250 or section 254 or sec;tion 260 or sec-
tion 262 or section 264, the amount of tax on which interest 
was payable under clause (iii) of the proviso to sub- 10 
. section (1) has been reduced, the interest shall be reduced 
accordingly, and the excess interest paid, if any, shall be 
refunded."; 
(3) after sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely: - 15 
U(8) Notw~thstanding anything contained in clause (iii) 
of the proviso to sub-section (1), the Income-tax Officer may, 
in such cases and under such circumstances as may be pres-
cribed, reduce or waive the inte.re~t payable by any person 
under any provision of this section.··. 20 
¥nsertion 9. After section 141 of the Income-tax Act, the following section 
of new sec-lion 141A. shall be inserted, namely :-
Relief to 
be given 
to, and 
interest to 
be recover-
ed from, 
assesseea 
Incertaln 
• 
"141A. (1) If any assessee having furnished a return under 
section 139 before the 1st day of January of the assessment year, 
pays before that date the tax determined as payable by him in 2S 
pursuance of a provisional assessment made under section 141 or 
a regular assessment made under section 143 or section 144, or 
where neither of such assessments has beeR made before that 
date, the tax payable by him on the basis of such return after 
taking into consideration the tax paid for the assessment year 30 
under the provisions of Chapter XVII-B or Chapter XVII-C, b:e 
shall be entitled to a deduction from the amount of income-tax 
and super-tax with which he is chargeable of an amount equal 
to one per cent. of the amount of tax so paid by him before the 
said date. 3S 
(2) If any assessee does not furnish a return under section 
139 before the 1st day of January of the assessment year and no 
regular assessment under section 144 is made before the said 
date, he shall, in addition to the amount of income-tax anel 
lUper-tax with which he is chargeable, be liable to pa, an amount 40 
• • 

, ' calculated at two per cent. per annum from the said 1st day of 
January to-
(i) in the case where no return is furnished, the date on 
which a regular assessment is made under section 144; 
S (ii) in the case where a return is filed after the said 1st 
day of January, the date on which a provisional assessment 
under section 141 or a regular assessment under section 143 
or section 144, whichever is earlier, is made, 
the calculation in the case referred to in clause (i) being made 
10 with reference to the tax payable on regular assessment under 
section 144 and in the case referred to in clause (ii) being made 
with reference to the tax payable on the basis of the return, and 
in either case after taking into consideration the tax already paid 
under the provisions of Chapter XVII-B or Chapter XVII-C. 
IS (3) If any assessee having furnished a return under 
section 139 before the 1st day of January of the assessment year 
does not pay before that date the tax payable on the basis of 
such return after taking into consideration the tax already paid 
for the assessment year under the provisions of Chapter XVII-B 
20 or Chapter XVIl-C and no provisional assessment under section 
141 or regular assessment under section 143 or section 144 is 
made before the said date, he shall, in addition to the amount of 
income-tax and super-tax with which he is chargeable, be liable 
to pay an amount calculated at two per cent. per annum from 
2S the said 1st day of .January to the date on which a provisional 
assessment under section 141 or a regular assessment under sec-
tion 143 or section 144, whichever is earlier, is made, the calcula-
tion being made with reference to the tax payable on the basis 
of the return after taking into consideration the tax already paid 
30 under the provisions of the aforesaid Chapters. 
(4) Any sum paid by an assessee in accordance with the 
provisions of sub-section (1) otherwise than in pursuance of a 
provisional assessmen,t made under section 141 or a regular 
assessment under section 143 or section 144, shall be treated as a 
3S payment of tax in respect of the relevant assessment year, and 
credit therefor shall De given to the assessee in the regular 
assessment.". 
10. In section 146 of the Income-tax Act, for the words and figures Amend-
"in accordance with the prOVisions of section 143 or 144", the words :~n~:~4G. 
40 and figures "in accordance with the provisions of section 143 or 
section 144~' s8a11 be substituted, 
• • 

8 , 
=~f 11. In section 209 of the Income-tax Act, after clause (c) and 
section 209. before the Explanation, the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
Amend-
ment of 
section 210. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 215. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 220. 
"( d) in cases where the Income-tax Officer makes an amend-
ed order referred to in sUb-section (3) of section 210 on the basis S 
of a provisional assessment, the total income on the basis of 
which the relevant provisional assessment had been made ~ hall 
be substituted for the total income referred to in clause (a) .". 
.2. In section 210 of the Income-tax Act, for sub-section (3), the 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- 10 
"(3) If, after the making of an order by the Income-tax 
Officer under this section and before the 15th day of February of 
the financial year, a regular assessment or a provisional assess-
ment under section 141 of the assessee (or of the registered firm 
of which he is a partner) is made in respect of a previous year IS 
later than that referred to in the order of the Income-tax Officer, 
the Income-tax Officer may make an amended order requiring 
the assessee to pay in one instalment on the specified date, or in 
equal instalments on the specified dates, if more than one, faUing 
after the date of the amended order, the advance tax computed 20 
on the basis of the total income determined for the purposes of 
the regular assessment or the provisional assessment aforesaid 
as reduced by the amount, if any, paid in accordance with the 
original order.". 
13. In section 215 of the Income-tax Act, for sub-section (2), the 2S 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely :- . 
"(2) Where before the date of completion of a regular assess-
ment, a provisional assessment is made under section 141 or tax 
is paid by the assessee otherwise than in pursuance of such a 
provisional assessment- 30 
(i) interest shall be calculated in accordance with the 
foregoing provision up to the date on which the tax is paid 
either as provisionally assessed or otherwise; and 
(ii) thereafter interest shnll be calculated at the rate 
aforesaid on the amount by which the tax as so paid (in so 35 
far as it relates to income subject to advance tax) falls short 
. of the said seventy-five per cent:'. 
14. In section 220 of the Income-tax Act, to sub-section (2), the 
following proviso shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, 
added, namely :- 40 
"Proviued that, where as a result of an order under section 
154, or section 155, or se.ction 250, or section 254, ort section 260, 
II 

LOK SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE FINANCE BILL, 1963 
(As introduced in Lok Sabha) IHe-print with line numbers7 
1. Page li, line 19, - - -
after "Act" insert 
2. Page 11, line 20,-
after "(1)" insert 
" If , 
11.11 , 
3. Correct line numbers on pages 15, 18, 21, 
25 and 30. 
NEW DElliI, 
March 6~ 1963 
PhaIgun-aTo, ~.1.~ {Sakal 

" • 9 
~,r section 262, or section 264, the amount on which interest WU! 
payable under this section had been reduced, the interest shall be 
reduced Iiceordingly and the excess interest paid, if any. shall be 
refunded.". 
5 15. In section 223 of the Income-tax Act, in sUb-section (2), the Amend-
~ords "in a district" shan be, and shall be deemed always to have ~U~~~2I. 
been, omitted. 
16. In'section 233 of the Income-tax Act, for the words and figures Amend-
"aaeSltn~t made under section 143 or 144", the words and figures ~~U~~~3. 
10 "assessment made under section 143 or section i44'" shall be substi-
tuted. 
, . 
17. In section 271 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1). in Amtitd:' ':. 
clause (a), the word "his" occurring before the words "total income" :c~:i'lI~' 
shall be omitted. 
IS 18. In section 291 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1), after Amend-
the wordS "the evasion of (layment of tax on income", the words ~U~~i91. 
!lit' is necessary or expedient so to do" shall be inserted. 
18. In section 297 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2). in Arnetdf 
clause (e), before the words, figures and letter "section 23A of the ~~Uo~ 297. 
20 repealed Act", the words, l¥ackets and letters "subject to the 
provisions of clause (9) and clause (j) of this sub-section" shall be, 
35 
40 
and shall be deemed always to have been, inserted. 
20. -In the Second Schedule to the Income-tax Act,- Amend-
ment of 
(1) in Part I, after rule 19, the following rule sllall, be; and the Second 
shall be deemed always to have been, inserted, namely: _ Schedule. 
"1gA. A Tax Recovery Officer, being a Collector or an Entrust-
additional Collector, may, subject to the approval of the State r:!~r::.i~f 
Government, entrust any of his functions as Tax Recovery ~~~~g:_ 
Officer to any other officel' lower than him in rank who is tor or 
empowered to effect recovery of arrears of land revenue or ~~1l!~~;.1 
other public demand under any law relating to land revenue 
or other public demand for the time being in force in the 
State and such officer shall, in relation to functions sO 
entrusted to him', be deemed to be a Tax Recovery Officer."; 
(2) in rule 86, for sub-rule (1), the following sub-rule shan 
be, and shall be deemed always to have been, substituted, 
118me1y:-
"(1) An appeal from any original order passed by the 
Tax Recovery Officer under this Schedule, not being an order 
whietr is' conclusive, shall li~ 
• <s> in the-' case of a Tax Recovery Officer, being a 
• CoHectbr or an additioD81 Collaet~ or an officer referred 

.Amend-
.. ent of Ac:U.,ot 
1t57. 
" 10 
tt:) in sub-clause (iii) of clause (44) of section 2, to the 
revenue autho:ojty to which appeals ordinarily lie against 
the orders of a Collector under the law relating to land 
revenue of the State concerned; and 
(b) in any other case, to the revenue authority 19 5 
which an appeal or an application for revision would 
ordinarily lie, if the order passed by him were the order 
under the law relating to land revenue or other public 
demand for the time being in force in the State eon-
cerned.". 
21. In section 5 of the Wealth-tax Act, 1957,-
(1) in sub-section (1)-
(a) clause (xv) shall be omitted; 
10 
(b) in clause (xvi), for the words "twelve year national 
plan savings certificates held by the assessee", the words IS 
"twelve year national plan savings certificates, ten year 
defence deposit certificates and twelve year national defence 
certificates held by the Rssessee, to the extent to whicl) the 
amount of such certificates or· deposits do not exceed in each 
case the maximum amount permitted to be invested or 20 
deposited therein" shall be substituted; 
(2) to sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be added, 
namely:-
"Provided that for the purpose of making any assessment 
for the financial year commencing on the 1st day of April,2S 
1963, the provisions of clause (b) shall not apply to ten year 
defence deposit certificates and twelve year national defence 
certificates held by the assessee on the relevant valuation 
date.". 
2Z. In the Indian Tariff Act, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as the 30 
Tariff Act) ,-
(1) in section 2A,-
(i) in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) after the words "manufactured in India" 
occurring before the Explanation, the following shall be 35 
inserted, namely;-
"and if such excise duty on a "like article i. 
leviable at any percentage of its value, the custom. 
duty to which the imported article shall be 80 liable 

5 
10 
15 
20 
11 
• shall be calculated at that percentage of the value 
of the importe,d article."; 
(b) in the ExpZanation, for the words, "In this sub-
section", the words, brackets, figure and letter "In this 
sub-section and sub-section (lA)" shall be substituted; 
(ii) after sub-section (1). the following sub-section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"(lA) For the purpose of calculating under thil 
section the customs duty on any imported article equal 
to the excise duty for the time being leviable on a like 
article, if produced or manufactured in India, where 
such excise duty is leviable at any percentage of its value, 
the value of the imported article shall, notwithstanding 
anything contained in section 14 of the Customs Act, 1962 
be the aggregate of-
(i) the value of the imported article as calculated 
under the said section 14; 
(ii) any duty of customs chargeable on that 
article under section 12 of the Customs Ac~ 1962 
other than the duty referred to in sub-sectioll (1). 
and 
(iii) any sum chargeable on that article under 
any law for the time being in force as an llddition 
to, and in the same manner as, a duty of customs."; 
25 (2) the First Schedule shall be amended in the manner speci-
fied in the Second Schedule to this Act. 
23. (1) In the case of goods chargeable with a duty of customs s~ 
which is specified in the First Schedule to the Tariff Act as amended :r CUI::'. 
by this Act or any subsequent Act'of Parliament, or in that Schedule 
30 read with any notification' of the Central Government for the time 
being in force, there shall be levied. and collected as an addition to, 
and in the same manner as, the total amount so chargeable, a sum 
equal to 10 per cent. of such amount: . 
Provided that in computing the total amount so chargeable, any 
35 duty chargeable under section 2A of the Tariff Act or section 24 of 
this Act shall not be included. 
(2) Sub-section (1) shall cease to have effect after the 31st day 
of March 1964 except as respects things done or omitted to be done .• , . 
before such cesse!'; and section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 shell 
• 

12 
·apply upon such cesser as if the said sub-section 11.:-.1 then been 
repealed by a Central Act. 
Regulatory U. (1) There shall be levied and collected, with effect from such 
:::a7o~!. ~ate as may be specified in this behalf by the Central Government 
by notification in the Official Gazette, on all goods mentioned in the 5 
.First Schedule to the Tariff Act as amended by this Act or any 
subsequent Act of Parliament, a regulatory duty of customs which 
shall be-
(a) twenty-five per cent. of the rate, if any, specified in the 
said First Schedule read with any notification issued under JO 
section 3A or sub-section (1) of section 4 of the TAriff Act; or 
(b) ten per cent. of the value of the goods as determined in 
accordance with the provisions of section 14 of the Customs Act, 
1_ ~~~ 
., 
...... ' 
Amend-
ment of 
Act 1 uf 
lHi. 
whichever is higher: 15 
Provided that different dates may be specified by the Central 
Government for different kinds of goods. 
(2) Sub-section (1) shall cease to have effect after the 31st day of 
March, 1964 except as respects things done or omitted to be done 
before such cesser; and section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 20 10 of. 1887. 
shall apply upon such cesser as if the said sub-section had then been 
re~ed by a Central Act. 
(3) The duty of customs leviable under this section in respect of 
any goods referred to in sub-section (1) shall be in addition to any 
other duty of customs chargeable on such goods under the Customs 25 
Act, 1962. ~2 of 1982. 
(4) The provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 and the rules and 52 of 1982. 
regulations made thereunder, including those relating to refunda uu:l 
exemptions from duties, shall, as far as may be, apply in relaticm .to 
the levy and collection of the regulatory duty of customs leviable ~o 
under this section in respect of any goods as they apply in .relation 
to the levy and. collection of the duties of customs on such «oods 
under that Act or those rules and regulations. 
(5) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall, as soon 
.. may be after it is issued, be placed before each House of 'Parliament. IS 
25. In the Indian Tariff (Amendment) Act, 1949, in sections.~ and 
~, for ttle figures "1963", the fi8ures "1964" shall be substituted. 
• • 
• 

,lJ 
26. In the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (hereinafter referred Amend i 
to as the _CenkalExcises Act), in the First Schedule,- ~~nl :f 
(a) in Item No. 4,- 1144. 
(,1) under "I. Uftmanufactured tobacco-"-
S for the entry in the third column against sub-item 
(5), the entry "One rupee and sixty naye paise" shall 
be .substituted; 
(2) under "II. Manufactured tobacco-"-. 
for the entries in the third column against sub-items 
10 (2) (i.), (2) (ii), (2) (iii) ,(2) (iv) and (2) (v), the entries 
"Thirty-four rupees", "Seventeen rupees", "Eight rupees 
and fifty naye paise", "Four rupees and twenty nay~ 
paise" and "Two rupees" shall, respectively, be substi-
tuted; 
IS (b) in Item No.6, for the entry in the third column, the 
entry "Four hundred and ten rupees per kilolitre at fifteen 
deg:pees ·ot Centigrade thermometer" shall be substituted; 
(c) in Item No.7, for the entry in the third column, the entry 
"Two hundred and ten rupees per kilolitreat fifteen degrees of 
20 Centigrade thermometer" shall be substituted; 
(d) in Item No.8, for the entries in the third column.against 
sub-items (a) and (b), the entries "Three hundred and ninety 
rupees per kilolitre at fifteen degrees of Centigrade thermometer" 
and "Three hundred and seventy rupees per kiloIitre at fifteen 
2S degrees of Centigrade thermometer" shall, respectively, be substi-
.luted; 
(II) in Item No.9, ior the 'cntry in the third column, the 
«l'try''ODe aundred and ninet:·-:tve rupees per metric ·tonne" 
shall be subatituted; 
30 (1) in Item No. '13, for the entry in the third column, the 
entry "Thirty-two rupees per quintal" shall be substituted; 
,(,) -in ·!tem No. '14,-
(1) in sub-item 1 (4) (ii), the words "and ready mixed 
paints, sold by w,eight" occurring in the second column shall 
3S be omitted; 
• 
• 
(2) in sub-item 1 (4) (iii), tl1" words "sold by volume" 
occurring in the second column shall be omitted; 
(3) for the entries in the third column ,against sub~items 
1(1) (ii) , 1(3) (ii) , 1.(3) (iv) , 1(4) (i), 1(4) (ti), 1(4).(tii), nCi) 
and III (i), the entries "Seventy-five naye paise per kilo- . 
gtam", "Thirty rupees and fifty naye paise per quintal", 

14 
• "One rupee and five naye paise per litre", "Seventy-five naye 
paise per kilogram". "Nineteen rupees and fifty naye paise 
per quintal". "Sixty-five naye paise per litre", "Thirty-five 
naye paise per litre" and "One rupee and fifty naye paise 
per litre" shall, respectively, be substituted; 5 
(h) in Item No. 15, for the entries in the third column 
against sub-items I(l)(i), 1(1) (ii) , 1(2), 1(3), II(i) and 1I(&i), 
the entries "Fifteen rupees and fifty naye paise per quintal", 
"Eighteen rupees per quintal". "Thirty-seven rupees and fifty-
five naye paise per quintal". UThirty-seven rupees and fifty-five 10 
naye paise per quintal". ''Thirteen rupees and twenty-five naye 
paise per quintal" and "Fifteen rupees and fifty naye paise per 
quintal" shall, respectively, be substituted; 
(i) in Item No. 17, for the entry in the third column against 
sub-item (5), the entry ''Thirty-five naye paise per kilogram" 15 
shall be substituted; 
(j) in Item No. 26A, for the entries in the third column 
against sub-items (1) amI (2), the entries "Three hundred rupees 
per metric tonne" and "Five hundred rupees per metric tonne" 
shall, respectively, be substituted; 2.0 
(k) in Item No. 26AA, sub-item (i) shall be renumbered as 
(ia) thereof and befort. ~he sub-item (ia) as SQ renumbered, the 
fol1owing sub-item shall be inserted, namely:-
"Ci) Semi-finished steel includin~ 
hbams, bill-:ts. ~Iabs. ~h~C'f h:lrs, 
til} bus and hClC h Irs. 
Thirty rupee~ per metric tonne plu! I.he 
excise du~y for the time h::ing leviable on 2.5 
~'eel ingots .... 
27. (l) When goods of the description mentioned in this section 
chargeable with a duty of excise under the First Schedule to the 
Central Excises Act, as amended by this Act or any subsequent Act 
of Parliament or under that Schedule read with any notification of 30 
the Central Government for the time being in force, are assessed to 
duty, there shall be levied and collected-
(a) as respects goods comprised in Items Nos. 6, 8, 9, lID, 
17(3), 22A, 23A except sub-item (1) thereof, 23B, 28, 29.31 except 
sub-item (1) thereof and 32 of that Schedule, a special duty of 35 
excise equal to 10 per cent. of the total amount so chargeable on. 
such goods; 
(b) as respects goods comprised in Items Nos. 2, 3(1), 'ub-
items I, II (2) and II (3) of Item No.4, Items Nos. 13, 14, 14F, 15, 
15A, 15B, 16. 16A, 17 except sub-ftem (3) thereof, 18A(2) , 21,4 0 
22. 23, 23A(1), 27, 30 •. 31 (1), 33, sub-i~ems (1) and (4) of Item 
No. 34 and 37 of that Schedule, a special duty of excile equal to 
20 per cent. of the total amount so chargeable ·on luch goods; and 
• 

lOot 1897. 
lOoUal.,. 
• - I 
(C) as respects goods comprised in Items Nos, 4 11 (1), 18, 
18A(l), 18B, 20, 29A, 33A, SUb-items (2) arid (3) of Item ~o. 34 
and radiograms comprised in Item No. 3?A of that Schedule, a 
special duty of excise equal to 33 1/3 per cent. of the total amount 
5 so chargeable on such goods. 
(2) Sub-section (1) sl'Jall cease to have effect after the 31st day 
of March, 1964 except as respects things done or omitted to be done 
before such ce~;ser; and section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 
shall apply upon such cesser as if the said sub-section had then been 
10 repealed by a Central Act. 
(3) The duties of excise referred to in sub-section (1) in respect 
of the goods specified therein shall be in addition to the duties of 
excise chargeable 'on such goods under the Central Excises Act or , 
any other law f01' the time being in force and such special duties shall 
15 be levied for purposes of the Union and the proceeds thereof shall 
not be distributed among the States. 
(4) The provisions of the Central Excises Act and the rules made 
thereunder, including those relating to refunds and ~xemptio~ from 
duties, shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to the levy and 
20 collection of the duty of excise leviable under this section in respect 
of any goods as they apply in relation to the levy and collection of 
the duties of excise on such goods under that Act or those rules. 
28. (1) There shall be levied and collected, with effect from "such Regulatory 
date as may be specified in this behalf by the Central Government ~~~rte~t 
25 by notification in the Official Gazette, on all goods mentioned. in the . 
First Schedule to the Central Exci:;l:!s Act as amended by this Act or 
any subsequent Act of Parliament, a regulatory duty of excise which 
shall be ten per cent. of the value of the goods as determined in 
accordance with the provisions Qf section 4 of the Central Excises 
~o Act: ot.i ... J~ 
- Provided that different dates may be speCified by the Central 
Government for different kinds of goods. 
(2) Sub-section (1) shall cease to have effect after the 31st day 
of March, 1964, except as respects things done or omitted to be done 
S before such. cesser; and section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 
3 shall apply upon such cesser as if the said sub-section had then been 
repealed by a Central Act. 
(3) The duties of excise referred to in sub-section (1) in respect 
of the goods specified therein shall be in addition to the duties of • 
40 excise chargeable on such goods under the' Central Excises Act or 
any other law for the time being in force and such regulatory duties 
shall be levied for purposes of the Union and the proceeds thereof . 
shall·not bl! distributed among the States . 
• 

Disconti-
nuance of 
aaltduty. 
Amend-
ment of 
Act 180! 
1806. 
, 
i6 • 
(4) The provisions of the Central Excises Act and the rules mad\:! 
thereunder. including those relating to refunds and exemptions; f100m 
duties, shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to the levy. and 
colle"etion of the regulatory duty of excise leviable under this section 
in respect of any goods as they apply in relation to the levy ad 5 
collection of the duties of excise on such goods under that Act or 
t.hose rules. 
(5) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall, 8a soon 
as may be after it is issued, be placed before eaclf HOUse of Parnament: 
29. For the year beginning on the first day of April, 1963, nb duty 10 
under the Central Excises Act. or the Tariff Act shall be levied in 
respect of salt manufactured in, or imp'Orted' intO', India. 
30. In the Schedule to thE' Medicinal and Totl~ Pi'eparattonS 
(Exeise Duties) Act; 1955.-
• 
(a) in Item N'o. 1, in the column relating to "Rate of duty.", 15 
for the words "Ten per cent. ad valorem", the words "Rupee 
one and ten naye paise per litre of the strength of London proof 
sp:rit or ten per cent. ad valorem, whichever is higher." shall be 
su~stltuted; 
(b) in Item No. 2-
(1) in the column relating to "Description of dutiable 
goods", tIte words "which are prepared by distillation or to 
which alcohol has been added; and" shall be omitted; 
20 
(2) in the column relating to "Rate of duty", the words 
"or ten per cent. ad valorem, whichever is higher" shall be 25 
inserted at the end; 
(c) in Item No.3, after sub-item (ii), the following item shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"(iia) Ayucvcdio; pr~p lra:ion;. CUIl- Rupee, fiC,ccll and fifty naye paise per litre 
(aiRing: akloh·,ll. which are pre- of the strength of London prooftpiril." ; 30 
pared by distillation or to which 
alcohol has been added. and 
which arc cap'lblc or being eon-
,umcd as MJinary akoholic he-
\'~I':Igcs. 3S 
Cd) in Item No.6, in the column relating to "Rate of duty", 
for the words "Twenty-five per cent. ad valOTem", the words' 
"Rupees three and: eigtlty..ftve naye paise per litre of th~ strength 
of London proof spirit or twaty-ftYepet cent. advrdorem, wb'i,ch.; 
ever ill higher" shall be substituted. • 4 0 

• 11 
ii. For the First Schedule to the Indian Post Oftlce Act, 1898, 'the ~ 
follQ.wing Schedule shall be substituted, namely:- ::fat.: 
"THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
ha.AND POSTAGB RATE 
(See section 7) 
i.III".. 
For a weiJhtDOtcZcecdinsfifteenlrains • • 15 nayepal ... 
For every ft£teen,rams. or fraction thereof. exccediq fifteen ,rams. 10 naJcpaiM. 
10 For aletter-c:ard 
Siqle 
Reply 
LlUlN:M'u 
Book. Pau,", allil Sampl, ,." 
rS For the first fift)' arama or fraction thereof 
• 10 naye pafae. 
• 6 na7e paise. 
• 13 nayc paise. 
• 10 na7c paiae. 
For every additional twenty-five irams. or fraction thereof. in 
CKClI of fift), ,rams ' • S na1e paiae. 
R,gistered NfIIIIJ,aperl 
Par. weight not exceedin, one hundred grams • • 2 naye paiae. 
zo For a weiaht exceeding one hundred ,rams and not exceedin, two 
hundred ,rami . 3 naye paiIe. 
For eycry two hundred ,rams. or fraction thereof. exccedin, two 
hundred arams • • 3 naye paia •• 
In the case of more than one copy of the same issue of a rc,istel'ed 
ZS newspapcr beiDl carried in the same packet-
fora weiaht not exceeding onc hundred grams 3 nayc paise. 
for every additional fifty grams. or fraction thereof. in excess of 
one hundred ,rams • 2 naye palee I 
Provided that such p3aet shall not b: delivered at any addressee'. 
30 teaidencc but aha1I be,ivcn to a rccoiniseda,cnt at the Post O~cc; 
Parcds 
Fora woiaht not excccding four hundrec! gramll • • 60 nayc p.iae. 
For every four hundred ,rams. or fraction thereof, exceeding four 
bundred irama . 60 nayc paisc.'·. 
~, Declaraticm under the Provisional 9011ection ot'. Taxes Act. 1U1.. 
It i. hereby declared that it is expedient in the public intel'eit 
that the provisions of clauses 22, 23, 25, 26, 27 and 30 of this Bill &hall 
ha~e iramediate tGeot UDder the Provislo.ual Olilection "Of Tax ... 
1_ 

THE FIRST· SCHEDlJLB 
(See section 2) 
PDT I 
income-tax and IUrcharge. on. income-ta:r: 
Paragraph A 
(i) In the case of every individual who is married and fJVfJr7 
Hindu undivided family whose total income does not exceed Ra. 20,000 
in either case-
Rate, of Income-ta:r: 
Where the individual has nO Where the.individual has' 
child wholly or mainly depen- one child .moU, 01' mainly 
dent on him or where the dependent on hlDl or where 
Hindu undivided family has the Hindu undivided family 
Where the individual has 10 
more than ODC child wholly 
or mainly dependent On him 
no minor coparcener. has one minor coparcener. 
or where the Hindu .undivi-J 
ded family has more than.] 
one minor coparc:enCf. IS 
Ra. RI. Ra. 
(1) On the first 3,000 oftotal 3,300 of total income 3.600 oftotal Nil 
income income 
(2) On the nat 2,000 .. 1.100 
" 
1,400 u 3% 
(3) On the next 2.S00 .. 2,SOO " 3.S00 " 1t% 
(4) On the next 2,SOO " 2,SOO .. 2,SOO .. lQ% 20 
(S) On the neJ:t 2,SOO .. 2,SOO " 2,SOO 
" 
121% 
(6) On the neJ:t 2.S00 .. 2,SOO .. 2,SOO " IS% 
(7) On the nezt 2,500 .. 2,SOO It 2, SAO h aoP/. 
(8) On the nat 2,500 
" 
2,Soo .. 2.Soo 
" 
3)% 
____________________ ~--------------------------_____ 2S 
(ii) In the case of every individual who is not married and every 
individual or Hindu undivided family whose total income in either 
case exceeds Rs. 20,000 and in the case of every unregistered firm or 
other association of persons or body of individuals, whether 
incorporated or not, or every artificial juridical person. referred to in 
IUb-clause (vii) of clause (31) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 30 
not being a case to which any other Paragraph of this Part applies :-
(i) Ort the first 
(2) On the next 
(3)On the next 
(4) On the next 
• (S) On the next 
(6) On the next • 
(7) On the next 
.) On the next 
"(p) On.~ottGlld'-
. . 
II 
Rs. 
1,000 ohotal income 
4.000 .. 
2.S00 .. 
2.500 
" 2.500 .. 
3.500 to 
3,,00 
" •• ,tIb i, 
Nil 
~% 
J! "./. 
101% 
12"'!. 
1,-,(. 
20% 
21% 
~ 
'I1J 

, 
10 
I, 
• Provided that for the purposes of this Paragraph-
(0 no income-tax shall be payable on a total income which 
does Dot exceed the limit specified ,belowj 
(ii) the income-tax payable shall in no case exceed half the 
amount by which the total income exceeds the said limitj 
(iii) the income-tax payable by an individual who is married 
or a Hindu undivided family whose total inco~e exceeds in either 
caseRs. 20,000 .shall not exceed the aggregate of-
(a) the income-tax which would have been payable if 
the total income had been Rs. 20,000j 
(b) half the amount by which the total income exceeds 
RI.20,000; 
The lialit aforesaid ·shall'be-
(0 Rs. 6,000 in the case of every Hindu undivided family 
which as at the end of the previous year satisfies either of the 
following conditions, namely;-
(a) that it has at least two members entitled to claim 
partition who are not less than eighteen years of age; or 
(b) that it has at least two members entitled to claim 
partition who are not lineally descended one from the other 
and who are not lineally des~ended from any other living 
, member of the family; 
(ii) Rs. 3,000 in every other case. 
Surcharge~ em income-t~ 
2, The amount of income-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore 
I!lpec1fied shall be increased by the aggregate of the surchargee 
.alc~at8ft-aS ~der:~ 
3' 
(a) a surcharge for purposes of the Union equal to the sum 
of-:-
(i) two and a half per cent. of the amount of income-tax 
ealculatedat the average rate of income-tax on the income' 
under the head "Salaries"included in the total income; 
(ii) five per cent. of the amount of income-tax calculated 
at the average rate of income-tax on the total income 81 
reduced by the income under the head "Salaries" included 
theremj and 
<iii) where the earned income included in the total 
!alome exceeds RI. 1,00,000, ian D8J' Nant nf the di1!erece 
• 

20 
between the amount of income-tax which would haw been 
payable on the whole of the earned income included in the 
total income if such earned income had been the total income 
and the amount of income-tax payable on a total income ot S 
Rs. 1,00,000; . 
(b) a special surcharge at fifteen per cent. ot the difference 
between the amount of income-tax on the total income and the 
amount of income-tax on the whole of the earned income, if any, 
included in the total income if such earned income had been the 10 
total income: 
Provided that the surcharge for purposes of the Union and 
the special surcharge, both together, shall not exceed halt the 
amount by which the total income as reduced by the amount of 
income-tax payable by the assessee exceeds the limit specifted IS 
below:-
The limit aforesaid shall be-
(i) Rs. 6,000 in the case of every Hindu undivided family 
which as at the end of the previous year satisfies either of 
the following conditions, namely :-
20 
(a) that it has at least two members entitled to 
claim partition who are not leiS than eighteen years ot 
age; or 
(b) that it has at least two members entitled to 
clllim partition who are not lineally descended one from 2S 
the other and who are not lineally descended from any 
other living member of the family; 
(ii) Rs. 3,000 in every other case; 
. 
(c) an additional surcharge for purposes of the Union 
calculated on the amount of the residual income at the following 
rates, namely: _ 30 
C.') On the first Rs. 6,000 of the residual income 
Cia') On the next Rs. 9,000 of the residual income 
Cii.') On the next Rs. 12,000 of the residual income 
(;flrOn the next Rs. 15,000 of the residual income 
, CfI) On the balance of the residual income 
Provided that-
4% 
6% 
8% 
9% 
10%: 3S 
(i) no additional surcharge shall be levied where the 
residual UacOUl'e does Dot exceed the limit lIp8CUlad lNio'W; 
• 

10 
IS 
20 
21 
(ii) the additional surcharge shall in no case exceed the 
aggregate of the following BUmS, namely:-
(a) an amount calculated at three per cent. on 80 
much of the amount of residual income as does Dot 
exceed the limit specifted below; 
(b) one-half of the amount by which the residual 
income exceeds the limit specified below. 
The limit aforesaid shall be-
(i) Rs. 6,000 in the case of every Hindu undivided family 
which as at the end of the previous year satisfies either of 
the following conditions, namely:-
(a) that it has at least two members entitled to claim 
partition who are not less than eighteen years of age; or 
(b) that it has at least two members entitled to claim 
partition who are not lineally, descended one from the 
other and who are not lineaiIy descended from any 
other living member of the family; 
(ii) Rs. 3,600 in the case of every individual who has 
more than one child wholly or mainly dependent on him 
or in the case of every Hindu undivided family having more 
than one minor coparcener; 
(iii) Rs. 3,300 in the case of every individual who has 
one child wholly or mainly dependent on him or in the case 
of every Hindu undivided family having one minor copar-
25 cener; 
(iv) Rs. 3,000 in every other case. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this Paragraph, in the case of 
every Hindu undivided family· governed by the Mitakshara law, a 
son shall be deemed to be entitled to claim partition of the copar-
30 cenary property -against his father or grandfather notwithstandinl 
any custom to the contrary. 
Paragraph B 
In the case of every local authority,-
Rate of income-tax 
35 On the whole of the total income 30% 
SU'I'cha'l'ge on. income-tax 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
Of five per cent. o! the amount of inoome .. ta·x, 
• 

D 
Paragmph C • 
In every case in which under the provision. of the Income-tax 
Act, income-tax i5 to be charged at the maximum rate,-
Rate of income-tax 
On the whole of the total income ... 25% 
SU'I'cha'l'ge, Oft. ift.COm.e-tax 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by the aggregate of the surcharges cal-
culated as under:-
(a) a surcharge for purposes of the Union of five per cent. of 10 
the amount of income-tax; 
(b) a special surcharge of fifteen per cent. of the amount of 
income-tax; and 
(c) an additional surcharge for purposes of the Union 
calculated on the amount of the residual income at the rate. u I, 
specified in Paragraph A of this Part. 
Paragraph D 
In the cue of fNery company,-
Rate of income-to« 
On the whole of the total income 25% 
Pa'l'ag'l'a.ph E 
In the case of every registered firm,-
Rate, of income-tax 
(I) On the first Rs. 2S,000 of total income 
(2) On the next Rs. IS,OOO of total income 
(3) On the next Rs . ..0,000 of total income 
(4) On the next Rs. 40,000 of total income· 
(S) On the next Rs. so,ooo of tot a! income' 
(6) On the balance of total income .. 
Where·,the firm Where the firm 
has four or less . has five or 
partners more partners 
as on the last day of the 
previoul year 
Nil Nil 
S% 
6% 
7% 
8% 
10% 
7% 
8% 
9% 
10% 
12% 
30 
SU'I'cM'I'ge on income-taz 3S 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union • of Wtenty per cent. of the amount of inr.nma-t .. 'If. 

• 
PART n 
Super-taz lind surcharge. on super-tax 
Paragraph A 
in the case of every individual, Hindu undivided famUy, 
5 unregistered firm ar other association of persons or bodIy of indi-
viduals, whether incorporated or not, or every artificial juridicail. 
penon referred to in sub-clause (vii) of clause (31) of section 2 of 
the Income-tax Act, not being a case to which any other Paragraph 
of this Part applies,-
10 
IS 
50 
Rat" of lUPer-tax 
(I) On the first RI. 20,000 ofiotal income 
(2) On the next RI. 5,000 of total income 
(3) On the next RI. 5,000 of total income 
(4) On the next Rs. 10,000 of total income 
(s) On the next Rs. 10,000 of total income 
(6) On the next Rs. 10,000 of total income 
(7) On the next Rs. 10,000 of total income 
(8) On the balance of total income . 
Surcharges on super-tdX 
Nil 
8% 
18% 
22% 
32 % 
40% 
45% 
47·5% 
The amount of super-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore 
~ifled shall be increased by the ageregate of the . surcharges 
oalculated as under:-
(II) A surcharge for purposes of the Union equal to the sum 
of--
(i) two and a half per cent. of the amount of super-ttUt 
calculated at the average rate of super-tax on the income 
under the head "Salaries" included in the total income; 
(ii) five per cent. of the amount of super-tax calculated 
at the average r.ate of super-tax on the total income as 
reduced by the income under the head "Salaries" included 
therein; and 
(iii) where the earned income included in the total 
income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000, ten per cent. of the difference 
between. the amount of super-tax which would have been 
payable on the whole of the earned income included in the 
total income, if such earned income had been the total 
income and the amount of super-tax payable on a total 
income of Rs 1,00,000; • (b)' A special surcharge at fifteen per cent. of the c:W!erence 
'liefWhfn th. amoUnt tit ItIJI1er-tax on th~ tataJ. iD~ome and 'the 

• 
amount of super-tax on the whole of the earned income, if any, 
included in the total income, if such earned income had been 
the total income. 
Paragraph B 
In the case of every local authority,-
Rate of super-tax 
On tha whole of the total income 
Surcharge on super-tax 
16% 
5 
The amount of super-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by a ~urcharge for purposes of the Union 10 
of 121 per cent. of the amount of super-tax. 
Paragraph C 
In the case of every association of persons being a co-operative 
lOCiety as defined in clause (19) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act,-
Rates of super-tax 
(1) On the first Rs. 25,000 of total income 
(2) On the balance of total income 
Surcharge on super-tax 
Nil 
16% 
The amount of super-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore 
lilpecified shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 20 
of 12i per cent. of the amount of super-tax. 
Paragraph D 
In the case of every company, other ,than the Life Insurance Cor-
pOration of India established Wlder the Liie Insurance Corporation 
Act, 1956,- 25 
Rates of super-tax 
On the whole of the total income 
Provided that-
.. 55%: 
(i) a rebate at the rate of 50 per cent. on so much of the total 
income as consists of dividends from any Indian company; and 30 
at the rate of 35 per cent. on the balance of the total itlcome 
shall be allowed in the case of any company" which-
(a) in respect of ita profits liable to tax Wlder the 
Income-tax Act for the assessment year commencing on the 
1st day of April, 1963, has made the prescribed arrangements 
for the declaration and payment within I~dia of the divi- 3S 
dends payable out of such profits in a~ Witbthe 
provisions of aectiOD 194 of 'that Act: and ' 

2) 01 J962 
• (b) is such a company as is referred to in section lOS 
')£ the Income-tax Act with a total income not exceeding 
Rs. 25,000; 
(ii) a rebate at the rate of 5) per cent. on so much of thtf 
total income as consists' of dividends from a subsidiary .Indian 
company formed and registered before the 1st day of April, 1961; 
at the rate of 45 per cent. on so much of the total income a. 
consists of dividends from any other Indian company; and at the 
rate of 30 per cent.. on the balance of the total inCOInf' shall be 
10 allowed in the case of any company which satisfies condJtion (II) 
but not condition (b) of the preceding clause; 
(iii) a rebate at the rate of 50 per cent. on so much of the 
total income as consists of dividends from a subsidiary Indian 
company formed and registered before the 1st day of April, 1961; 
IS at the rate of 30 per cent. on so much of the total income al 
consists of dividends from an Indian company, not being. a subli-
diary company, formed and registered before the 1st day of 
April, 1959; at the rate of 45 per cent. on so much of the total 
income as consists of dividends from any other Indian company 
20 formed and registered on or after the 1st day of April, 1959; at 
the rate of 30 per cent on so much of the total income as consisu 
of royalties received from an Indian concern in pursuance of an 
agreement made by it with the Indian concern on or after the 
1st day of April, 1961 and which has been approved by the-
as Central Government; and at the rate of 17 per cent. on the 
balance of the total income shall be allowed in the case of lny 
company not entitled to a rebate under either of the prececDn, 
clauses: 
Provided further that-
30 (i) the amount of the rebate under clause (i~ or clause (i(~ 
35 
4$ 
of the preceding proviso shall be reduced by the swn,.if any, 
equal to the amount or the aggregate of the amounts, 8S thee ... 
may be, computed as hereunder:-
(a) on the aggregate of the sums computed. in the manner at the rate of 100%. 
provideJ in c!a\l.,e (i) orthe second provl~o to Paragrrph 
o ofP,lr t II of the First Schedule to the Finance (NO.2) 
Act 1962 as reJuced by the amount, if any, which is 
dee:ned to have be,:n t2~en into. account. ill accord!lnl.:e 
with el.lu~e (ii) of the saId prOVIRO. for the purpose of 
reducing the rebate mentioned in clause (i) of the laid 
proviso to nil j and 
(b) on Ihe amount r("pre~enting Ihe faCt'. valul' of apy bonus at the rite of fa, ". 
shares or the amClunl ofa,ny bonus I~sued. to Its ~hare-
hottlers durinlt !h~ prevIous yellf wuh a view to ,.ncreas-
ina the paiJ-up capital; 
• 

26 
(ii) where the sum arrived at in accordance with clause (i) 
of this proviso exceeds the amount of the rebate arrived at in 
accordance with clause (i) or clause (ii), as the case may be, of 
the preceding proviso, only so much of the amounts of reduction 
mentioned in sub-clauses (a) and (b) of clause (i) of this proviso : S 
as is sufficient. in that orcier, to reduce the rebate to nil shall 
be deemed to h~ve been taken into account for the purpose: 
·Provided further that the super-tax payable by a company, the 
total income of which exceeds rupees twenty-five thousand, shall not 
exceed the aggregate of- n 
(4) the super-tax which would have been payable by the 
company if its total income had been rupees twenty-five 
thousand; and-
(b) half the amount by which its total income exceeds. 
rupees twenty-five thousand. IS 
Explanation I.-For the purposes of this Paragraph, where any 
portion of the profits and gains of a company is not incJuded ill its 
total income by reason of such portion being agricultural income, the 
amount representing the face value of any ~onus shares and the 
amount of any bonus issued to its shareholders shall each be deemed 20 
to be such proportion thEreof as the average of the total income of 
the cOIl)pany in the five previous years in which the company has 
been in receipt of taxable income immediately preceding the relevant 
previous year bears to the average of its total profits and gains 
(excluding capital receipts) for the preceding five years aforesaid, 25 
reduced by such allowances as may be admissible under the Income-
tax Act which have not been taken into account by the company in 
its profit and loss accounts for the preceding five years aforesaid. 
Explanation. II.-For the purposes of this Paragraph and Part IU· 
of the Schedule, a company shall be deemed to be a subsidiary of 30 
another. company if that other company holds more than half in 
nominal value of the equity share capital of the . first mentioned 
company. 
Paragraph E 
.-In the case of the Life Insurance Corporation of India established 3S 
under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956,- 31 of 1986. 
Rate of super-tu 
On the whole of its profits and gains from life 
lDsurance business 
• 

~.; 
• PART UI 
Rates for deduction of tax at source in certain caae. 
In every case in which under the provisions of sub-section (2) of 
section 192 and sections 193 to 195 of the Income-tax Act, tax is to 
S be deducted at the rates in force, deduction shall be made from the 
income subject to deduction at the following rates :-
10 
IS 
20 
30 
35 
40 
4S 
50 
J nc,lIne-tox 
Rates of 
surcharges 
Rilte uf J----- -----
I, In the case of a person other 
than a company-
Income-
tax 
(a) in every cast", on the 25% 
whole income (rxcluding 
interest payi&ble on any 
security of the Central 
Government issued or 
drclued to bl: income-
tax Crt!e, and inle~st pa) -
able on any security uf 
a State Government 
issued income-tax free, 
the incomC'-rax whereon 
ia payable by the State 
Governmcnt), and 
(b) in addition, where the 
person is non-resident 
in India, on th~ whole 
income. 
a, ·In the case oCa company-
(ia) in every case-
Surcharge Special 
for surcharge 
purposes 
orehe 
Union 
3'75% 
(a) on the whole inc')me (excluding interest payable on any 
security of the Central Government i~sued or declared 
to be income-tax free anJ interest payable on any 
security of II State Government issued incomt'-tax 
free, the income-tax whereon is payp.ble by the State 
Govcrnmcnt);and . 
(il) on the whole income (I"xcluding dividends plyable by 
lin Indi~n comp:Jny referred to in c1au~e (III) of sub-
section (1) of s:::tion 99 ;)f the Income-tax Ac:t); and . . 
Super-tax 
Rate of 
super-tax 
Rate. of 
aurchugea 
Super-tax and IUl-
char," Qn .uper-
tax In accordance 
with the provision I 
oC c1allte (6) oC sub-
section (1) of section 
1I3 oC the Income-
tax Act. 
~ate or I RAte oC 
Income- super-
tax I tax 
25% 

28 
Rale of Rate or 
iuconle- super· 
ta~ tu 
(6) in ajjitlan • wh ~re th'! c:>'11plny is neirh~r an Indian com-
plny n lr a c l'11pmy which hlS mile the preicribed S 
arr.lng:ments for the declaration and plyment of divi-
dends wiLhin India,-
(.) on the inc')m: frilm divilends1 (excluding dividendi. 
plYlble by an Inlian complny referred to in clause 10 
(ill) of gub-section (1) of section 99 of the Income-
uxAct)-
(I) on divUenJq p'lyable by any of its subsidiary Indian 
computies f,)rmed and registered before the ISt 
day of April, 1961 Nil 
(2) ~n 1iviJ:nh plYlble by an Jnlian company, not 
being a subddisry company, formed and registered 
before the lit dayuf April. 1959 
(3) on div:d ~nds plYlble by any other Indian company 
fJrmeJ and registered OD or after the 1st day of April, 
1959 . 
(i.) on th~ inc')me from royalties plY'lble by an Indian 
c:mcern in punU'lnce of an agreement which is made 
by it wi'h the lndhn concern CD or arter the BT day of 
April, 1961 and which has been approved by the Central 
Government. . . . • . • • 
(in) on sny other income 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See section 22(2)] 
In the First Schedule to the Tariff Act,-
20% 
20% 25 
33% 
(i) in Item No. 24, for the entry in the fourth column, the 30 
entry mRs. 60·00 per kilogram" shall be substituted;. 
(ii) in Item No. 24 (3), for the entry in the fourth column 
and the entry in the sixth column, the entry "Rs. 50·00 per 
kilogram" shall be substituted; 
(iii) in Item No. 28A, for the entry in the second column, 35 
the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
Upatent or proprietary medicines not containing alcohol, 
opium, Indian hemp or other narcotic drugs or other 
narcotics other than those medicines which are exclusively 
Ayurvedic, Unant, Sidha or Homoeopathic. 40 
ExplaMtion.-'Patent or proprietary medicines' means 
any drug or medicinal preparation, in whatever form, for 
use in the internal or external treatment of, or for the 
preventioJll of ailments in, human beings or adimals, which 
bears either on itself or on its container or both, a name' 4S 

29 
which is not specified in a monograph in a Pharmacopoeia, 
Formulary or other publications notified in this behalf by 
the Central Government in the Official Gazette, or which is 
a brand name, that is, a name or a registered trade mark 
S under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 
1958), or any other mark such as a symbol, monogram, label, 
signature or invented words or any writing which is used in 
relation to that medicine for the purpose of indicating or so 
as to indicate a connection in the course of trade between the 
10 medicine and some person having the right either as pro-
prietor or otherwise to use the name or mark with or without 
any indication of the identity of that person."; 
(iv) in Item No. 29, for the entry in the fourth column, ~he 
entry uRs. 12·00 per 100 linear metres" shall be substituted; 
15 (v) in Jtems Nos. 30, 73, 73 (1), 77 and 77 (5), for the entries 
against each of them in the fourth and fifth columns, the entries 
"60 per cent. ad valorem" and "50 per cent. ad valorem" shall, 
respectively, be substituted; 
(vi) in Item No. 30(1), for the entries in the fourth column 
20 against suJ:.-;tems (a), (b) (i) and (b) (ii) , the entry "50 per cent. 
ad valorem" shall be substituted; 
(vii) in Item No. 39, for the entry in the fourth column, the 
entry 1120 per cent. ad valorem" shall be substituted; 
(viii) i\} Items Nos. 63 (1), 63 (20A) and 63 (35), for the entry 
2$ against eac'" of them in the fourth column, the entry "30 per cent. 
ad valorem" shall be substituted; 
30 
(ix) in Item No. 63 (2) ,-
(1) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(a) (i), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
"Rs. 22·00 per tonne or 10 per cent. ad valorem, 
whichever is higher, plus 5 per cent. ad valorem."; 
(2) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(a) (ii), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:- • 
"Rs. 64·00 per tonne plus 5 per cent. ad valorem"; 
3S (3) for the entry in the fourth column against sub.Jtem 
(b" the foll ~".' '" entry shall be substituted, namely:-
• "Rs. 60·00 per tonne plus 6 per cent. ad valorem"; 

30 
(x) in Item No. 63 (3) ,- • 
(1) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(i), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
. "Rs. 31·00 per tonne or 10 per cent. ad valorem, 
whichever is higher, "lus 5 per cent. ad valorem"; 5 
(2) for the entry in the fourth .column against sub-item 
(ii), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
"Rs. 60·00 per tonne or 20 per cent. ad valorem, 
whichever is higher, plus 5 per cent. ad valorem"; 
(ri) in Item No. 63 (9), for the entry in the fourth column, 10 
the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
. . "Rs. 60·00 per tonne plus 10 per cent. ad valorem"; 
(rii) in Item No. 63 (10),-
(1) for the e.,.try in the fourth column against sub-
item (i), the entry "Rs. 8\)·00 per tonne plus 5 per cent. ad IS 
valorem" shall be substituted; 
(2) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-
item (ii), the entry "Rs. 100·00 per tonne plus 5 per cent. 
ad valorem" shall be substituted; 
(xiii) in Item No. 63(12), in the entry in the second column, 
for the words "Iron. or steel bolts and nuts", the words "Iron or 
steel bolts and nuts, not otherwise specified," shall be substituted; 
(xiv) in Item No. 63(14A), for the figures "50" and "40" in 
the fourth and fifth columns, the figures "55" and "45" shall, 
respectively, be substituted; 2S 
(:rv) in Item No. 63(17), for the words and figure "plus 5 
per cent. ad valorem" in the entry against each of the sub-items 
(i) and (ii) in the fourth column, the words and figures "plus 10 
per cent. ad valorem" shall be substituted; 
(xvi) in Item No. 63(18), for the figures "20" and "40" in the 30 
fourth column against sub-items (a) and (b), the figures "25" and 
"45" shall, respectively, be substituted; 
(xvii) in Item No. 63(19),-
(1) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(a)( i), the following entry shall be substituted, namely: - 3S 
"Rs. 15·00 per tonr.? or 10 per cent. ad valorem, 
whichever is highE'l", plus 5 per cent. ad valonm"; 
• 

• 31 
(~) for the entry in the fourth co1umn against sub-item 
(a)(ii), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
"Rs. 40·00 per tonne plus 5 per cent. ad valorem"; 
(3) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
5 (b), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
10 
"Rs. 60·00 per tonne plus 5 per cent. ad valorem"; 
(xviii) in Item No. 63 (20) ,-
(1) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(a)(l)(i), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
"Rs. 29·00 per tonne or 10 per cent. ad valorem. 
whichever is higher, plus 5 per cent. ad valorem"; 
(2) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(a)(l)(ii), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
"Rs. 50·00 per tonne plus 5 per cent. ad valorem"; 
IS (3) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(a)(2)(i), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
"Rs. 30·00 per tonne or 10 per cent. ad valorem. 
whichever is higher, plus 5 per cent. ad valorem"; 
(4) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
~o (a)(2)(ii), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
as 
"Rs. 60·00 per tonne plus 5 per cent. ad valorem"; . . 
(5) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(b)'(l)(i), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
"Rs. 32·00 ' per tonne or 10 per cent. ad valorem, 
whichever is higher, plus 5 per cent. ad valorem"; 
(6) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(b)(l)(ii), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
"Rs. 55·00 per tonne plus 5 per cent. ad valorem"; 
(7) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
30 (b)(2)(i), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
• 
"Rs. 32·00 per tonne or 10 per cent. ad valorem, • 
whichever is higher, plus 5 per cent. ad valorem"; 
(8) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(b)(2)(ii), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
"Rs. 64·00 per tonne plus 5 per cent. ad valorem", 

• 
U 
(=) in Item No. 63(21)A,-
(1) for the entry in tile fourth column against sub-item 
(a)(i), the following entry ,,,,all be substituted, namely:-
"Rs. 10·00 per tonne Dr 15 per cPnt. ad valorem. 
wllichever is higher"; 
S 
(2) for the entry in the fourth column a.gainst sub-item 
(a)(ii), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
<IRs. 10·00 per tonne or 25 per cent. ad valorem. 
whichever is higher"; 
(3) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 10 
(b)(i), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
"Rs. 31·00 per tonne or 10 per cent. ad valorem. 
whichever is higher"; 
(4) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(b)(ii), the following ent.ry snail be substituted, namely:-
"Rs. 60·00 per tonne plus 5 per cent. ad valorem'~; 
(xx) in Item No. 63(24), for the figures "55" and "45" in the 
fourth and !ifth columns, the figures "60" and "50" shall, respec-
tively, be substituted; 
IS 
(xxi) in Item No. 63(25),- 20 
(1) for the entry in the fourth column against SUD-n.em 
(i), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-. • "30 per cent. ad valorem."'; 
(2) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(ii), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:- 2S "30 per cent. ad valorem plus Rs. 35·00 per tonne"; 
(xxii) in Item No. 63(28), for the figures "55" in the fourth 
column, the figures "60" shall be substituted; 
(xxiii) in Item No., 63(31),-
(1) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(a), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:- 30 
"Rs. 29·00 per tonne or 10 per cent. ad valorem, 
whichever is higher, plus 5 per cent. ~d valorem"; 
(2) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(b),the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
• "Rs. 50·00 per tonne plus 5 per cent. ad valorem"; 35 
• 

10 
33 
(uiv)" in Item No. 63(32),-
(1) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(a), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
"Rs. 50·00 per tonne plus 5 per cent. ad valorem"; 
(Z) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(b), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
URs. 84·00 per tonne plus 5 per cent. ad valorem"; 
(:av) in Item No. 71,-
(1) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(a), the fol'owing entry shall be substituted, namely:-
"60 per cent. ad valorem"; 
(2) for the entry in the fourth column agamst wb-
item (b) , the following entry shall be . substituted, 
namely:-
IS "100 per cent. ad valorem"; 
(xxvi) in Items Nos. 72, 72(1), 72(2) and 72(3), for the entry 
against each of them in the fourth column, the entry "20 per cent. 
cul valorem" shall be substituted; 
(xxvii) in Item No. 75, for the figures "35" in the fourth 
column, the figures u50" shall be substituted; 
(xxviii) in Items Nos. 75 (11) and 75 (12), for the figure. 
u25" against each of them in the fourth column, the figures "SI" .. shall be substituted; and 
(x=) in Item No. 87, for the figures u50" in the fourth 
25 column, the figures "60" shall be substituted . 
• 
a781 (B) t.S. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of this Bill is to give effect to the financial proposals 
of the Central Government for the financial year 1963-.64 and to 
provide for certain connected matters. The Notes on Clauses 
explain the various provisions contained in the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; MORARJI DESAI. 
The 28th February, 1963. 
• 

Notes on Clauses 
Clause 2 prescribes the rates of income-tax and super-tax for 
dssessments for the assessment year 1963-64 and for deduction of 
tax at source from salaries, interest on securities, dividends etc. 
during the said financial year. In the case of individuals, Hindu 
undivided families, unregistered firms etc., the slab structure and 
the basic rates of income-tax and super-tax remain the same as for 
the assessment year 1962-63. In regard to surcharges on income-tax 
it is proposed to levy an additional surcharge for purposes of the 
Union calculated on the residual income of the assessee, viz., the 
total income as reduced by capital gains, if any, and the income-tax 
and super-tax chargeable on the reduced total income. In arriving 
at the residual income, the tax to be deducted therefrom will be 
calculated without reducing it by any relief, rebate or deduction of 
tax to which the assessee might be entitled. The rates fixed for the 
additional surcharge rise progressively from four per cent. to ten 
per cent. on successive slabs of residual income. The rates of the 
other existing surcharges of income-tax and super-tax, viz., the 
surcharge for purposes of the Union and the special surcharge remain 
the same as before, but in regard to these surcharges on income-tax, 
the existing exemption limits of Rs. 15,000 for certain Hindu undivided 
families and of Rs. 7,500 for individuals, unregistered firms, etc. have 
been removed. 
In the case of registered firms the slab structure and rates of 
income-tax remain the same as before, but it is proposed to levy a 
surcharge for purposes of the Union at twenty per cent. of the 
income-tax payuble by them. 
In the case vf companies, the rates of income-tax and the effec-
tive rates of sU}ler-tax remain the same as for the year 1962-63. 
The existing rebate of one-tenth of the income-tax and super-tax 
attributable to income derived from exports out of India, admissible 
to all assessees other than foreign companies which have not made 
the prescribed arrangement' for the declaration and payment of 
dividends within India, is being continued. In addition to this, 
a provision has been made for allowing a further rebatQ of tax to 
a manufacturer who, after the 28th February, 1963, himself exports, 
or where the first purchaser from him exports any articles produced 
by him in any of the industries listed in the First Schedule to the 
Industries (Develofment and Regulation) Act, 1951 except for certain 
35 
• 

38 . 
specified industries like textiles, sugar, cement, etc. and any other 
industry which might be excluded hereafter. The additional rebate 
of tax will be calculated on an amount equal to 2 per cent. of the 
sale proceeds received by manufacturers. These tax rebates will, 
cumulatively, be subject to the limit of the income-tax and.: 8Ilper-tu 
otherwa. payable by the assessee. 
Clause 3' provides that the additional surcharge for purpoaes of 
the l:Jnion shall not be taken into account in calculating the amount 
of any relief, rebate or deduction of income-tax admissible to the 
assessee under any provision of the law. 
ClatMJe 4 substitutes the existing deftnitioD of the, term "To: 
Reczo¥ery Officer" by a revised definition. The reviled deftDitioD' 
briDp under the category of 'Tax Recovery Of6.cer', BDy oIIeer' of 
the State. Government empowered to recover arrears of land revenue 
or other public demand. who has been authoriaed by' the State 
Govermnent by a general or special notification in the Oftlcial Gazette 
to UIItl"ciae the powers of a Tax Recovery Officer. 
Cluun 5 amends clause (b) of section 13 of the Income-tax 'Aet. 
The" amendment is of a clarificatory nature. 
Clau.se 6 introduces a new sub-clause (iii) in clause (c) of section 
4LO of the Income-tax Act. The effect of this will be that with eftect 
from the assessment year 1963-64, any expenditure inc.urred b~ a 
c:omp~ for any period after the 28th February, 1~63, on paymat 
of remuneration including the value of perquisities. to the extent 
it is in excess of Rs. 5,000 per month for each employee, shall be 
disallOWed in computing the company's total income. Any payment 
of gratuity, etc. will, however, not be taken into account in computing 
the aforesaid expenditure. 
Clause 7, amends clause (b) of section 58 of the Income-tax Act. 
This amendment is consequential to the amendment in clause 6. 
Clause 8 amends sub-clause (iii) (b) of the proviso to sub-HCUon 
(1) of, section 139 of the Income-tax Act and introduces two new 
sub-sections (lA) and (8) in the said section. 
The eff.ect of these amendments is to provide that the interelt 
payable OD a~o,UDt of delay in submission of returns will be ealou)at-
ed OD the amount of the tax payable on the total income 88,,811811.' bJ: 
• the Income-tax Officer but if the income assessed is subsequently. 
redu.ced as a result of any order of rectification or an order on appeal, 
reference or revision; the amount of the interest shall be co ... 
quentially reduced and the excess interest paid. if any, shall be TefuDd .. 
pd. Further, the Income-tax Officer will be enabled to rectuce or waive 
• 

• 
the iDtereat charged, for delay in submlaion· of relurns in sueh' 
circumataace8 as may be prescribed~ 
Clause' introduces a new section 141A in the Income-tax Act. 
The effect of this is to provide that (i) where an assessee pays the 
tax demanded from him on a regular or provisional assessment, or 
where DB such assessment has been made but he pays the tax due 
from him on the basis of the total income declared in the return 
flled by him, before the 1st day of January of the relevant 1IaIes. 
meD.t year, a sum equal to one per cent. of the tax so paici Ihall be 
credited to him; and (ii) if the aS6essee does not file his return, of 
total income by the 31st December of the relevant assessment· year, 
or having filed the return does not pay the tax due on the basis of 
such retarn by that date, he shall be liable to pay interest on the 
amount of the tax payable by him at two per cent. per annum 
caleu1ateci from· the 1st day of January of the relevant assessment 
y.eB to the date on which a provisional assessment or a regular 
_____ em i. made on him, whichever is earlier. 
C14use 10 amends section 146 of the Income-tax Act. The amend-
ment is of a drafting nature. 
~: lJi lDtrodaces' a new'sub-clause (d) in section 209- of. the, 
Ineome-tax Act. This amendment is consequential to the amend-
meat made· by claull! 12. 
~ 12 su~tttutes sub·section (3) of section 210 of the Income-
_ Act by a revised· sub-section. This introduces a new provision 
..oHng the· Inc('Jfte-tax Officer to revise an earlier order for payment 
of adlv.anoe-taK baled on the last completed regular assessment of the 
IllleIlM on the basis of the total income detennined In a provisional 
.... anent of the assessee for a later year. The proviso to the' 
eaaiItiilg-.u}).secrtion (3) has been omitted. 
Clause 13 substitutes sub-section (2) of section 215 of the Income-
tax Act by a revised sub-section. The amendment made is conse-
quential to the amendment made by clause 9. 
Clause 14 adds a proviso to sub-section (2) of section 220 of the' 
Inoome-tax Act. This provides that where the tax payable by an 
aasessee has been reduced as a result of any order of rectift.eation of 
the assessment or an order on appeal, reference or revision, the 
interest payable by the aSSE:Ssee for failure to pay the tax in due • 
time shall be consequentially reduced and the excess amount paid, 
if any, shall be refunded. 
crouse lSi amends sub-section (2) of section 223 of the Income.tu 
.Net: 1\te effeet of this will' be that a Tax Recovery OfD'cer to whom 

II 
the Income-tax Officer has sent a certificate for the recovery of 
arrear tax dues from a defaulter will be enabled to forward the 
certificate to any other Tax Recovery Officer in the same or any 
other district if the de!:lulter's property is situated within the 
jurisdiction of the latter. 
Clawe 16 amends section 233 of the Income-tax Act.. This is an 
amendment of a drafting nature. 
Clause 17 amends clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 271· of 
the Income-tax Act. This is an amendment of a drafting nature. 
CZoo.se 18 amends sub-section (1) of section 291 of the Income-tax 
Act. This is an amendment of a drafting nature. 
Clause 19 amends clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 297 of 
the Income-tax Act. This is a c1arificatory amendment. 
Clause 20.-Sub-c1ause (1) of this clause introduces a new Rule 
19A in the Second Schedule to the Income-tax Act. This enables a. 
Tax Recovery Officer, being a Collector or an additional Collector, 
subject to the approval of the State Government, to entrust any of 
his functions as Tax Recovery Officer to any officer lower to him in. 
rank who is empowered to effect recovery of land revenue or other 
public demand under the law for the time being in force in the State. 
The officer to whom any such functions have been entrusted shall 
be deemed to be a Tax Recovery Officer in relation to those functions. 
Sub-clause (2) substitutes sub-rule (1) of Rule 86 of the Second 
Schedule by a revised sub-rule. The new provision in it is that an 
appeal against an order passed by an official of the State Government 
who has been entrusted with any functions of a Tax Recovery OfIicer 
under the new Rule 19A of the Second Schedule aforesaid will lie 
to the revenue authority to which an appeal or an application for 
revision against his orders would lie under the law of the State 
Government concerned relating to land revenue or recovery of public 
demand. 
Clause 21.~Sub-clause (1) (a) omfts clause (xv) of sub-section 
(1) of section 5 of the Wealth-tax Act. As a result of this the exist-
ing exemption from wealth-tax on the value of jewellery to the 
extent of Rs. 25,000 will cease to be operative with effect from the 
assessment year 1963-64. 
Sub-clause (1) (b) amends clause (xvi) of sub-section (1) of 
• section 5 of the Wealth-tax Act, to include amongst the Government 
securities in respect of which assessees are exempted from wealth-
tax, Ten Year Defence Deposit Certificates and Twelve Year National 
Defence Certificates which have been issued in Novem1aer, 1962 in 
replacement of the Twelve Year National Plan Savings Certificates . 
• 

39 
Sub-clause (2) adds a proviso to sub-section (3) of section 5 of 
the Wealth-tax Act. This provides that for the purposes of an 
assessment to wealth-tax for the assessment year 1963-64 an assessee 
will be entitled to exemption on the value of Ten Year Defence 
Deposit Certificates and Twelve Year National Defence Certiftcates 
even though such certificates might .have been held by him for a 
period of less than six months prior to the relevant valuation date. 
Sub-clause (1) of Clause 22 seeks to amend section 2A of the 
Indian Tariff Act to effect a revision of the basis for the levy of 
countervailing duty, where the excise duty is ad valorem, so aS'to 
include in the value for calculation of countervailing duty all import 
duties chargeable on the imported article except the countervailing 
duty itself. . 
Sub-clause (2) of Clause 22, read with the Second Schedule, seeks 
to increase the basic import duties on certain items. The changes 
are:-
(i) the duty on tobacco, manufactured and unmanufactured, 
is proposed to be increased by approximately 50% of the existing 
levels; 
(ii) the duty on cinematograph films, not exposed, is pro-
posed to be raised from Rs. 6·60 per 100 linear metres to Rs. 12·00 
per 100 linear metres; 
(iii) the duty on paints, colours and painters' materials, all 
sorts, not otherwise specified, is proposed to be raised from 50% 
(standard) and 40% (prt:!ferential) to 60% (standard) and 50% 
(preferential) ; 
(iv) the duty on certain coal-tar dyes is proposed to be 
raised from 20% to 50%; 
(v) the duty on raw rubber is proposed to be raised. from 
10% to 20%; 
(vi) the duty on certain iron and steel items is proposed to 
be raised by 5%. The main items affected by the increase are 
plates· and sheets, tinplates, rails, wire, rods and bars, structures 
and structurals and manufactures not otherwise specified; 
(vii) the duty on tools other than machine tools and agri-
_ cultural implements is proposed to be raised from 50% to 60% 
and on hardware from 75% to 100%; 
(viii) the duty on certain items of machinery and their 
component parts is proposed to be raised from 1B% to 20%; 
(i,x) the duty on electrical as well as certain non-electrical 
instruments, apparatus and appliances is proposed to be raised 
from 50~ (standard) and 40% (preferential) to 60% (standard) 
and 5(1% (preferential); 
• 

.., 
(a:) the duty on conveyances, not otherwise specUled, II 
,propaaed to be raised. from 35% to 50%; 
(rl) the duty on certain motor vehicle parts ia proposed .to 
be raised from 28% to 50%; 
. (rli) tlle duty on the residuary tarift item "All other articles 
not otberwise specified" is proposed to be raised from ~ to 
60%; and 
(rlii) the descriptions in Item No. 28A relating to Patent er 
proprietary medicines and Item No. 63.(12) relating to Iron or 
Steel bolts and nuts are proposed to be altered as a meuure of 
rationalisation. 
Clause Z3 seeks to provide for the levy upto the aut day"'Gf 
March, 1964, of an additional duty of 10% of the basic duty charge-
Able for the tlmebetug on all items in the lmportSchedule. 
Clause 24 proposes to levy upto the 31st day of March, 19M,·a 
regulatory duty of customs, at the rate of 25% of the rate specl1led 
in the Import Sebedule (read with any modlftcatioDi made by 
DOUftcation In the ease of protective duties) or 10" of the value of 
the goods, whichever is higher. The intention is to regulate the 
quantity of soods imported. The date from which IIlch levy in 
respect of any goods will be effective will be notified by the Central 
Government. 
L"IauIe 25 IIHka to maintain for another year the ItCltUB quo in 
regard to commitments under the General Agreement on Tarifts 
and Trade. 
. '. 
Clause 26-
Sub-c14use (4) (1) se~ to increase the rate of. duty GIl 
tobacco other than ftue-cured and not actually used tor the 
mmufaeture of cigarettes or smoking mixtures for pipes ad 
cigaret~ or biris. 
Sub-clause (4) (2) seeks to increase the rates of duty on 
dgarettes . 
. Sub-c:Cuse (b) seeks to increase the rate of duty em motor 
spirit. 
Sub-clause (c)seeks to raise the rate of duty on keroane. 
Sub-c14U1e (d) propolH an lDcreaae in the rates of duty on 
refined di~l oila and vaporizing oil. 
Sub~e (e) seeks to increase the rate of duty on diesel 
oil, not otherwise speCified. 
SlI.b-clat.&.Ie (f) seeks to increase the rate of· duty OD vege-
&able product In replacement of ·the duty OD -:..-we non-
... ntial on. used in its manufacture. 

41 
Sub-clauses (g) (1) and (g) (2) propose to introduce a single 
rate of duty for all ready-mixed paints, whether sold by weight 
or by volume. 
Sub-clause (g) (3) seeks to increase the rates of duty on 
certain varieties of pigments, colours, paints, varnishes, blacks 
and cellulose lacquers which nonnally require vegetable non-
essential oils in their manufacture. 
Sub-clause (h) Seeks to raise the rates of duty on soap in 
replacement of the duty on vegetable non-essential oils. 
Sub-clause (i) seeks to increase the rate of duty on straw-
board. 
Sub-clause (;) seeks to raise the rates of duty on copper 
and copper alloys. 
Sub-clause (k) seeks to introduce for purpose of simpli-
fication a new sub-item for semi-finished steel under Item 
No. 26AA relating to iron or steel products. - . 
Clause 27 seeks to levy a special duty of excise upto the 31st day of 
March, 1964, on certain goods chargeable with a duty of excise under 
the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944. 
Clause 28 proposes to levy upto the 31st day of March, 1964, a 
regulatory duty of excise, at the rate of 10% of the value of the 
goods. The intention is to regulate the demand for such goods in 
the country. The date from which such levy in respect of any 
goods will be effective will be notified by the Central Government. 
Clause 29 like section 4 of the Finance Act, 1962, provides that 
salt shall be duty free for another year. 
Clause 30 seeks to amend the SChedule to the Medicinal and 
Toilet Preparations (Excise Duties) Act with a view to increasing 
the rates of duty on certain Ayurvedic preparations containing 
alleohol which are capable of being consumed as ordinary alcoholic 
beverages. The clause also seeks to make marginal adjustments on 
certain other items of the. Schedule. 
- Clause 31 substitutes the existing Schedule by a new Schedule. 
The new Schedule seeks to increase the rate of postage-
(i) on postcards, single and reply, from 5 and 10 naye paise 
to 6 and 12 naye paise respectively; -
(ii) on Book, Pattern and Sample Packets, under the 
various categories from 8 and 3 naye paise to 10 and 5 naye paise 
respectively, and 
(iii) on parcels, under the various categories from 50 naye • paise in each to 60 naye paise. (·,i. 
2781(B) 1$-8. ,-

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill seeks to levy an additional surcharge of income-tax for 
purposes of the Union on individuals, Hindu undivided families, 
unregistered firms, etc. and provides for the grant of marginal relief 
to assessees at certain lower levels of residual income. It also seeks 
to introduce a new provision in the Income-tax Act for giving credit 
to assessees for a certain percentage of the ta}C paid by them if the 
payment is made within the prescribed period and for charging cer-
tain interest if they do not pay the tax due on the basis of their 
returns of jncome within the aforesaid period. The Bill also seeks 
to withdraw the exemption hitherto allowed to wealth-tax assessees 
on the value of jewellery to the extent of Rs. 25,000, which is likely 
to result in an increase' in the number of wealth-tax assessees. 
The aforesaid measures will involve extra work and necessitate 
employment of some additional. staff. The expenditure OIl account 
of additional staff together with incidental expeDleS on administra-
tion is estimated at about Rs. 4 lakhs. 
RBQUDEMERT OF PDso!fNI:l. .AIfD FnrANCll 
I.Ojfiur,-
ColJllDiasioner of Income-to 
Assistant CommissioDen 
Incame-taII: Ofllc:en (C!. I) 
II. SM6-
IDlpec:tOra 
SuperviaOl'I 
Headc1erb 
SteDoIraphers 
UppordivieioQ ckrb 
Stenotypists • 
Lower division cleIb 
III. IncitlM,tJI."",,,-
Iacidcntal expeuea iIIclucSiq a.. IV Staff, •. . . • . 
TOTAL , 
or, -., 
No. ADa .. l emoluments Cost 
I 
3 
I2 
4 
8 
7 
4 
50 
170 
18 
IX". 
3XRs. 
IZxRs. 
4Xa.. 
8xRI. 
7fJ( RI. 
4xRs. 
50xRI. 
IaxRa. 
18xRl. 
.. 
aol4OO 
14.400 
5,400 
a,Blo 
4,po 
3,000 
I,Boo 
1,800 
1,610 
1,500 
RI. 
lI,sao 
34,,60 
aI,ooo 
7~00 
90.000 
~ 
7,7,000 
3.90,000 
------~------------------------------~ ~.-----------

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 2(5) (vi) provides for rules being made with respect to 
computation of amount of profits and gains derived from the export 
of any goods or merchandise out of India in respect of which deduc-
tion of income-tax and super-tax is admissible under clause 2(5) (0. 
The rule making power is of a normal character. 
OMGIPND-L. S. 1- 2781 (B) LS-2 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central 
Government for the financial year 1963-64. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (1) and (3) of 
article 117 and clause (1) of article 274 of the Constitution of 
India, recommended to the Lok Sabha, the introduction and 
consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
SeCTetary. 
(8hri Morarji Desai, 
Minister .oj Finance.) 