Bm NO.7 of 1,,0 
THE FINANCE BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 2C}TH FEBRUARY, 1960) 
L( 

8U1 No. 7 of 19410 
THE FINANCE BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central Government 
for the financial year 1960-61. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Finance Act, 1960. Short title 
and com-
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, sections 3 to 17 mencement. 
S inclusive shall be deemed to have come into force on the first day of 
April, 1960. 
2. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3) and (4), 
for the year beginning on the 1st day of April, 1960,-
(a) income-tax shall be charged at the rates specified in 
10 Part I of the First Schedule, and, in the cases to which Para-
graphs A, Band C of that Part apply, shall be increased by a 
surcharge for purposes of the Union and a special surcharge, 
calculated in either case in the manner provided therein; and 
II ofl9Z2. IS 
20 
ofr'59- 30 
(b) super-tax shall, for the purposes of section 55 of the 
Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (hereinafter referred to as the 
Income-tax Act), be charged at .the rates specified in Part II of 
the First Schedule, and, in the cases to which Paragraphs A, B 
and C of that Part apply, shall be increased by a surcharge for 
purposes of the Union and a special surcharge, calculated in 
either case in the manner provided therein. 
(2) In making any assessment for the year ending on the 31st 
day of March, 1961,-
(a) where the total income of an assessee, not being a 
company, includes any income chargeable under the head 
uSalaries" or any income chargeable under the head "Interest on 
Securities" or any income from dividends from which income-tax 
has been or might have been ded~cted under the provisions of 
section 18 of the Income-tax Act or in respect of which by virtue 
of section 49B of the Income-tax Act, as continued in force by 
sub-section (4) of section 19 of the Finance Act, 1959, he is 
deemed himself to have paid the income-tax imposed under the 
Income-tax 
and super-
tax. 

2 
Income-tax Act, the income-tax payable by the assessee on that 
part of his total income which consists of such inclusions shall 
be an amount bearing to the total amount of income-tax payable 
according to the rates applicable nnder the operation of the 
Finance Act, 1959, on his total income the same proportion as the S u of 1959. 
amount of such inclusions bears to his total income; 
(b) where the total income of an assessee, not being a com-
pany, includes any income chargeable under the head "Salaries" 
on which super-tax has been or might have been deducted under 
the provisions of sub-·section (2) of section 18 of the Income-tax 10 
Act, the super-tax payable by th!,! assessee on that portion of his 
total income which consists of such inclusion shall be an amount 
bearing to the total amount of super-tax payable according to 
the rates applicable under the operation of the Finance Act, 1959, Il of 1959 • 
on his total income the same proportion as the amount of such 15 
inclusion bears to his total income. 
(3) In making any assessment for the year ending on the 31st 
day of March, 1959, or for the year ending on the 31st day of March, 
1960, or for the year ending on the 31st day of March, 1961,· where 
the total income of a company, other than the Life Insurance Corpc- 20 
ration of India established under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 
1956, includes any profits and gains from life insurance business, the 31 (If 19~6. 
super-tax payable by it shall be the aggregate of the tax calculated-
(i) on the amount of profits and gains from life insurance 
business so included, at the rate applicable to the Life Insurance 25 
Corporation of India in accordance with the Finance Act of the 
relevant year; and 
(ii) on the remaining part of its total income, at the rate 
applicable to the company on its total income. 
(4) In cases to which section 17 of the Income-tax Act applies, 30 
the tax chargeable shall be determined as provided in that section, ' 
and with reference to the rates imposed by sub-section (1). 
(5) In cases in which tax has to be deducted under section 18 of 
the Income-tax Act at the prescribed rates, the deduction shall be 
made at the rates speCified in Part III of the First Schedule. 3S 
(6) For the purposes of this section, and of . the rates of tax" 
imposed thereby, the expression "total income" me~ total income 
as determined for the purposes of income-tax or super-tax, as the 
case may be, in accordance with the provisions of the Income-tax 
I, 
'PI 
( 
... Act, and the expression "earned income" has the me~ing aSSigned, 40 
to it in clause (6AA) of section 2 of that Act. 
.. \ '-

5. 
JO 
3' 
3. In section 19 of the Finance Act, 1959,-
(i) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 
imerted, and shall be deemed always to have been inserted, 
namely:-
"(3A) The amendments to the Income-tax Act made by 
section 5, section 7, section 12, sp.r'ion 14 and section 15 shall, 
in relation to dividends declare<1 or payable by a company in 
respect of the previous year relevant to the assessment for the 
year ending on the 31st day of Ma>:C"'l, 1961, have effect on and 
from the 1st day of April, 1959."; 
(ii) in sub-section (4), after the words "declared or payable 
by a company", the words and figures "on or before the 30th day 
of June, 1960," shall be inserted, and shall be deemed always to 
have been inserted. 
IS 4. In section 9 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2), for clause 
(4) of the third proviso, the following clausr shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(4) in the case of a property the construction of which was 
completed before the 1st day of April, 1950, the total amount of 
U) such taxes and in the case of any other property, one-half of the 
total amount of such taxes, shall, notwithstanding anything con-
tained in such law, be deemed to be the tenant's liability for such 
taxes, and". 
Amendment 
ohection 19. 
Act 12 of 
J9S9. 
Amendment 
ofeecdoD9· 
5. In section 10 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2), for Amendment 
a, clause (xiii), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- ofaectioD JO. 
"(xiii) any sum paid to a scientific research association 
having as its object the undertaking of scientific research or to a 
university, college or other institution to be used for scientific 
research or to a university, college or other institution to be used 
30 for research in social science or statistical research related to the 
class of business carried on: 
Provided that such association, university, colleg~ or institu-
tion is for the time being approved for the purposes of this clause 
by the prescribed authority;". 
35 6. In section 14 of the Income-tax Act, for sub-section (3), the AmendlMDt 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- oflecdon 14· 
"(3) The tax shall not be payable by a co-operative society, 
,including a co-operative society ca.rrying on the business of 
'banking-
<to (i) in respect of the entire amount of its profits and 
, gains of business carried on by it, if it is-
(a) an agricultural or a rural credit society; or 

4 
(b) a society engaged in a cottage industry; or 
(c) a society engaged in the marketing of the agri-
cultural produce of its members; or 
(d) a society engaged in the purchase of agricultural 
implements, seeds, livestock or other articles intended S 
for agriculture for the purpose of supplying them to its 
members; or 
(e) a society engaged in the processing of the 
agricultural produce of its members, to the extent to 
which such process is ordinarily employed by a culti- 10 
vator to render the agricultural produce raised by him 
fit to be taken to the market, and is not a society 
engaged in the performance of any manufacturing 
operations with the aid of power; 
(ii) in respect of so much of its profits and gains of IS 
business carried on by it as does not exceed ten thousand 
rupees, if it is a co-operative society other than a co-ope-
rative society referred to in clause (i); 
(iii) in respect of interest and dividends derived from 
its investments with any other co-operative society; 20 
(iv) in respect of any income derived from the letting 
of godowns or warehouses for storage, processing or faci-
litating the marketing of commodities; 
(v) in respect of any interest on securities chargeable 
under section 8 or any income from property chargeable 2.5 
under section 9, where the total income of the co-operative 
society does not exceed twenty thousand rupees and the 
society is not a housing society or an urban consumer's 
society or a society carrying on transport business or a 
soci~ty engaged in the performance of any manufacturing 30 
operations with the aid of power: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall 
apply to-
(i) the Sanikatta Salt Owner's Society; 
(ii) a co-operative society carrying on insurance bum- 3S 
ness in respect of the profits and gains of that business 
computed in accordance with rule 9 in the Schedule. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, an 
'urban consumer's co-operative society' means a society for the 

benefit of the consumers within the limits of a municipal cor-
poration, municipality, municipal committee, notified area com-
mittee, town area or cantonment.". 
7. In section 15B of the Income-tax Act, in claulle (b) of the second Amendment 
S proviso to sub-section (1), for the words "one twentieth of the ~~B. MCdoD 
assessee's total income" and "one hundred thousand rupees", the words 
"seven and a half per cent. of the assessee's total income" and "one 
hu~dred and fifty thousand rupees" shall respectively be substituted. 
8. In section 15C of the Income-tax Act, in clause (ii) of sub- Ten~t 
10 section (2), for the word "thirteen", the word "eighteen" shall be ~sc. eec:tiOD 
substituted. 
9. In section 18 of the Income-tax Act,- Amendmmt 
. .. . ofaeaion 18. (t) m sub-section (3D), after the words "declaration and pay-
ment of dividends", the brackets and words" (inclqding dividends 
I, on preference shares)" shall be inserted; 
(ii) sub-section (3E) shall be omitted. 
10. In section 18A of, the Income-tax Act.- Amendment 
(i) in clause (a) of sub-section (1), for the words "In the ~~A. sectioD 
case of income in respect of which provision is not made under 
~o section 18 for deduction of income-tax at the time of payment", 
the words "In the case of income other than income chargeable 
under the head 'Salaries'" shall be substftuted, and after ~he 
words "the amount of such inclusions bears to his total world 
income", the following words shall be inserted, namely:-
zs "The income-tax and super-tax so calculated shall be 
reduced by the amount of income-tax and super-tax which 
would be deductible during the said financial year in 
accordance with the provisions of section 18 on any income 
(other than income chargea,ble under the head 'Salaries') 
30 included in the said total income: "; 
(ii) in sub-section (3), for the words "to which the provisions 
of section 18 do not apply", the words "which is not chargeable 
under the head 'Salaries'" shall be sUDstituted; 
(iii) in sub-section (6),-
IS (a) for the words "regular assessment, so far as such 
tax relates to income to which the provisions of section 18 
do not apply", the following words shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"regular assessment (reduced by the amount of tax 
40 deductible in accordance with the provisions of sectio~ 

Ameadment 
of aection 
z3A• 
Insertion of 
new eection 
49BB• 
Relief to 
company in 
respect of 
dividend 
'Plid out of 
put tued 
profits. 
6 
18 on any income, other than income chargeable under 
the head 'Salaries', included in such assessment), so far 
as such tax relates to income other than income charge-
able under the head 'Salaries'''; 
(b) in the second proviso, for the words "to which the S 
provisions of section 18 do not apply", the words "other than 
income chargeable under, the head 'Salaries' " shall be 
substituted. 
11. In section 23A of the Income-tax Act,-
(i) in sub-section (2), in clause (i), for the words "ninety 10 
per cent.", the words "eighty per cent." shall be substituted; 
(ii) in Explanation 2, for the figures "100%", where they 
occur, the figures "90'%" shall be substituted. 
12. After section 49B of the Income-tax Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:- IS 
"49BB. (1) Where in respect of. any previous year relevant 
to the assessment year commencing after the 31st day of March, 
1960, an Indian company or a company which has made the 
prescribed arrangements for the declaration and payment of 
dividends within India, pays any dividend wholly or partly out 20 
of its profits and gains actually charged to income-tax for any 
assessment year ending before the 1st day of April, 1960, and 
deducts tax therefrom in accordance with the provisions of 
section 18, credit shall be given to the company against the 
income-tax, if any, payable by it on the profits and gains of the 25 
previous year during which the dividend is paid, of a sum 
~alculated in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2), 
and where the amount of credit so calculated exceeds the 
income-tax payable by the company 
shall be refunded. 
as aforesaid, the excess 
(2) The amount of income-tax to be given as credit under 
, sUb-section (1) shall be a sum equal to ten per cent. of so much 
of the dividends referred to in sub-section (1) as are paid out 
of the profits and gains actually charged to income-tax for any 
30 
assessment year ending before the 1st day of April, 1960. 35 
Explanation I.-For the purposes of this section, the aggre-
gate of the dividends declared by a company in respect of any 
previous year shall be deemed first to have come out of the 
distributable income of that previous year and the balance, if 
any, out of the undistributed part of the distributable income of 40 
one or more previous years immediately preceding that previous 
year as would be just sufficient to cover the amount of such 

100(1949. 
Z7 of 1957. 
7 
balance and as has not likewise been taken into ace' "\Ilt for 
covering such balance of any other previous year" 
Explanation H.-The "distributable income" of any previous 
year shall mean the total income assessed for that year u 
S reduced by-
(i) the amount of income-tax and super-tax payable by 
the company in respect of the saic:t total income; 
(ii) the amount of any other tax levied under any law 
for the time being in :orce on the company by the Govern-
10 ment or by a local authority in excess ~ the amount, if any, 
which has been allowed in computing the total income; 
15 
(iii) the amount paid to any charitable institution or 
fund to the extent to which it is exempt from tax under 
section 15B; and 
(iv) in the case of a banking company, the amount 
actually transferred to a reserve fund under section 17 of the 
Banking Companies Act, 1949, 
and as increased by-
(4) any profits and gains or receipts of the company not 
20 included in its total income; and 
(b) any amount attributable to any allowance made in 
computing the profits and gains of the company for purposes of 
assessment, which the company has not taken into account in 
its profit and loss account.". 
2S 13. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Wealth-tax Act, 
1957 (hereinafter referred to as the Wealth-tax Act), no tax shall be 
charged in respect of the net wealth of a company for any financial 
year commencing on or after the 1st day of April, 1960. 
14. In section 5 of the Wealth-tax Act, in clause (xx) of sub-
30 section (1), for the words "if on the relevant valuation date the 
provisiqns of this Act are not applicable to the company by reason 
of the provisions contained in that section", the following words 
'shall be substituted, namely:-
35 
"for a period of five successive assessment years commencing" 
with the assessment year next following the date on which the 
company is established, which period shall, in the case of a 
'Company established before the commencement of this Act, be 
computed in accordance with this Act from the date of its 
"esiablishment as if this Act had been in force on and from the 
date of Its establishment". 
Wealth tu 
not to be 
levied OD 
companies 
from 1960-
6x. 
AmcDdment 
of section S. 

<'\mendment 
of section 5. 
Amendment 
.flection 6. 
15. In section 5 of the Expenditure-tax Act, 1957 (hereinafter 29 of 19S7. 
referred to as the Expenditure-tax Act), in clause (d), for the word, 
brackets, figures and letter uclause (via) ", the words,. brackets, 
fi:gures and letters "sub-clause (a) of clause (via)" shall be 
substituted. , 
16. In section 6 of the Expenditure-tax Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) for clause (g), the following clause shall be sub-
stituted, namely:-
"(g) any expenditure incurred by the assessee in 10 
respect of the education of himself or any of his depend-
ants, and where the assessee is a Hindu undivided 
family, of any member of the family-
(i) if the expenditure is incurred in India. 
subject to a maximum of rupees three thousand per I, 
year; and 
(ii) if the expenditure is incurred in any. country 
outside India, subject to a maximum of rupees eight 
thousand per year;"; 
(b) after clause (i), the following clause shall be insert- 20 
ed. namely:-
"(j) any expenditure incurred by the assessee for 
travel in India in connection with his proceeding on . a 
holiday and any expenditure incurred on behalf of the 
assessee by his employer by way of travel concession or 2S 
assistance in connection with his proceeding on leave in 
India, subject in the aggregate to a maximum of rupees 
one thousand five hundred per year."; 
(ii) for sub-section (4). the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, and shall be deemed always to have been substituted, 30 
namely:- • 
" (4) If the assessee proves in any year that, in respect of 
any sum out of which any expenditure incurred is chargeable 
to tax under this Act, he has paid in any foreign COWltry any 
income-tax, wealth-tax. expenditure-tax, gift-tax or estat~ 35 
duty under any law for the time being in force in that country 
and that any such tax or duty has been included in the ex-
penditure chargeable to tax under this Act, he shall be 
entitled to a deduction of the full amount of such tax and 
duty paid in the foreign country.". 44 

18 of 19S8. 17. For section 18 of the Gift-tax Act, 1958, the following section Subsdtu-
. don of new shall be substItuted, namely: - lection for 
"18. If a person making a taxable gift pays into the treasury R8ec:tJb'otn 18. e a e on 
within fifteen days of his making the gift the amount of tax due advance 
• on the gift calculated at the rates specified in the Schedule, he payments. 
shall, at the time of assessment under section 15. be given credit, 
in addition to the amount so paid, for an amount equal to ten per 
cent. of the amount so paid. . 
Explanation.-If a person makes more than one taxable gift 
10 in the course of a previous year, the amount of tax due on anyone 
of such gifts shall be the difference between the total amount of 
tax due on the aggregate value of all taxable gifts so far made, 
including the taxable gift in respect of which tax has to be paid, 
calculated at the rates specified in the Schedule and the total 
15 amount of tax on the aggregate value of all the gifts made during 
that year excluding the taxable gift in respect of which tax has 
to be paid.". 
18. The Indian Tariff Act, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as the Amendment 
Tariff Act), shall be amended in the manner specified in the Second ~~~~ 32 of 
2. Schedule. 
30 
3$ 
19. In the Indian Tariff (Amendment) Act, 1949, in sections 4 and :rA::e~} 
5, for the figures "1960", the figures "1961" shall be substituted. 1949. 
20. In the First Schedule to the Central Excises and Salt Act, ~~dmeDft 
1944 of nrwt I 0 
,- 19# 
(a) in Item No. I, for the entry in the third column, the entry 
"Twenty-eight and three-fourths naye paise per imperial gallon" 
shall be substituted; 
(b) in Item No.4, for the entry in the third column, the 
entry "One rupee and forty-five naye paise per imperial gallon" 
shall be substituted; 
(c) in Item No.8, in the second column, for the words 
"'Sugar' means any form of sugar containing more than ninety 
per cent. of sucrose", the words" 'Sugar' means any form of sugar 
in which the sucrose content, if expressed as a percentage of the 
material dried to constant weight at 1050 Centigrade. would be 
more than ninety" shall be substituted; 
(d) in Item No. 10, for sub-item (2), the following sub-items 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"(2) For eyelet (other than motOr cyclet)-
(a) tyreI Sixty MY. paW per tyre or fifteen per cent, 
ad fJa/or_. whichever Is hIaher. 

(3) All other tyres 
(e) in Item No. 12,-
10 
Thirty /llJye pai5e per tube or fifteen per cent. 
ad valorem, whichever is higher. 
Fifteen r~r cent. ad valorem." ; 
(1) for sub-items (b) and (c), the following sub-items S 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"(b) .if it contains 40 per cent. or more by weight of silk; 
(0) if it contains 60 per cent. or more by weight of rayon· 
er artificial silk; or 
(d) if manufactured on a handloom."; 
(2) after sub-item (4), the following sub-item shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(5) Cotton fabrics, "Ilot otherwise Thirty-seven llaye paise per square 
specified. yard."; 
Ie 
(3) Explanation III in the second column shall be omitted; IS 
(f) in Item No. 12A,-
(1) for sub-items (ii), (iii) and (iv), the following sub-
items shall be substituted, namely:-
"(ii) if it contains 40 per cent. or more by weight of silk; 
(iii) if it contains cotton and less than 60 per cent. by» 
weight of rayon or artificial silk; 
(iv) if it contains no cotton and less than 40 per cent. by 
weight of wool and less than 40 per cent. by weight 
of rayon or artificial silk; or 
(v) if manufactured on a handloom;"; 2$ 
(2) the Eg:planation in the second column shall be 
omitted; 
(g) after Item No. 12A~ the following Item shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"I2.B. SILK FABRJCS-
'Silk Fabrics' include all varieties of fabrics manufac-
tured either wholly or partly from silk, but do 
n.t include any IUch fabrk-
(I) ifit contains 40 per cent. or more by weight of wool; 
(ii)' if it contains cotton or artificial silk or both and less 
than 40 per cent. by weight of silk; 
(iii) if it contains no cotton and no artificial silk and less 
than than 40 per cent. by weight of wool and less 
than 40 per cent. by weight of silk; or 
c;.) if nIUluCactured on a handloom."; 
Thirty naye paise per 
square yard. 
35 
40 

(h) the existine Item No. 12B shall be re-numbered as Item. 
No. 12C; 
(i) in Item No. 14, in the entry in the third column, for the 
figures and words "19 naye paise per lb.", the figures and word. 
S "30 naye paise per lb." shall be substituted; 
JO 
20 
(j) for Item No. 17, the following Item shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"17. FOOTWEAR-
'Footwear' includes all varieties of footwear, whether 
known as boots, shoes, sandals, chappals or by any 
other name, and component parts thereof-
(I) Footwear produced in any factory including the Ten per cent. ad 
precincts thereof whereon fifty or more workers fJaJ.r_. 
are working, or were working on any day 
of the preceding twelve months, and in any part of 
which the process of manufacturing footwear is 
being carried on with the aid of power or is 
ordinarily so carried on, the total equivalent of 
such power exceeding two horsepower, 
(z) component pam of footwear in, or in relation to the Fifteen per call. ,. 
manufacture of, which any process is ordinarily fJalor",. ... ; 
carried on with the aid of power. 
(k) in Item No. 18, for the entries in the third column against 
sub-items (1), (2), (3) (a) (i), (3) (a) (ii) , (3) (a) (iii), (3) (b) (0, 
2S (3) (b) (ii) and (3) (b) (iii), the entries "Seven rupees and fifty 
naye paise per fan", "Fifteen rupees per fan", "Five rupee. 
and twenty-five naye paise per motor", "Two rupees and sixty-five 
naye paise per stator", "Two rupees and sixty-five naye paise per 
rotor", "Ten rupees and fifty naye paise per motor", "Five rupee. 
30 and twenty-five naye paise per stator" and "Five rupees and 
twenty-five naye paise per rotor" shall, respectively, be sub.ti-
tuted; 
(l) in Item No. 19,-
(i) for the entries in the third column against sub-item. 
3S (1) (i), (1) (ii) and (1) (iii) and (2), the entries "Ten nalle 
paise per bulb", "Forty naye paise per bulb", "Eighty naye 
paise per bulb" and "Forty naye paise per foot" shall respec-
tively be substituted; 
(ii) for sub-item (3), the followine sub-itema Ihall b. 
40 substituted, namely:-
"(3) Sodium and mercury vapour dischar'Ke lamps 
Cot) AlllOrt!, not otherwise Ipeci8e4 . 
Five per cent. l1li 
IIGl",..",. 
Pirteea pee cent. .. 
."""'."; 

12 
(m) in Item No. 20, for the entries in the third column against 
sub-items (1), (2) and (3), the entries "Fifteen per cent. ad 
valorem", "Fifteen per cent. ad valorem" and "Seventeen and 
half per cent. ad valorem" shall respectively be substituted; 
(n) in Item No. 21, for sub-items (5), (6), (7) 1 (8), (9) and S 
(10), the following sub-items shall be substituted, namely:-
ICes) straw board, other than corrugated board Five nay, pais, per lb. 
(6) duplex and triplex board Ten naye paill per lb. 
(7) pulp board, not otherwise specified, including grey Ten naye paue per lb. 
board and mill board. 10 
(8) corrugated board 
(9) coated board (including an, chrome and board for 
playing cards). 
(10) paper and paper board, aliaorts, not otherwise speci-
fied. 
Ten nay. paise per lb. 
Fifteen nay' paise per 
lb. 
Fifteen nay, paise per 
lb."; 15 
(0) in Item No. 24, in the third column for the words "plus 
eighty naye paise per imperial gallon", the words "plus one rupee 
and seventeen naye paise per imperial gallon" shall be substituted; 
(p) in Item No. 25, for the entries in the third column against 
sub-items (a) and (b), the entries "Sixteen per cent. ad valorem ao 
plus sixty-five rupees per ton" and "Sixteen per cent. ad valorem 
plus thirty rupees per ton" shall respectively be substituted; 
(q) for Item No. 27, the following Item shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"27. MOTOR VEHICLES- 2S 
'Motor Vehicles' means all mechanically propelled vehicles 
adapted for use upon road" and includes a chassis and a 
trailer; but does not include a vehicle running upon 
fixed rails,-
(I) Autocyc1es, motor cycles, ICOOten, 'luto-ricbhaws and One hundred nnd 30 
any other three-wheeled motor vehicles. seventy-five rLlDee1I 
each. 
(~) Motor vehicles of not more than I6 H. P. by Royal One thousand rupees 
Automobile Club (a.A.C.) ratina. each. 
(3) Motor cars of more than 16 H.P. by Royal Automobile Three thousand rupees 35 
Club (R.A.C.) rating, constructed or adapted to carry each or fifteen per 
notmore than niDe pel'lOnI. cent. ad valor",. 
whichever i. lHgher. 
(4) Motor vehiclca, DOt otherwise specified. Two thousand five 
hundred rupees each 40 
or twelve and half 
per cent. ad valor"" 
whichever is higher." ; 
(r) after Item No. 28, the following Items shall be inserted, 
namely:- 45 
"29. CYCLES, PARTS OF CYCLES OTHER. THAN 
MOTOR CYCLES, NAMELY-
(I) free wheel. • 
(i.-, rimI •• 
Two rupees each. 
Four rupees eICh. 

11 
30. INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINES, ALL SORTS, 
NAMELY-
(I) those designed for use as a prime-mover for transport 
vehicles and have been given for that purpose some 
Ten per cent. tid 
5 special shape, size or quality which would not be essen-
tial for thel1' use for any other purpose. 
valor,m. 
(ii) others. Five per cent. al vaJorl ..... 
31. ELECTRIC MOTORS, ALL SORTS AND PARTS 
10 THBREOF,NAMELY:-
(I) those designed for u.e in circuits of less than 10 am-
peres and at a pressure not exceeding ~So volts. 
(2) those designed for use in circuits at a pressure exceeding 
400 volts, and 
Fifteen per 
valor'm. 
cent. ad 
15 (I) with a rated capacity not exceeding 10 H. P .. Ten per cent, U 
30 
35 
40 
(i.) exceeding 10 H. P. 
(3) all others 
(4) parts of electric motors 
32. CINEMATOGRAPH FILMS, EXPOSED-
(1) News reels and shorts not exceeding SOO 
metres. 
(2) Feature films, advertisement shorts, and 
films not otherwise specified. 
• 33. ALUMINIUM-
(a) In any crude form including ingots, bars, 
blocks, slabs, billets, shots and pellets. 
(b) Manufactures, the following, namely, plates, 
sheets, circles, strips and foils in any form 
or size. 
34. TIN PLATE AND TINNED SHEETS 
INCLUDING TIN TAGGERSl.AND 
CUTTINGS OF SUCH PL./\ TES, 
SHEETS OR TAGGERS 
35. PIG IRON 
VIMor"". 
Five per cent. 
wUONm. 
Fifteen per cent. 
VIMor"", 
Fifteen per cent. 
ttalor"". 
Of a width 
ot 30 mm. 
or higher 
Below 30 
Mm. in 
width 
tid 
ad 
tid 
Fifteen nay, 
pais, per metre, 
Ten tkU" paiu 
per metre. 
Fifty nay, paisl! Thirty-three 
per metre. nay' pais. per 
metre. 
Three hundred rupees 
per metric tonne. 
Five hundred rupees 
per metric tonne. 
Two hundred rupees 
per metric tonne •• 
Ten rupees per metric 
tonne .... 
21. In section 2 of the Khadi and Other Handloom Industries 
Development (Additional Excise Duty on Cloth) Act, 1953, in 
45 clause (b), for the words "and rayon or artificial silk fabrics", the 
words IIsilk and rayon or artificial silk fabrics" shall be substituted. 
Amendment 
of Act I2 of 
19S3· 
2%. In the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Import- Amendment 
ance) Act, 1957,- of Act 58 of 1957. 
(4) in clause (c) of section 2, for the figures and letter 
.50 u12B", the figures and letter 1112C" man be substituted; 

D .... tiau-ace .f _t 
•• ty. 
14 
(b) in the First !chedule, in the entry relating to Item 
No. 12, after sub-item (4), the following sub-item shall be 
inserted, namely:-
UCs) Cotton fabrics, not otherwise Ipecified . Thirteen II aye paUe 
per square yard.' 5 
13. For the year beginning on the 1st day of April, 1960, no duty 
under the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, or the Tariff Act shall 
b, levied in respect of salt manufactured in, or imported into, India. 
Declaration under the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931. 
It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest r. 
that the provisions o~ clauses 18, 19, 20, 21 and 22 of this Bill shall 
have immediate effect under the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 
U~al 
• 
1011 944. 
16 of 19]1 • 

s 
15 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 2) 
PART I 
Income-tax and surcharges on income-tax 
Paragraph A 
(i) In the case of every individual who is married and every 
Hindu undivided family whose total income does not exceed Rs. 20,091 
in either case-
~ates of Income-tax 
10 Where _ the individual has no 
child wholly or mainly de-
pendent on him or where the 
Hindu undivided family has 
no minor coparcener. 
Where the individual has 
one child wholly or mainly 
dependent on him or where 
the Hindu undivided fami-
ly has one minor coparcener. 
Where the individual has 
more than one child wholly 
or mainly dependent on 
him or where the Hindu 
undivided fanUly haa more 
than one minor coparcener. l'i 
-------.- -._----_._--- .. ----_._-"-_. ---_._-- ----_ .. 
Rs. Rs. Ra. 
(I) On the fint 3,000 oCtotal 3,300 of total 3,600 of totlll Nil 
income_ income. income. 
(2) On the next 2,000 
" 
1,700 
" 1,400 
" 3% 
20 (3) On the next 2,500 " 2,500 " 2,,)00 " 6% 
(4) On the next 2,500 " 2,500 " 2,500 " 9% 
(5) On the next 2,500 " 2,500 
" 2,500 
" no/. 
(6) On the next 2,500 " 2,500 " 2,500 
" 14% 
(7) On the next 5,000 " 5,000 " 5,000 " 18% 
-----_ .. ------ ----------- .. _-
25 (ii) In the case of every individual who is not married and every 
30 
35 
individual or Hindu undivided family whose total income in either 
case exceeds Rs. 20,000 and in the case of every unregistered firm 
or other association of persons, not being a case to whioh any other 
Paragraph of this Part applies:-
Rs. 
(I) an the first 1,000 of total income Nil 
(2) On the next ,.,000 
" " 3% 
(3) On the next 2,500 .. " 6% 
(4) On the next 2,500 
" " ,% 
(5) On the next 2,500 " " 11% 
(6) On the next 2,,00 " " 14% 
(7) On the next 5,000 " 18% 
(8) On the balance of total income 25%1 

18 
Provided that for the purposes of this Paragraph-
(i) no income-tax shall be payable on a total income which 
does not exceed the limit specified below; 
(ii) the income-tax payable shall in no 'case exceed half the 
amount by which the total income exceeds the said limit; J 
(iii) the income-tax payable by an individual who is married 
or a Hindu undivided family whose total income exceeds in 
either case Rs. 20,000 shall not exceed the aggregate of-
(a) the income-tax which would have been payable if 
the total income had been Rs. 20,000; 10 
(b) half the amount by which the total income exceeds 
Rs.20,000; 
The limit aforesaid shall be--
(i) Rs. 6,000 in the case of every Hindu undivided family 
which as at the end of the previous year satisfies either of the 15 
following conditions, namely:-
(a) that it has at least two members entitled to claim 
partition who are not less than eighteen years of age; or 
(b) that it ha!'; at least two members entitled to claim 
partition who are not lineally descended one from the other 20 
and who are not lineally descended from any other living 
member of the family; 
(ii) Rs. 3,000 in every other case. 
Surcharges on income-tax 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore 25 
specified shall be increased by the aggregate of the surcharges 
calculated as under:-
(a) A surcharge for purposes of the Union equal to the 
sum of-
(i) five per cent. of the amount of income-tax; and 30 
(ii) where the earned income included in the total 
income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000, five per cent. of the difference 
between the amount of income-tax which would have been 
payable on the whole of the earned income included in the 
total income if such earned income had been the total income 35 
and the amount of income-tax payable on a total income 
of Rs. 1,00,000; • 
(b) A special surcharge at fifteen per cent. of the difference 
between the amount of income-tax on the total income and the 
amount of income-tax on the whole of the earned income, if any, 40 
included in the total income if such earned income had been the 
total income: 
Provided that-
(i) no surcharge for purposes of the Union shall be payable 
where the total income does not exceed the limit specified below; 45 
(it) no special surcharge shall be payable in the case of an 
assessee whose total income does not include any income from 

17 
dividend on ordinary shares if his total income does not exceed 
the limit specified below, and where the total income includes 
any dividends on ordinary shares, such limit shall be increased 
by Rs. 1,500 or the amount of the said dividends, whichever is 
5 less: 
Provided further that-
(a) where the total income includes any dividends on 
ordinary shares, the surcharge for purposes of the Union and 
the special surcharge shall not in each case exceed half the 
10 amount by which the total income exceeds the respective limits 
applicable in either case; 
(h) the surcharge for purposes of the Union and the special 
surcharge, both together, shall not exceed half the amount .by 
which the total income exceeds the limit specified below; 
15 The limit aforesaid shall be-
(i) Rs. 15,000 in the case of every Hindu undivided family 
which satisfies as at the end of the previous year either of the 
following conditions, namely:-
(a) that it has at least two members entitled to claim 
30 partition who are not less than eighteen years of age; or 
(h) that it has at least two members entitled to claiIl1-
partition who are not lineally descended one from the other 
and who are not lineally descended from any other living 
member of the family; 
35 (ii) Rs. 7,500 in every other case. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this Paragraph, in the case of 
every Hindu undivided family governed by the Mitakshara law, 
a son shall be deemed to be entitled to claim partition of the 
coparcenary property against his father, or grand-father notwith-
30 staming any custom to the contrary. 
Paragraph B 
In the case of every local authority,-
Rate of income-tax 
On the whole of the total income 
35 Surcharge on income-tax 
30% 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
of 5 per cent. of the amount of income-tax. 
Paragraph C 
40 In every case in which under the provisions of the Income-tax 
Act, income-tax is to be charged at the maximum rate,-
Rate of income-tax 
On the whole of the total income •. 25% 

18 
Surcharges on income-tax 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by the aggregate of the surcharges 
calculated as under:-
(a) a surcharge for purposes of the Union of five per cent. S 
of the amount of income-tax; and 
(b) a special surcharge of fifteen per cent. of the amount 
of income-tax. 
Paragraph D 
In the case of every company,-
Rate of income-tax 
On the whole of the total income 
Paragraph E 
In the case of every registered firm,-
Rates of income-tax 
(1) On the first Rs. 40,000 of total income 
(2) On the next Rs. 35,000 of total income 
(3) On the next Rs. 75,000 of total income 
(4) On the balance of total income 
PART II 
Super-tax and surcharges en super-tax 
Paragraph A 
.. 20% 
Nil 
5% 
6% 
9% 
Ie 
IS 
20 
In . the case of every individual, Hindu undivided family, 
unregistered firm and other association of persons, not being a oaae 
to which any other Paragraph of this Part applies,- 2, 
Rates of super-tax 
(1) On the first Rs. 20,000 of total income Nil 
(2) On the next Rs. 5,000 of total income 3% 
(3) On the next Rs. 5,000 of total income 15% 
(4) On the next Rs. 10,000 of total income 20% 30 
(5) On the next Rs. 10,000 of total income 30% 
(6) On the next Rs. 10,000 of total income 35% 
(7) On the next Rs. 10,000 of total income 40% 
(8) On the balance of total income 45% 

19 
Surcharge. on .uper-t4X 
The amount of super-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by the aggregate of the surcharges 
calculated as under:-
S (a) A surcharge for purposes of the Union equal to the sum 
of-
(i) five per cent. of the amount of super-tax; and 
(ii) where the earned inceme included in the total 
income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000, five per cent. of the difference 
I. between the amount of super-tax which would have been 
payable on the whole of the earned income included in the 
total income,. if such earned income had been the total 
income and the amount of super-tax payable on a total 
income of Rs. 1,00,000; 
IS (b) A special surcharge at fifteen per cent. of the difference 
between the amount of super-tax on the total income and the 
amount of super-tax on the whole of the earned income, if any, 
included in the total income, if such earned income had been 
the total income. 
28 Paragraph B 
l -
In the case of every local authority, ..... 
Rate of super-tax 
On the whole of the total income 
Surcharge on super·ta..r 
16~ 
2Cj The amount of super-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
.. specified shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
of 12! per cent. of the amount of super-tax 
Paragraph C 
In the case of every association of persons being a co-operative 
3(' society as defined in clause (5B) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act.-
Rates Qj super-tax 
(1) On the first Rs. 25,000 of total income 
(2) On the balance of total income 
Surcharge on super·ta;r 
Nil 
lS~ 
35 The amount of super-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by a surcharge for purpOlies of the Union 
of 121 per cent. of the amount of super-tax. 

Paragraph D 
In the case ot every company, other than the Lite Insurance 
Corporation ot India established under the Life Insurance Corporation 
Act, 1956,-
Rates of super-tax 
On tlie whole ot the ~otal income 
Provided thai-
(l) a rebate at the rate of 45 per cent. on so much of the 
total income as consists ot dividends from a subsidiary Indian 
company; at the rate ot 40 per cent. on so much of the total 
income as consists of dividends from any other Indian company 10 
formed and rep.istered on or after the 1st day of April, 1959; and 
at the rate of 35 per cent. on the balance of the total income 
shall be allowed in the case of any company which-
'(a)' in respect of its profits liable to tax under the 
Income--tax Act for the year ending on the 31st day ot March, l!i 
1961, has made the prescribed arrangements for the declara-
tion and payment within India of the dividends payable 
out of such profits in accordance with the provisions of sub-
section (3D) of section 18 of that Act; and 
(b) is such a company as is referred to in sub-section 20 
(9) of section 23A of the Income-tax Act with a total income 
not exceeding Rs. 25,000; 
(ii) a rebate at the rate of 45 per cent. on so much of the 
total income as consists of dividends from a subsidiary Indian 
company; at the rate of 35 per cent. on sO much of the total 2S 
income as consists of dividends from any other Indian company 
formed and r~gistered on or after the 1st day of April. 1959; and 
at the rate of 30 per cent. on the balance of the total income 
shall be allowed in the case of anv company which satisfies 
condition (a) but not condition (b) of the preceding clause; 30 
(iii) a rebate at the rate of 45 per cent. on so much of. the 
total income as consists of dividends from a subsidiary Indian 
company; at the rate of 22 per cent. on so much of the total 
income as consists of dividends from any other Indian company 
formed and registered on or after the 1st day of April. 1959; and 3S 
at the rate of 12 per cent. on the balance of the total income 
shall be allowed in the case of nnv ('ompany not entitled to a 
rebate under either of thf' preceding clauses: 
Provided turther that-
(i) the amount of the rebate under clause (i) or clause 40 
(ii) of the precedin~ proviso shall be reduced by the sum. if any, 
equal to the amount or the ag~egate of the amounts. as the case 
may be, computed as hereunder:-
(a) on the al/;I[re~ate of the sums computed in The manner aT the rate of Joo% 
provided in clause (i) of the second proviso to Paragraph 4S 
D of Part TJ of the Fint Schedule to the Finance Act. 
I9~Q, as reduced by the amount, ihny, which is deemed 12 ofI959. 
to . have heen tak$n into account, in accordance with 
clause (if) of the saJd proviso. for the purpose of reducing 
the rebate mentioned in claule (I') of the said proviso to SO 
.. 1 ;m! 

• 
10 
IS 
21 
(b) on the amount representing the face value of Iny bonus It the rate of 30% 
shares or the amount of any bonus issued to its share-
holders during the previou8 year with a view to increasing 
the paid lip capital; 
(ii) where the sum arrived at in accordance with clause (i) 
of this proviso exceeds the amount of the rebate arrived at in 
accordance with clause (i) or clause (ii), as the case may be, of 
the preceding proviso, only so much of the amounts of reduction 
mentioned in sub-clauses (a) and (b) of clause (i) of this pro-
viso as is sufficient, in that order, to reduce the rebate to nil shall 
be deemed to have been taken into account for the purpose: 
Provided further that the super-tax payable by a company, the 
total income of which exceeds rupees twenty-five thousand, shall not 
exceed the aggregate of-
(a) the super-tax which would have been payable by the 
company if its total income had been rupees twenty-five 
thousand; and 
(b) half the amount by which its total income exceeds rupees 
twenty-five thousand. 
20 Explanation.-For the purposes of this Paragraph, where any 
portion of the profits and gains of a company is not included in its 
total income by reason of such portion being agricultural income, the 
amount representing the face value of any bonus shares and the 
amount of any bonus issued to its shareholders shall each be deemed 
2~ to be such proportion thereof as the average of the total income of 
the company in the five previous years in which the company has 
been in receipt of taxable income immediately preceding the rele-
vant previous year bears to the average of its total profits and gains 
(excluding capital receipts) for the preceding five years aforesaid, 
30 reduced by such allowances as may be admissible under the Income-
tax Act which have not been taken into account by the company in 
its profit and loss accounts for the preceding five years aforesaid. 
Paragraph E 
In the case of the Life Insurance Corporation of India established 
All 31 01 19S6. 3' under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956,-
Rate of super-tax 
On the whole of its profits and gains from life 
insurance business 
PART III 
40 Rates fOf' deduction of ta.r under section 18 of the Income-ta.r Act 
at the prescribed rates 
In every case in which under the provisions of section 18 of the 
Income-tax Act, tax is to be deducted at the prescribed rates, deduc-

22 
tion shall be made from the income subject to deduction at the 
following rates:-
r ~-----.. --
Income-tax I Super-tax 
--------1---------.--.----1---------1--------
I 
Rate of 
I. In the cale of a person other 
than a company-
Rate of 
income-
tax 
(0) in every case, on the %5% 
whole income (excluding 
interest payable on any 
security of the Central 
Government issued or d<'C-
lared to be inr.ome-tax 
frec), and 
(b) in addition, where the 
person is one whom the 
person responsible for 
paying the income has no 
reason to l::elieve to be 
resident in the taxable 
territories, on the whole 
income. 
2. In the case of a company-
(0) in every case--
Rates of 
Surcharges 
1------1----Surcharge 
for 
purposes 
• of the 
Union 
Special 
surcharge 
super··tax 
Rates 
of 
surcharges 
Super-tax and sur-
charges on super-tax 
I. 
IS 
in accordance with 
the provtSlons (': 
clause (b) of suI" as 
section (1) of aectic" 
17 of the Income-tax 
Act. 
I Rate of I Rate of 3· 
I 
Income- Super-tax 
tax 
1 
(I) on the whole income (excluding interest payable on any 20% 35 
security of the Central Government issued or declared to 
be income-tax frce); and 
(ii) on the whole income (excluding dividends payable by an 10% 
Indian company referred to in .ection S6A ofthe Income-
tax Act); and ... 
(b) in addition, where the company is neither an Indian company 
nor a company which has made the prescribed arrange-
ments for the declaration and payment of dividend. 
within Indi;l,-
(i) on the income from dividends (excluding dividendi pay-
able by its subsidiary Indian company, if any, or by an 
Indian company referred to in section S6A ofthe Income-
taxAct)--. 
ttl) on dividends payable by an Indian company formed 
and registered on or after the I st day of April, 1959 . 
(b) on any other dividend 
(it) on any other income. not beina income from dividendI 
33% 
33% 
,. 

s 
18 
30 
23 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 18) 
PART I 
In the First Schedule to the Tariff Act,-
(i) in Item No. 22 (1), for the existing entries in the fourth 
column against sub-items (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e), the entriei 
"Rs. 6 per Imperial gallon", "Re. 1 per bottle", "50 naye paise per 
bottle", "25 naye paise per bottle" and "Rs. 7·50 per Imperial 
gallon", respectively, shall be substituted; 
(ii) in Item No. 22 (2), for the existing entries in the fouiih 
column against sub-items (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e),theentries 
"Rs. 12 per Imperial gallon", "Rs. 2 per bottle", "Re. 1 per bottle", 
"50 naye paise per bottle" and "Rs. 15 per Imperial gallon", res-
pectively, shall be substituted: 
(iii) in Item No. 22(3), for the existing entries in the fourth 
column against sub-items (a) and (b), the entries "Rs. 80 per 
Imperial gallon" and "Rs. 50 per Imperial gallon", respectively, 
shall be substituted; 
(iv) in Item No. 22 (4) ,-
(1) for the existing entries in the fourth column against 
each of the sub-items (a) and (b) (ii), the entry "Rs. 150 per 
Imperial gallon of the strength of London proof or 125!er 
cent. ad valorem, whichever is higher" shall be substitute ; 
(2) for the existing entry in the fourth column against 
sub-item (b) (i), the entry "Rs. 200 per Im~erial gallon or 
125 per cent. ad valorem, whichever is higher " shall be subs-
.tituted; 
(v) in Item No. 27 (4) (a), for the existing entry in the fourth 
column, the entry "TIle rate at which excise duty is for the time 
being leviable on kerosene" shall be substituted; 
(vi) in Items Nos. 29(1), 48, 63(4), 63(10), 66(a), 66(1) and 
75(8), to each of the respective entries in the fourth column, the 
words "plus the excise duty for the time being leviable on like 
articles if produced or manufactured in India, and where such 
duty is leviable at different rates, the highest duty" shall be 
added. 

Item 
No. 
Name of article 
H 
PART II 
Nature of Standard rate of duty 
duty 
Preferential rate of Du!'3-
duty ifthe arti- don of 
cle is the pro-. protec-
duce or manu· dve 
facture of rates S 
of duty 
The Unt- A Bri-
ted tish 
Kingdom Colony 
---.-- ~--.----.-----.--------------
% 3 4 s 6 7 
----In the first Schedule to the Tariff Act,-
(i) after Item No. 73(20), the following Items shall be inserted 
namely:-
·'73(%1) Electric motors, all Revenue The excise duty for 
the time being levi-
able on like articles 
if produced or ma-
nufactured in India 
and where IUch 
dUL) is leviable 
at d ·ff.:rent ratel, 
the highelt duty; 
and the duty 10 
l.:viable ,hall be 
in addition to the 
duty leviable on the 
article under any of 
the other I tems ill 
this Schedule. 
IOrts, and part, 
thereof. 
7~ (n; Internal combu.-
tion engines, all 
IOrta. 
Revenue The excise duty for 
the time being levi-
able on like articles 
if produced or ma-
nufactUred in India 
and where such 
duty il leviable 
at dift".:rent rateS, 
the highest duty ; 
and the duty 10 
leviable shall be 
in addition to the 
duty leviable on the 
article under any of 
the other Items in 
]0 
I, 
30 
JS 
this Schedule. 45 
(ii) after Item 
namely:-
No. 75(18), the following Item shall be inserted, 
75 (19) Mechanically pro- Revenue 
pelled vehiclel 
adapted for use 
upon roads, in-
cluding challis 
and trallers, but 
DOt includina 
vehicles intended 
to ron upon fixed 
rails, 
The excise duty for 
the time being levi- , 
able on like articles ' 
if produced or ma-
nufactured in India 
and wh~ luch 
duty is leviable 
at different rat.:., 
the highelt duty; 
and the duty 
.0 leviable shall 
be in addition 
to the duty le-
viable on the arti-
cle under any of 
the other Items 
in this Schedule. 
60 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of this Bill is to give effect to the financial proposals of 
the Central Government for the next financial year and to provide for 
certain connected matters. The Notes on 'Clauses explain the various 
provisions contained in the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 29th February, 1960. MORARJI DESAI. 

26 
Notes On clauses 
ClauSe 2 prescribes the rates of income-tax and super-tax for the 
financial year 1960-61 and for deduction of tax at source from interest 
on securities, dividends, etc. For assessees other than companies, the 
same rates as prescribed by the Finance Act, 1959 continue. The 
distinction between the surcharge for purposes of the Union and 
the special surcharge has been clarified in the various parts of the 
First Schedule. 
In the case of companies, 
(i) the rate of income-tax has been fixed at 20 per cent. as 
against the existing rate of 31·5 per cent. (30 per cent. income-
tax and 1·5 per cent. surcharge on income-tax), 
(ii) the effective rate of super-tax on an Indian company 
with a total income exceeding Rs. 25,000 has been fixed at 25 
per cent. so that the aggregate rate of income-tax and super-tax 
applicable to such a company will be 45 per cent. as against 51·5 
per cent. as at present, 
(iii) the effective rate of income-tax and super-tax on Indian 
branches of foreign companies has been fixed at 63 per cent. as 
against 61·5 per cent. as at present, 
(iv) the effective rate of super-tax on dividends received by 
parent companies (Indian or foreign) from their subsidiary 
Indian companies continues at 10 per cent., 
(v) on dividends receivable by any company from an Indian 
company (not being a subsidiary company) formed and registered 
on or after 1st April, 1959, the effective rate of super-tax otherwise 
payable has been reduced by 5 per cent. in the case of an Indian 
company and 10 per cent. in the case of a foreign company, 
(vi) bonus issues out of premiums received in cash will be 
taken into account for the purposes of super-tax like other bonus 
issues, 
(vii) super-tax payable with reference to excess distribution 
()[ dividends has been withdrawn, 
(viii) the general rate for deduction of super-tax at source 
on interest on securities, dividends, ek, payable to Indian com-
panies has been reduced from 25 per cent. to 10 per cent., the 
total effective rate of deduction on account of income-tax and 
super-tax thus being reduced from 45 per cent. to 30 per cent., 
(ix) the rate for deduction of super-tax on dividends payable 
by an Indian company (other than a subsidiary company) form-
ed and registered on or after 1st April, 1959 to a foreign company 
has been reduced from 43 per cent. to 33 per cent., 
(x) the rate of super-tax for the Life Insurance Corporation 
of India has been fixed at 22·5 per cent. so that the aggregate 
rate of income-tax and super-tax remains at 42·5 per cent. as at 
present, and 
(xi) the rates of super-tax applicable to the Life Insurance 
Corporation of India for the financial years 1958-59, 1959-60 and 
1960-61 have been made applicable also to such other companies 
• 

2'1 
as carryon life insurance business in respect of their profits fron l 
such business. 
Clause 3 makes the following amendments to section 19 of the 
Finance Act, 1959:-
Sub-clause (i) inserts a new sub-section (3A) with a view 
to clarifying that interim dividends declared or payable by a 
company even before 1st April, 1959 but in respect of a previous 
year relevant to the assessment year 1960-61 will not be grossed 
up in the assessments of the shareholders. 
Sub-clause (ii): Sub-section (4) of section 19 provided that 
the benefit of grossing would be available for dividends declared 
in respect of a previous year relevant to the assessment for 
1959-60 or an earlier year. In order to clarify that this benefit 
will be available only where the dividends are declared in rela-
tion to the accounts of a previous year not later than the previous 
year relevant to the assessment year 1959-60, a suitable amend-
ment has been proposed in sub-clause (ii). 
Clause 4 amends section 9 of the Income-tax Act to provide that 
the whole of the taxes levied by a local authority and borne by the 
owner in respect of a property constructed before 1st April, 1950 
shall be treated as the tenant's burden which would be taken into 
account in determining the annual letting value on the basis of the 
full rent payable by the tenant. 
Clause 5 amends clause (xiii) of sub-section (2) of section 10 of 
the Income-tax Act so as to extend the benefit of that clause to any 
sums paid to a scientific research association or to a university, 
college or other institution to be used for scientific research, whether 
or not such scientific research is related to the class of business 
carried on by the assessee. 
Clause 6 amends sub-section (3) of section 14 of the Income-tax 
Act so as to provide that profits and gains from business carried on 
by co-operative societies (other than those carrying on insurance 
• business) shall be wholly exempt only in the case of co-operative 
societies which are connected with agriculture, rural credit and 
cottage industries. In the case of other such societies, profits and 
gains from business will be exempt up to Rs. 10,000 only. 
Clause 7 makes an amendment to section 15H of the Income-tax 
Act to extend the benefit of exemption from tax in respect of dona-
tions for charitable pur{'oses upto seven and a half per cent. of the 
assessee's total income (as reduced in the manner provided in that 
sectiOg) or Rs. 1,50,000 whichever is less. 
Clause 8 amends section 15C of the Income-tax Act so as to extend 
the period within which a new industrial undertaking may be~n 
to manufacture or produce articles to be eligible for the exemption 
provided by that section, by another five years. 
Clause 9 makes the following amendments in section 18 of the 
Income-tax Act:-
Sub-clause (i) clarifies that tax shall be deducted under 
sub-section (3D) in respect of all dividends including dividends 
on preference shares. 
Sub-clause (ii) deletes sub-section (SE). 

28 
Clause 10 makes the following amendments to section 18A of the 
Income-tax Act:-
Sub-clause (i) extends the scope of sub-section (1) of section 
18A and provides that for the purposes of the advance. payment 
of tax, all incomes other than 'salaries' will be taken into consi-
deration. It has, however, been clarified that while computing 
the amount of advance tax, credit shall be given for all taxes 
deductible at source under section 18 on all such incomes. 
Sub-clauses (ii) and (iii) are consequential upon the amend .. 
ment proposed in sub-clause (i). 
Clause 11 amends section 23A of the Income-tax Act so as to reduce 
in the case of companies dealing in or holding investments the 
statutory percentage for distribution of dividends from 100 per cent. 
to 90 per cent. A consequential amendment has been made in clause 
(i) of sub-section (2) of section 23A. 
Clause 12 inserts a new section 49BB to give credit to an Indian 
company which distributes dividends in respect of a previous year 
relevant to the assessment for t'he year 1960-61 or a later year out 
of profits already taxed in the assessments for 1959-60 and ~arlier 
years. The amount of credit to be given for this purpose is a sum 
equal to 10 per cent. of the dividends distributed out of past taxed 
profits. The credit is to be given against the company's tax liability 
on its income for the previous year in which the dividend is paid. 
Clause 13 provides that no wealth-tax sha1:l be charged in respect 
of the net wealth of a company for any financial year commencing 
on or after 1st April, 1960. 
Clause 14 makes a formal amendment to section 5 (1) (xx) of the 
Wealth-tax Act, 1957, consequential upon the abolition of wealth-tax 
on companies, so as to retain the existing exemption from wealth-tax 
for the prescribed number of years in respect of shares held in a com- • 
pany established with the object of carrying on a new industrial 
undertaking in India. 
Clause 15 amends clause (d) of section 5 of the Expenditure-tax 
Act, 1957, with a view to restricting the exemption mentioned therein 
to passage concessions enjoyed by foreigners employed in India. 
Clause 16 makes the following amendments in section 6 of the 
Expenditure-tax Act, 1957:- . 
Sub-clause (i) amends clause (g) of sub-section (1) so as 
to allow a deduction of Rs. 3,000 for expenditure incurred on 
education in India and inserts a new clause (j) in sub-section 
(1) providing for a deduction of Rs. 1,500 for expenditure incurr-
ed on travel in India by the assessee while on holiday or during 
leave. 
Sub-clause (ii) amends sub-section (4) with retrospective 
eftect to provide for the deduction of taxes paid by the assessee 
to a foreign Government in full. 

29 
Clause 17 amends section 18 of the Gift-tax Act so as to provide 
that the advance tax paid is the same as the tax payable on regular 
assessment. 
Clause 18, read with the Second Schedule, proposes certain 
changes in the Import Tariff-
(a) The rates of duty on wines, spirits and other alcoholic 
liquors are being increased by approximately one-fourth to one-
third of the existing rates; 
(b) On a number of articles on which central excise duties 
have been imposed, provision is being made for the levy of a 
countervai'ling import duty. This is necessary in order that the 
indigenous producer or manufacturer of these articles is not 
placed at a disadvantage in comparison with the importer. 
Clause 19 seeks to maintain for another year the status quo in 
regard to commitments under the General Agreement on Tariffs and 
Trade. 
Clause 20-
Sub-dause (a) proposes an alteration in the excise duty on 
kerosene by way of readjustment of rates between the basic and 
the additional excise duties. 
Sub-clause (b) proposes an alteration in the excise duty on 
motor spirit by way of readjustment of rates between the basic 
and the additional excise duties. 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to make certain clarificatory amend-
ment in respect of the definition of Sugar. 
Sub-clause (d) seeks to amend the tariff relating to tyres 
to provide for specific rates of duty in respect of tyres and tubes 
for cycles. 
Sub-clause (e) (1) seeks to amend the tariff relating to cotton 
fabrics consequential upon the imposition of an excise duty on 
silk fabrics. 
Sub-clause (e) (2) seeks to make certain clarificatory amend-
ment in respect of cotton fabrics not otherwise specified. 
Sub-clause (e) (3) proposes to omit the Explanation to 
enable the imposition of an excise duty on staple fibre fabrics. 
• Sub-clause (f) is consequential upon the proposal to levy duty 
on silk fabrics and on fabrics made of staple fibre. 
Sub-clause (g) proposes to levy an excise duty on sllk 
fabrics. 
Sub-clause (h) proposes to re-number Item No. 12B as Item 
No. 12C. 
Sub-clause (i) proposes an increase in the permissible limit 
of the excise duty on tea from 19 nP. per lb. to 30 nP. per lb. 
Sub-clause (j) seeks to amend Item No. 17 relating to foot-
wear so as to enable duty being levied on component parts of 
footwear also. 

30 
Sub-clause (k) proposes an increase in the rates of excise 
duty on electric fans and parts of fans. 
Sub-clause (1) proposes an increase in the excise duty on 
electric lighting bulbs and fluorescent lighting tubes and also 
seeks to include certain other types of lamps within this Item. 
Sub-clause (m) proposes an increase in the excise duty on 
batteries and parts of batteries. 
Sub-clause (n) seeks to rationalise the tariff relating to 
paper board. 
Sub-clause (0) proposes an alteration in the excise duty on 
refined diesel ailE; and vaporising oil by way of readjustment of 
the rates between the basic and the additional excise duties and 
also an increase in the excise duty by 25 naye paise per imperial 
gallon. 
Sub-clause (p) proposes an alteration in the excise duty on 
diesel oil. not otherwise specified and furnace oil by way of 
readjustment of the rates between the basic and the additional 
• excise duties. 
Sub-clause (q) seeks to amend Item No. 27 relating to motor 
cars so as to enable excise duties being levied at varying rates 
on all types of motor vehicles. 
Sub-clause (r) proposes to levy an excise duty on cycle 
free-wheels and rims; internal combustion engines; electric 
motors and parts thereof: cinematograph films, exposed; alumi-
nium ingots and certain semi-manufactures of aluminium; 
tinplate and tinned sheets and pig iron. 
Clause 21 seeks to include silk fabrics in the definition of 'cloth' 
in the Khadi and Other Handloom Industries Development (Addi-
tional Excise Duty on Cloth) Act. 1953. 
Clause 22 seeks to make certain amendments in the Additional 
Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957, consequent 
upon the clarificatory amendments proposed in the definition of 
cotton fabrics under clause 20(e)(2). It also seeks to re-number Item 
J2B as 12C. 
Clause 23, like section 31 of the Finance Act, 1959, provides that 
salt shall be duty free for another year. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill seeks to levy new excise duties on-
1. Aluminium. 
2. Parts of cycles. 
3. Internal combustion engines. 
4. Electric motors. 
5. Cinematograph films, exposed. 
6. Tinplate. 
7. Pig'Iron. and 
8. Silk Fabrics. 
The Bill also provides for levies on cerfain types of motor vehicle.~ 
and parts of footwear hitherto not' excisable and on staple fibre 
fabrics. These levies will necessitate the employment of some addi-
tional staff. The increase in staff together with incidental expenses 
of administration is estimated to cost Rs. 7·94 lakhs per annum. 
I. VOLUME OF WORK 
There are about 500 units which JI't:' now to be brought under 
excise control. 
II. REQUIREMENT OF PERSONNEL AND FINANCE 
No. Annual emoluments Co~t 
A. OjJiurs: 
Assistant CollectoTli . z 2 x Il.6oo 23,200 
Superintendents-
Class I 3 3 )( 9,300 .27,900 
Class U Ii 6 x 6,720 40,].10 
B. Staff: 
Deputy Superjntendenta (E) 35 35 x 4,800 1,68,000 
Inspectors 56 56 x 2,820 I,S7,920 
Sub-.Inapecton 44 44 x 1,884 82.1196 
Dy. Superintendents (M) 2 2 )( 4,800 9,600 
Head C1erkl 9 9 x 3,575 32.175 
Upper- Division Clerks 26 26 Y 2,568 66.768 
Lower Division ClerkA 37 37 x 1,884 69.708 
Stenotypists .4 4 x 2,124 S.49b 
C. Incidental exJnnsu : 
Incidental expensC8 including ClIlSS IV 
Staff, contmgencics, etc. . . 1 .• 06,800 
TOTAL 7.93,783 
or lU. 7'94 1akhs 
31 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central 
Government for the financial year 1960-61. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of 
article II7 and clause (I) of article 274 of the Constitution of 
India. recommended to the Lok Sabha. the introduction and 
consideration of this Bill. 
M. N. KAUL . . 
Secretary. 
(Shri Morar;i Desai, 
Minister of Finance.) 