F 9 JAN 199;
As iytropucep IN Lox SABHA ON

Bill No. 7 of 1991
ns

| SALARY, ALLOWANCES AND PENSION OF MEMBERS OF
PARLIAMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL 1991

A

BILL

further to amend the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of
Parliament Act, 1954.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Salary, Allowances and Pension of
Members of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1991.

5 2. In section 5 of the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members
of Parliament Act, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),—

a (a) in sub-section (2), after the words “performed by him”, the

words “either alone or along with a companion,” shall be inserted;

(0) after Explanation II, the following Explanation shall be
10 inserted, namely:—

“Explanation I1—For the purposes of sub-section (2), any
journey performed by the companion, if any, shall be added in
computing the limit of sixteen journeys specified in the proviso
to that sub-section.”.

Short
title.

Amend-
ment of
section
5,


Amend-
ment of

Facility of
journey
by rail

to Ex.
members.

2
3. In section 8A of the principal Act,—
(@) in sub-section (1),—

कद
6) for the portion beginning with the words “With effect
from the commencement of the Salary and Allowances of Mem-

bers of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1976”, and ending with 5

the words “whether continuous or not”, the following shall be
substituted, namely:

“With effect from the commencement of the Salary, Allow-
ances and Pension of Members of Parliament (Amendment)
Act, 1991, there shall be paid a pension of two hundred and
fifty rupees per mensem to every person, for every year of
service up to five years, whether continuous or not”;

(ii) for the first and second provisos, the following proviso
shall be substituted, namely:—

“Provided that where any person has rendered service
as aforesaid for a period exceeding five years, there shall be
paid to him an additional pension of one hundred rupees per
mensem for every year in excess of five years subject to
the condition that the maximum pension payable to a mem-
ber shall not exceed two thousand two hundred and fifty
rupees per mensem:”;

(iii) in the third proviso, for the words “Provided also”, the
words “Provided further” shall be substituted;

(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be sub-
stituted, namely: —

“(3) Where any person entitled to pension under sub-sec-
tion (1) is also entitled to any other pension from the Central
Government or any State Government or any corporation own-
ed or controlled by the Central Government or any State Gov-
ernment or any local authority, under any law or otherwise,
such person shall be entitled to receive the pension under sub-
section (1) in addition to such other pension;

Provided that the aggregate of the pension to which such
person is entitled shall not exceed five thousand rupees.”

4. After section 8B of the principal Act, the following section shall
be inserted, namely: —

‘8C. Every person who has been a member of the Council of
States or of the House of the People or of the Provisional Parliament
shall be entitled to perform six free return journeys by rail, in air-

10

15

20

25

35

conditioned two-tier or first class, in a year from his usual place of

residence in India to any other place in India.

Explanation—For the purposes of this section “Provisional Par-
liament” shall include the body which functioned as the Constituent
Assembly of the Domi
mencement of the Constitution’. f

ion of India immediately before the com- Pr

105 of
1976.


1"

WK onsii
Conarcaima 4h,
to हे ५२

THE SALARY, ALLWANCES AND छड1/5301 9७ MEMERRS OF PARLLAMENT:
५... GMENDAENT) BILL, 1991

(ig_be/As introduced in Lok Sabha)

4. Page 1, line 12, ie |
omit ") ifh ey,"
2. Page 3, Line 13,-
“siter "each" insert "year"
3. Page 7, line 5,-
ee "persons" reai "person" i
ABW DELHI;
तह लक

Faisa 19,



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Joint Committee on Salary and Allowances of Members of
Parliament has made several recommendations for increasing the pension
and existing facilities of Members of Parliament and ex-Members of
Parliament. It is proposed to implement the following recommendations
as accepted by the Government of India:—

(6) a Member of Parliament may have a companion while per-
forming air journey; s0, however, that the air journey per-
formed by the companion will he computed towards the existing
eciling of 16 single air journeys;

(i) relaxation of minimum period of membership for grant of
pension and increase in pension for ex-Members of Parliament
(un 6950.00 per mensem for each of membership up to 5 years
ar Rs. 100.00 per mensem for each additional year of member-
ship beyond 5 years, the maximum ceiling being Rs. 2250.00 per
mensem); —

(ii) grant of pension. 9s ex-Member to be in addition to other pen-
sions subject to a maximum ceiling of Rs. 5000.00 per mensem on
all such pensions;

(iv) free travel facility to ex-Members of Parliament for 6 return
journeys by rail in AC-II tier or first class in a year.

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
' ‘ SATYA PRAKASH MALAVIYA.

New DELHI;
The 8th January, 1991.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clauses 3 and 4 of the Bill seek to amend various provisions of the
Act, to provide for increase in the amount of pension for ex-Members of
Parliament, relaxation of the minimum period of membership for grant
of pension and to provide for six free return journeys by rail in AC-II
tier sleeper or first class, to ex-Members of Parliament.

2. The above provisions would involve a recurring expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India to the extent of Rs. 6.71 crores per
annum approximately.

3. The provisions of the Bill will not involve any other expenditure
either recurring or non-recurring


| ANNEXURE

ExTRACTS FROM THE . SALARY, ALLOWANCES AND PENSION oF MEMBERS OF
PARLIAMENT Act, 1954

|| (30 oF 1954)

* . * * *

5. (1) * * * * *

(2) Every member shall be entitled to an amount equal to the fare
by air for each single journey by air (other than a journey referred to
in section 4 or the second proviso to sub-section (1) of this section or
section 6C performed by him from any place in India to any other
place in India during his term of office as such member:

Provided that no member shall be entitled to any payment under this
subsection in respect of any journeys in excess of sixteen performed by
him daring any year. H के

Faplanation I.—The provisions of clause (c) of sub-section (1) and
of sub-section (2) of section 4 shall, so far as may be, apply to travelling
allowances payable under this section as they apply to travelling allow-
ances payable under that section.

Explanation I—For the purposes of this section, “year” means,—

(i) in the case of a person who is a member at the commence-
ment of the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parlia-
liament (Amendment) Act, 1985, the year beginning with such
commencement and each of the subsequent years;

(४) in the case of a person who becomes a member after such
commencement, the year beginning with the date on which his term
of office as such member commences and each of the subsequent
year.

8A. (1) With effect from the commencement of the Salary and
Allowances of Members of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1976, there
‘shall be paid a pension of a five hundred rupees per mensem to every
person who has served for a period of five years, whether continuous or
‘not,— 1

( as a member of the Council of States; or

(ii) as a member of the House of the People; or
5

Travelling
allow-
ances

for inter-
mediate
journeys.

Pension.


6

(ii) partly as a member of the Council of States and partly
as a member of the House of the People; or

(iv) as a member of the Provisional Parliament; or
(v) partly as a member of the Provisional Parliament and—

(a) partly as a member of the Council of States and partly
as a member of the House of the People, or

(b) partly as a member of the Council of States or partly
as a member of the House of the People:

Provided that with effect from the commencement of the Salary,
Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament (Amendment) Act,
1981, any person who has served as aforesaid for a period which falls
short of five years by not more than sixty days, shall also be paid a pen-
sion of five hundred rupees per mensem:

Provided further that where any person has served as aforesaid for
a period exceeding five years, there shall be paid to him an additional
pension of fifty rupees per mensem, for every year in excess of five:

Provided also that every person, who has served for any period as
a member of the Provisional Parliament and who is not entitled to any
pension under the foregoing provisions of this sub-section, shall, with
effect from the commencement of the Salary, Allowances and Pension
of Members of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1985, be entitled to a pen-
sion of five hundred rupees per mensem, | !

Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this sub-section “Provisional
Parliament” shall include the body which functioned as the Constituent
Assembly of the Dominion of India immediately hefore the commence-
ment of the Constitution.

Explanation 2.—Where in any General Election held for the purpose
of constituting a new House of the People, poll could not be taken in any
Parliamentary constituency or any part thereof on the date originally
fixed under clause (d) of section 30 of the Representation of the People
Act, 1951 on account of snowfalls or other weather conditions of an ex-
treme nature in such constituency or part thereof or on account of such
constituency or part thereof being inaccessible for any reason, the mem-
ber elected to such House from such constituency shall be deemed, for
the purposes of this sub-section, to have served as member for such
House from the date of publication. under section’ 73 of the safd Act, of
the notification relating to such House. |

(3) Where any person entitled to pension under sub-section (1) is
also entitled to any pension from the Central Government or anv State
Government or any corporation nwned or controled by the Central
Government or any 9106 Government or any local authority, mnder any
law or otherwise; then, — i

(a) where the amount of pension to which he is entitled under
such law or otherwise, is equal to or in excess of that to which he


'
|
|

पु

“4 ‘

is entitled under sub-section (1), such person shall not be entitled to
any pension under that sub-section; and . |

(b) where the amount of pension to which he is entitled under
such law or otherwise, is less than that to which he is entitled under
sub-section (1), such persons shall be entitled to pension under that
sub-section only of an amount which falls short of the amount of
pension to which he is otherwise entitled under that sub-section:

Provided that any pension (whether known as Swatantrata Sainik
Samman pension or by any other name) received by such person as a
freedom fighter shall not be taken into account for the purpose of this
sub-section and such person shall be entitled to receive such pension in
addition to the pension to which he is entitled under sub-section (1).

(4) In computing the number of years, for the purposes of sub-section

(1), the period during which a person has served as a Minister as defined
in the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, 1952 or as an Officer of
Parliament as defined in the Salaries and Allowances of Officers of
Parliament Act, 1953 (other than the Chairman of the Council of
States), or as a Leader of the Opposition as defined in the Salary and Al-
Jowances of Leader of Opposition in Parliament Act, 1977, or has served
in allor any two of such capacities by virtue of his membership in the
House of the People or in the Council of States shall also be taken into
| | }


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of
Parliament Act, 1954, | 1

(Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya, Minister of Petroleum and Chsmicals and
Parliamentary Affairs)