LOK S.lillHA
CuRRI G:E.NDA
to
THli,CENTRAL EXCI.:lEG .AJ.'JDSALT Al'JD ADDITIONAL DUTIES 0 F
B;XCI uE, (J\HLN:i)ivi~...1') BI LL, 1980
1• Page2,line40,-
.forIadval.r.r-em .,H; 1 read I ad valoremplus'
2.I-age3,line9,-
for "derivati.veilread "derivatives"
3.Page3,line3)--,
for IIf'olLowi.nQgII read "foLl.owi.ngiI
4. Page4, line8,-
fer "asetI read "case"
5.Page5,line23,-
omit "bytI
NEVI DELHI 1
Ja::2uary22L-1980__
lViagha2, 1901 (8aka)


lof 1944. 
As INTRODUCED IN' LolC SABRA oK 
itiU No. 7 of 1_ 
TltE CENTRAL EXCISES AND SALT AND ADDITIONAL 
DUllES OF EXCISE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1980 
A 
BILL 
fu.riher to amend the CeAtTcat Exc~.. GAd Salt Act!, 1~, a.d th4 Addi-
tli.onal Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Impon:a'RCfl) Act~ 1957. 
BE it enacted by PatHament in the Thirtieth Year of the Repuilli. 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) 'I'bts Aet may be called the Central Excises and Salt and 
Additional Duties of Excise (Amendment) Act, 1980'. 
S (2) It shall be deemed U> Daft come .to f.orcer ()n the 24th day of 
November, 1979. 
2. In the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (hereinafter referred to 
as the Central Excises Act), in section 2, in clause (1), after sub-claUle 
(iv), the following sub·clauses shall be inserted, namely:-
10 "(v) in relation to goods comprised in Item No. 19 I of the First 
'ScbeGuJe, ineludes bl8ehmg, rnerceristrrg, dyeing, printing, water-
~g, rttbberising, shrink-proofing, organdte processing or any 
other ~ 01" anyone 01' more of these processes; 
(vt) in relation to goods comprised in Item No. 21(1) of the 
IS Firat ScDe4ule, includes milling, raDing, blo.mg i tentering, dyeing 
or 8IftI1 other process or anyone or more of these prOCesles; 
(vit) in relation to' goociis comprtsed in Item No. 22 (1) of the 
F'irs:tJ' 8ehectale, includes bieachi'n-g, dyeing, printing, shrink-proofini 
tentering, heat-setting, crease resistant prote$SiI¥g or any other pro-
20 cess or anyone or more of these processes,". 
Short title 
and com-
menc .. 
ment. 
Amend-
ment of 
...tieD 2. 

Am"'-
ment of 
I'1rlt 
Schedule. 
2 
3. In the Central Excises Act, in the Firat Schedule,-
(i) in Item No. 19, for sub-item I, the foUowin, sub-item ahall 
be iubstitl\ted, namely:-
"I. Cotton fabrics, other than (i) 
embroidery in the piece, in strips or in 
motifs, and (ii) fabrics impregnated, 
coated or laminated with preparations 
of cellulose derivatives or of other arti-
ficial plastic materials-
5 
(a) cotton fabrics, not sub-
jected to any process 
Twenty per cent. J~ 
ad valorem.": 
(b) cotton fabrics, subjected Twenty per cent. 
to the process of bleaching, mer- ad valorem." 
cerlsmg. dyeing., printing, water-
proofing, rubber ising, shrink-proof- J 5 
ing, organdie processing or 
any other process or any two or 
more of these processes 
(ii) in Item No. 21, for sub-item (1), the following sub-item 
shall be substituted, namely:- 20 
"( 1) Woollen fabrics, other than 
embroidery in the piece, in strips or in 
motifs.-
(a) woollen fabrics, not sub-
jected to any process 
(b) woollen fabrics, subjected 
to the process of milling, raising, 
blowing, tentering, dyeing or any 
other process or any two or more 
of these processes 
Twelve per cent. 
ad valorrem. 
Twelve per cent. 
ad valorem. II ; 
(iii) in Item No. 22, for sub-item (1), the following Bub-item 
shall be substituted, namely:-
•• (1) Man-made fabrics, other than 
(i) embroidery in the piece, in strips or 
in motifs, and (ii) fabrics impregnated, 
coated or laminated with preparations 
of cellulose derivatives or of other arti-
ficial plastic materials-
Twenty per cent. 
25 
30 
35 
(a) man-made fabrics, not sub-
jected to any process . ad valorem.'~ 40 
(b) man-made fabriCS, subject-
ed to the process of bleaching, dye-
ing, printing, shrink-proofing, tenter-
ing, heat-setting, crease resistant 
processing or any other proceSl or 
any two or more of thn_ procell. 
rupees ftve per 
.quare metre. 
Twenty per cent. 
ad valorem plU1 
rupees five per 
Iquare metre.". 
4S 

.. ., 1157. 
.t. In the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods ot Special Importance) 
Act, 1957, in the First Schedule,-
.. 
(i) in Item No. 19, for sub-item I, the following sub-item shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"I. Cotton fabrics, other than (0 
embroidery in the piece, in strips or in 
motifs, and (ii) fabrics impregnated, 
coated or laminated with preparations 
of cellulose derivative or of other arti-
ficial plastic materials-
(a) cotton fabrics, not subject-
ed to any process 
(b) cotton fabrics, sub-
jected to the process of bleaching, 
mercertsing, dyeing, printing, water-
proofing, rubberising, shrink-proof-
ing, organdie processing or any other 
process or any two or more of 
these processes 
Five per cent. 
ad valorem. 
Five per cent. 
ad valorem.'''; 
5 
10 
15 
(ii) in Item No. 21, for sub-item (l), the followini sub-item 20 
.hall be substituted, namely:-
"(1) Woollen fabrics, other than 
embroidery in the piece, in strips or in 
motifs-
(a) woollen fabrics, not subject-
ed to any process 
(b) woollen fabrics, subjected 
to the process of milling, ralSlng, 
blowing, tentering. dyeing or any 
other process or any two or more 
of these processes 
Five per cent. 25 
ad valorem. 
Five per cent. 
ad valorem."; 
.10 
(iii) in Item No. 22, for sub-item (1), the followinQi sub-item 
shall be substituted, namely:-
" (1) Man-made fabrics, other 
than (i) embroidery in the piece, in 
strips or in motifs, and (ii) fabrics 
impregnated, coated or laminated 
with preparations of cellulose de-
rivatives or of other artificial plastic 
materials-
(a) man-made fabrics, not 
subjected to any process 
' .. 
Seven and a 
half per cent. 
ad t)al·O'rem plus 
rupees two per 
square metre. 
Seven and it 
half per cent. 
35 
~'4 • : 
(b) man-made fabrics, sub-
jected to the process of bleach-
ing, dyeing, printing, shrink-
proofing, tentering, heat-setting, 
crease resistant processing or 
any other process or any two or 
more of these processes. 
ad valorem plua 45 
rupees two per 
square metre.". 
Amend-
ment of 
First 
Schedule 

8pedJl 
provi-
lions .. 
to· dati .. 
of excise 
on cotton 
fabrics, 
woollen 
fabrics, 
11laIl-
made 
fabric-, 
etc., dur-
ina a 
certain 
put 
period 
and 
valida-
tion. 
4 
.I. (1.) Every Central Act as in force at any time duringtlaepericMl com-
mencing with the appointed day and ending with the day immediately 
~ing tbe date of commencement of this Act, and pro~ding tar or 
relating to the levy of duties of excise on-
(a) "cloth", "cotton cloth" or, as the @Be may be, "cotton S 
fabrics", 
(b) "woollen fabrics", 
(c) "rayon or artificial silk fabrics" or, as the ase may Qe, "man-
made fabrics", 
shall have and shall be deemed to have always haddect during the 10 
saki· period as if-
(t) such "cloth", "cotton cloth" or, as the case may be, "cotton 
fabrics" comprised for the purposes of the duty leviable under that 
Act-
(A) a sub-item covering such "cloth", "cotton cloth" or IS 
"cotton fabrics" not subjected to any process mentioned in sub-
clause (v) of clause (1) of section 2 of the Central Excises Act, 
as amended by this Act; and 
(B) a sub-nem covering such "cloth", "cotton cloth" or 
"cotton fabrics" subjected to any suchproce&S or any two or more 20 
such processes, 
and the rate of duty specified in such Act with respect to such "cloth", 
"C!Gtton cloth" or "cotton fabrics" had been specified separately with 
respeet to each of the aforementioned sub-it.-ns thereof; 
(ii) such "woollen fabrics" comprised for the purposes of duty 25 
leviable under that Act-
(A) a sub-item covering such "woollen fabrics" not subject-
ed to any process mentioned in sub-clause (vi) of clause (f) of 
section 2 of the Central Excises Act, as amended by this Act; and 
(B) a sub-item covering such "woollen fabrics" subjected 30 
to any such process or any two or more suoh. pt'ocesses, 
and the rate of duty specifted in such Act with respect to IUch "woollen 
fabrics" had been specifted separately with respect to each of the 
afQrementioned sub-items thereof; 
(iii) such "rayon or artificial silk fabrics" or "man-made fabrics" 3S 
comprised for the purposes of duty leviable under that Act-
(A) a sub-item covering such "rayon or artificial" silk fabrics" 
or "man-made fabrics" not subjected to any process mentioned in 
sub.clause (vii) of clause (f) of section 2 of the Central Excises 
Act, as amended by this Act; and 40 
(8) a sub-item covering S'Ileh "rayon or artifidai silk fabrics;' 
or "man-made fabrics" subjected to any such process or any two 
or mol'e such procene8, 
and the rate of duty $pecUled in such Act with respect to such 
"rayon or artificial silk fabrics" ami "man-made fabrics" had been 45 
specified separately with re~pect to each of the aforementioned sl.1b· 
items thereof; and 
/ 

5 
10 
s 
(W) the amendmeftts to clause <I) of Retion 2· of the Central 
Excises ~t made by section 2 of this Act had been in force at all re-
levant times subject to the modifications that the relerence therein-
(A) to tae "goods comprilJed in Item No. 19 1 of the First 
~haduletl Iiball be ~nstrued as a referern::e to such "cloth", 
"cotton cloth" or, as the case may be, "cotton fabrics"; 
(B) to the "goods comprised in Item No. 21 (1) of the First 
Schedule" shall be construed as a reference to "woollen fabrics"; 
(C) to the "goods comprised in Item No. 22 (1) of the First 
Sehedule" shall be construed as a reference to sucl1 "rayon er 
artiftcial silk fabrics" or, as the cale may be, "man-mw fabrics"; 
and subject to such further modifications as the context may require. 
(2) Any rule or notification or any action or thing made, issued, taken 
or done or purporting to have b2ell made. issued, taken 01" done under a 
15 Central Act referred to in sub-section (1) before the date of commence-
ment of this Act, with respect to or in relation to the levy of duti(:s of 
excise on-
(a) "cloth", "cotton cloth" or, as the case may be" "cotton 
fabrics", 
• • (b) "woollen fabries", 
(c) "rayon or artificial silk fabrics" or, as the case may be, "man-
made fabrics", 
shall for all purposes by be deemed to be, and to have always been, as valid-
ly and effectively made, issued. taken or done 8'S if the provisions of this 
lS section had been in force at all material times and. accordingly. not-
withstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other aUthority-
45 
(a) all duties of excise levied, assessed or collected or purport-
ed to have been levied, assessed or collected. before the date of com-
mencement of this Act, on-
(i) "cloth", "cotton cloth" and "cotton fabrics" subjected to 
any proeesa, 
(ii) "woollen fabrics" subjected to any process, 
(iii) ,"rayon or artificial silk fabrics" and "man-made fabrics" 
subjected to any process, 
undE'r ~mv such Central Act shall be deemed to be, and shall be deemed 
always to have been, as validly levied, assessed or collected as if the 
provisionCJ of this section had been in force on and from the appointed 
day; 
(b) no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or continued 
in any court for the refund of, and no enforcement shall be made by 
any ccrurt of any decree or order directing the refund of, any such 
duties of excise which have been collected a~d which would have 
been validly collected if the provisions of this sect:on had been in 
force 1m and from the appointed day; 

6 
(e) refunds shall be made of all such duties of excise which 
have been collected but which would not have been so collected if 
the provisions of this section had been in force on and from the 
appointed day; and 
(d) recoveries shall be made of all such duties of excise which S 
have not been collected or, as the case may be, which have been 
refunded but which would h:we been collected or, as the case may 
be, would not have been refunded if the provisions of this sect~on 
had been in force on and from the appointed day. 
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no act or 10 
omission on the part of any person shall be punishable as an offence 
which would not have been so punishable if this section had not come 
into force. 
Erplanatioo.-In this section-
(a) "appointed day", in relation Ur-
(i) "cloth", means the 1st day of January, 1949; 
(ii) "cotton cloth", means the 28th day of February, 1954; 
I 
(iii) "cotton fabrics", means the 1st day of March, 1955; 
(iv) "woollen fabrics", means the 1st day of March, 1955; 
(v) "rayon or artificial silk fabrics", means the 28th day ~ 20 
February, 1954; and 
(vi) "man-made fabrics", means the 18th day of June, 1977; 
(Ib) "Central Act" includes ?ny prov:sion, in a Bill introduced 
in the House of the People, in respect of which a declaration was 1tl of tNt. 
made under section 3 of the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931; 2S 
(e) "duties of excise" means dures of excise levied under any . 
Central Act whether 3S such or as additional duties of excise or 
auxiliary duties of excise or special dut:es of excise C1T by any other 
name. 
I. (1) The Central Excises and Salt and Additional Duties of Excise 30 
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1979, is hereby repealed. . 12 of 1971. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the Ordinance so repealed shall be deemed to have been done or 
taken under the corresponding provision~ of this Act. 

S1'A'tEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Central Excise duty was levied for the first time on cotton fabrics in 
1949, on man-made fabrics (rayon or artificial silk fabrics) in 1954 and OD 
woollen fabrics in 1955. From the very early stages of the textile tarifr, 
with a view to achieving progression in the rate structure and to alien-
ing excise control with the demands of different producing sectors, duti .. 
Itave been levied not only on grey fabrics but also at the stage of pro-
c:etlsing such as bleaching, dyeing and printing. 
2. In its judgment dated the 24th January, 1979, in the Real Honest 
Textiles and others VI. Union of India (Special Civil Applications No. 
1552 etc. of 1978), the Gujarat High Court held that the tetm "fabric" as 
used in the tariff description "cotton fabric" would refer to something 
that was woven; hence it could relate only to cloth in the grey stage; 
processing of the grey cloth either by bleaching, dyeing or printing did 
not amount manufacturing and both before and after processing it 
remained a fabric falling within the same item of Central Excise Tariff 
(Item 19-cotton fabrics, of the First Schedule to the Central Excises and 
Salt Act.) . The Court arrived at a similar conclusion with respect to man-
made fabrics falling under item No. 22 of the same Schedule. The Court 
observed that processing was an excisable activity covered by the resi-
dual tariff item No. 68 of the said Schedule. The Court accordingly 
ordered refund of the excise duties collected in excess by the Govern-
ment for a period of three years prior to the institution of the proceed-
ings before the Court alongwith interest at the rate of 12 per cent. per 
annum. 
3. After the pronouncement of the above judgment several writ peti-
tions were filed in various courts agitating the same point. More than 
130 cases were filed in the Gujarat High Court alone. The revmue 
implications of the cases decided by the High CO'Ul't exceeded Rs. 30 
t:rores. 
4. The judgment of the Gujarat High Court had the effect of com-
pletely upsetting the arrangement regarding levy of excise duties on 
textile fabrics which was being followed for several years. The judgment 
also had the effect of disturbing the balance evolved between different 
sectors of the textile industry, besides puttIng large amounts of revenue 
at stake. In so far as past assessments were concemed, refund of excise 
duties to manufacturers as ordered by the High Court would have only 
meant a fortuitous and windfall benefit to such persons without any 
relief to the ultimate consumers who had. purchased the fabrics and had 
bome the burden of the duties. The same position holds good in the case 
of woollen fabrics as well. 
5. In oTder to overcome the difficulty wh:ch arose as a result of the 
Judgment of the Gujarat High Court, it was proposed to suitably amend 
the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, and the Additional Duties of 
Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 and also to validate the 
7 

past levies in respect of those fabrics. Accordingly, the Central Exclsei 
and Salt and Additional Duties of Excise (Amendment) Bill, 1979 was 
introduced in the House of the People on the 18th May, 1979. As the 
House of the People had been dissolved and the Council of States was 
_tilt session and the Presidem was satilied that circumstances exilted 
Which tendered it necessary for him to take immedi.Me action to glw 
etrect to the provisious of th& Blll, the Central Excises and Salt aDd 
AddWaal DuDes ot Excise (Amendment). Ordinance. 19'19 (12 of. ~ 
was promulpted by the President on the 24th Nov~r, li79. 
6. The Bill seeks to rep..·tbe pn~, 01, tbe Ord_ ... , 
NIrw DIJLm; 
The 16th January, 1980. 

Memorandum regarding modification contained in the Bill to 7'epltJce the 
Cent7"cd E~ au Salt elM AdcHtioftal .Duties of EzdiBe 
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1979. 
The definition of "appointed day" contained in the EzpZcnation to 
section 5 of the Ordinance has been modified to spell out separately the 
appoiDited day with reference to cloth, cotton cloth, cotton fabrics, 
woollen fabrics, rayon or artificial silk fabrics and man-made fabrics 
(vide EXPULnation to clause 5 of the Bill). The BilI does not involve any 
other deviation from the Ordinance . 
.. ' 
9 

Dellni-
tions. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CENTRAL EXCISES AND SALT Ar:r, 1944 
(1 OF 1944) 
• • • • • 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context,-
• • • • • 
<f> "manufacture" includes any process incidental or ancill8lf to 
the completion of a manufactured produ~t; and 
• • • • 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 3) 
Item Description of goods 
No. 
(1) (2) 
• • • • 
19. COTTON FABRICS-
• • • • 
I. Cotton fabrics other than (i) embroidery 
in the piece, in strips or in motifs, and 
(ii) fabrics impregnated, coated or 
laminated with pnparatioDa of cellu-
lose derivatives or of other G'tIIdaI 
plastic materials. 
• • • • 
21. WOOLLEN FABRICS-
"Woollen fabrics" means all varieties of fabrics 
in which wool predominates in weight or 
which contain more than 30 per cent. 
of wool and 50 per cent. or more of 
non-cellulosic fibre or yarn or both: 
Provided that in the case of embroidery in 
the piece. in strips or in motifs, such 
10 
• 
-----. ----------. 
Rate of duty 
.---,.- - -- -
(3) 
• 
• 
Twenty per cent. 
ad valorem. 
• 

predeminance or percentages, as the 
c:ase may be, shall be in relation to the 
base fabrics whieh are embroidered-
(1) Woollen fabrics, other than em-
broidery in the piece, in strips 'Or 
in motifs . 
• • • 
22. MAN-MADE FABRICS-
"Man-made fabrics" means all varieties of 
fabrics manufacturec;i either wholly 
or partly from man-made fibres or 
yarn and includes embroidery in the 
piece, in strips or in motifs and fabrics 
impregnated, coated or laminated with 
preparations of cellulose derivatives 
or of other artificial plastic materials 
in each of which man-made 
(i) ceU'ulosic fibre or yarn, or 
(ii) non-cellulosic fibre or yarn 
predominates in weight: 
Provided that in the case of embroidery 
in the piece, in strips or in motifs 
and fabrics impregnated, coated or 
laminated with preparations of 
cellulose derivatives or of other 
artificial plastic materials, S'Uch 
predominance shall be in relation 
to the base fabrics which are em-
broidered or impregnated, coated or 
laminated, as the case may be--
• 
Twelve per cent. 
ad valMem. 
• 
(1) Man-made fabrics other than (i) 
embroidery in the piece, in strips or 
in motifs, and (ii) fabrics impre~­
nated, coated or laminated with 
preparations of cellulose derivatives 
or of other artifi~ial plastic materials. 
Twenty per cent. 
ad valorem nl'IR 
rupees five per 
square metre. 
• • • • • 

I2 
EKTBAeTS FROM THE ADDITIONAL DtmI8 or EXb:* (~ or SPBCIAL 
Item 
No. 
• 
i~aj~, 1957 
(58 OF 1957) 
• • • 
THE FIRST SCHEDUlE 
[See section 3 (1)] 
. , 
• 
.... J 
in the 
I"irst 
Schedule 
to the 
Central 
Excises 
and Salt 
Act, 1944 
Description of goods Rate of Additional duty 
._-_.-.- - -----------_._---------_ ..... _----_. 
(1) (2) 
• • • 
19. COTTON FABRICS-
1. Cotton fabrics other than (i) embroidery, 
in the piece, in strips or in motifs and 
(ii) fabrics jmpr~gnated. coated or 
laminated with preparations of cel-
lulose derivatives or of other artificial 
Plastic materials . 
• • • 
21. WOOLLEN FABRICS-
(1) Woollen fabrics" other thim em-
broidery in the piece, in strips' or in 
motifs. 
• • • • 
22. MAN-MADE FABRICS-
(1) Man-made fabrics other than (i) em-
broidery, in the piece, in strips or in 
motifs, and (ii) fabrics impregnated, 
coated or laminated with preparaticms 
of cellulose derivatives or of other 
artificial plastic materials.' 
• • • 
• 
• 
(3) 
• 
Five per cent 
ad valorem. 
• 
Fi~ per cent. 
. ad . vazorem. 
• 
I· 
Seven and a half per 
cent. ad valorem plus 
two rupeesp~r square 
metre. 
• • 

LOX SABH • 
.. 
BILL 
further te amend the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1"", ed the Addi· 
tional Duti. of hclJe (Goods of Special ImporlanH) Act, 1.'. 
(SJI,ri It. V.nkclt4,. .... , 
Jliftwter of '""-".) 