a

As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA |

25 FEB 2M

Bill No. 7 of 2000

THE UNIFORM EDUCATION BILL, 2000
By
Suzi Rampas ATHAWALE, M.P.
A
BILL,
to provide for uniform education throughout the country

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as

.

1. (1) This Act may be called the Uniform Education Act, 2000
(2) it extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—

i) “appropriate Government” means the Central Government or the State
Government; as the case may be; and

(ii) “ education” means education upto higher secondary level.

3. it shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide free and
ulsory education to every child irrespective of his caste, colour or creed.

=

Short title,
extent and

commence-
ment.

Definitions.

Free and
‘compulsory
education.


Establishment
of schools.

Uniform
system of
education in
schools.

Free Uniform
and books eto.
to students.

Scholarship to
poor students.

Recognition
of educational
certificates.

Power, to make
rules.

2

4. The appropriate Government shall establish and maintain schools in every
district according to its population and need.

5. There shall be uniform system of education in all schools whether owned by, or
receiving aid out of the funds of the appropriate Government or owned or run by private
organisations or individuals or societies or by minorities. 5

6. ‘The appropriate Government shall provide breakfast, mid-day meal, uniform
and books free of cost to all students in all schools.

7. The appropriate Government shall provide rupees two hundred per month
upto primary level and rupees four hundred per month upto higher secondary level as
scholarship to every student the income of whose parents or guardian is less than one 10
thousand rupees per month.

8. The appropriate Government shall not recognise for any purpose any educational
certificate awarded by 8 school not following uniform pattern of primary and/or higher
secondary education under the provisions of this Act.

9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Ufficial Gazette, make rules for 15
carrying out the provisions of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Article 45 of the Constitution provides that it shall be the duty of the State to
provide free and compulsory education to all children until they attain fourteen years of
age. Although, the Government has taken many steps ¢ this end, yet, they are not
adequate. At present, we have schools run by the Government and those by private
organisations and minorities, All these schools follow different patterns and as a result
there is no uniformity in the education imparted in these schools.

Uniformity in the system of school education is imperative to arouse consciousness
of national integration in the highly sensitive and impressionable minds of the children,
‘The type of education imparted to the children at the school level determines their growth
in the final analysis as future citizens of the country.

Moreover, uniform system of education would avoid any feelings of discrimination or
denial of equal opportunities in the matter of career advancement.

Although the Government has taken many steps to provide free education, the parents
are not allowing their children to study, Due to poverty they send their children to earn
money and this results in increase in the child labour in the country. Therefore, itis necessary
to provide them with free meals, uniforms, books and scholarships so that such parents are
tempted to send their children to schools.

It is, therefore, proposed to provide for uniform and free education upto the higher
secondary stage.

Hence this Bill.

New Deva; RAMDAS ATHAWALE
November 30, 1999,


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Ttis estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is likely
to be involved, Anon-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees twenty crore is also
likely to be involved.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
to provide for uniform education throughout the country,

(Shri Ramdas Athawale, MP)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—31921 S—18-1-2000,