As Intropucen IN.Lok SABHA

5 ४7 FEB 2006

Bill No. 7 of 2006

THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO COWS BILL, 2006
By

‘Suri Bacui Sincu Rawat, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for effective measures for the prevention of cruelty to cows and for matters
incidental thereto.

Wuereas cow is the embodiment of divine virtues like love, compassion, benevolence,
tolerance and non-violence;

AND WHEREAS our health and prosperity, high quality-low cost eco-friendty-employment,
sustainable organic agriculture to a large extent depends upon cow and its progeny and on
account of its virtues, it commands reverence and cultural sanctity from the people of the
nation;

AND WHEREAS Cow is subjected to inhuman cruelty and atrocities resulting in law and
order problems and breach of peace, alarming depletion in its population, decline in its
growth rate and sharp reduction in cow-human ratio and consequent malnutrition, disease,
disabledness, poverty, unemployment and pollution of agricultural products and environment,
it is expedient in the interest of the nation to take effective steps to prevent cruelty to and
killing of cows and its progeny by an effective legislation to give effect to the provisions of
the Directive Principles of State Policy contained in articles 47, 48 and 48A of the Constitution.


Short title and
extent.

Definitions.

Duties of
persons
having charge
of cows.

Killing or
causing injury
or cruelty to
cows
prohibited.

Restriction on
export of
cows,
Prohibition on
sale of beef.

Establishment
of institutions.

Levy of
charges or
fees.

2

Be it enacted by Parliament in the fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as |
1. (7) This Act may be called the Prevention of Cruelty to Cows Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires —
(a) “beef” means flesh of cow or its progeny in any form;
(0) “beef products” include extraction from beef;
(c) “cow” includes its progeny including bulls and bullocks;
(4) “export” means taking to a place outside India;
(e) “injury” means—

(1) (0 torturing any cow so as to subject it to unnecessary pain or suffering
or causing or permitting any cow to be so treated;

(ii) abandoning any cow in such circumstances which render it likely
that it will suffer pain;

(iii) wilfully permitting any cow, by its owner to go at large in any
street, while the cow is affected with any contagious or infectious disease or,
without reasonable excuse permit any diseased cow to die;

and includes killing of cow;

(iv) practising phooka or doom dev or injecting any substance in the
body of the cow for improving lactation,

(0) “killing” means killing by any method whatsoever and includes inflicting
physical injury which in ordinary course causes death; and

(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. It shall be the duty of every person having the care or charge of any cow to take all

reasonable measures to ensure that the contravention of the provisions of this Act does not
take place.

4. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
or any usage or custom to the contrary, no person shall cause any injury or kill or attempt to
kill for any purpose whatsoever any cow in any place to which this Act extends.

(2) Nothing in this section shall apply 10,--
(a) the dehorning of cows; or

(6) the extermination and destruction of cow under the authority of any law for
the time being in force and in the manner prescribed thereunder.

5. No person shall export a cow for the purpose of killing it either directly or through
his agent or servant or by any other person acting on his behalf.

6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
person shall possess or offer for sale or sell or transport beef or beef products in any form.

7. There shall be established by the State Government or by any local authority or non-
governmental organisations, when so’ directed by the Government, institutions for the
reception, maintenance and care of stray, unprotected, infirm, disabled, diseased, barren or
abandoned cows.

8. The State Government or the local authority, if so authorised may levy such fees as
may be prescribed for the care and maintenance of cows as mentioned in section 7


3

9. (1) Whoever kills or attempts to kill or abets the killing of cow shall be guilty of an
offence punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years
but which shall not be less than two years and with fine which may extend to ten thousand
Tupees on each cow.

(2) Whoever causes injury to, other than killing of, cow shall be guilty ofan offence
punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.

(3) Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravere or abets the contravention of
the provisions of section 5 or section 6 shall be guilty of an offence punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to
ten thousand rupees.

10. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, an Offences to be

offence punishable under section 9 shall be cognizable and non-bailable. cognizable and
non-bailable.

वा, Whoever abets any offence punishable under this Act or attempts to commit any — Abetments
such offence shall be punishable with punishment provided in this Act for such offence. and attempts,

12. Any police officer not below the rank of sub-Inspector or any person authorised in Power to
this behalf by the Government may, with a view to securing compliance with the provisions enter, seize,
of this Act,— ote.

(a) enter, stop and search any vehicle used or intended to be used for the
transportation of any cow for killing;

(0) seize any cow in respect of which he has sufficient reason to believe that any
provision of this Act has been or is being or is about to be contravened, along with the
vehicle in which such cow is found,

and thereafter take all measures necessary for its safe custody irvan institution referred
to in section 7 pending final disposal of the case.

13. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any officer of the Protection of
Government or local authority or any other person for anything which is in good faithdone action taken
or intended to be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder. in good faith.

14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules Power to
to carry out the purposes of this Act. make rules.

(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately eee the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses, agree in making any mddification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.

15. The provisions of this Act shall override the provisions of the Prevention of Act to
Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 or any other law for the time being in force to the extent of pple
inconsistency. other laws.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Cow is subjected to inhuman cruelty and atrocity resulting in decline in its growth rate
and sharp reduction in cow-human ratio. It is in the interest of the nation to take effective
steps to prevent cruelty to cows, prohibit and punish cruel treatment of cows, including
killing of cows, which is the most extreme form of cruelty.

The proposed legislation was brought before Lok Sabha by the BJP led NDA
Government during 13th Lok Sabha. The Bill, however, could not be introduced due to
opposition from certain sections on the gounds, inter-alia, that the Bill is ultra vires of the
Constitution and legislation on the subject is outside the legislative competence of the
House. However, under article 48 of the Constitution, a duty has been cast upon the
Government to prohibit slaughter of cows and calves. Acting under this Directive Principle,
the Union Parliament has got the legislative competence to enact a law on the subject.

It is, therefore, proposed to enact a uniform central law, namely, the Prevention of
Cruelty to Cows Act, 2006 under entry 17 of the Concurrent List in the Seventh Schedule to
the Constitution, inter-alia to prevent cruelty to cow and its progeny and ban on export of
cows and prohibition on sale of beef; etc. *

The salient features of the Bill are as under:—

() causing injury or killing of cow are being made cognizable and non-bailable
offences;

(i) there would be restriction on export of cows as well as prohibition on sale of
beef or beef products;

(ii) a provision is being made for the establishment of institutions by State
Governments, local authorities or non-Governmental Organisations, when so
directed by the Government, for the reception, maintenance and care of stray,
unprotected, infirm, disabled, diseased, barren or abandoned cows.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

New Dew; BACHI SINGH RAWAT
November 30,2005.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Sub-clause (1) of clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
make, by notification in the Official Gazette, rules to carry out the purposes of the
proposed legislation.

The rules may include the rate of fees which may be levied for caring or
maintaining cows in institutions established by the State Government, a local authority
or anon-Governmental organisation.

The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of detail and
administrative nature and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

.
A

BILL

to provide for effective measures for the prevention of cruelty to cows and for
matters incidental thereto.

(Shri Bachi Singh Rawat, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—51241S(S1)—08.02.2006.