Bill No.  7 of  2011
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
By
SHRI ARJUN MEGHWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2011.
2. After article 330 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“330A. (1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes in the Council of States.
(2) The number of seats reserved in any State or Union territory for the
Scheduled  Castes or the Scheduled Tribes under clause (1) shall bear, as nearly as may
be, the same proportion to the total number of seats allotted to that State or Union
territory in the Council of States as the number of seats reserved for the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, in that State or Union territory in
the House of the People bears to the total number of seats allotted to that State or
Union territory in the House of the People.”.
Reservation
of seats for
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes in the
Council of
States.
Short title.
Insertion of new
article 330A.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Reservation
of seats for
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes in the
Legislative
Councils of
States.
3. After article 332 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
“332A. (1) Seats shall be reserved in the Legislative Council of every State,
where such a Council exists, for the  Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
(2) The number of seats reserved in any State for the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes under clause (1) shall bear, as nearly as may be, the  same proportion
to the total number of seats in the Legislative Council of that State as the number of
seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be,
in the Legislative Assembly  of the State bears to the total number of seats in the
Legislative Assembly of the State.
(3) Of the total number of members elected from seats reserved for the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, in the Legislative Council of a
State—
(a) as nearly as may be, one-third shall be elected by electorates
consisting of members of municipalities, district boards and such other local
authorities in the State as Parliament may by law specify;
(b) as nearly as may be one-twelfth shall be elected by electorates
consisting of persons residing in the State who have been for at least three years
graduates of any university in the territory of India or have been for at least three
years in possession of qualifications prescribed by or under any law made by
Parliament as equivalent to that of a graduate of any such university;
(c) as nearly as may be, one-twelfth shall be elected by electorates
consisting of persons who have been for at least three years engaged in teach-
ing in such educational institutions within the State, not lower in standard than
that of a secondary school, as may be prescribed by or under any law made by
Parliament;
(d) as nearly as may be, one-third shall be elected by the members of the
Legislative Assembly of the State from amongst persons who are not members of
the Assembly;
(e) the remainder shall be nominated by the Governor in accordance with
the provisions of clause (5).
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), the Central Government
may, after consultation with the Governor of the State, prescribe the manner in which
the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may
be, in the Legislative Council of the State shall be filled in, if the number of such
reserved seats is less than twelve.
(5) The members to be nominated by the Governor under sub-clause (e) of
clause (3) shall consist of persons having special knowledge or practical experience in
respect of such matters as the following, namely:—
Literature, science, art, co-operative movement or social service.’’.
4. In article 334 of the Constitution, after clause (a), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(aa) the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
in the Council of States and in the Legislative Council of the States;”.
Insertion of
new article
332A.
Amendment
of article 334.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Although, the Constitution of India provides for the reservation of seats for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People and in the Legislative
Assemblies of the States, it is unfortunate that even after sixty-one years of enforcement of
the Constitution of India, there is no provision as regards the reservation of seats for them in
the Council of States and in the Legislative Council of  a  State, where such a Council exists.
In order to uphold the principle of social justice, it is, therefore, imperative that the
seats be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and  the Scheduled Tribes in the Council of
States and in the Legislative Councils of the States.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; ARJUN MEGHWAL
February 8, 2011.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*****
334. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, the provisions
of this Constitution relating to—
(a) the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
in the House of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States; and
(b) the representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the House of the People
and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States by nomination,
shall cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of sixty years from the commencement
of this Constitution:
Provided that nothing in the article shall affect any representation in the House of the
People or in the Legislative Assembly of a State until the dissolution of the then existing
House or Assembly, as the case may be.
*****
Reservation
of seats and
special
representation
to cease after
sixty years.

LOK SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Arjun Meghwal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—6296LS(S3)—18.02.2011.