1
THE STATE BANK OF INDIA (SUBSIDIARY BANKS LAWS)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2009
A
BILL
further to amend the State Bank of Hyderabad Act, 1956 and the State Bank of India
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws)
Amendment Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 7 of 2009

2
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE STATE BANK OF HYDERABAD ACT, 1956
2. In sub-section (4) of section 9 of the State Bank of Hyderabad Act, 1956 (hereafter
in this Chapter referred to as the State Bank of Hyderabad Act), for the words "with the
approval of the Reserve Bank", the words "in consultation with the Reserve Bank and with
the approval of the Central Government" shall be substituted.
3. In section 10 of the State Bank of Hyderabad Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1A), for the words "with the approval of the Reserve Bank",
the words "in consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the approval of the
Central Government" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words "with the approval of the State Bank and
the Reserve Bank", the words "with the approval of the State Bank and the Central
Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank" shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-section (3B),—
(i) for the words "with the approval of the State Bank and the Reserve
Bank", the words "with the approval of the State Bank and the Central
Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank" shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words "with the approval of the Reserve Bank",  the words "in
consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the approval of the Central
Government" shall be substituted.
CHAPTER III
A
MENDMENTS TO THE STATE BANK OF INDIA (SUBSIDIARY BANKS) ACT, 1959
4. In sub-section (4) of section 6 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act,
1959 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the words "with the approval of the
Reserve Bank", the words "in consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the approval of
the Central Government" shall be substituted.
5. In section 7 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1A), for the words "with the approval of the Reserve Bank",
the words "in consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the approval of the
Central Government" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (4), for the words "with the approval of the State Bank and
the Reserve Bank", the words "with the approval of the State Bank and the Central
Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank" shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-section (6),—
(i) for the words "with the approval of the State Bank and the Reserve
Bank", the words "with the approval of the State Bank and the Central
Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank" shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words "with the approval of the Reserve Bank", the words "in
consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the approval of the Central
Government" shall be substituted.
6. In section 25 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) in clause (a), for the words "with the approval of the Reserve Bank",
the words "in consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the approval of the
Central Government" shall be substituted;
Amendment
of section 9.
79 of 1956.
Amendment
of section 10.
Amendment
of section 6. 38 of 1959.
Amendment
of section 7.
Amendment
of section 25.

3
(ii) in clause (b), for the words "to be nominated by the Reserve Bank",
the words "to be nominated by the Central Government on the recommendation
of the Reserve Bank" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (6), for the words "in consultation with the Reserve Bank",
the words "in consultation with the Central Government" shall be substituted.
7. In section 29 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words  "and with the approval of the Reserve
Bank", the words "and the Reserve Bank, and with the approval of the Central
Government" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (3),—
(i) in the proviso to clause ( a), for the words "with the approval of the
State Bank and the Reserve Bank", the words "with the approval of the State
Bank and the Central Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank" shall
be substituted;
(ii) in clauses (b) and (c), for the words "with the approval of the Reserve
Bank", the words "in consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the approval
of the Central Government" shall respectively be substituted;
(c) in sub-section (5), for the words "with the approval of the Reserve Bank",
the words "in consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the approval of the
Central Government" shall be substituted.
8. In section 31 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "with the approval of the Reserve Bank",
the words "in consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the approval of the
Central Government" shall be substituted;
(b) in clause (a) of sub-section (3), for the words "with the approval of the
Reserve Bank", the words "in consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the approval
of the Central Government" shall be substituted.
9. In section 35A of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) for the words "Where the Reserve Bank, on the recommendation of the
State Bank", the words "Where the Central Government, on the recommendation
of the Reserve Bank and in consultation with the State Bank" shall be
substituted;
(ii) for the words "the Reserve Bank may", the words "the Central
Government may" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-sections (2) and (5), for the words "The Reserve Bank may", the
words "The Central Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank may" shall
respectively be substituted;
(c) in sub-section (3), clause (
b) of sub-section (4) and sub-sections (6) and (7),
for the words "the Reserve Bank", wherever they occur, the words "the Central
Government" shall respectively be substituted.
10. In section 63 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words "after consultation with State Bank and
with the previous approval of the Reserve Bank", the words "after consultation with
the State Bank and the Reserve Bank and with the previous approval of the Central
Government" shall be substituted;
(b) sub-section (3) shall be omitted;
(c) in sub-section ( 4), for the words "by the State Bank", the words "by the
Board of Directors of a subsidiary bank" shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 29.
Amendment of
section 31.
Amendment
of section
35A.
Amendment
of section 63.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The transfer of ownership of the State Bank from the Reserve Bank to the Central
Government was carried out pursuant to the coming into force of the State Bank of India
(Amendment) Act, 2007 (30 of 2007). There are certain provisions in the State Bank of India
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 and the State Bank of Hyderabad Act, 1956 dealing with the
approval of, or consultation with the Reserve Bank in the management and functioning of
the subsidiary banks. Due to change in the ownership, those provisions need to be suitably
modified to reflect the change in ownership. Further, the change of ownership in the State
Bank also necessitate consequential changes in the aforesaid Acts. The Bill proposes to
amend the said two Acts, inter alia,—
(a) to confer power on the Central Government instead of the Reserve Bank, but
after consultation with the Reserve Bank, to approve—
(i) increase or reduction of the authorised capital of a subsidiary bank;
(ii) fixation of the issued capital of subsidiary banks by the State Bank;
(iii) raising of issued capital by preferential allotment or private placement
or public issue by the subsidiary banks;
(iv) issuing of bonus shares to the existing equity shareholders;
(v) permitting the Chairman of the State Bank to nominate an official of
the State Bank or the subsidiary bank as the Chairman of the Board of a
subsidiary bank;
(vi) appointment of the Managing Director, fixation of the term of the
office; salary and allowances and removal of the Managing Director;
(vii) supersession of the Board of Directors of subsidiary banks in public
interest or for depositors' interest or for securing the proper management of the
subsidiary banks on the recommendation of the Reserve Bank and appointment
of an administrator and a committee to assist the administrator; and
(viii) making of regulation by the Board of the subsidiary banks;
(b) to confer power on the Central Government in place of the Reserve Bank to
approve the removal from office of a director nominated under clauses (c) and (d) of
sub-section (1) of section 25.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; PAW AN KUMAR BANSAL.
The 10th December, 2008.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE STATE BANK OF HYDERABAD ACT, 1956
(79 OF 1956)
* * * * *
CHAPTER III
CAPITAL OF THE HYDERABAD BANK
9. (1) * * * * *
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the State Bank may, with
the approval of the Reserved Bank, authorise the Hyderabad Bank to increase or reduce its
authorised capital.
10. (1) * * * * *
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the issued capital of the
Hyderabad Bank, shall consist of such amount as the State Bank may, with the approval of
the Reserve Bank, fix, and shall be divided into fully paid-up shares of such denomination
in accordance with sub-section (2) of section 9.
* * * * *
(3) The Hyderabad Bank may, from time to time, with the approval of the State Bank
and the Reserve Bank, increase, whether by public issue or by preferential allotment or
private placement in a accordance with the procedure as may be specified by regulations
made under section 63 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks)  Act, 1959, its issued
capital by issue of equity or preference shares.
* * * * *
(3B) The Hyderabad Bank may, with the approval of the State Bank and the Reserve
Bank, increase from time to time by way of issuing bonus shares to existing equity
shareholders, its issued capital in such manner as the State Bank, with the approval of the
Reserve Bank, direct.
* * * * *
————
S
TATE BANK OF INDIA (SUBSIDIARY BANKS) ACT, 1959
(38 OF 1959)
* * * * *
6. (1) * * * * *
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the State Bank may, with
the approval of the Reserve Bank, authorise a new bank to increase or reduce its authorised
capital.
7. (1) * * * * *
1A.  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the issued capital of a
new bank shall, consist of such amount as the State Bank may, with the approval of the
Reserve Bank, fix and shall be divided into fully paid-up shares of such denomination in
accordance with sub-section (2) of section ( 6).
* * * * *
Issued capital.
Authorised
Capital of
New Banks.
38 of 1959.
Issued Capital
of New
Banks.
5
Authorised
Capital.

6
(4) A new bank may from time to time, with the approval of the State Bank and the
Reserve Bank, increase, whether by public issue or by preferential allotment or private
placement in accordance with the procedure as may be prescribed, its issued capital by
issue of equity or preference shares.
* * * * *
(6) A new bank may with the approval of the State Bank and the Reserve Bank,
increase from time to time by way of issuing bonus shares to existing equity share holders, its
issued capital in such manner as the State Bank, with the approval of the Reserve Bank, direct.
* * * * *
25. ( 1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 2) the Board of Directors of a
subsidiary bank shall consist of the following:—
(a) The Chairman for the time  being of the State Bank, ex officio or an official of
the State Bank or of the subsidiary bank nominated by him as Chairman, with the
approval of the Reserve Bank;
* * * * *
(b) One director, possessing necessary expertise and experience in the matters
relating to regulation or supervision of commercial banks, to be nominated by the
Reserve Bank;
* * * * *
(6) Any nomination or appointment of a director made by the State Bank under this
Act shall, except in so far as it relates to an Officer of that bank, be in consultation with the
Reserve Bank.
* * * * *
29 (1) The State Bank shall, after consulting the Board of Directors of a subsidiary
bank, and with the approval of the Reserve Bank, appoint a managing director for that
subsidiary bank:
Provided that in the case of the first appointment of the managing director no such
consultation with the Board of Directors of the subsidiary bank shall be necessary.
* * * * *
(3) The Managing Director of a subsidiary bank—
(a) shall devote his whole time to the affairs of that bank:
Provided that managing director of the subsidiary bank may, with the approval of the
State Bank and the Reserve Bank, be a director of any other institution;
(b) shall  hold office for such term not exceeding four years and subject to such
conditions as the State Bank may, with the approval of the Reserve Bank, specify at
the time of his appointment;
(c) shall receive such salary and allowances as may be determined by the State
Bank with the approval of the Reserve Bank.
* * * * *
(5) The State Bank may, with the approval of the Reserve Bank, for any sufficient
reason, remove from office the managing director of a subsidiary bank:
Provided that no managing director shall be removed from office unless he has been
given an opportunity of showing cause against such removal.
* * * * *
31. (1) The State Bank may, with the approval of the Reserve Bank, for any sufficient
reason, remove from office a director nominated under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 25 and not being an officer of the State Bank.
* * * * *
Composition
of the Board
of Directors.
Managing
Director.
Removal from
office of
director.

7
(3) Any director elected under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of section 25 may be
removed from office—
(a) by the State Bank with the approval of the Reserve Bank, if at the time of the
removal there are no shareholders other than the State Bank registered in the books,
of the subsidiary bank concerned;
(b) by a resolution passed by a majority of the votes of such shareholders
holding in the aggregate not less than one-half of the share capital held by all such
shareholders:
Provided that if the  total amount of the holdings of all shareholders, other than the
State Bank, registered in the books of the subsidiary bank, on the date of the resolution, is
below five per cent. of the total issued capital, the resolution shall not have effect unless
confirmed by the State Bank.
* * * * *
35A. (1) Where the Reserve Bank, on the recommendation of the State Bank is satisfied
that in the public interest or for preventing the affairs of a subsidiary bank being conducted
in a manner detrimental to the interest, of the depositors or the subsidiary bank or for
securing the proper management of the subsidiary bank, it is necessary so to do, the
Reserve Bank may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, by order, supersede the Board
of Directors of the subsidiary bank for a period not exceeding six months as may be specified
in the order:
Provided that the period of supersession of the Board of Directors may be extended
from time to time, so, however, that the total period shall not exceed twelve months.
(2) The Reserve Bank may, on supersession of the Board of Directors of the subsidiary
bank under sub-section (1), appoint, for such period as it may determine, an Administrator
(not being an officer of the Central Government or a State Government) who has experience
in Law, finance, banking, economics or accountancy.
(3) The Reserve Bank may issue such directions to the Administrator as it may deem
appropriate and the Administrator shall be bound to follow such directions.
(4) Upon making the order of supersession of the Board of Directors of the subsidiary
bank, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,—
(a) the chairman, managing director and other directors shall, as from the date
of supersession vacate their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under this Act, or any
other law for the time being in force, be exercised and discharged by or on behalf of
the Board of Directors of such subsidiary bank, or by resolution passed in general
meeting of the subsidiary bank, shall, until the Board of Directors of the subsidiary
bank is reconstituted, be exercised and discharged by the Administrator appointed
by the Reserve Bank under sub-section ( 2):
Provided that the power exercised by the Administrator shall be valid notwithstanding
that such power is exercisable by a resolution passed in the general meeting of the subsidiary
bank.
(5) The Reserve Bank may constitute a committee of three or more persons who have
experience in Law, finance, banking, economics or accountancy to assist Administrator in
the discharge of his duties.
(6) The committee referred to in sub-section (5) shall meet at such times and places
and observe such rules of procedure as may be specified by the Reserve Bank.
Supersession
of Board of
Directors in
certain cases.

8
(7) The salary and allowance payable to the Administrator and the members of the
committee constituted under sub-section (5) by the Reserve Bank shall be such as may be
specified by the Reserve Bank and be payable by the concerned subsidiary bank.
* * * * *
63 (1) The Board of Directors of a subsidiary bank may, after consultation with the
State Bank and with the previous approval of the Reserve Bank, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made there-
under, to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the
purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act or any other law for the time being in
force.
* * * * *
(3) All regulations under this section, except the first regulations, shall be made in
consultation with the Board of Directors of the subsidiary bank concerned.
(4) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be after it is made under this section by the
State Bank, be forwarded to the Central Government and that Government shall cause a
copy of the same to be laid before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the
regulation or, both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that regulation.
* * * * *
Power of the
State Bank to
make
Regulations.

LOKLOK SABHA   SA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the State Bank of Hyderabad Act, 1956 and the State Bank of India
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959.
————
(Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal, Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance)
GMGIPMRND—572LS(S5)—12-02-2009.