1
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 7 of  2017
THE DESIGNATION OF STATES AS SPONSOR OF
 TERRORISM BILL, 2017
By
SHRI ARVIND SAWANT, M.P.
A
BILL
to designate certain States as sponsor of terrorism, to provide for withdrawal of trade
relations with such States, to create legal, economic and travel sanctions for the
citizens of such States and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS  the Islamic Republic of Pakistan propagates and harbours agents of
international terror who have repeatedly attacked the territory and people of the Republic of
India and there is an urgent need to co-ordinate activities at the international and national
level to ensure the best response to protect the interests of the Republic of India and its
citizens;
A
ND WHEREAS the Islamic Republic of Pakistan poses a continual risk to the peace and
security of the region so long as it continues to harbour agents of terror and propagates acts
of terror against the territory and citizens of the Republic of India.

2
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1 ) This Act may be called the Declaration of States as Sponsor of title and Terrorism
Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "abet" includes—
(i) the communication or association with any person or class or persons
who is engaged in assisting in any manner terrorists and disruptionists;
(ii) the passing on or the publication of, without any lawful authority, any
information likely to assist the terrorists or disruptionists or the passing on or
the publication or distribution of any document or matter obtained from terrorists
or disruptionists;
(iii) the rendering of any assistance, whether financial or otherwise, to
terrorists or disruptionists; and
(iv) the failure to apprehend and punish, as per the laws of such country,
persons involved in any terrorist act against the people or any section of the
people in India;
(b) "terrorist act" means doing of any act with intent to threaten or likely to
threaten the unity, integrity, security or sovereignty of India or with the intent to strike
terror in the people or any section of the people in India, or in any foreign
county, or with the intent to influence by threat or likely to influence by the threat the
Government of India or an international Government organisation—
(i) by using bombs, dynamites or other explosive substances or inflammable
substances or firearms or other lethal weapons or poisonous or noxious gases
or other chemicals of by any other substances (whether biological, radioactive,
nuclear or otherwise) of a hazardous nature or by any other means or whatever
nature to cause—
(a) death of, or injuries to any person or persons: or
(b) loss of, or damage to or destruction of property: or
(c) disruption of any supplies or services essential to the life of the
community in India or in any foreign country: or
(d) damage or destruction of any property in India or in a foreign
country used or intended to be used for the defence of India or in
connection with any other purposes of the Government of India, any
State Government or any of their agencies: or
(ii) by overawing by means of criminal force or the show of criminal force
of attempt to do so or causes death of any public functionary: or
(iii) by designing to seriously interferes with or seriously disrupts an
electronic system, computer system or network or to attempt to do so: or
(iv) by providing support by means of sponsoring or making provisions,
including by non-enforcement of any law to prevent the same for the training of
any militia paramilitary or guerrilla forces to wage proxy war against the
Government of India: or
Definitions.
Short title and
commencement.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(v) by detaining, kidnapping or abducting any person and threatens to kill
or injure such person or does any other act in order to compel the Government of
India, any State Government or the Government of a foreign country or any
other person to do or abstain from doing any act, commits a terrorist act.
Explanation I.— For the purposes of this section, public functionary
means the constitutional authorities and any other functionary notified in the
Official Gazette by the Central Government as a public functionary under the
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.
Explanation II.— For the purposes of this section, a terrorist act shall
include an act of terrorism involving citizens or the territory of more than one
country.
Explanation III.— Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions and
unless the context otherwise requires the term 'terrorism' shall mean premeditated
violence motivated by any political, religious, radical or ideological cause
perpetrated against 'non-combatant' targets by sub-national groups or
clandestine agents.
Explanation IV .— For the purposes of this section, the term 'non-
combatant' implies, in addition to civilians, those military personnel (whether or
not armed or on duty) who are not deployed in a war zone or even if they are
deployed in a war zone, they are not directly taking part in hostilities;
(c) "State sponsor of terrorism" means the country specified in the Schedule
to this Act and shall include such other countries as so designated by the
Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette and included in the
Schedule to this Act.
3. ( 1) Whoever being a head of the State sponsor of terrorism or member of the
Government of such State or a citizen or a body corporate belonging or affiliated to a country
designated by the Central Government as a State sponsor of terrorism and included in the
Schedule to this Act shall be subject to the following prohibitions—
(a) he shall he prohibited to travel within the territory of India and shall not be
eligible for the grant of visa;
(b) he shall he prohibited from trading with any individual. entity or body corporate
in India;
(c) he shall be prohibited from receiving or making grants, financial remittances.
investments or assets of any description whether corporeal or incorporeal, movable or
immovable, tangible or intangible, wherever located, or providing or receiving financial
assistance or aid from or to any individual entity or body corporate in India;
(d) he shall be subject to prohibition of undertaking maritime activities
including but not limited to fishing or trawling or entering the territorial waters of
India;
(e) he shall be prohibited from overflight over the geographical boundaries of
India.
(2) The status of most favoured nation or favoured nation granted to the State Sponsor
of terrorism nation shall be deemed to have been withdrawn from date of coming into force of
this Act.
(3) The States which sponsor terrorism and do not initiate any action against the
terrorist leaders, terrorists and their camps shall he declared as "State of and for terrorist".
(4) The Central Government may, if it deems appropriate, relax the prohibition referred
to in clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section (1).
Prohibitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
4. (1) Any individual being a head of the State, member of the Government, a citizen or
a body corporate of another country, who abets the State sponsor of terrorism shall be
subject to such prohibitions referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section 3 as the Central
Government may deem appropriate.
(2) The Central Government may, if it deems appropriate, relax the prohibitions of
sub-section (1).
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, revoke the
diplomatic immunity of officials of a State sponsor of terrorism and make such officials
amenable to the jurisdiction of the courts in India.
(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in other law for the time being in force, an
official of a State designated as sponsor of terrorism shall not be immune from any suit
brought against him in any Court in India in which monetary damages and compensation are
sought against such State for causing physical injury to persons or damage to property or
death of persons by an act of terrorism.
6. The Government of India shall use all available diplomatic means including its
voting power to oppose any loan or other use of funds of any International Financial Institution
to a State sponsor of terrorism.
Explanation.—In this section. the term 'International Financial Institution' includes
the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary
Fund.
7. (1) No individual, or body corporate shall import into or export from the  territory of
India any goods or services from or into any country which has been designated as a State
sponsor of terrorism.
Explanation.— In this sub-section, the term 'import into or export From the territory of
India' shall include transactions in foreign exchange or transfer credit or payment between
any banking institution or a national thereof or import or export of currency or securities to
and from a State sponsor of terrorism.
(2) No individual or body corporate shall make any new investment in a State sponsor
of terrorism or in property owned or controlled by the Government of such a State or a
national thereof.
8. ( 1) Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act, or otherwise deals in any
manner whatsoever, with a State sponsor of terrorism, shall he published with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to five years or with fine or with both.
(2) An offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session, or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid. both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
Liability of
officials of
States sponsor
of terrorism.
Restrictions for
aiding and
abetting States
sponsor of
terrorism.
Opposition to
assistance by
International
Financial
Institutions
States sponsor
of terrorism.
Prohibition
on trade and
investment.
Offences and
penalties.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

THE  SCHEDULE
[See sections 2(c) and 3(1)]
1. The Islamic Republic of Pakistan
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our country and indeed countries in the region and around the world have been
subjected to numerous terror attacks, from organisations and individuals based in Pakistan
and with the support of elements in the Government of Islamic Republic of Pakistan. India in
particular has suffered numerous attacks like 26/11 Mumbai and most recent attack in Uri on
September 18, 2016. There has been widespread International condemnation of the attack
and also of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan by most Nations.
Despite undeniable evidence to substantiate that the Islamic Republic of Pakistan
sponsors terror in India, we have continued to remain engaged diplomatically, culturally and
economically with the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for decades.
The strategic restraint practiced by India in the last decade has come at a heavy price.
Several hundred brave men of our security forces and citizens have been killed in various
terror attacks on our soil.
The Islamic Republic of Pakistan continues to provide safe heaven to dreaded terrorists
like Hafeez Saeed and terrorist organizations like the Taliban, Al-Qaeda, Jama'at-ud-Da"wah,
Jaish-e-Mohammad, the Haqqani Network, Lashkar-e-Toiba among many others.
This proxy war being waged against India has also forced us to incur unprecedented
economic expenditure.
While we are looking at the international community to recognize and declare Pakistan
as a terror state, it is for us, as the most affected country, to take the first step towards this.
We must go beyond merely condemning the attacks on our sovereignty time and again and
take a decisive and strong step to declare the Islamic Republic of Pakistan a terror state.
This Bill underlines our strong condemnation of Islamic Republic of Pakistan's
propagation and sponsorship of international terror and recognises its role in providing a
safe heaven to dreaded terrorists and terror organisations and its active role in abetting and
aiding infiltration of terrorists from its soil into India.
Pakistan poses a continual risk to the peace, security and stability of the region. The
Bill, therefore, seeks to terminate and prohibit further economics, trade, sports and cultural
agreements with Pakistan. It also prescribes repealing the Most Favoured Nation status
given by India to Pakistan and also the Indus Water Treaty.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ARVIND SAW ANT
December 2, 2016.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

GMGIPMRND—4056LS(S3)—01-03-2017.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to designate certain States as sponsor of terrorism, to provide for withdrawal of
trade relations with such States, to create legal, economic and travel
sanctions  for the citizens of such States and for matters
connected  therewith or  incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Arvind Sawant, M.P.)