THE ABOLITION OF BEGGING  BILL, 2010
By
SHRI PRASANTA KUMAR MAJUMDAR, M.P.
A
 BILL
to provide for abolition of begging and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the  Abolition of Begging  Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “beggar” means a person who indulges in begging;
(c) “begging” means—
(i) soliciting or receiving alms in a public place including railways, bus
stops, road sides or any other place where public has access;
Short title and
extent.
Definitions.
Bill No. 7 of 2010
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
(ii) exposing or exhibiting any wound, deformity or disease of self or of
any other person or of an animal for the purpose of soliciting or collecting alms;
(iii) allowing one self to be used as an exhibit for the purpose of soliciting
or collecting alms;
(d) "child" means a boy or a girl who has not attained the age of eighteen years;
(e) "children home" means special homes established under Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000; and
(f) “receiving centre” means a centre established under section 5.
3.  Begging by any person is hereby abolished.
4. Whoever forces or encourages any person, including a child in his care, custody or
charge, for begging shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than twenty years:
Provided that the punishment, in case of a person who forces or encourages two or
more persons to indulge in begging, shall not be less than twenty-five years.
5. (1) Any person found begging shall be arrested by the police and before making
every such arrest, the officer-in-charge of the concerned police station shall satisfy himself
as to the bonafide of the arrested beggar.
(2) Any person, other than a child, arrested on the ground of begging shall be sent to
a Receiving Centre, to be established in every district by the appropriate Government,
wherein such person shall be provided with facilities for his rehabilitation.
Explanation:— For the purpose of this section, facilities for rehabilitation includes
medical care, sustenance and training in agricultural or industrial or other pursuits aiming at
providing gainful employment to the beggars.
(3) Any child arrested on the ground of begging shall be sent to a children home.
6. The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Beggars'
Welfare Fund for the welfare of the beggars.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall, for the purpose of providing employment
opportunities to beggars, formulate such schemes, work out such plans, including plans
for provision of education, and create such suitable infrastructure in every district, as it
considers appropriate.
(2) The appropriate Government shall set up destitute homes in every district for
providing food, shelter and protection to the old, infirm, helpless and destitute persons to
ensure that they do not indulge in begging.
8. Any person who maims himself or other persons for the purpose of soliciting or
collecting alms shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to
twenty years.
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, an
offence under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
10. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
56 of 2000
Abolition of
begging.
Punishment for
forcing or
encouraging
any person for
begging.
Arrested
beggars to be
sent to
receiving
centres.
Constitution
of Beggars'
Welfare Fund.
Formulation of
schemes, plans
for beggars.
Punishment for
maiming.
Offence to be
cognizable and
non-bailable.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State legislature.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
For the last sixty-two years of our independence, Government has failed to check and
abolish begging in the country. Despite welfare measures taken by the Central and the State
Governments, begging continues unabated all over the country, especially in the metroplitan
cities and urban centres.
In cities, beggars are seen lurking and forcing even foreign visitors to pay alms. Such
unwarranted acts do not only leave bad impression in the minds of visitors but also bring
dishonour to the name of the nation.
Drives launched by different State Governments and Union territory Administrations
and anti-begging legislations enacted by various State Legislatures so far have failed to
contain this menace, which has assumed criminal proportions.
To root-out the menace of begging from the country, a national perspective has to be
created by developing an infrastructure to tackle begging not only by a legal framework but
also socially by creating an environment of accommodation and acceptance of beggars in
the society, to assure them a life with dignity. Therefore, it is necessary to create an atmosphere
so that beggars are provided with sufficient means of livelihood by the Government.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; PRASANTA KUMAR MAJUMDAR
December 17, 2009
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for establishment of  "Receiving Centres" by the appropriate
Government. Clause 6 provides for establishment of the Beggars' Welfare Fund by the
Central Government. Clause 7 of the Bill provides for formulation of schemes and creating
suitable infrastructure in every district to enable the beggars to earn their livelihood. The
Central Government would have to incur expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India
for the establishment of receiving centres, destitute homes for formulation of schemes and
creating suitable infrastructure in respect of Union territories. As far as the establishment of
receiving centres, destitute homes and formulation of schemes and creating suitable
infrastructure in the States is concerned, the State Governments will incur expenditure from
their respective Consolidated Funds. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about
rupees eight hundred crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees forty crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

7
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for abolition of begging and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—165LS(S-1)—22-02-2010.