  AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
                                                             Bill No. 7 of 2022
THE BUREAU OF ACCOUNTABILITY BILL, 2022
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYY A SHETTY, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a Bureau of Accountability to suggest
  measures for rooting out corruption; making the administration
efficient and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Bureau of Accountability Act, 2022.
    (2) It extends to the whole of India.
     (3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Bureau” means the Bureau of Accountability established under
section 3;
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
5
10
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.

3. (1)The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette,establish a Bureau to be known as the Bureau of Accountability for carrying outthe purposes of this Act.
 (2) The Bureau shall consist of —
(i) three serving or retired Judges of the Supreme Court of India;
(ii) Cabinet Secretary to the Central Government;
(iii) Home Secretary to the Central Government;
(iv)  Director of Intelligence Bureau;
(v) Director of the Central Bureau of Investigation;
(vi) One retired General of the Army to be nominated by the Central
Government;
(vii) One eminent social worker to be nominated by the Central
Government;
(viii) One political worker to be nominated by the Central
Government;
(ix) Two Members of Parliament one each from the House of the People andthe Council of States, to be nominated by the Presiding Officers of the respectiveHouses; and
(x) Three serving or retired Chairpersons of Public Sector undertakings to
be nominated by the Central Government.
(3) The members of the Bureau shall have a tenure of six years from the date
of their appointment or nomination, as the case may be.
(4) The office of the Bureau shall be at New Delhi.
(5) The Central Government shall appoint such number of Officers and staff asit considers necessary for the efficient functioning of the Bureau.(6) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions ofservice of  members and officers and staff of the Bureau shall be such as may beprescribed.
4.  The Members of the Bureau shall elect from amongst themselves  a member
to preside over its meetings and the member so elected shall be designated as
Chairperson of the Bureau.
5. The Bureau shall —
(i)   make the administration corruption free;
(ii) accelerate the pace of working in the Ministries of the Government of
India; and
(iii) take steps and suggest measures to implement the policies framed by
the Central Government within the prescribed time period.
6. The members of the Bureau shall carry out surprise inspections of various
Ministries and Departments of the Central Government and the Public Sector
Undertakings, from time to time, and suggest measures for carrying out administrative
reforms in the functioning of the Union Ministries, Departments and Public Sector
Undertakings.
7. (1) The Bureau shall formulate rules for its internal working and the rules so
made shall be laid on the Table of each House of Parliament.
          (2) If any amendment is made to the rules framed under sub-section (1), the
amendment so made shall also be laid on the Table of each House of Parliament.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Establishment of
a Bureau of
Accountability.
Chairperson of
the Bureau.
Functions of
the Bureau.
Powers of
Bureau.
Procedure to be
followed by
the Bureau in
its functioning.
2

5
10
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive ses-
sions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the
rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to make
rules.
3

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is a fact that unstable bureaucracy is a big hurdle in the development of the
country. Some senior officers and their subordinates working in Government offices
do not dispose of their official works within the prescribed or reasonable time period.
Many important files remain pending for months in Government Offices which in
turn leads to corruption. It is, therefore, necessary that a high powered permanent
Bureau should be set up to accelerate the pace of work of bureaucracy and ensure
timely completion of work.
           Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;                     GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY
3 December, 2021.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall establish a
Bureau of Accountability. It further provides that the Central Government shall appoint
such number of officers and staff as it considers necessary for the efficient functioning
of the Bureau. It also provides that the office of the Bureau shall be located at
New Delhi. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees
one hundred and twenty five crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees eighty crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
     to provide for establishment of a Bureau of Accountability to suggest
       measures for rooting out corruption; making the administration
   efficient and for matters connected  therewith.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P .)