‘AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

१9 nn anne

Bill No.7 of 200° 7 of 2001

THE SENIOR CITIZENS (WELFARE) BILL, 2001
By
‘Sunt CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE, M.P
A
BILL
} provide for payment of ‘pension and provision of other facilities to old persons.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty

second Year of the Republic of India as

1. (J) This Act may be called the Senior Citizens (Welfare) Act, 2001.
(2) Itextends to the whole of India.

(3) Itshall come into force on such date as
Official Gazette, appoint.
e Central Government a Board to be known

2. (1) There shall be established by th
“Central Board for Senior Citizens’ Welfare”, hereinafter called the “Central

the Central Government may, by notification

(2) The Central Board shall consist of the following persons, namely:—

(a) the Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Government of

India, who shall act as its Chairman;

Short title,
extent and
‘commence-
ment.

Establishment
of Central
Board for
Senior Citizens
Welfare.


Establishment
of State Board
for Senior
Citizens
Welfare.

Formulation of
plans to help
old persons.

Duty of every
person to take
care of his par-
ents, grand
parents.
Runishment for
non-compli-
ances of provi-
sions of Act.

Facilities to per-
sons registered
under this Act.

Establishment
of District
‘Committee for
Senior Citi-
zens Welfare,

Duty of
‘Committee to
register all
persons.

2

(6) one representative from each of the State and Union territory Boards |
lished under section 3;

(c) one member from each of the State and Union territory Governments; and

(d) two members from amongst those persons who are engaged in active social
work. के

3. (1) There shall be established by every State Government and Union territory
administration a Board to be known as the “State Board for Senior Citizens Welfare”
or the Union territory Board for Senior Citizens Welfare, as the case may be, hereinafter
called the “State Board” or the “Union territory Board” to aid the Central Board in imple-
menting the provisions of this Act.

(2) The State Board or the Union territory Board shall consist of a Chairman and such
number of members, as may be determined by the respective State Government or the Union
territory administration, as the case may be.

4, Every State Board and Union territory Board shall formulate plans for helping out
the old persons registered under sub-section (7) of section 9.

5. It shall be the duty of every person to take care of his parents and grand parents,
who do not have any sources of income or sustenance.

6. If any person fails to comply with the provisions of section 5, he shall be punished
with a fine of rupees ten thousand and term of imprisonment for five years.

7. Every State Government or Union territory administration, as the case may be, in
their respective jurisdiction, shall provide the following to a person who is registered
under sub-section (7) of section 9,—

(a) an amount not exceeding rupees two thousand per month as pension;

(6) free medical aid in Government hospitals and other hospitals aided by the -
Government;

(c) residential accommodation free of cost:

Provided that the infirm persons from amongst the registered shall be kept in old.
persons homes to be established by the Central Board. : के

8. (1) There shall be established in every district by the respective State or Union.
territory Board, a Committee to be known as the “District Committee for Senior
Citizens Welfare”, hereinafter called the “Committee”.

(2) The Committee shall consist of a President and such number of other members,
may be determined by the State or Union territory Board, as the case may be.

(3) The District Committees shall work under the control of the respective State
Union territory Board.

9. (1) It shall be the duty of every Committee to register all persons who hav
attained the age of fifty-five years and are unable to work and have no means to sup;
themselves.

(2) The Committee shall give wide publicity through radio network, newspay
etc. for registering the senior citizens.

(3) The Committee shall forward the list of the registered persons to the State
or the Union territory Board, as the case may be.


2

10. (7) There shall be constituted by the Central Government a fund to be known
the “Senior Citizens ‘Welfare Fund” to carry out the purposes of this Act.

(2) The fund shall consist of the sums paid into it by the Central Government and
grants or donations received from international agencies.

11. The expenses incurred on providing the senior citizens with pension and other
| mentioned under section 7 shall be met out of the fund constituted under
section 10. ai

12, Every State and Union territory Board shall work under the guidance and control
of the Central Board.

13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make.rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modi-
fication in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall

be without preju-
dice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

Constitution of
Senior Citizens
Welfare Fund.

Expenses in-
curred on Pen?
sion and facili-
ties to be met
out of Fund
Constituted for
this purpose.

State and Union
territory Board
shall work un-
der guidance
and control of
Central Board.

Power to make
rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In our country, there are millions of old persons who are unable to take care of
themselves or do not have sufficient means to lead a happy life. These people, with no
support from any source, live in-hunger and are left uncared for. Although, many social
organisations have made arrangements for taking care of old and sick persons, it is not
sufficient as the majority of the aged are still left to fend for themselves. The forefathers
of our Constitution envisaged this aspect and a provision was made in the Directive
Principles of State Policy that the Government shall made effective provisions to give
assistance in cases of old age, sickness and disablement and in other cases of undeserved -
want. Our country being a welfare State, it should provide security to persons in their old
age.

The Bill seeks to give impetus to the new social order and to give social security to
the old and sick, provide them with pension, medical and residential facilities.

New Detut; CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE
February 8, 2001


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

| 2 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a Central Board for old persons
fare. Clause 3 provides for the establishment of State Boards and Union territory Boards
old persons welfare. Clause 7 provides for the payment of pension of rupees two
five hundred per month, free medical aid, free residential accommodation to
ns who have attained the age of fifty-five years and are unable to work and have no
neans to support themselves and also for the establishment of old persons homes for old
frm persons. Clause 8 provides for the establishment of committees for old persons
“welfare in every district of the country. Clause 9 provides that the Committee shall give
wide publicity through radio net-work, newspapers, etc. for registering the old persons.
Clause 10 provides for the constitution of old persons welfare fund by the Central
Government. As far as expenditure on State Boards is concerned, it will be met from
the consolidated fund of the respective states. But, expenditure to be incurred on Union
‘territory Boards and expenses relating to payment of pension, etc. to old persons, shall
be met from the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to
involve an estimated annual recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crores from
the Consolidated Fund of India.

‘A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crores is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
‘out the purposes of this Bill, As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation —
on legislative power is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL
to provide for payment of pension and provision of other facilities to old persons.

(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—6371LS—16-02-2001.