THE WORKING ELEPHANTS (PROTECTION AND WELFARE)
BILL, 2008
By
SHRI C.K. CHANDRAPPAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for measures for the protection and welfare of working elephants and for
matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Working Elephants (Protection and Welfare) Act,
2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint but which shall not be later than three months from the date of
assent.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  7  of 2008.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "Board" means the Working Elephants Protection and Welfare Board set up
under section 3;
(ii) "Fund" means the Working Elephants Protection and Welfare Fund set up
under section 7;
(iii) "mahout" means any person who is responsible for driving, training or
taking care of an elephant;
(iv) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(v) "working elephant" means any elephant which is domesticated and put to
work for earnings by any person or institution by whatever name called;
3. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a board to be known as the Working
Elephants Protection and Welfare Board in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Board shall consist of:
(i) an eminent person having special knowledge or practical experience in the
field of animal sciences or a veterinary doctor who shall be nominated by the Central
Government as Chairman;
(ii) the secretary to the Government of India in charge of the ministry of
Environment and Forests who shall be member-secretary of the Board, ex-officio;
(iii) the secretary to the Government of India in charge of ministry of Finance
as member;
(iv) two members representing the owners of timber depots where working
elephants are engaged in work, to be nominated in such manner as may be prescribed;
(v) two members representing the owners of circus companies where working
elephants are engaged in work, to be nominated in such manner as may be prescribed;
(vi) two members representing the zoological gardens situated in various parts
of the Country, to be nominated in such manner as may be prescribed;
(vii) three members representing the places of worship of various faiths where
working elephants are engaged for any purpose, to be nominated in such manner as
may be prescribed;
(viii) ten members representing the states having largest population of working
elephants, to be nominated in such manner as may be prescribed;
(ix) five members representing the working elephant owners, to be nominated
in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(x) one member representing the mahouts, to be nominated in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairman and other members of the Board, shall be such as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the
Working Elephants Protection and Welfare Board shall have the power to take steps for the
implementation of the provisions of this Act.
5. (1) The Board shall meet at least once in three months.
(2) The Board shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(i) to encourage studies on the problems relating to working elephants and
suggest measures to overcome them;
Definitions.
Working
Elephants
Protection and
Welfare Board.
Board to have
power to take
steps for the
implementation
of provisions
of this Act.
Functions of
the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(ii) to create infrastructure for better health care of the working elephants and
for their transportation from one place to another;
(iii) to provide for better care and maintenance of working elephants through
measures such as inserting electronic chips in their body which shall keep a complete
record of life history, health and movement of working elephants;
(iv) to provide special sanctuaries for working elephants and deploy experts in
animal science and veterinary doctors in such sanctuaries to ensure that elephant
population is sustained and enhanced;
(v) to work in close collaboration with states having high population of working
elephants and creation of facilities including facilities for proper food, drinking water
and sanitation for the working elephants;
(vi) to create awareness among public to treat domesticated elephants in just
and friendly manner;
(vii) prescribe guidelines regarding training, pay and conditions of service of
mahouts; and
(viii) to provide for welfare measures for working elephants when they get old
and are not able to work.
6. It shall be the duty of the Board to ensure that no cruelty is shown to working
elephants and they are treated with compassion, love and care by all persons.
7. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Fund to be known as the Working
Elephants Protection and Welfare Fund with a corpus of rupees two thousand five hundred
crore.
(2) The Central Government, the State Governments and the working elephant owners
shall contribute to the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donation, contribution or assistance
from individuals, organisations or otherwise shall also be credited to the Fund.
8. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Duty of the
Board to
ensure proper
care of
working
elephants.
Working
Elephants
Protection and
Welfare Fund.
Power to
make rules.
10
5
15
25
20
30
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The elephant population in the country is gradually coming down and this animal may
face extinction. Elephant is an animal which is royal, beautiful and dignified. It would be a sad
day for humanity if elephants get extinct, as happened in the case of mammoth and dinosaurs
in the past. Elephants have been a good companion to mankind for several thousands of
years.
In this context, it is important that we take steps to protect elephants and to promote
the welfare of the working elephants. It is easy and practical to take care of the working
elephants.
If we are doing it seriously and also consciously, then the State should take the
responsibility of providing protected sanctuaries for these animals to rest and also for
breeding, for certain number of months every year.
The Bill proposes to set up a Board for the welfare of the working elephants. It also
proposes an Elephant Welfare Fund for taking steps to ensure that working elephant's
welfare is taken care of.
If the proposed steps are taken, it would contribute to strengthening the wild life and
prevent the elephants facing extinction.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; C. K. CHANDRAPPAN
November 19, 2007.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill proposes for the setting up of Working Elephants Protection and
Welfare Board. Clause 5 provides that the Board shall undertake certain welfare measures in
pursuance of the provisions of the Bill. Clause 7 provides for the setting up of Working
Elephants Protection and Welfare Fund.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore would be
involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred  crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill.
As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of
a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for measures for the protection and welfare of working elephants and for
matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri C.K. Chandrappan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—157LS(S-5)—06-02-2008.