AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

- Bill No. 7 of 2005

. THEABOLITION OF BEGGING BILL, 2005 ह |
| | By
SHRI RAM Das ATHAWALE, M.P.
हे aa
7 | BILL
le for abolition of begging and Hes matters connected therewith or incidental
; thereto.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth year of the Republic of India as follows:—

a ie
ee

) This Act may be called the Prevention of Begging Act, 2005. Short title

| and extent.
| extends to the whole of India. d |
this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— , Definitions.

appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of that
all other cases, the Central Government;

) "begger" means a person who indulges in begging;

a
ee
बच
Sek


Abolition of
begging.

Punishment
for forced
begging.

Arrest of
persons found
begging, etc.

Beggars’
Welfare Fund.

Formulation
of schemes
and plans for
beggars, etc.

Power to
make rules.

(०) "Begging" means—

(i) soliciting alms in a public place, including railways, bus-stops, road
sides and public transport, by invoking compassion; and

(ii) entering in any private premises for the purpose of soliciting or
receiving alms

(d) "receiving centre" means a centre established under section 5, where any
person taken into custody on the ground of begging shall be kept till the time he is
rehabilitated

3. Begging by any person in any manner is hereby abolished.

4. Whoever forces or encourages any person, including a child in his care, custody or
charge, for begging or whoever uses any person as an exhibit for the purpose of begging,
shall, in the first instance, be warned of indulging in such activities and punished with a fine
of rupees five hundred if he indulges inspite of the warning given to him.

5. (1) Any person found begging shall be arrested by the Police.

(2) Any person so arrested shall be sent to a receiving centre, to be established in.
every district by the appropriate Government, wherein such person shall be provided with
facilities for his rehabilitation |

(1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be called the Beggars
Welfare Fund for the welfare of the beggars

(2) The fund shall be utilised by the Central Government as and when required for the
welfare and rehabilitation of beggars.

7. (1) The appropriate Government shall formulate such schemes, work out such
plans, including plans for provision of education, and create suitable infrastructure in
every district so as to enable beggars to take up suitable jobs for earning livelihood.

(2) The appropriate Government shall set up destitute homes for providing food,
shelter and protection, to the old, infirm, helpless and destitute persons so.as to discourage
them from indulging in begging

8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

espite all efforts made and welfare measures taken by the-Central Government, and
Governments, the practice of begging continues unabated all over the country,
lly in the metropolitan cities and urban area. There are organised gangs who exploit
t children and force them into begging not for the sustenance of these boys and girls
hering alms for the gang leaders and organisers. Some people have made forcing
n into begging a business. They kidnap children and force them to go for begging and
luge amount.

per 1971 census the number of beggars in the country was ten lakhs and the
has considerably increased during subsequent years.

le, the old and infirm beggars can be sent to destitute homes the able-bodied
hould be given education and training so that they can get gainful employment.

herefore, it is high time that a law for prevention of begging is brought forward.
Hence the Bill. | |

I; RAMDAS ATHAWALE


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 5 of the Bill provides for establishment of "receiving centres" in every district
by the appropriate Government. Clause 6 provides for setting up of Beggars’ Welfare Fund
Clause 7 provides for formulation of schemes and creating suitable infrastructure by
appropriate Government in every district so as to enable beggars to take up suitable jobs. It —
further provides for setting up of destitute homes by the appropriate Government. The
Central Government would have to incur expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India
for establishment of receiving centres, destitute homes, formulating schemes, creating suitable
_ infrastructure in respect of Union territories and shall also have to contribute monies into
Beggars’ Welfare Fund. As fir as establishment of receiving centres, destitute homes
formulation of schemes and creating suitable infrastructure in the States are concerned, the
concerned State Governments will incur expenditure from their Consolidated Funds, though
the Central Government may have to extend some financial assistance to the States for
implementing the provisions of the Bill. The Bil}, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India . It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about
rupees one hundred crore per annum. |

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty lakhs is also likely to be involved.



. हि MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

= Clause 8 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions
of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative —
~ power is of anormal character

Bi:
a

i



कै

LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for abolition of begging and for matters connected therewith or _
incidental thereto.

(Shri Ramdas Athawale, 14.22)

MGIPMRND—4017LS(S-1)—~14.01.2005.