As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

THE EMPOWERMENT OF WOMEN BILL, 1999
By
Dr. V. Sarora, M.P.
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
\USES

1. Short title, extent and commen

2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
Ebucationat. RicHts
3. Free Education to women.
4. Free Vocational training to girl students.
CHAPTER III
EmptoyMent RiGhts
5. Reservation of posts in Government services.
6. Working women welfare fund,
7, Representation of women employees in trade unions.
8. Constitution of Advisory Committees.
9. Central Advisory Committee.
10. Appointment of Officers,
1. Register of women employees.
12. Annual Report of Advisory Committee.
13. Employer to furnish information in respect of women employees.
CHAPTER IV
‘Sexuat Harassment
14. Meaning of sexual harassment,
Special Officer to deal with cases in the Government offices.
16. Special Officer for every district,
17. Women employees not to be harassed.

18. Women employees to approach Special Officer in case of harassment.

(i)

“<5 Bill No. 80 of 1999
— 5म


19. Special Officer to make inquiries.
20. Special Officer to recommend action against guilty.
21. Special Officer to have powers of a civil court
22. Punishment.

CHAPTER V

Soctat. Scurry Rights

23. Provision of pension to destitute women.
24. Women’s home.
2
26. Welfare Fund for women other than working women.

CHAPTER VI

Economic RiGHts

w

Insurance Scheme for women.

2
28, Board to manage Bank.
2
30, Sitting of Bank.
31. Capital of Bank.

3

Establishment of Women Development Bank.

3S

). Board to frame policies and to determine business of Bank.

Ss

32, Dealings and transactions of Bank.

33, Duty of Bank.

34. Terms and conditions for granting loan.
3
36. Women registered with employment exchanges to get priority.

3

a

. Application for availing loan,

a

. Officers and staff.
CHAPTER VII
Sociat. Ricirs
38, Establishment of lineage.
39. Right to refuse to fill forms in certain cases.
40. Misdemeanour under the Act.
41. Penalities.
CHAPTER VIII
Property RIGHTS
42, Rights of an unmarried woman,
43, Rights of a married woman
44. Rights of a widow.
CHAPTER IX

Sreciat Courts
4

aw

Establishment of Special Courts for women:

46. Qualification for appointment as Chief Judge and other Judges.


47. Senior most Judge to act as Chief Judge or to discharge his functions in certain
circumstances,

48. Term of office.
49. Resignation and removal.

50. Salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chief Judge
and other Judges.

51. Financial and administrative powers of the Chief Judge.
52. Staff of the special Court.

53, Jurisdiction, powers and authority of special courts.

54. Power of special courts.

55. Exclusion of jurisdiction of courts except the concerned High Court and Supreme
Court.

56. Transfer of pending cases.
57. Free legal aid to women.
CHAPTER X
MisceiLancous
58. Act to have over-riding effect
59. Power to remove difficulties.

| Power to make rules.

(iii)


No. 80 of 1999

THE EMPOWERMENT OF WOMEN BILL, 1999
By

Dr. V. Saroia, MP.
r
BILL
provide for empowerment of women in all fields and for matters connected therewith
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-—
1, (/) This Act may be called the Empowerment of Women Act, 1999.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
ification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise provides.—

(a) “appropriate Government” means the State Government in relation to a
State and the Central Government in other cases;

(0) “bank” means the Women Development Bank established under section 27:
(०0 “child” means a person who has not attained the age of fourteen years;

(व) “court” means a special court established under section 45:

Short title, ex-
tent and com-
‘tmencement

Definitions.


2

(९) “destitute woman” means a woman who has heen separated, divorced or a
widow or an unmarried woman who has no source of income:
(0 “employer” means:

(i) in relation to an establishment which is under the control of the
appropriate Government, a person or an authority appointed by the appropriate
Government, for the supervision and control of employces or where no person
is so appointed, the head of the department:

(ii) in relation to an establishment under any local authority. the person
appointed by such authority for the supervision and control of employees or
where no person is So appointed, the chief executive officer of the local authoritys,

(iii) in any other case, the person who, or the authority which has (he
ultimate control on the affairs of the establishment or entrusted to any other
person whether called 2 Manager, Managing Director, Managing Agent,
Supervisor or by any other name who has been entrusted with the affairs of the
establishment, such person;

(g) “establishment” includes:—

(i) a factory;

(ii) a mine;

(ii) a plantation;

(iv) an agricultural field;

(0) an establishment wherein persons are employed for the exhibition of
equestrian, acrobatic and other performances:

(vi) a place where, manufacture, production, or such other similar activity
is carried out;

(vii) a place where trading either wholesale or retail in any product is
carried out;

(viii) a hotel, restaurant, lodge or any eating place;
(ix) a shop where sale in any product is carried out or a service is provided;
(0 a place where construction work is carried out;

(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(i) “property” means movable and immovable property and includes all rights

pertaining (o property by way of lease, licence and inheritance.

CHAPTER II
Epucational RIGHTS
Free education 3. The appropriate Government shall, —
to women. 2 . न
(a) provide free and compuisory education upto graduation level to all
women;

(6) open adequate number of educational i

titutions exclusively for women;

(0) reserve fifty per cent. of seats in educational institutions for women till
adequate number of educational institutions exclusive to them have been set up; and

(d) provide scholarships to women for pursuing higher education.

Explanation.—In this section, ‘free education’ means uniform, books and
stationery, nutritious meals during school hours and transportation free of cost and
no fees for admission or for taking any examination shali be charged.

Free vocational 4, The appropriate Government shall provide vocational training to all girl

taining to Girl e
a 3 students.


3
CHAPTER III

EmptoyMent RIGHTS

5. The Central Government shall reserve thirty per cent. of posts and appointments
| its control for women.

6. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be called Working
Women Welfare Fund for carrying out the following purposes:—

(8 to ensure the right to work for women;
(i) to ensure equa! wages to women employees;

(iii) to ensure steady and definite increase of the women employees in the
total work force;

(jv) to ensure after suitable amendments, proper application of the existing
. labour laws for the benefit of the women employees;

(७) to ensure child care facilities for the women employees with minimum
needs like milk, tiffin, clothes, toys and trained ayahcs to look after the children;

(vi) to ensure mobile child care facilities for agricultural women employees;

(vii) to ensure retiring rooms with adequate facilities like bathrooms,
latrines, etc, at the work-site for the women employees;

(viii) to ensure residential facil
place of their work;

ies for women employees nearest to the

(ix) to ensure recreational facilities for the kids of the women employees at
the child care centres;

(x) to ensure proper and adequate security arrangement for the women
employees at the work site as well as to and from their residential places;

(xi) to ensure improved and conducive working conditions for the women
employees;

(xii) to ensure reservation of beds in the hospitals for women employees;

(xiii) to ensure proper and adequate maternity facilities for the women
employees;

(xiv) to ensure equality for married and unmarried women employees in
the employment as well as in service conditions and wages;

(xv) to ensure cheap, safe and quick transportation facilities for women
employees;

(xvi) to ensure protection from health hazards, particularly for the women
employees working in industries like cashew, mines, tobacco, construction projects,

(2) Every employer and State Government shall contribute to the fund in such
as may be fixed by the Central Government,

7. The appropriate Government shall ensure representation of women employees in
ious committees of trade unions formed for the Purposes of working class.

8. (/) The Central Government shall constitute Advisory Committee in every
and Union territory in respect of the area at the city level, district level and an
x body at State level, consisting of equal number of representatives from the

riate Government, the employees and the trade unions, who shall be women, to

Reservation of
posts in Gov-
ernment Serv-
ices

Working Women
Welfare Fund

Representation
of women em-
ployees in trade
Unions.

Constitution of
Advisory Com.
mittees,


Central Advisory
Committee.

Appointment of
Officers

Register of
women em-
ployces

‘Annual Report
of Advisory
Committees.

Employer to
furnish infor-
mation in re-
spect of women
employees

Meaning of
Sexual harass-
ment.

advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of the administration
this Act may be referred to it by the Central Government including matters relating
to the application of the Fund.

(2) The members of the committees so constituted shall from amongst themselves
elect the Chairmen of the committees.

(3) The Central Government shall publish the names of the members of all
Advisory committees in the Official Gazette.

9. The Central Government shall constitute a Central Advisory Committee which
shall coordinate the functioning of all the Advisory Committees for their proper functioning
and for the adoption of uniform policies.

10. The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint as many officers as it may deem necessary for the proper enforcement of the
provisions of this Act.

वा, The Advisory Committee at the district level shall maintain a register of women,
employees in its area and the information contained therein shall be checked with the
information supplied by cach employer regarding women employed by them and their
specific needs, if any.

12, Each Advisory Committee shall, as soon as may be. alter the end of each finank
year, prepare a comprehensive report of its activities of the previous year, which were financed
from the Fund, together with a statement of accounts.

13. The appropriate Government may require an employer, who employs women in
his industry or establishment, to furnish for the purposes of this Act, such statist
other information, in such form and within such period as may he prescribed.

CHAPTER IV

SEXUAL HARASSMENT
14, For the purposes of this Act, ‘sexual harassment” means and includes—
(i harassing any employee by virtue of her being a female:

(ii) indecent representation of women with a view to annoy or irritate her an
which results in mental injury of a female employee;

(iii) detaining a female employee before or after normal working hours in ॥
absence of other employees and where there is no work to be performed by thi
female employee, with a view to outrage her modesty or molest her:

(iv) paying less wages, or giving of work more than required of her, to a fem:
employee. than her male counterpart;

(v) refusing to grant leave of absence to a female employee or permission to
during her pregnancy/termination of pregnancy or other periods when she would n
be physically or biologically fit to perform her work to her fullest capacity:

(vi) passing of obscence or lewd comments against a female employee or
her presence;

(vii) making a female employee attend office on holidays or come to s
place where her presence is not required in connection with her employment;

(viii) compelling a female employee to attend a party/dance or any mi
programme or to dine with her employer or any other person if the female employ.
is not willing to do so;

(ix) refusal to allow rest to female employee as provided under the provisio
of any other law for the time being in force;



es)

(0 making her dress in a way which would present her वी an obscene manner;

(xi) making her perform such a job or duty which would denigrate her
personality;

(पा) touching or otherwise fondling or Mlirting bodily of a female employee in
the guise of teaching her the job or help her in her job;

(xiii) making her perform such duties which she
condition would be able to perform:

not with her physical

(xiv) gestures or actions either by word or by written material intending to insult
or cause mental injury to a female employee;

(xv) showing pornography or other obscene literature to at female employee:

(xvi) sexual advances with a view to assault or molest or outrage modesty of a
female employee;

(xvii) offering unwanted suggestions or advice about physical appearance or on
other matters of a female employee with a view to hurt her; and

(xviii) doing of any other act or causing any act by using position as an employer
with a view to exploiting a female employee

15. (1) The Central Government shall designate an officer, who shall be a woman, as
| deem fit, to be the Special Officer in every department, or office or an establishment
its jurisdiction to deal with cases arising out of this Act.

(2) The Special Officer so designated under sub-section (1) shall deal with
laints lodged by female employees in her department or office or establishment.

16. The appropriate Government shall appoint a Special Officer, who shall be a
an, for every district to deal with cases arising out of provisions of this Act within
jurisdiction of that district.

17. No person being an employer or manager or supervisor in charge of the office/
sation or a factory or establishment or any other work place or any other employee or
yy other person shall indulge or caused to be indulged in sexual harassment of women
yyees.

18. If any female employee has been subject to sexual harassment, she mi
concerned Special Officer for redressal of her grievances

proach

19, As soon as a complaint has been lodged with the Special Officer, she shall make
‘caused to be made an inquiry into the facts and circumstances of the complaint.

20. If after inquiry, the Special Officer finds any person guilty of sexual harassment
shall—

(a) in case the guilty is an employee of the Government, recommend to the
appropriate authority for taking such disciplinary action as she may deem fit;

(b) in case the guilty is not employed in Government service, recommend to
the employer or other person in charge of the affairs of the organisation where the
accused is employed, such action as she may deem fit;

Provided that if it is brought to the notice of the Special Officer that no action has
taken by the employer or the person in charge of the affairs of the organisation where
e accused is employed—

(0) in case it is an office or establishment under the control of the Central
Government, the Central Government shall terminate the services of both the accused
Person and the person in charge of the office where the victim is employed;

Special offiver to
deal with cases in
the Governmer
offices

Special Officer
for every district.

‘Women employ
‘ees not to be har-
assed

Women employ:
ees 10 approach
Spectal Officerin
case of harass-
ment,

Special Officerto
make inquires.

Special Officer
to recommend
action against
guilty.


Special Officer
to have powers
ofa Civil Cour.

Punishment,

Provision of
pension to des-
titute women.

‘Women’s home.

Insurance
Scheme for

‘Welfare Fund for
women other
than working
women.

Establishment
of Women
Development
Bank.

Board to man-
age Bank.

6

(ii) in case the work place where the victim is employed is noi under the
control of the Central Government, the facilities and concessions extended to that
organisation by the Central Government shall be withdrawn forthwith

21. A Special Officer while discharging her functions under the provisions of this Act
shall have the powers of a Civil Court and the proceedings thereof shall be in accordance
with the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

22. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be punished with
imprisionment for a period of not less than seven years and with fine not less than fifty
thousand rupees and shall be disqualified from joining the Government service.

CHAPTERV
Sociat Security RicirTs

23. The appropriate Government shall provide a pension at the rate of rupees one
thousand and five hundred per mensem, to be revised from time to time, to all destitute
women till they are gainfully employed or facilities for self-employment have been
created for them or aécommodated in women’s homes whichever is the earliest.

24, (7) The appropriate Government shall establish women’s homes in every
district for accomodating destitute women.

(2) In every women’s home:—
(i) medical care, food and clothes shall be supplied free of cost to the inmates;
(ii) recreational facilities shall be made ayailable; and

(iii) necessary facilities for self employment shall be made available.

25. (1) The Central Government shall frame and administer an Insurance Scheme
for all women.

(2)The Insurance Scheme so administered shall cater to housewives, working
women and self employed women in both organised and unorganised sectors.

(3) The Insurance shall cover against accidents, injuries, illness connected with
pregnanacy or otherwise or any loss in the self-employment due to natural calamity or
any mishap.

(4) The Central Government shall determine the amount of insurance and the
premium payable by every woman and the period of the insurance cover thereon.

26. (7) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be called the Women
Welfare Fund for carrying out welfare measures for women other than working women.

(2) Every State Government shall contribute to the Fund in such ratio as may
determined by the Central Government.

(3) The Fund shall be utilised for providing necessary facilities to women pursuing
education, or self-employment and for payment of pension to destitute women.

CHAPTER VI
Economic RIGHTS

27. (1) The Central Government shall establish a Women Development Bank
with its headquarters at New Delhi

(2) The Bank shall set up its regional offices in every State capital and a branch
in every city having a population of more than one million and in every district:

Provided that the bank may set up more than one branch in a city or a district in
accordance with its population and requirement.

28. (/) The Bank shall be managed by a Board consisting of the following, namely:—

(a) a Chairman, who shall be an expert in banking service to be appointed by
the Central Government;


7
(b) members to represent the following:—
(0 Union Ministry of Women Development;
(ii) Union Ministry of Finance;

(iii) a representative of National Commission of Women established under
the National Commission for Women Act, 1990;

(iv) a representative of reputed Women’s Associations in the country; and
(v) a representative of Legal profession.

(2) The terms of appointment, qualification of Chairman and other members of the
ard shall be such as may be prescribed.

(3) The salaries and other allowances and conditions of service of the Chairman
ll be such as may be prescribed.

(4) The members of the Board shall be entitled to such allowances as may be
rescribed for attending the sittings of the Board.

29. The Board shall frame policies and determine business of the bank with a view to
ing alround development of women.

30. (7) The Board shall hold sittings as often as possible but in any case not later than
months from the date of its previous sitting.

(2) The sittings of the Board shall be presided over by the Chairman and in his absence,
Ny any member to be elected as acting chairman from members amongst themselves.

31. (/) The authorised capital of the Bank shall be rupees five hundred crore

dit may be increased at any time by the Central Government by notification in the
Gazette.

(2) Every State Government shall contribute to the bank in such ratio as may be
ined by the Central Government.

32, The dealings and transactions of the bank shall be exclusively with women and
such organisations as are engaged in the welfare activities of women.

33. The bank shall perform the following business, namely:—
(i accept deposits, cither in cash or in any banking instrument from women:
(ii) open savings or other accounts in favour of women;

(iii) extend loans to women for pursuing education including higher and
technical education;
(iv) extend loans to women for self-employment;

(v) extend loans to women for illness, pregnancy including termination of

Pregnancy, marriages, religious ceremonies and for such other similar Purposes as
may be prescribed; and

(vi) extend loans to women for purchase/construction of houses, purchase of
vehicles and consumer durables.

34, (1) The bank may impose such terms and conditions, as it may deem necessary,
granting loan to women.

(2) The loan amount shall be determined in accordance with circumstances and
of every case.

(3) The loan amount shall be repayable over such period as may be determined
vy the bank.

Board to frame
policies and de-
termine business
of Bank.

Sitting of Bank.

Capital of Bank.

Dealings and
transactions of
Bank

Duty of Bank

‘Terms and Con-
ditions for grant-
ing loan.


Application for
‘availing loan,

Women
registered with
Employment
Exchanges to
get pnonty,

Officers and
statt

sstablishinent

of lineage.

Right to refuse
to fill forms in
certain cases

Misdemeanour
under the Act

Penalties

Rights of an
unmarried
woman,

8

35. (/) Every woman who wishes to avail of loan facility may make a
to the nearest bank.

application

(2) The bank, on receipt of an application under sub-section (/), shall take a
decision with regard to grant of loan, within a period of one month from the date of
receipt of such application and state reasons in case the loan amount is not granted.

(J) The appropriate Government shall forward names of women registered with
employment exchanges under their jurisdiction to the concerned regional office.

(2) Any woman who has registered herself with an employment exchange and is not
gainfully employed shall have preference in getting loan for self-employment

37. The bank shall appoint necessary officers and staff for efficient functioning
of the ban

Provided that one half of the total number of appointments or posts shall be
reserved for women.

CHAPTER VII
Sociat, Ric
38. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force
throughout the territory of India, it shall be unlawful for any Government, authority or
person, to compel any other person who is a citizen of India to fill and sign any form,
statutory or non-statutory, official or non-official, which provides for establishing a person's
lineage only through his or her father or to prohibit him or her to write his or her mother's
name instead.
39, After the coming into force of this Act. it shall be lawful for any citizen of India
to refuse to fill a form requiring him or her to give his or her father’s name or her husband's
name and which does not give him or her the option to give the name of his or her mother.

40. It shall be a grave misdemeanour under this Act for any person to describe any
citizen of India as “bastard”.

41. (7) Whosoever compels any citizen of India to act in a manner contrary to the
provisioris of sections 38 and 39 of this Act or discriminate against any citizen on the ground
of the citizen’s refusal to act in a manner which is against the provisions of these sections,
shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month,
and fine of five hundred rupees or one month's imprisonment in licu thereof.

(2) The misdemeanour mentioned in section 40 shall be punishable with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and with fine of five hundred rupees
or one month’s imprisonment in case of non-payment of fine.

CHAPTER VIII

Property RIGHTS

42. An unmarried woman shall have the following rights, namely:—

(a) she shall have the right to live in the house of her parents but shall not have
the right to seek partition or disposal of such house;

(b) she shall have the right to claim an equal share in any property, other than
the residential house or dwelling unit referred to in clause (a), as a coparcener to such
property, whether such property is a joint-family property or any premises held on
lease or licence or under any other arrangement by her parents:

Provided that she shall have the right to claim partition of such property, if she
decides to remain unmarried after she attains the age of cighteen years or such other
age of marriage as may be determined under any law for the time being in force;
(c) she shall have the right to claim
of the family business of her parents; and

n equal share as a coparcener. in the gains

(d) she shalll have right to claim an equal share in any property. as a coparcener,
which is acquired by her parents by way of exchange, sale or transfer of any existing


v5
9

property or which is acquired by her parents by way of accreditation or succession
to any ancestral property or otherwise.

43. A married woman shall have the following rights, namely:—

(a) she shall have the right to live in the house of her husband whether owned
by him or by his joint family or owned by him, solely or jointly, as a lessee or licensee:

Provided that such right shall not be void in the event of judicial separation,
divorce or death of the husband:

Provided further that she shall also have the right to live in the residential
house or dwelling unit of her parents, in case she is deserted or divorced by her
husband, without secking partition or disposal of whole or any part thereof;

(0) she shall have the right to claim an equal share, as a coparcener, in the
property of her husband including that of in the joint family property of her husband,
from the date of marriage, and like any other coparcener she shall also have the right
to claim partition or disposal of whole or part of such property:

Provided that in the event of disposal of part or whole of such property, the
other coparcener shall have right to pre-emption;

(c) she shall have an option to have the custody of the children born out of the
wedlock and shall have the right to claim maintenance, not inconsistent with the
status of the family of her husband, both for herself and for her children which shall
include the expenses to be incurred on the education, training and upbringing of her
children in case of dissolution of marriage:

Provided that if in the interest of the education, training or upbringing of the
children it is considered necessary or expedient to leave the children under the custody
of the husband or any one else, she shall have the right to free access to the children
born out of the wedlock, irrespective of estrangement, desertion, divorce or death of
the husband.

(d) she shall have the right to claim an equal share in the gains of the business of
her husband or in the family business of her husband or in any other business in
which her husband is a partner.

44, A widow shall have the following rights, namely:—

(a) she shall, subject to such eligibility, as may be prescribed, be entitled to
suitable employment by the Central Government in case her deceased hushand
was employed in any of the establishment under the Central Government:

Provided that if she is not eligible for any such employment, she shall be
entitled to such monthly pension as would have been payable to her husband at
the time of his deemed superannuation:

Provided further that if the death of her husband occurs during the course
of his duties, she shall be entitled to such monthly salary and allowances, as would
have been payable to her husband till his deemed superannuation, besides any
other compensation admissible to her under any other law for the time being in
force;

(8) she shall have the first claim and absolute right to the property of her deceased
husband;

(c) she shall be entitled to have such share and status as the share and status of
her deceased husband would have been, in the family business; and

(d) she shall have the right to live in the residential house or dwelling unit of her
| Parents, in the case she so desires, without secking partition or disposal of whole or
_ any part thereof.

Rights of a
married
wornan,

Rights of a
widow.


10
CHAPTER IX
Sreciat Courts

Establishment 45. (1) The appropriate Government shall set up sufficient number of special |

of iia deal exclusively with matters arising out of atrocities or offences committed against women. —
‘outs for

Women. (2) Each special court shall consist of a Chief Judge and such number of other |
Judges as the appropriate Government may deem fit.

(3) Every special court shall be headed by the Chief Judge.

Qualification 46. (J) A person shall be qualified for appointment as the Chief Judge unless he —

for appoint-

ment as Chief (a) is, or has been, a District Judge; or

Judge and other

Judges. (6) has, for at least two years, held the office of the Judge of the special court;

and has, for at least five years, been associated with women’s cause;
(2) A person shall be qualified for appointment as a judge unless he.—
(a) is, or has been, a judicial Magistrate; or

(b) has, for a period of not less than five years, been practising law; and has
for atleast five years, been associated with women’s cause.

(3) Every Chief Judge of a special court in a Union territory shall be appointed
by the President,

(4) Every Chief Judge of a special court in a State shall be appointed by ॥
Governor of the State concerned,

(5) Every other Judge of a special court shall be appointed by the appropriate
Government,

(6) One-third of the total number of posts of Chief Judges and other Judges i
every State shall be reserved for women.

Sealer oct 47. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chief Judge
Judge to act as of a special court by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the senior most Judge
One pled that Court shall act as the Chief Judge until the date on which a new Chief Judge, appointed
पल in inaccordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office.

certain circum-

ance (2) When the Chief Judge is unable to discharge his functions owing to absen

illness or any other cause, the senior most Judge of that special court shall discharge the
functions of the Chief Judge until the date on which Chief Judge resumes his duties.

‘Term of office. 48. Every Chief Judge and other Judges shall hold office as such for a term of five
years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains, —

(a) in the case of the Chief Judge, the age of 65 years, and
(b) in the case of any other Judge, the age of 60 years,
whichever is earlier.
Resignation 49. Every Chief Judge or a Judge may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed
and removal. tg the President in case he is a Chief Judge or a Judge of a special court in a Uni
territory or to the Governor, in case he is a Chief Judge or a Judge of a special court in
State resign from his office:
Provided that the Chief Judge or any other Judge shall unless he is permitted by 0
President or the Governor, as the case may be, to relinquish his office sooner, continue
hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until
person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of his
term of office, whichever is the earliest.

‘«


॥1

50. The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of the Chief Judge

ora Judge of a special court shall be such as may by prescribed by the Central
Government:

Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of

service of the Chief Judge or a Judge of a special court shall be varied to hiv disadvantage
after his appointment.

51. Every Chief Judge shall exercise such financial and administrative powers over
“the special court as may be vested in him in such manner as may be prescribed.

52, The appropriate Government shall determine the nature and categories of the
officers and other employees required to assist a special court in the discharge of its functions,

53. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, every special court shall exercise

all the judicial powers and authority exercisable immediately before that day by all courts
(except High Courts and the Supreme Court) in relation to all matters of offences or atrocities
‘Committed against women under the Indian Penal Code or any other law for the time being

=

54. Every special court constituted under this Act shall havi
‘court for the purpose of holding any inquiry as are vested in a civil
Civil Procedure, 1908 and in a criminal court under the Code

¢ powers of any other
court under the Code of
of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
55. On the date of coming into force of this Act, the Jurisdiction, powers and
in relation to any offences or crimes or atrocities committed against wome
exercisable by a special court and no other court (except High Courts
Court) shall have, or be entitled to exercise any jurisdiction, powers or au
such offences or crimes or atrocities committed against women,

authority
hall be
and the Supreme
thority in relation

56. Every suit or other proceedin,
nmediately before the date of comin,
use of action wherein it is based is
titution, within the jurisdiction
e to such special court:

pending before any other court or any authority
into force of this Act being a suit or proceeding the
such that it would have been if it had arisen after such
of a special such court, shall stand transferred on that

Provided that nothing contained in this section shall

apply to a suit or other Proceeding
ing in a High Court or the Supreme Court.

CHAPTER-X
MISCELLANEOUS

58. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding
ith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in
by virtue of any law other than this Act.

anything inconsistent
any instrument having

59. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
emment may, by order published in the Official G
consistent with the provisions of this
emoving the difficulty,

Provisions of this Act, the Central
azelte, make such provisions, not
Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for

(2) Every order referred to in this section shall,
id before each House of Parliament,

soon as may be after it is made,

60. The Central Government may, #'

'Y notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
‘ing out the provisions of this Act

Salary and al-
lowances and
other terms and
conditions of
service of Chief
Judge and other
Judges

Financial and
administrative
powers of the
Chief Judge.

Staff of the spe-
ial coun

Jurisdiction,
powers and
authonty of
Special
Couns,

Power of Spe-
cial Couns

Exclusion of
Jurisdiction of
courts except
the concerned
High Court and
the Supreme
Court.

Transfer of
Pending cases

Free legal aid
to women,

Act to have
over-riding
effect

Power to re-
move difficul-
ties,

Power to make
rules,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Even after fifty years of independence, our womenfolk have not improved much.
They are treated as second grade citizens. Though they also equally. if not more than the
menfolk, contribute to the nation building activities, yet they are never recognised. Majority
of the women are illiterate; socially insecure, economically dependent upon menfolk. Though
the Government has taken many steps to improve the lot of women. yet they are not sufficient.
Womenfolk in our country are placed at disadvantage in the following sectors:—

(1) Education

(2). Employment—They are given less wages than men
(3) Social rights

(4) Property rights

(5) Self-employment opportunities

Atrocities against women are increasing day by day. Cases of atroc against women
are piling up in courts. Courts take a long time in disposing of the cases. Sexual harassment
takes place at the work places. Working women have not been given adequate facilities at
the work places.

Girls are not sent to schools by thier parents. They do not get admission in schools,
There is no vocational training facility for them. Women are not given jobs. They do not
have adequate opportunities for self-employment. The National Commission for Women
does not have adequate powers to deal with the situation,

With a view to alround development of women, it is proposed to bring forward a
comprehensive Bill providing for-——

(1) free education to women;

(2) vocational trainin;

(3) freg insurance facilities;

(4) facilities at the work places;

(5) equal rights in the management, associations, etc.;
(6) special courts to deal with atrocities against women:
(7) facilities for destitute women;

(8) property rights.

The Bill seeks to make an attempt to improve the lot of women.

New छा; V .SAROJA
October 21, 1999.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill makes provision for free education to women. It also provides for

g of adequate number of schools for them. Clause 4 provides for vocational training
nen. Clause 6 makes provision for Working Women Welfare Fund. Clause 8 provides
tution of Advisory Committees. Clause 10 provides for appointment of Special
to supervise the facilities to working women at the work places. Clause 16 provides
intment of Special Officer to investigate cases of sexual harassment against women.
23 provides for pension to destitute women. Clause 24 provides for establishment
n’s homes. Clause 25 makes provision for insurance scheme for women.

Clause 26 provides for setting up of a Fund for women other than working women
27 provides for the establishment of a Women Development Bank. Clause 28 provides
Board to manage the Bank. Clause 31 provides that the authorised Capital of the
shall be rupees five hundred crore.Clause 37 provides for appointment of officers
aff of the Bank. Clause 44 provides that a widow shall be entitled to employment
. Clause 45 provides for establishment of Special courts for women. Clause 50
ides for salaries and allowances of Chief Judge or other Judges of special courts.

52 provides for appointment of officers and staff to assist Special courts. Clause 57
for free legal aid to women.

Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. Tt
to involve an annual recurring expenditure of fupees one thousand crore. A non-
g expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clasue 60 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the matter will relate to detail only, the delegation of legislative
powers is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for empowerment of women in all fields and for matters connected |

(Dr. ४ Saroja, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1723LS—9. 11.1999. .