8Ul No. 80 of 19$9 
THE LEGAL PRACTITIONERS BILL, 19S9 
(As INIRODUCED IN LOK SABRA 
ON 19TH NOVEMBER 1959) 

TIlE LEGAL PRACTITIONERS BILL, IPS" 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PuLIMINARY 
CLAUSBS 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
BAR COUNCILS 
3. State Bar Councils. 
4. All-India Bar Council. 
5. Bar Council to be body corporate. 
6. Functions of State Bar Councils. 
7. Functions of All-India Bar Council. 
S. Term of office of members of Bar Council. 
9. Constitution of Standing Committees. 
10. Staff of Bar Council. 
11. Accounts and audit. 
12. Vacancies in Bar Councils and committees thereof not to 
invalidate action taken. 
13. Election to Bar Councils not to be que~tioned on certain 
grounds. 
14. Power to make rules. 
CHAPTER III 
ADMISSION AND ENROLMENT OF ADVOCATES 
It5. Senior and other advocates. 
16. State Bar Council to maintain roll of advocates. 
17. State Bar Councils to send copies of rolls of advocates to 
the All-India Bar Council. 
18. Common roll of advocates. 
i 

CLAUSES 
19. Disputes regarding seniority. 
20. Certificate of enrolment. 
21. Right of pre-audience. 
22. Persons who may be admitted as advocates on the roll of 
High Court. 
23. Authority to whom applications for enrolment may be 
made. 
24. Disposal of applications for admission as an advocate. 
25. Application once refused not to be entertained by another 
Bar Council except in certain circumstances. 
26. Power to make rules. 
CHAPTER IV 
RIGHT TO PRACTICE 
27. Advocates to be the only recognised class of legal practi-
tioners. 
28. Right of advocates to practise. 
29. Special provision for attorneys. 
30. Power of court to permit appearances in particular cases. 
31. Advocates alone entitled to practise. 
32. Power of High Courts to make rules. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCONDUCT OF ADVOCATES 
33. Punishment of advocates for misconduct. 
34. Disciplinary powers of All-India Bar Council. 
35. Appeals. 
36. Stay of order. 
37. Alteration in roll of advocates. 
38. Powers of disciplinary committee. 
39. Cost of proceedings before a disciplinary committee. 
40. Review of orders by disciplinary committee. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
41. Penalty for persons illegally practising in courts and Before 
other authorities. 

iii 
CLAUSES 
42. Payment of part of enrolment fees to the All-India Bar 
Council. 
43. Reciprocity. 
44. Indemnity against legal proceedings. 
45. General power of All-India Bar Council to make rulel. 
46. Repeal of certain enactments. 
CHAPTER VII 
TEMPORARY AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 
47. Elections to first State Bar Council. 
48. Term of office of members of first All-India Bar Council 
and State Bar Councils. 
49. Rights of certain existing legal practitioners not affected. 
50. Barristers may be admitted as advocates during limited 
period. 
51. Dissolution of existing Bar Councils. 
02. Power to make rules pending the constitution of a Bar 
Council. 
THE SCHEDULE 

BUI No. 80 of 1'59 
THE LEGAL PRACTITIONERS BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to amend and consoLidate the Law· relating to legal practitioners and 
to provide for the constitution of Bar Councils and an All-India 
Bar. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:--
CHAPTER I 
PRELIM IN ARY 
5 1. (11 This Act may be called the Legal Practitioners Act, 1959" Short title, 
extent and 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu cm:nmt ence-m.n. 
and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govel'D-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and dift'er-
10 ent dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "advocate" means an advocate entered in any roll un-
der the provisions of this Act; 
(b) "All-Ind 1 Bar Council" means the All-India Bar Coun-
cil constituted Ul. rier section 4; 
(c) "appointed day", in relation to any provision of this 
Act, means the day on which that provision comes intn f""ne; 
(d) "attorney" includes '1 solicitor; 
1166 (B) LS--l. 
Ddinitie>nl 

Stat. B., 
Coundlt. 
(e) "Bar Council" means a Bar Council constituted under 
this Act; 
(f) "common roll" means the common roll of advocater. 
prepared and maintained by the All-India Bar Council under 
section 18; 5 
(g) "High Court", except in sub-section (1) of section 32 
and in section 39 does not include a court of the Judicial Com-
missioner, and, in relation to a State Bar Council, means,-
(i) in the case of a State Bar Council constituted for a 
State, the High Court for that State, and 10 
(ii) in the case of a State Bar Council constituted for a 
State and one or more Union territories, the High Court for 
the State; 
(h) "law graduate" means a person who has obtained a 
bachelor's degree in law from any University established by law 15 
in India; 
(i) "legal practitioner" means an advocate, vakil or attorney 
of any High Court, a pleader, mukhtar or revenue agent; 
(;) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(k) "roll" means a roll of advocates prepared and maintain-
ed under this Act; 
(I) "State" does not include a Union territory; 
(m) "State Bar Council" means a Bar Council constituted 
20 
under section 3; 25 
(n) "State roll" means a roll of advocates prepared and 
maintained by a State Bar Council under section 16. 
CHAPTER II 
BAR COUNCILS 
3. (1) There shall be a Bar Council- 30 
(4) for each of the States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, 
Bombay, Madhya Pradesh, Madras, Mysore, Orissa, Rajasthan 
and Uttar Pradesh, to be known as the Bar Council of that State; 
(b) for the State of Assam and the Union territory of Mani. 
pur, to be known as the Assam Bar Council; 3S 
(c) for the State of Kerala and the Union territory of the 
Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands, to be known a« the 
Karala Bar Council; 

3 
(d) for tho State of Punjab and the Union territories of 
Delhi and Himllcool Pradesh, to be known as the Punjab Bar 
Council; and 
(e) for the State of West Bengal and the Union territories 
5 of Tripura and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, to be known 
as the West Bengal Bar Council. 
(2) A State Bar Council shall consist of the following membel'S, 
namely:-
(a) two Judges of the High Court who have been advocates, 
10 nominated by the Chief Justice of the High Court: 
Provided that in the case of the Assam Bar Council and the 
Orissa Bar Council only one such Judge shall be so nominated; 
(b) the Advocate-General for the State, ex officio; 
(c) in the case of the Assam Bar Council and the Orissa 
15 Bar Council, ten members, and in every other case, fifteen mem-
bers, elected by advocates on the roll of the State Bar CouncU 
from amongst themselves: 
Provided that of the elected members of the West Bengal 
Bar Council and the Bombay Bar Council, such number, as may 
20 be prescribed in each case, shall be persons who are entitled to 
practise in the High Court at Calcutta or the High Court at 
Bombay, as the case may be, in the exercise of its original 
jUrisdiction. 
(3) There shall be a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman of each 
25 State Bar Council elected by the Council in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 
4. (1) There shall be a Bar Council for the territories to which All-India 
this Act extends to be known as the All-India Bar Council which Bar Council 
shan consist of the following members, namely:-
30 (a) two Judges of the Supreme Court who have been advo-
cates, nominated by the Chief Justice of India; 
(b) the Attorney-General of India, ex officio; 
(c) the Solicitor-General of India; ex officio; 
(d) three members elected by the Supreme Court Bar AHo-
35 elation from amongst its members; 
(e) one member elected by each State Bar Council from 
amongst its members; 
(f) where a State Bar Council has on its roll on the 1st day 
of January of the year in which the election is held more than 
40 three thousand advocates, one additional member elected by it 
such member being a person who 11 on Its roll and is not a mem-
ber of the State Bar Council. 

Bar Coundl 
to be body 
'!Orvora teo 
Punctionl of 
Stlte Bar 
Counc:ilJ. 
'unction. 
of All-India 
Bar Council. 
4 
(Z) There shall be a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman of the All-
India Bfll Council elected by the Council in slich manner as may be 
prescribed. 
5. Every Bar Council shall be a body corporate having perpetual 
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire and hold pro- 5 
perty, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and may by 
th~ name by which it is known sue and be sued. 
8. The functions of a State Bar Council shall be-
(a) to admit persons as advocates on its roll; 
(b) to prepare and maintain such roll; 
(c) to entertain and determine cases of misconduct against 
advocates on its roll; 
(d) to manage and invest the funds of the Bar Council; 
(e) to provide for the election of its members; 
[0 
(1) to perfonn all other functions conferred on it by or un- IS 
der this Act; 
(g) to do all other things necessary for discharging the 
aforesaid functions. 
7. The functions of the All-India Bar Council shall be-
(a) to prepare and maintain a common roll of advocates; 20 
(b) to lay down standards of professional conduct lind eti-
quette for advocates; 
(c) to lay down the procedure to be followed by its disci-
plinary committee and the disciplinary committee of each State 
Bar Council; 2.S 
(d) to deal with and dispose of any matter arising under this 
Act, which mey be referred to it by a State Bar Council; 
(e) to exercise genera! supervision and control over State 
Bar Councils; 
<f) to lay down standards of legal education in consultation 30 
with the Universities in India imparting such education; 
(g) to recognise Universities whose degree in law shall be a 
qualification for enrolment as an advocate and for that purpose 
to visit and inspect Universities; 
(h) to manage and invest the funds of the Bar Council; 35 
(i) to provide for the election of its members; 

U) to perform all other functions conferred on it by or un-
der this Act; 
(k) to do all other things neeessary for discharging the 
aforesaid functions. 
5 8. The term of office of the elected members of a Bar Council Term of 
mall be six years, but as nearly as possible one-third of the members ~~~b~:S of 
first elected to each such Council shall retire on the expiration of Bar C'..ouncil. 
every second year in the prescribed manner, and the vacancies so 
caused shall be filled by the election of new members in the pres-
10 cribed manner. 
9. (1) A StGte Bar Council shall constitute from amongst its mem- Constitution' 
b th f II . t d' 'tt I of.tandinl· ers e 0 owlOg s an 109 commI ees, name y:- committees. 
(a) an executive committee consisting of five members; 
(b) an enrolment committee consisting of three members; 
I~ and 
(c) a disciplinary committee consisting of five members. 
(2) The All-India Bar Council shall constitute the following 
standing committees, namely:-
(a) an executive committee consisting of nine members 
20 elected by it from amongst its members; . 
(b) a disciplinary committee consisting of five members 
elected by it from amongst its members; and 
(c) a legal education committee consisting of twelve mem-
bers of whom-
2S (i) two shall be the Judges of the Supreme Court nomi-
nated on the Council by the Chief Justice of India; 
(ii) five shall be persons elected by the Council from 
amongst its members; and 
(iii) five shall be persons co-opted by the members refer-
30 red .to in sub-clause (i) and sub-clause (ii). 
(3) A State Bar Council and the All-India Bar Council may con-
stitute from amongst its members such other committees as it may 
deem necessary for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of 
this Act. 
3S 10. (1) Every Bar Council shall appoint It secretary and an Staff of 
&ecountant and may employ such number of other persons on its Bar Council. 
staff as it may deem necessary. 
(2) The secretary and the accountant shall possess such. quali-
fications as may be prescribed. 
11ee (B) LS-2. 

ACeount6 
aDd audit. 11. (1) Ever,. Bar Council shall cause to be maintained such books 
of accounts and other books in such form and in such manner as may 
be prescribed. 
(2) The accounts of a Bar Council shall be audited by auditors 
appointed by it, at such times and in such manner as may be pres- .5 
cribed. 
(3) As soon as the accounts of a State Bar Council have been 
audited, that Bar Council shall send a copy of such accounts together 
with a copy of the report of the auditors thereon, to the All-India 
Bar Council. 10 
yacancies 12. No act done by a Bar Council or any committee thereof shall 
~~cils and be called in question on the ground merely of the existence of any 
committees vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Council or com-thereof not . to invalidate rruttee, as the case may be. 
action taken. 
Blection to 13. No election of a member to a Bar Council shall be called. in IS 
~ ::b~cilS question on the ground merely that due notice thereof has not been 
.. UC8tion~d given to any person entitled to vote thereat, if notice of the date has, 
;o.:~~n not less than thirty days before that date, been published in the Offi-
cial Gazette. 
Power to 14. (1) A Bar Council may make rules to carry out the purposes 20 
make rules. of this Chapter. 
(2) In particular, end without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for-
(a) the manner in which the election of members of the 
Bar Council shall be held and the manner in which results of 25 
elections shall be published; 
(b) in the case of a State Bar Council, the division of the 
territory for which the Bar Council is constituted into various 
consti tuencies; 
(e) in the case of the West Bengal Bar Council and the 30 
Bombay Bar Council. the number of advocates practising in the 
High Court at Calcutta or the High Court at Bombay, as the 
case may be, in the exercise of its original jurisdiction, who shall 
be elected to the Bar Council; 
(d) the manner of election of the Chairman and the Vice- 35 
Chairman of the Bar Council; 
(e) the manner in which and the authority by which doubts 
and disputes as to the validi ty of an election to the Bar Council 
or to the office of the Chairman or Vice-Chairman shall be finally 
decided; : I 40 

7 
(1) the manner in which the order of retirement by rotaUOIl 
of the members of the Bar Council shall be determined; 
(g) the filling of casual vacancies in the Bar Council; 
(h) the powers and duties of the Chairman and the Viee-
S Chairman of the Bar Council; 
(i) the summoning and holding of meetings of the Bar 
Council, the times and places where such meetings are to be 
held, the conduct of business thereat and the number of members 
necessary to constitute a quorum; 
10 (j) the constitution and functions of any committee of the 
Bar Council and the term of office of members of any such 
committee; 
(k) the summoning and hording of meetings and the conduct 
of business of any such committee; 
IS (l) the qualifications and the condition5 of service of the 
secretary, the accountant and other employees of the Bar 
Council; j 
(m) the maintenance of books of accounts and other books by 
the Bar Council; 
20 (n) the appointment of auditors and the audit of the accounts 
of the Bar Council; ! 
(0) the management and investment of the funds of the 
Bar Council. 
(3) No rules made under this section by a State Bar Council 
25 shall have effect unless they have been approved by the All-India 
Bar Council. 
CHAPTER III 
ADMISSION AND ENROLMENT OF ADVOCATES 
15. (1) There shall be two classes of advocates, namely, senior Senior IlII.d 
30 advocates and other advocates. other 
(2) An advocate may, with his consent, be designated as senior 
advocate if the Supreme Court or a High Court is of opinion that 
by virtue of his ability, experience and standing at the Bar he is 
deserving of such distinction. 
35 (3) Senior advocates shall, in the matter of their practice, be 
subject to such restrictions as the All-India Bar Ccuncil may, in the 
interests of the legal profession, prescribe. 
advooates. 

8 
,_ .. A4) An adv.ocate of-the Supreme Court who was a senior advocate 
of that Court immediately before the appointed day shall, for the 
purposes of this section, be deemed to be a senior advocate. 
State Bar 16.(1) Every State Bar Council shall preparE: and maintain a 
~~~~~ to . roll of advocates in which shall be entered the names and eddressE.'s 5 
roll of of-
.dvocates. 
(a) all persons who were entered as advocates on the roll of 
the High Court immediately before the appointed day; 
(b) all other persons who are admitted to be advocates on 
the roll of the State Bar Council under this Act on or after the 10 
appointed day. 
(2) Each such roll of advocates shall consist of two parts, the 
first part containing the names of senior advocates and the second 
part, the names of other advocates. 
(3) Entries in each part of the roll of advocates prepared end IS 
~intained by a State Bar Council under this section shall be in 1he 
order of seniority, and such seniority shall be determined as 
follows:-
(a) the seniority of advocates referred to in clause (a) of 
sub-section (1) shall be determined in accordance with their 2.0 
seniority inter se immediately before the appointed day; 
(b) the seniority of any person who was a senior advocate 
of the Supreme Court immediately before the appointed day 
shall, for the purposes of the first part of the State roll, be deter-
mined in accordance with such principles as the All-India Bar 2.5 
Council may specify; 
(c) the seniority of a vakil, pleader or an attorney who is 
enrolled as an advocate under sub-section (2) of section 22 shall 
be determined in accordance with the date of his entry . in the 
register of vakils, pleaders or attorneys, as the case may be; 30 
(d) the seniority of any other person who, on or after the 
appointed day, is enrolled as a senior advocate or is admitted as 
an advocate shall be determined by the date of such enrolment 
or admission, as the case may be. 
State Bar -17. Every S~te Bar Council shtall send to the All-India Bar 3S 
~~':r:~ie~o Council an authenticated copy of the first roll of advocates prepared 
of rolls of by it. under this Act and shall thereefter communicate to the All-
:Ali-\~;f ~t;l.dl~ Bar Council all alterations in, and additions to, any such roll, 
I U' Council. as soon' as the same have been made. 

9 
18, (1) The All-India Bar Council shall prepare and maintain a Common roll 
f h ' h h 11' . h ' d' 11 of ~dvOCll el common roll a advocates w IC s a comprIse t e entrIes rna e In a . 
State rolls and shell include the names of all advocates entitled as 
of right to practise in the Supreme Court immediately before the 
5 appointed day whose names are not entered in any State roll. 
(2) The common roll of advocates shall consist of two parts, the 
first part containing the names of senior advocates, and the second 
part, the names' of other advocates. 
(3) Entries in each part of the common roll shall be in the order 
10 of seniority IQnd such seniority shall be determined as follows:-
(a) the seniority of an advocate enrolled in a State roll shall 
be determined in accordance with his seniority in that 
roll; 
(b) the seniority of any person who was a senior advocate 
15 of the Supreme Court immediately before the appointed day 
and whose name is not entered in any State roll shall, for the 
purposes of the first part of the common roll, be determined 
in accordance with such principles IQS the All-India Bar Council 
may specify in this behalf; 
20 (c) the seniority of any person who was an advocate (but 
not a senior advocate) of the Supreme Court immediately before 
the appointed day and whose name is not entered in any State 
roll shall, for the purposes of the second part of the common roll, 
be determined in accordance with the date of his enrolment as 
25 an advocate of the Supreme Court. 
(4) There shall be entered in the common roll of advocates all 
alterations and additions communicated to the All-India Bar Coun-
cil under section 17 by a State Bar Council. 
19. (l) Where the date of seniority of two or more persons is Disputes 
30 the same, the one senior in age shaU be reckoned as senior to the reg~rd.ini 
other. semorlty. 
(2) Subject as aforesaid. if any dispute arises with respect to 
the seniority of any person, it shall be referred-
(a) if the dispute relates to seniority in a State roU, to the 
35 State Bar Council; 
(b) if the dispute relates to seniority in the common roll, 
to the All-India Bar Council; 
and the decision of the State Bar Council or the All-India Bar Coun-
cil, as the case may be. in respect of such dispute shall be final. 

to 
C~rtifiCllt~ 20. There shall he issued a certificate of enrolment in the pres· 
of enrolment. Cribed form to every person whose name is entered in any roll of 
advocates maintained under this Act. 
::!~~di~~ce. 21. (1) The Attorney-General of India shall have pre-audience 
over all other advocates. 5 
(2) Subject .to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Solicitor-
General of India shall have pre-audience over all other advocates. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2), the 
Additional Solicitor-General of India shall have pre-audience over 
all other advocates. 
(4) Subject to the prOVlSlons of sub-sections (1), (2) and (3), 
the Advocate-General of any State shall have pre--audience over all 
other advocates, and the right of pre-audience among Advocates-
General inter se shall be determined by their respective seniority. 
(5) Subject as aforesaid-
(i) senior advocates shall have pre-audience over other 
advooo.tes, and 
(ii) the right of pre-audience of senior advocates inter se 
and other advocates inter se shall be determined by their res-
10 
15 
pective seniority. 20 
Persons who 22. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made may be . admitted as thereunder, no person shall, on or after the appomted day, be ad-
advocates on mitted as an advocate on a State roll unless he--the roll of 
High Court. ).. . f I d' (a IS a CItIzen 0 n la: 
Provided that, subject to the other provisions contained 25 
in this Act, a national of any other country may be edmitted 
as an advocate on a State roll, if citizens of India, duly 
qualified, are permitted to practise law in that other coun-
try; 
(b) has completed the age of twenty-one years; 
(c) (i) has obtained a bachelor's degree in Arts, Science 
or Commerce from any University established by law in India 
and has thereafter obtained a bachelor's degree in law from any 
such University which is recognised for the purposes of this 
30 
Act by the All-India Bar Council: 35 
Provided that for a period of three years from the appoint-
ed day, an under-graduate who has obtained a bachelor'!! degree 
in law from any such University which immediately before the 

10 
IS 
20 
II 
appointed day was conferrin, such degree. on under-graduates, 
shall be deemed to possess the qualification required by this 
clause; or 
(ii) has obtained any qualification in law from any foreign 
country which is recognised by the All-India Bar Council for the 
purposes of this Act; 
(d) has undergone the prescribed course of training in law 
and passed the prescribed examination after such training: 
Provided that this clause shall not apply to-
(1) a barrister who has received practical training in 
England; 
(ii) any person who has been a member of the Judicial 
Service of a State or a member of the Central Legal Service; 
and 
(iii) any other class of persons who by reason of their 
legal training or experience are declared by the All-India 
Bar Council to be exempt from the provisions of this clause. 
(e) fulfils such other conditions as ~ay be specified in the 
rules made by the State Bar Council under this Chapter; 
(f) has paid an enrolment fee of rupees five hundred to the 
State Bar Council. 
(2) NotWithstanding enything contained in sub-section (1), a 
vakil, pleader or an attorney who is a law graduate, or who is not 
a law graduate but was entitled to be enrolled as an advocate of a 
25 High Court immediately before the appointed day under any law 
then in force, may be admitted as an advocate on a State roll if he-
(a) makes an application for such enrolment in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act, not later than one year from the 
appointed day; and 
30 (b) fulfils the conditions specified in clauses (a), (b), (e) 
and (f) of sub-section (1). 
23. An application for admission as an advocate shall be made Authority 
in the prescribed form to the State Bar Council within whose juris- to ~ho,!, 
d· t' th l' t· applications IC IOn e app lcan proposes to practIse. lor enrol-
mentmay he 
made. 
35 24. (I) A State Bar Council shall refer every application for D' 1 f 
d . . d Jsposa 0 
a mISSIOn as an a vocate to its enrolment committee, and subject to applications 
the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), such committee shall for adffild'ssion as an a vo-
dispose of the application in the prescribed manner. cate. 
(2) Where the enrolment committee of a State Bar Council pro-
40 poses to refuse any such application, it shall refer the application 
for opinion to the All-India Bar Council and every such reference 
&hall be accompanied by a statement of the il'ounds in &upport of 
the refusal of the application. 

Application 
on~'e refused 
not to be 
entertained 
by another 
Bar Council 
except in 
certain cir-
cWllltances. 
Power to 
male. niles. 
Advocates 
to be the 
only recog-
niled class 
oflegal 
practitioners. 
Right of 
advocates 
to practile. 
(3) The enrolment committee of a State Bar Council shall dis-
pose of any application referred to the All-India Bar Council under 
sub-section (2) in conformity with the opinion of the All-India Bar 
Council. 
25. Where a State Bar Council has refused the application of 5 
any person for admission as an advocate on its roll, no other State 
Bar Council shall entertain an application for admission of such 
person as an advocate on its roll, except with the previous consent 
in writing of the State Bar Council which refused the application 
and of the All-India Bar Council. 10 
26. (1) A State Bar Council may make rules to carry out the 
purposes of this Chapter. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for-
(a) a course of practical training in law and the examina- I' 
tion to be passed after such training for admission as an advocate 
on the roll of the Bar Council; 
(b) the form in which an application shall be made to the 
Bar Council for admission as an advocate on its roll and the 
manner in which such application shall be disposed of by the 20 
enrolment committee of the Bar Council; 
(c) the conditions subject to which a person may be 
admitted as an advocate on any such roll; 
(d) the instalments in which the enrolment fee may 
paid. 
be 
25 
(3) No rules made under this Chapter shall have effect unless 
they have been approved by the All-India Bar Council. 
CHAPTER IV 
RIGHT TO PRACTISE 
27. Subject to the provisions of this Act and any rules made 30 
thereunder, there shall, as from the appointed day, be only one class 
of legal practitioners, namely, advocates enrolled under this Act. 
28. Subject to the provisions of this Act and any rules made there-
under-
(a) every advocate whose name is entered in the cornmon 3' 
roll shall be entitled as of right to practise throughout the terrf-
tories to which this Act extends; ~ 

13 
(i) in all courts includmg the Supreme Court; 
(ii) save as otherwise provided by or under any law for 
the time being in force, before any tribunal or person legally 
authorised to take evidence; 
5 (iii) before any other authority or person before whom 
such advocate is by or under any law for the time being in 
force entitled to practise. 1 
29. Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 27 and 28, the Special pzo.. 
High Court at Calcutta or the High Court at Bombay may provide vision for attorneys. 
10 for the admission of proper persons to be attorneys and shall have 
power to remove or to suspend from practice on reasonable cause, 
any such attorney. 
30. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, any Power of 
court, authority or person may permit any person, not enrolled as :~t to 
15 an advocate under this Act, to appear before it or him in any parti- appearances 
cular case. ~~~rticular 
31. Except as otherwise provided in this Act or in any other law Advocates 
for the time being in force, no person shall, on or after the appointed a1Ol~tleed 
d b . led' b f h' enu to ay, e entIt to practIse in any court or e ore any aut onty or practile. 
20 person unless he is enrolled as an advocate under this Act. 
32. (1) The High Court may make rules laying down the condi- ~?wer of 
tions subject to which an advocate shall be permitted to practise in u:1h ~ 
the High Court and the courts subordinate thereto. rulet. 
(2) Without prejudice to the proviSions contained in sub-section 
25 (1), the High Court at Calcutta and the High Court at Bombay may 
make rules-
(i) providing for the qualification and admission of proper 
persons to be attorneys; I 
(ii) declarittg what shall be deemed to be the functions, 
30 powers and duties of such attorneys and the procedure to be 
followed in removing or suspending any such attorney from 
practice; 
(iii) determining the persons who shall be entitled respec-
tively to plead and to act in the High Court in the exercise 01 
35 its original jurisdiction. 
(3) Until rules are made under this section, any rules made by 
a High Court under its Letters Patent or any other law relating to 
any of the matters specified in this section which were in force 
immediately b~fore the appOinted day, shall continue in force so far 
40 as consistent with this Act, and shall be deemed to be rules made 
under this section. 
1166(B) LS-3. 
.' i 

Paaiahla.' _r advocatea 
for mi .. 
CODduct. 
t~ 
CHAPTER V 
MISCONDUCT OF ADVOCATES 
33. (1) Where 6 State Bar Council has received a complaint or 
has otherwise reason to believe that any advocate on its roll has been 
guilty of professional or other misconduct, it shall refer the case for 5 
disposal to its disciplinary committee. 
(2) The disciplinary committee of a State Bar Council, if it does 
not summarily reject the complaint, shall fix a date for the hearing 
of the case and shall cause a notice thereof to be given to the advo-
cate concerned and to the Advocate-General of the State. 
(3) The disciplinary committee of a State Bar Council after 
giving the advocate concerned and the Advocate-General an oppor-
tunity of being heard, may make any of the following orders, 
namely:-
10 
(a) dismiss the complaint or, where the proceedings were 15 
initiated at the instance of the State Bar Council, direct that 
the proceedings be filed; 
(b) reprimand the advocate; 
(c) suspend the advocate from practice for such period as 
it may deem fit; 
(d) remove the name of the advocate from the State roll of 
advocates. 
20 
(4) Where an advocate is suspended from practice under clause 
(c) of sub-section (3), he shall during the period of suspension, be 
debarred from practising in any court or before any authority or 25 
person in India. 
(5) Where any notice is issued to the Advocate-General under 
sub-section (2), the Advocate-General may appear before the disci-
plinary committee of the State Bar Council either in person or 
through any advocate appearing on his behalf. 
DJlcipliDarJ 34. (1) Where the All-India Bar Council has received a complaint 
~~ndi~f or has otherwise reason to believe that any advocate on the common 
Bar CoanciJ. roll whose name is not entered on any State roll has been guil,ty of 
professional or other misconduct, it shall refer the case for ddsposal 
to its disciplinary committee. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, the 
disciplinary committee of the All-India Bar Council may, of its ~wn 
motion, withdraw for inquiry before itself any proceedings for 
35 

5 
10 
15 
~o 
9 of 1901. 
25 
30 
35 
IS 
disciplinary action against any advocate pending before the discipli-
nary committee of any State Bar Council and dispose of the same. 
(3) The disciplinary committee of the All-India Bar Council, in 
disposing of any case under this section, shall observe, so far as may 
be, the procedure laid down in section 33, the references to the 
Advocate-General in that section being construed as references to 
the Attorney-General of India. 
(4) In disposing of any proceedings under this section the discip-
linary committee of the All-India Bar Council may make any order 
which the disciplinary committee of a State Bar Council can make 
under sub-section (3) of section 33, and where 8lly proceedings have 
been withdrawn for inquiry before the All-India Bar Council, the 
State Bar Council concerned shall give effect to any such order. 
35. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the disciplinary AppeaIt. 
committee of a State Bar Council made under sub-section (3) of 
section 33 may, within sixty days from the date of the communica-
tion of the order to him, prefer an appeal to the All-India Bar Coun-
cil. 
(2) Every such appeal shall be heard by the disciplinary com-
mittee of the All-India Bar Council which may pus such order 
thereon as it deems fit. 
(3) The provisions of sections 5 and 12 of the Indian Limitation 
Act, 1908, shall so far as may be, apply to appeals under this sec-
tion. 
36. An appeal made under section 35 shall not operate as a stay Stay .r 
of the order appealed against, but the All-India Bar Council hear- order. 
ing the appeal may, for sufficient cause, direct the stay of such 
order on sueh terms and conditions as it may deem fit. 
37. (1) Where an order is made under this Chapter reprimanding Alteration ia 
or suspending an advocate, a record of the punishment shall be roll of ad-
t ed . t h' vocate.. en er agaIns IS name-
(a) in the case of an advocate whose name is entered in the 
State roll, in that roll; 
(b) in the case of an advocate whose name is entered in the 
common roll and not in any State roll, in the common roll; 
and where any order is made removing an advocate from practice, 
his name shall be struck off the State roll or the common roll, as the 
case may be. 
(2) Where in respect of any advocate a record of punishment i. 
entered in a State roll or where the name of an advocate is struck off 

any such roll, a record of such punishment shall also be entered in 
the common roll, or, as the case may be, his name shall be struck 
off the common roll. 
(3) Where any advocate is suspended or removed from practice, 
the certificate granted to him under section 2Q, in respect of his , 
enrolment shall be recalled. 
~-;ru:!y 38. (1) The disciplinary committee of a Bar Council shall have 
committee. the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following matters, namely:- s of 1908. 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any perlon 10 
and examining him on oath: 
(b) requiring discovery and production of any documents: 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from 
any court or office: l' 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses 
or documents; 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed: 
Provided that no such disciplinary committee shall have the 
right to require the attendance of- 20 
(a) any presiding officer of a court except with the previous 
sanction of the High Court to which such court is subordinate; 
(b) any officer of a revenue court except with the previous 
sanction of the State Government. 
(2) All proceedings before a disciplinary committee of a Bar 2, 
Council shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the mean-
ing of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Codie, and every such 45 of 1860. 
disciplinary committee shaH be deemed to be a civil court for the 
purposes of sections 480, 482 and 485 of the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1898. 30 s of 1898• 
(3) For the purposes of exercising any of the powers conferred 
by sub-section (1), a disciplinary committee may send to any civil 
court in the territories to which this Act extends, any summons or 
other process, for the attendance of a witness or the production of 
a document reqUired by the committee or any commission which it 3' 
desires to issue, and the civil court shall cause such process to be 
served or such commission to be issued, as the case may be and may 
enforce any such process as if it were a process for attendance or 
production before itself. 

17 
39. The disciplinary committee of a Bar Council may make such ~~~;:spro­
order as to the costs of any proceedings before it as it may deem b~f~re a di8-
tit and any such order shall be executable as if it were an order- ~~~~~e. 
(a) in the case of an order of the disciplinary committee 
S of the All-India Bar Council, of the Supreme Court; 
(b) in the case of an order of the disciplinary committee 
of a State Bar Council, of the Hiih Court. 
40. The disciplinary committee of a Bar Council may of its own Review of 
motion or otherwise review any order passed by it under this o~de.rs ~y dlsclphnary 
10 Chapter: committee. 
Provided that no such order of review of the disciplinary com-
mittee of a State Bar Council shall have effect unless it has been 
approved by the All-India Bar Council. 
CHAPTER VI 
15 MISCELLANEOUS 
41. Any person who practises in any court or before any Penalty . for 
th 't . b f h h' t t'tl d t t' persons !Ilc-au Ort y or person, In or e ore w om e IS no en 1 e 0 prac lse gaIly prac-
under the provisions of this Act, shall be punishable with imprison- tising in . . courts and ment for a term Whlch IDly extend to SlX months. before other 
authorities. 
20 42. Every State Bar Council shall, before the thirtieth day of Payment of 
April in each financial year, pay to the All-India Bar Council a ~~~e~~ f~~; 
sum equivalent to forty per cent. of the total of the enrolment fees to !he AU-
realised by it under this Act during the financial year immediately g'o~:cil. Bar 
preceding that year. 
2S 43. (1) Where any cQuntry, specified by the Central Government Redprociry. 
in this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette, prevents 
citizens of India from practising the profession of law or subjects 
them to unfair discrimination in that country, no subject of any such 
country shall be entitled to practise the profession of law in India. 
30 (2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the All-India 
Bar Council may prescribe the conditions, if any, subject to which 
foreign qualifications in law shall be recognised for the purpose of 
admission as an advocate under this Act. 
44. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any Bar Ind;emnity 
35 Council or any committee thereof or a member of a Bar Council ~glUocn8tdl.ega1 ,·r ee mp. 
for any act in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance 
of the provisions of this Act or at any rules made' thereunder. 

10 
General 45. The All-India Bar Council may make rules for discharging its 
~~~indi~f functions under this Act, and, in particular, such rules may 
Bar Council prescribe-
to make 
rules. (a) the standards of professional conduct and etiquette to 
Repeal of 
certain er:. 
actmenta. 
be observed by advocates; 
(b) the standards of legal education to be observed by 
Universities in India and the inspection of Universities for that 
purpose; 
5 
(c) the foreign qualifications in law which shall be 
recognised for the purpose of admission as an advocate under 10 
this Act; 
(d) the procedure to be followed by the disciplinary 
committee of a State Bar Council and by its own disciplinary 
committee; 
(e) the restrictions in the matter of practice to which senior IS 
advocates shall be subject; 
(f> the fees which may be levied in respect of any matter 
under this Act; 
(g) general principles for guidance of State Bar Councils. 
46. (1) On the date on which 9 State Bar Council is constituted 20 
under this Act, the provisions of sections 3 to 7 (inclusive), sub-
sections (1), (2) and (3) of section 9, section 15 and section 20 of the 
Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926, shall stand repealed in the territory 
for which the State Bar Council is constituted. 
(2) On the date on which Chapter III comes io.to force, the 25 
following shall stand repealed, namely:-
(a) sections 6, 7, 18 and 37 of the Legal Practitioners Act, 
1879, and so much of sections 8, 9, 16, 17, 19 and 41 of that Act 
as relate to the admission and enrolment of legal practitioners; 
38 of 1916. 
18 of 1879. 
,~ 
(b) sections 3, 4 and 6 of the Bombay Pleaders Act, 1920; 30 Bombay Act 
17 of 1920. 
(c) so much of section 8 of the Indian Bar Councils Act 
1926, as relates to the admission and enrolment of legal practi~ 
tioners; 
(d) the provisions of the Letters Patent of any High Court 
and of any other law in so ~a~ as they relate to the admission 35 
and enrolment of legal practItIoners. 

/ i' 
~ 
t8 of 1879. 
5 
Bombay Ai;t. 
( 17 of 19:10. 
I 38 of 19:16. ~. 
-~ 
10 
18 of 1951. 
15 
18 of 1879. 20 
Bombay Act 
17 of 19:10. 
38 of 19:16. 
2S 
35 
19 
(3) On the date on which Chapter IV comes into force, the 
following shall stand repealed, namely:-
(a) sections 4, 5, 10 and 20 of the Legal Practitioners Act, 
1879, and so much of sections 8, 9, 19 and 41 of that Act as confer 
on legal practitioners the right to practise in any court or before 
any authority or person; 
(b) sections 5, 7, 8 and 9 of the Bombay Pleaders Act, 1920; 
(c) section 14 of the Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926, and so 
much of sections 8 and 15 of that Act as confer on legal practi-
tioners the right to practise in any court or before any authority 
or p~rson; 
(d) the Supreme Court Advocates (Practice in High 
Courts) Act, 1951; 
(e) the provisions of the Letters Patent of any High Court 
and of any other law conferring on legal practitioners the right 
to practise in any court or before any authority or person. 
(4) On the date on which Chapter V comes into force, the 
follOWing shall stand repealed, namely:-
(a) sections 12 to 15 (inclusive), sections 21 to 24 (inclusive) 
and sections 39 and 40 of the Legal Practitioners Act, 1879, and 
so much of sections 16, 17 and 41 of that Act as relate to the 
suspension, removal or dismissal of legal practitioners; 
(b) sections 24 to 27 (inclusive) of the Bombay Pleaders 
Act, 1920; 
(c) sections 10 to 13 (inclusive) of the Indian Bar Councils 
Act, 1926; 
(d) the provisions of the Letters Patent of any High Court 
and of any other law in so far as they relate to the suspension. 
removal or dismissal of legal practitioners. 
(5) When the whole of this Act has come into force-
(a) the remaining provisions of the Acts referred to in this 
section which do not stand repealed by virtue of any of the 
foregoing provisions of this section (except sections 1, 3 and 36 
of the Legal Practitioners Act, 1879) shall stand repealed; 
(b) the enactments specified in the Schedule shall stand 
repealed to the extent mentioned therein. 

Elections to 
first State 
Bar Coundl. 
CHAPTER VII 
TEMPORARY AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 
47. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the elected 
members of a State Bar Council, constituted for the first time under 
this Act, shall be elected by and from amongst advocates, vakils, 
pleaders and attorneys who, on the date of the election, are entitled 5 
as of right to practise in the High Court. 
Explanation.-Where the territory for which the Bar Council is 
to be constituted includes a Union territory, the expression "High 
Court" shall include the Court of the Judicial Commissioner of that 
U . . . 10 
mon territory. . 
Term of 48· NotWithstanding anything contained in this Act, the term of 
:::~~o~ffi~;t office of the nominated and elected members of the All-India Bar 
All-Iadia Bar Council and a State Bar Council constituted for the first time, shall 
g>a':C~a~d be two years from the date of the first meeting of the Council. 
Councils. 15 
Rights of 
cenain 
existing legal 
practitioners 
not affected. 
49. NotWithstanding anything contained in this Act,-
(a) every pleader or vakil practising as such immediately 
before the date on which Chapter IV comes into force (herein-
after in this section referred to as the said date) by virtue of the 
provisions of the Legal Practitioners Act, 1879, the Bombay Plead- 20 18 of 1879. 
ers Act, 1920, or any other law who does not elect to be, or is Bombay Act 
not qualified to be, enrolled as an advocate under this Act; 17 of 1920• 
(b) every attorney practising as such immediately before 
the said date by virtue of the provisions of the Legal Practitioners 
Act, 1879, or any other law who does not elect to be, or is not 25 18 ot 1879. 
qualified to be, enrolled as an advocate under this Act; 
(c) every mukhtar and revenue agent practising as such 
immedietely before the said date by virtue of the provisions of 
the Legal Practitioners Act, 1879, or any other law; 18 of 1879. 
shall, notwithstanding the repeal by this Act of the relevant provi- 30 
sions of the Legal Practitioners Act, 1879, the Bombay Pleaders Act, ~8 o~ 1879. 
1920, or other law, continue to enjoy the same rights as respects Ir~f ~~:'ct 
practice in any court or revenue office or before any authority or 
person and be subject to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the same 
authority which he enjoyed or, as the case may be, to which he was 35 
subject immedi • .ltely before the said date and accordingly the relevant 
provisions of the Acts or law aforesaid shall have effect in relation 
to such persons as if they had not been repealed. 

:11 
So. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, for a period of Barristen 
five years from the date on which Chapter III comes into force, 8 ::rre~e a:; 
barrister may be admitted as an advocate under this Act on ful1llling adv~catc.a . 
the conditions specified in clauses (e) and (f) of sub-section (1) of ~uru:,~:~t-
5 section 22. 
5L (1) On the constitution of a State Bar Council under this DislOlution 
of existing Act (hereinafter referred to as the new Bar Council) - Bar 
(a) all properties and assets vesting in the corresponding Council •. 
Bar Council shall vest in the new Bar Council; 
10 (b) all rights, liabilities, and obligations of the correspond-
ing Ber Council, whether arising out of any contract or other-
wise, shall be the rights, liabilities and obligations respectively 
of the new Bar Council; 
(c) all proceedings pending before the corresponding Bar 
I) Council in respect of any disciplinary matter or otherwise shall 
stand transferred to the new Bar Council. 
(2) In this section, "corresponding Bar Council" in relation to a 
State Bar Council means the Bar Council for the High Court in the 
territory for which the State Bar Council is constituted under this 
20 Act. I 
52. Until a Bar Council is constituted under this Act, the power Power to 
of tha t Bar Council to make rules under this Act shall be exercised- make rules 
pending the 
(a) in the case of the All-Indie. Bar Council, by the Supreme cornStituBation 
, ' 0 a r Court; Council. 
25 (b) in the case of a State Bar Council, by the High Court. 
THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 46 (5)] 
REPEAL OF CERTAIN ENACTMENTS 
--_ .. _-- ... -- -_._-------_ ........ _.--._ .. _-- ---------------
Short title Extent of repeal 
30 I. The Legal Practitioners (Women) Act, The whole. 
1923 (23 of 1923). 
2. The Legal Practitioners (Fees) Act, 1926 The whole. 
(21 of 1926). 
3. The States Reorganisation Act, 1956 Section 53. 
3S (37 of 1956). 
----------------------------------------------1166 (B) LS-4. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bill seeks to implement the recommendations of the All-
India Bar Committee made in 1953, after taking into account the 
recommendations of the Law Commission on the subject of Reform 
of Judicial Administration in so far as the recommendations relate 
to the Bar and to legal education. 
2. The main features of the Bill are:-
(1) the establishment of en All-India Bar Council and a 
common roll of advocates, an advocate on the common roll havinl 
a right to practise in any part of the country and in any Court, 
including the Supreme Court; 
(2) the integration of the bar into a single class of legal 
practitioners known as advocates; 
(3) the prescription of a uniform qualification for the 
admission of persons to be advocates; 
(4) the division of advocates into senior advocates and other 
advocates based on merit; 
(5) the creation of autonomous Bar Councils, one for the 
whole of India and one for each State. 
3. Following the recommendation of the All-India Bar Committee 
and the Law Commission, the Bill recognises the continued existence 
of the system known as the dual system now prevailing in the High 
Courts of Calcutta and Bombay, by making suitable provisions in 
that behalf. It would, however, be open to the two High Courts, if 
they so desire, to discontinue this system at any time. 
4. The Bill, being a comprehensive measure, repeals the Indian 
Bar Councils Act, 1926, and all other laws on the subject. 
,. The Notes on clauses explain, wherever necessary, the various 
provisions of the Bill. 
A. K. SEN. 
NEW DELm; 
The 12th November, 1959. 

Notes on clauses 
Clause 3.-This clause provides for the constitution of a Bar 
Council for each State, Union territories being attached to the 
neighbouring States, on the lines recommended by the All-India Bar 
Committee. A provision has, however, been made for reservation of 
certain seats for advocates practising on the original side of the 
Calcutta and Bombay High Courts who will be in a minority. This 
provision is based on section 4 (3) of the existing Indian Bar COWlcils 
Act, 1926. :'1 
Clause 4.-This clause provides for the establishment of an All-
India Bar Council. The composition of the· Bar Council is on the 
lines recommended by the All-India Bar Committee. The All-India 
Bar Committee has suggested that each State Bar Council should 
send one representative to the All-India Bar Council and where 
there are more than one thousand advocates on the roll of a State 
Bar Council, it should be entitled to send one additional representa-
tive. In view of a large number of persons having joined the legal 
profession in recent years and several States having become larger 
units on account of the recent reorganisation of States, the number 
of one thousand has been changed to three thousand. 
Cla1.L8e 6.-This clause prescribes the functions of a State Bar 
Council on the lines recommended by the All-India Bar Committee. 
Clause 7.-This clause prescribes the functions of the All-India 
Bar Council. The main functions of the All-India Bar Council will 
be to prepare and maintain a common roll of advocates and to 
exercise general supervision and control over State Bar Councils. 
The Law Commission has deplored the deterioration of standards 
of legal education and has suggested that the All-India Bar Council 
should be given certain powers for improving such standards. The 
All-India Bar Council has accordingly been empowered to recognise 
the Universities whose degrees in law will be a qualification for en-
rolment as an advocate. The All-India Bar Council will also lay 
down general standards of professional conduct and etiquette for 
advocates. 
Clause 9.-This clause empowers the All-India Bar Council and 
a State Bar Council to constitute certain standing committees. Since 
the Bar Councils will be fairly large bodies and will not be in a 

24 
position to meet often, it will be necessary tor them to function in 
committees . 
. Clause 15.-'l.·his clause provides fOl" the division of the Bar into 
senior advocates and other advocates as recommended by the Law 
Commission. The status of a senior advocate will be conferred by 
the Supreme Court or a High Court on merit only. A senior 
advocate will be prohibited from accepting certain kinds of minor 
legal work like the drafting of pleedings, notices, affidavits, etc. A 
saving provision has been made in respect of the existing senior 
advocates of the Supreme Court who will continue to be designated 
as senior advocates. . 
Clause 16.-This clause requires a State Bar Council to prepare 
and maintain a roll of advocates for the State. The roll will consist 
of two parts-the first part containing the names of senior advocates 
and the second part the names of other advocates. Entries in the 
roll of advocates will be made in accordance with seniority. The 
clause lays down certain rules for determining such seniority. 
Clause 18.-This clause provides for the preparation and mainte-
nance of a common roll of advocates by the All-India Bar Council. 
The common roll of advocates will comprise the entries made in all 
State rolls, and will include the names of advocates of the Supreme 
Court who are not entered on any State roll. As in the case of 
the State roll, entries in the common roll will be made in accordance 
with seniority. The clause lays down certain rules for determining 
such seniority. 
Clause 22.-This clause prescribes the qualifications for admis-
sion to the legal profession. In order to be eligible for admission to 
the legal profession a person must be a citizen of India. Foreigners 
may be admitted on reciprocal basis. The minimum educational 
qualifications are a bachelor's degree in Arts, Science or Commerce 
followed by a degree in law from any Indian University, or any foreign 
qualification in law which is recognised by the All-India Bor Council. 
A candidate for admission to the legal profession will also have to 
undergo a course of practical training and pass an eXGmination in 
practical subjects. Provision has been made for exemption from the 
practical test of persons who by reason of their legal training should 
not be subjected to such a test. Existing vakils, pleaders and 
attorneys who are law graduates, or who are not law graduates but 
are entitled to be enrolled as advocates of a High Court can be 
admitted as advocates if they apply for such enrolment within one 
year from the commencement of the new law. 

25 
Clause 24.-This clause provides that an application for admission 
as an advocate made to a State Bar Council shall be disposed of by 
the enrolment committee of that Bar Council. Where an enrolment 
committee proposes to refuse an application for enrolment, it must 
consult the All-India Bar Council. 
Clause 28.-Every advocate entered in the common roll will be 
entitled to practise in all courts, including the Supreme Court, and 
before all Guthorities and persons throughout the territories to which 
the new law extends. Thus the common roll will provide a unified 
Bar for the whole of India. 
Clause 29.-This clause empowers.the Calcutta and Bombay High 
Courts to admit attorneys on its roll. Under the Bill, the dual system 
prevailing on the original side of each of these High Courts will con-
tinue until the High Court itself decides to abolish it. Clause 32 (2) 
empowers each of these High Courts to make rules for continu-
ing the dual system. 
Clause 31.-This clause provides that no person other than an 
advocate enrolled under the new law shall be entitled to practise. 
The rights of existing legal practitioners who ere not enrolled as 
advocates under the Bill are, however, preserved by clause 49. 
Clause 33.-This clause provides that all cases of professional or 
other misconduct shall be disposed of by the disciplinary committee 
of the State Bar Council concerned. 
Clause 35.-This clause provides for an appeal to the All-India 
Bar Council from any order made by the disciplinary committee of 
a State Bar Council in any disciplinary proceeding. 
Clause 42.-This clause enjoins upon every State Bar Council to 
remit at the end of every financial year to the All-India Bar Council 
a part of the enrolment fees realised by it. This will provide the 
necessary funds to the All-India Bar Council for performing its 
functions under the Bill. -
Clause 43.-This clause provides that subjects of any foreign 
country, which discriminates against the citizens of India in the 
matter of legal practice, shall not be entitled to practise in India. It 
also empowers the All-India Bar Council to lay down conditions sub-
ject to which foreign qualifications may be recognised for enrolment 
as an advocate. 

Clause 46.-This clause repeals certain enactments. Such repeal 
has necessarily to take effect by stages in accordance with the dates 
on which the corresponding provisions of the Bill come into force. 
Clause 47.-This clause makes provision for election to 3 State 
Bar Council constituted for the first time. This provision is necessary 
because, until a Bar Council is constituted, the roll of advocates C8n-
n. It be prepared and until such roll is prepared, such advocates can-
not elect members to a State Bar Council. 
Clause 48.-This clause fixes the term of office of members of the 
All-India Bar Council and a State Bar Council constituted for the 
first time. The term fixed is a short period of two years which will 
be the transitional period during which steps will be taken to elect 
the regular Bar Councils in accordance with the provisions of the 
Bill. r ~·· •• I 
Clause 49.-This clause saves the rights of certain existing legal 
practitioners who will continue to be regulated by the existing law. 
Clause 50.-Under this clause, a barrister of England may be 
enrolled as an advocate during a transitional period of five years 8!1 
recommended by the All India Bar Committee. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clauses 14, 26, 32 and 45 of the Bill confer on certain authorities 
the power to make rules. Clause 14 empowers the All-India Bar 
Council and a State Bar Council to make rules for carrying out the 
provisions of Chapter II. The rules will relate to the procedure to 
be followed at election of members of the Bar Council, the filling 
of casual vacancies, summoning and holding of meetings of the Bar 
Council, etc. Under clause 26 a State Bar Council is empowered 
to make rules prescribing the course of practical training in law 
and the examination to be passed after such training, the form in 
which an application for enrolment as an advocate may be made, 
the conditions subject to which a person may be admitted as an ad-
vocate and the instalments in wh~ch the enrolment fee may be paid. 
Clause 32 empowers a High Court to make rules prescribing the 
conditions subject to which an advocate shall be permitted to prac-
tise in the High Court and the courts subordinate thereto. In addi-
tion, the Calcutta and Bombay High Courts, where the dual sys-
tem prevails, are empowered to make rules providing for the quali-
fication and admission of attorneys, the functions of such attorneys 
and the persons who shall be entitled to plead and to act in the High 
Court in the exercise of its original jurisdiction. Clause 45 confers 
a general rule making power on the All-India Bar Council. This 
clause empowers the All-India Bar Council to make rules prescrib-
ing the standards of professional conduct and etiquette, the standards 
of legal education, the foreign qualifications in law which IllGy be 
recognised, the procedure which may be followed by the disciplinary 
committee of a State Bar Council and by its own disciplinary com-
mittee, etc. 
2. The matters on which rules can be made are generally mat-
ters of procedure or detail. The delegation of legislative power is, 
therefore, of a normal character. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS .-ROM THE STATES REORGANISATION ACT, 1956 
(37 OF 1956) 
• • • • • • 
53. (1) The High Court for a new State shall have the like powers Power to 
io approve, admit, enrol, remove and suspend advocates and attor- :~~ate., 
neyll, and to make rules with respect to advocates and attorneys as etc. 
are, under the law in force immediately before the appointed day, 
exerciseable by the High Court for the corresponding State. 
(2) The right of eudience in the High Court for a new State shall 
be regulated in accordance with the like principles as, immediately 
before the appointed day, are in force with respect to the right of 
audience in the High Court for the corresponding State: 
Provided that, subject "1;0 any rule made or direction given by 
the High Court for a new State in exercise of the power conferred 
by this section, any person who, immediately before the appointed 
day, is an advocate entitled to practise, or an attorney entitled to 
act in any such High Court or Judicial Commissioner's Court as may 
be specified in this behalf by the Chief Justice of the High Court 
for the new State, shall be recognised as an advorote or an attorney 
entitled to practise or to act, as the case may be, in the High Court 
for the new State . 
• • • • • • 
28 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend and consolidate the law relating to legal practitioners 
and to provide for the constitution of Bar Councils and an 
AU-India Bar. 
GIPD-LSl-l166 (8) L5-14-II-S9- 19SO 
(Shri Asoke K. Sen, 
MInister of Law) 