A!i IN'rROD1]CED IN LQK SABHA ON 
.~ ~ 
..: ·'IIf. I. 
alit No. 80 of 1981 
THF; CHARITA5LE ENDOWMENTS (AMENDMENT) 
SILL, 1982 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the CMritable Endowments Act, 1890. 
........ 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Charitable Endowments (Amendment) 
Act, 1982. 
8 of 1890. 5 2. In section 13 of the Charitable Endowments Act, 1890, sub-section 
(2) shall be.! re- numbered as sub· ~t!ction (1), and-
(a) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, after the words "The 
appropriate Government may", the words ", by notification in the 
Official Gazette," shall be inserted; 
10 (b) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-
15 
tections shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Every rule made by the State Government under this 
Act shall be laid. as soon as may be after it is made, before the 
State Legislature. 
(.1) Everv rule made bv the Central 'Gcwernment under this 
Act shall be laid. as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in twq 
Short 
title. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
13. 

or more successive· sessions. and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive ses-
sions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modiftcation 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 5 
fo:"IIl or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS, AND REASONS 
Section 13: of tlie Charitable EndpWments Ac't, 1890 emPowers the 
appropriate Government to make rules consistent with the Act. The Act 
do~s not require the rules so made by appropriate Government to be 
published in the Official'Gazette or laid before Parliament or the Stat. 
Legislatures, as the case may be. 
"2. With' a view-to impletilei1ting: the-'recammendtlttonsmade 'by t1'M 
Committees on Subordinate Legislation with respect to the public~" 
and lay!ng. of rules and regulations, the Bill. seeks to am~nd the said 
section' to provide for the, publication of the rules made thereunder in 
the Official Gazette and for' the laying of such rules. Rules made by a 
State Government will have to be laid before the State Legislature, 
while, rules made by the Central Govemment· will have to' be :aid, before 
ParUalIJ.~t. 
S. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; 

Pow .. 
totrame 
forms 
and 
make 
rul ... 
13. 
ANNEXURE 
EJCTR.\CT, 11tO:&4 TH.. CIWUT.\BLE ENDOWMENTS Ar::r, 1890. 
(6 OF 1890) 
• • • • • • • • • • 
... 
..(2) The appropriate Government IIlay make rules conlisUlpt with tIli. 
Act fol'-: 
'(a) prescribing the fees to be paid to the Government in respect 
_of any ,'p~operty vested under this Act in a Treasurer of Charitabl~ 
F!ndowmentsj ,. -, , 
(b) regulating the cases and the mode in which schemes or any 
modification thereof are to be published before they are settled or 
made under section 5; 
(c) prescribing the forms ia which accounts are to be kept bv 
.Tre~uretS of ebaritable Endowments and the mode in which such 
accounts are to be auditedj and 
(d) generally carrying into effect the purposes of this, Act. 
, . . . . 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Charitable Endowments Act, 1890. 
(Shri Pranab Kumar 
Muk.herjee, Minister at 
Finance.) 