THE INDIAN TELEGRAPH (AMEND-
MENT) BILL, 1956 
(As INTRoDUCED IN Lox SABHA) 

13 of IBSS. 
Bill No. 80 of 195' 
THE INDIAN TELEGRAPH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1956 
(AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
BILL 
further to amend the India,.. Telegraph Act, 1885. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Telegraph (Amendment) Shon title 
A aDd commen-ct, 1956. cemau. 
~ (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In section 7 of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 (hereinafter AmendmeDt 
referred to as the principal Act),- ' I of section 7· 
(a) in sub-section (2), after clause (d), the following clauses 
10 shall be inserted, namely:-
"(e) the conditions and restrictions subject to which any 
telegraph line, appliance or apparatus for telegraphic com-
munication shall be established, maintained, worked, repair-
ed, transferred, shifted, withdrawn or disconnected; 
15 (f> the charges in respec.t of-
(i) the establishment, maintenance, working, repair, 
transfer or shifting of any telegraph line, appliance or 
apparatus; 
Hi) the services of operators operating such line, 
20 appliance or apparatus; 
(g) the matters in connection with the transition from 
a system whereunder rights and obligations relating to the 

2 
establishment, maintenance, working, repair, transfer or 
shifting of any telegraph line, appliance or apparatus for 
telegraphic communication attach by virtue of any agree-
ment to a system whereunder such rights and obligations 
attach by virtue of rules made under this section; S 
(h) the time at which, the manner in which, the condi-
tions under which and the persons by whom the rates, 
charges and fees mentioned in this sub-section shall be paid 
and the furnishing of security for the payment of such rates, 
charges and fees; 10 
(i) where any telegraph line, appliance or apparatus is, 
before the expiration of such period beginning with the day 
on which the line, appliance or apparatus was connected 
for use, as may be prescribed by rules made hereunder, 
given up by the person for whose benefit such line, appli- IS 
ance or apparatus has been provided or where the work done 
by the telegraph authority for the purpose of establishing 
any telegraph line, appliance or apparatus is, for some act or 
defau~t on the part of the person for whose benefit the line, 
appliance or apparatus is being or has been established, 20 
rendered abortive before such line, appliance or apparatus 
is connected for use, the payment to the Central Govern-
ment of a sum to be assessed by the telegraph authority in 
accordance with such principles as may be prescribed by 
rules made hereunder, to make good any loss incurred in 2S 
respect of such provision of work; 
(j) any other matter for which provision is necessary 
for the proper and efficient conduct of all or any telegraphs 
under this Act." and; 
(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall 30 
be inserted, namely:-
u (4) Nothing in this section or in any rules made here-
under shall be construed as- • 
(a) precluding the Central Government -from enter-
ing into an agreement with a person fbr the establish- 3' 
ment, maintenance and working by that Government on 
terms and conditions specified in the agreement, of any 
telegraph line, appliance or apparatus for the purpose of 
affording means of telegraphic communication, where 
having regard to the number of the lines, appliance or 40 
apparatus required by that person for telegraphic com-
munication, it is necess8t:Y or expedient to enter into 
such agreement with htm" or ' I 
(b) implying that the Central Government is under 
any obligation to provide any - telegraph line, appliance 45 

3 
or apparatus tor the purpose of aftording means of tele-
graphic communication. 
(5) All rules made under this section shall be laid for 
not less than thirty days before both Houses of Parliament 
S as soon as possible after they are made and shall be subject 
to such modifications as Parliament may make during the 
session in which they are so laid or the session immediately 
following." . 
3. After section 7 of the principal Act, the following sections shall Inscrti0cctin of . new s on 
10 be Inserted, namely: - after lIection 
7· 
"7A. Nothing in section 7 shall authorise the making of any Sayi'.1l of 
rules determining any agreement entered into by the Central ::!:enta. 
Government with any person before the commencement of the 
Indian Telegraph (Amendment) Act, 1956, relating to the estab-
I, lishment, maintenance or working of any telegraph line, ap-
pliance or apparatus for telegraphic communication; and all 
rights and obligations thereunder relating to such establish-
ment, maintenance or working shall be determined in 
accordance with the terms and conditions of such agreement. 
20 "7B. (1) Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Ar'?fu'adon 
Act, if any dispute concerning any telegraph line, appliance or of disputes. 
apparatus arises between the telegraph authority and the 
person for whose benefit the line, appliance or apparatus is to 
be, or has been provided, the dispute shall be detennined by 
2, arbitration and shall for the purposes of such determination be 
referred to an arbitrator appointed either generally or specially 
in this behalf by the Central Government. 
(2) The award of the arbitrator appointed under sub-section 
(1) shall be final and conclusive between the parties to the 
30 dispute and shall not be questioned in any court." 

.. 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under section 4 of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885, the Central 
Government has the exclusive privilege of establishing, maintain-
ing and working teiegraphs throughout India. Since the term 
"telegraphs" includes telephones, the use of telephones is regulated 
by this Act and Part V of the Indian Telegraph Rules, 1951, made 
under section 7 of the Act. 
But the matters specified in sub-section (2) of section 7 relating 
t~ which rules may be made under that section pertain mostly to 
rates, transmission and custody of telegrams and fees for searching 
the same and the sub-section does not expressly refer to the terms 
and conditions under which telephone connections may be given, 
transferred, shifted, withdrawn or disconnected. These terms and 
conditions are at present regulated by individual hiring contracts 
which are executed by the President and the subscribers. With the 
growing number of telephones it is necessary to do away with indivi-
dual hiring contracts and to replace them by statutory rules. For this 
purpose it is necessary to amend section 7 of the Indian Telegraph 
Act, 1885, providing specifically that rules may be made under that 
section for regulating such terms and conditions. A specific provision 
in the Telegraph Act is, however, considered necessary for the 
saving of existing hiring contracts, as it would be undesirable to 
render these existing contracts null and void. A provision as to 
arbitration is also considered necessary for the settlement of 
disputes that may arise between the telegraph authority and the 
telephone subscribers after the system of individual hiring contracts 
is replaced by the system of Statutory Rules. 
The present Bill is designed to achieve the objects mentioned 
above. 
JAGJIV AN RAM. 
NEW DELmj 
The 19th November, 195Ct 

5 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 2 of the Bill proposes to amend section 7 of the Indian 
Telegraph Act, 1885, by inserting in.J.er CIlia new clauses (e) to (j) in 
sub-section (2) of that .uClI\, , 'l11e ~atters contained in these new 
clauses for y.,rhich rules may' be made' relate to the installation, con-
nection, use and disconnection of telephones. Detailed provisions 
in relation to these matters are necessary for the day-to-day 
administration of the telephone system in an eftident manner. It 
is, however, extremely difficult to include all the detailed provisions 
which may be necessary in this behalf in the Act itself; they can 
best be made by rules, which will be laid before both Houses of Par-
liament after being made. The-deiegation of legislative power is of 
a normal type in the context of the present Bill . 
... ;"., 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Telegraph 
Act, 1885. 
(ShriJagj;fJan Ram, Minister of Communications) 