Bill No. 80 of 1963 
THE BANKING COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA 
ON 24TH AUGUST, 1962) 
£.,,, ~LlAMENT Ll8ftAR~ 
"oJ 
.. ;.(: ~·l···)··L··:·ii"-· . ..... .... . " .Ii. __ . 

BUt No. 80 of 196z 
TIlE BANKING COMPANmS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Banking Companies Act. 1949. 
BE, it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Banking Companies (Amendment) Short title. 
Act, 1962~ 
of 1949. 5 2. In section 11 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949 (hereinafter Amen~ent 
referred to as the principal Act) ,_ oflectlon II. 
(i) in sub-section (2), in clause (b), for the words beginning 
with "the banking company shall" and ending with "required by 
clause (a)", the following shall be substituted., namely:-
10 "the banking company shall deposit and keep deposited with 
the Reserve Bank: either in cash or in the form of unencum-
bered approved securities, or partly in cash and partly in the 
form of such securities-
(i) an amount which shall not be less than the minimum 
15 required by clause (a) j ; and 
(ii) as soon as may be after the expiration of each 
calendar year, an amount calculated at twenty per I cent. of 
its profit for that year in respect of all business transacted 
through its. branches in India, as disclosed in the profit and 
20 loss account prepared with reference to that year under 
section 29: "; 
1501 (B) LS-l. 

Amendment 
oftection 
17. 
Amendment 
of section 
18. 
(ii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 
(2), the Central Government may, on the recommendation 
of the Reserve Bank, and having regard to the adequacy of S 
the amounts already deposited and kept deposited by a bank-
ing company under sub-section (2), in relation to its deposit 
liabilities. in India, declare by order in writing that the provi-
sions of sub-clause (ii) of clause (:b) of sub-section (2) shall 
not apply to such banking company for such period as ,may 10 
be specified in the order."; 
(iii) in sub-section (3), in clause (ii), the following proviso 
shall be inserted at the end, namely:-
. "Provided further that in the case of every banking 
company to which this clause applies and which com- IS 
mences banking business for the first time after the com-
mencement cf the Banking. Companies (Amendment) Act. 
1962, th'e value of its paid-up capital shall not be less than 
five lakhs of rupees.". 
3. In section 17 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1), the words "unless the amount in such 
fund together with the amount in the share premium account is 
not less than its paid-up capital," shall be omitted; 
(ii) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
20 
inserted, namely:- 2S 
"(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub·· 
section (1), the Central Government may, on the recommen-
dation of the Reserve Bank and having regard to the ade-
quacy of the paid-up capital and reserves of a banking com-
pany in ·relation to its deposit liabilities, declare by order in 30 
writing that ,the provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply 
to the banking company for such period as may be specified 
in the order: 
Provided that no such order shall be made unless, at the 
time it is made, the aI1?-0unt in the reserve fund under sub- 3S 
section (1), together with the aIlIPunt in the share premium 
account is not less than the paid-up capital of the banking 
company.". . 
4. In section 18 of the prin~pal Act, for the words "twn per cent. 
of its time liabilities in India and five per cent. of its demand liabilities 40 
in India,", the words "tm-ee per cent. of the total of its time and 
demand liabilities in India," shall be substituted. 

a of 1934. 
3 
5. In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), in clause Amen~ment 
(c), after the words "a company incorporated outside India that", the ~! .. ectJon 
word'! "the C9rrying on of banking business by such company in India 
will be in the public interest and that" shall be inserted. 
5 I. In section 24 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the Amendment 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- of section a.t. 
"(2A) (11) Notwithstanding a,nything contained in sub-section 
(1) or in sub-section (2), after the expiry of two years from the 
commencement of the Banking Companies (Amendment) Act, 
ro 1~~ . 
IS 
20 
2S 
30 
3S 
(i) a scheduled bank, in addition to the average 
daily balance which it is, or may be, required to maintain 
under section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, and 
(ii) every other banking company, in addition to the 
cash reserve which it is required to maintain under section 18, 
shall main,tain in India in cash, ~old or unencumbered approved 
securities, valued at a price not exceeding the current market 
price, an amount which shall not at the close of business on any 
day be less than 25 per cent. of the total of its demand and time 
liabilities in India; 
(b) in computing the amount for the purposes of clause 
(11).-
(i) the deposit required under sub-section (2) of section 
11 to be made with the Reserve Bank by a banking company 
incorporated outside India, and 
(ii) any cash or balances maintained in India by a bank-
ing company other than a scheduled bank with itself or in 
current account with the Reserve Bank or the State Bank of 
India or with any other bank which may be notified in this 
behalf by the Cent~al Government, in excess of the aggregate 
of the cash or balance or both required to be maintained 
under section 18, and 
(iii) any balances maintained by a scheduled bank with 
the ResOl"ve Bank in excess of the balance required to be 
maintained by it under section 42 of the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934, and any balances maintained by a scheduled 
bank with the State Bank of India or with any other bank 
which may be notified in this behalf by the Central Govern-
menJt, 
40 shall be deemed to be cash maintained in India.". 
7. In section 35B of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), fur the Amf en~ment o section 
figures and word "268, 269, 310, 311 apd. ~88", t~e fi~es, warc:ts and ~$B. 

Amendment 
of section 
,I. 
4 
brackets "268 and 269. the proviso to sub-section (3) of section 309, 
sections 310 and 311. the proviso to section 387, and section 388" shaU 
be substituted.. 
8. In section 51 of the principal Act,-
(i) after the figures "35", the figures and letter "35A" shall 5 
be inserted; and 
(ii) the figures and letter "37, 44B" shall be omitted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
TIle provisions in the Banldng Companies Act relating to the 
minimum paid-up capital and reserves of the commercial banks and 
the amounts which such banks are required to maintain in the form 
of cash or bank balances or in the form of liquid assets which can be 
readily utilised for meeting a·ny current obligations are somewhat out 
of date. In view of the changes which. have taken place sjnce 
Me.rch 1949, when the provisions relating to the minimum paid-up 
capital were brought into force. and the very great increase in the 
deposits and working funds of the commercial banking system in 
recent years, it is considered desirable that the paid-up capital and 
reserves, the cash and bank balances, and the overall liquid assets of 
the commercial banks should be increased. The Bill seeks to emend 
the relevant provisions of the Act in a suitable manner for these 
purposes and is intended to strengthen the financial positicn of thP 
commercial banks generally and to increase the protection which is 
available to the depositors. 
The opportunity provided by the amendment of the Act for these 
purposes has also been utilised to make a few cla.rificatory chanlles 
in some of the other provisions of the Act. 
--. The scope and object of the amendments proposed are explained 
in detail in the notes on the various clauses of the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; MORARJI DESAI. 
The 17th Au.gu.st, 1962. 
s 

Notes 011. clauses 
Clause 2.-Section 11 of the Banking Companies Act which deal~ 
with the requirements as to the minimum paid-up capital and reserve .. 
provides that the exchangeable value of such capital and reserves 
in the case of a banking company incorporated in India and havin2 
only one offic~ shall be at least fifty thousand rupees. In the CaRp. 
of the exchange banks i~corpcrn.ted outside India. a sum of fifteen 
lakhs or twenty lakhs as the case may be, dependinJ:( on the location 
of the office of the bank in India, is required to be deposited with thp 
Reserve Bank in lieu of paid-up capital. Clause 2 seeks to raise th,. 
minimum paid-up ~pital in the case of a banking company incor-
porated in India which applies for a licence in future to five lakhs of 
rupees and also provides that banking companies incorporated out-
side India shall 'be required to increase the amounts deposited with 
the Reserve Bank of India. in lieu of paid-up capital and reserves by 
the transfer of twenty per cent. of the future annual profits of the 
Indian branches until such time as an exemption. if any, is granted. 
Clause 3.-Every banking company incorporated in India is 
required apart from complying with requirements as to the prescrib-
pd minimum paid-up capital and reserves, to transfer twenty pel' cent. 
of their annual profits to the !tatutory reserves. shown as such in its 
balance-sheet until such reserves are equal to paid-up capiml. Clause 
3 seeks to delete from sub-section (1) of Section 17 of the Act the 
limiting condition which has t~e effect of exempting banking com-
panies from making any further 'transfers towards reserves if th~ 
reserves are equal to paid-up capitel, and provides that' the transfers 
shall continue to be made instead until such time as an exemption. 
if any, is granted.: 
Clause 4.-Seclion 18 of the Banking Companies Act provides tnat 
non-scheduled banks shall maintain with' themselves or in cUlTent 
account balances with the Reserve Bank or its agencies cash or bank 
balances to the extent of two per cent. of their time &nd five per cent. 
of their demand liabilities. As it is 'Proposed that a uniform per-
centage of three per cent. of 1911 the liabilities should be prescribed 
in future in the case of the scheduled banks. clause 4 seeks to amend 
Section 18 of the Banking Companies Act so as to provide for, the 
same uniform requirement in the case of the non-scheduled banks. 
Clause 5 seeks to amend Section 22 of the Banking Companies Act. 
which deals with the licensing of banks so as to provide that in the 
6 

1 
ilase of any bank which is incorporated outside India, a licenee may 
be refused or cancelled, if it appears to the Reserve Bank that it will 
110t be in the public interest to allew the bank to operate or to 
continue to opelete in India. 
Clause 6.-Section 24 of 'the Banking Companies Act provides for 
the minimum requirements as to liquidity, that is the percentage of 
the assets which every bank is required to maintain in the form of 
cash balances with the Reserve Bank or its agencies, gold and unen-
cumbered approved securities. The minimum amount which is now 
required to be maintained in the form of such liquid assets is twenty 
per cent. of the total liabilities in India. The deposits with the 
Reserve Bank, or cash reserves and bank balances in regard to which 
separate provision is made in Section 42 of the Reserve Bank oI 
India Act, 1934, or Section 18 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949, 
as the case may be, are counted as liquid assets. 
Clause 6 seeks to amend Section 24 so as to provide that the 
minimum percentage of the liebilities which is required to be main-
tained in the form of liquid assets should be tweDity-fiv~ instead of 
twenty and that any deposits with the Reserve Bank or cash or bank 
balances, which may be required to be maintained under Section 42 
of the Reserve Bank of India Act or Section 18 of the Banking Com-
panies Act shall not be taken into account for the purposes of 
Section 24 but shall be deemed to be additional to the requirements 
of this Section. 
As the percentage of liabilities which is required to be maintained 
in the form of reserves or deposits with the Reserve Bank will vary 
from three to fifteen in the case of the scheduled banks, while the 
percenmage of liabilities required to' be maintained in the form of 
cash or bank balances will be three in the case of the non-scheduled 
banks, the overall effect of the provisions of the various' Sections, 
namely, Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act and Sections 18 
and 24 of the Banking Companies Act, considered together will be 
to provide for a minimum liquidity ratio of twenty-eight per cent. 
in the case of the scheduled banks, with provision for raising this 
percentage to forty, if necessary, and a liquidity ratio, not subject to 
variations, of twenty-eight per ceilit. in the case of the non-scheduled 
banks., 
A time-limit of two years is proposed to be prescribed for enabling 
the existing banks to comply with the amended requirements of the 
law. 
Clause 7 seeks to amend Section 35B of the Banking Companies 
Act, so as to make it clear that notwithstanding the provisions of 

the proViso to sub-section (3) of Section 309 and the proviso to 
Section 387 of the Companies Act, 1956, as recently amended, the 
approval of the Central Government shall not be necessary for 
determining the remunemtion of the chief executive officers or other 
directors of banking companies. 
Clause 8 provides for a clarificatory amendment of Sectio.n 51 of 
the Banking Companies Act, so as ,to make the provisions relating to 
the suspension of business or the sanctioning of a scheme of arrange-
ment with the credito.rs and shereholders inapplicable in relation to 
the State Bank of India and its subsidiaries which are governed by _ 
other statutory provisions in the relevant Acts. Section 35A of the 
Banking Companies Act, relating to the issue of directions by the 
Reserve Bank of India to banking companies generally is, however. 
proposed to be made applicable to the public sector banks. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE BANKING COMPANIES ACT, 1949 (10 Of' 1949) 
• • • • 
11. (1) 
• • • • • 
Requirement 
a8 to mini-
mum paid-up 
capital and 
(2) In the case of a banking company incorporated outside India- reserves. 
(a) the aggregate value of its paid-up capital and reserves 
shall not be less than fifteen lakhs of rupees end if it has a place 
or places of business in the city of Bombay or Calcutta or both, 
twenty lakhs of rupees; and 
(b) the banking company shall deposit and keep deposited 
with the Reserve Bank either in cash or in the form of unencum-
bered approved securities or partly in cash and partly in the 
form of such securities an amount which shall not be less than 
the minimum required by clause (a): 
Provided that any such banking company may at any time 
replace-: 
(i) any securities so deposited by cuh or by any other unen-
cumbered approved securities, or partly by cash and partly by 
other such securities, so however, that the total amount deposited 
is not affected; 
(ii) any cash so deposited by unencumbered approved secu-
rities of an equal value. 
• • ., • • 
• • • • • 
17. (1) Every banking company incorporated ,in India shall create Reserve 
a reserve fund and unless the amount in such fund together with the Fund . 
. amount in the share premium account is not less than its paid-up 
capital, shall, out of the balance of profit of each year as disclosed in 
the profit and loss account prepared under section 29 and before any 
dividend is declared, transfer to the reserve fund a sum equivalent 
to not less than twenty per cent. of such profit. • 
~ 
• • • • 
• • • • • 
9 
1501 (B) LS-2. 

10 
Cash reserve. 18. Every banking company, not being a scheduled bank, shall 
maintain in India, by way of cash reserve with itself or in current 
account opened with the Reserve Bank or the State Bank of India or 
any other bank notified by the Central Government in this behalf or' 
partly in cash with itself and partly in such account or accounts, a 
sum equivalent to at least two per cent. of iIts time liabilities .in India 
arui five per cent. of its demand liabilities in India, and shall submit 
to the Reserve Bank before the fifteenth day of every month a return 
showing tl~e amount so held on Friday of each week of the preced-
ing month with particulars of its time and demand liabilities in India 
on each such Frid,ay, or, if any such· Friday is a public holiday under 
the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881. at the close of business on the 26 of 18BI. 
preceding working day. 
ExpZanation.-In this section and in section 24, "liabilities in Indig" 
shall not include-
(a) the paid-up capital or the reserves or any credit balance 
in the profit and loss account of the banking company; 
(b) any advance taken from the Reserve Bank or from the 
State Bank of India or from the Refinance Corporation for 
Industry (Private) Limited, or from any bank notified by the 
Central Gov~rnment ,under clause (c) of the Ezplanation to sub-
t-
o 
section (1) of section 42, of the Reserve Bank: of India Act, 1934. 2 of 1934· • 
Licenaing of 
banklDl 
companies. 
• .' • • • 
22. (1) 
• • • • • 
• • • • • 
(3) Before granting any licence under this section, the Reserve 
Bank may require to be satisfied by I8D inspection of the boob of the 
company or otherwise that all or any of the following conditions are 
fulfilled, namely: - I 
(a) that the company is or will be in a position to pay its 
present or future depositors in full as their claims accrue; 
(6) that the 81fairs of the company are not being, or are 
net likely to be conducted in a manner detrimental to the 
intere.ats of its present or future depositors; 

II 
(c) in the case of a company incorporated outside India that 
the Government or law of the country in which it is incorporated 
does not discriminate in any way against banking companies 
registered in India, and that the company complies with all the 
provisions of this Act, applicable to banking companies incor-
porated outside India. 
• ,. • • • • 
• • • • • 
358. 
• • • • • 
(2) Nothing contained in sections 268, 269, 310, 311 end 388 (in 
so far as section 388 makes the provisions of sections 310 and 311 
apply in relation to the manager of a company) of the Companies 
I of I!;S6. Act, 1956, shall apply to any matter in respect of which the approvel 
of the Reserve Bank has to be obtained under sub-section (1). 
• • • • • 
• • • • • 
Amendments 
of provisions 
reIatina to 
appointmeDU 
ofmanaginc 
din:ctors, 
etc.? to be 
sublect to 
previous 
approval of 
the Reserve 
Bank. 
51. Without prejudice to the provisions of ,the State Bank of India Application 
23 of I9SS· Act, 1955, or any other enactment, the provisions of sections 10, 13 ofce~in provlSlons 
to 15, 17, 19 to 21, 23 to 28, 29 [excluding sub-section (3)], 31, 34, to the State 
35, 36 [excluding clause (d) of sub-section (1)], 37, 44B, 46 to 48, r~1l;k ~ 
50, 52 and 53 shall also apply, so far as may be, to and in relation ot~ ooti-
to the State Bank of India or any other banking institution. notified fled banks. 
by the Central Government in this behalf as they apply to and in 
relation to banking companies: 
Provided that-
(a) nothing contained in clause (c) of sub-section (1) of 
section 10 shall apply to the chainnan of the State Bank of India 
or to a general manager of any subsidiary bank in so far as the 
said clause precludes him from being a director of, or holding an 
office in, any institution approved by the Reserve Bank; 

38 or 1959. 
(b) nothing contained in section 19 shall apply to the hold-
ing by the State Bank of India of shares in the capital of any 
such subsidiary bank; and 
(c) nothing cont1lined in section 46 shall apply to any officer 
of the Central Government or the Reserve Bank or the State 
• Bank of India, nominated or appointed as director of the State 
Bank of India, or any such subsidiary bank or any other banking 
institution. notified by the Central Government under this section. 
Explanation.-The expression "subsidiary bank" in this sec-
tion shall have the same meaning as :in section 2 of the State 
Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959. 
* • * * * 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Banking Companies Act, 1949. 
(Shri MorarjJ Desai, 
Minister of Firulnce.) 