As INTRODUCED IN LoK SAmu. ON 
, 
Bllt No. 80 of 197. , 
THE CENTRAL EXCISES AND SALT AND ADDITIONAL 
DUTIES OF EXCISE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1979 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, and the Additional 
Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act" 1957. 
"-
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: -- . 
1. This Act may be called the Central Excises and Salt and Additional Short 
Duties of Excise (Amendment) Act, 1979. title. 
S 2. In the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (hereinafter referred to Amend-
as the Central Excises Act), in section 2, in clause (f), after sub-clause ment 
(iv), the following sub-clauses shall be inserted, namely: _ of section 2 
of Act 1 01 
U(w in relation to goods comprised in Item No. 19 I of the First 1944. 
Schedule, includes bleaching, mercerising, dyeing, printing, water-
10 proofing, rubberising, shrink-proofin~ organ die processing or any 
other process or anyone or more of these processes; . 
(vi) in relation to ~oods comprised in Item No. 21(1) of the First 
Schedule, includes milling, raising, blowing, tenteringj dyeing or any 
other process or anyone or more of these processes; 

Amend-
Dli!nt 
of First 
Schedule of 
Act 1 of 
1944. 
(vii) in relation to goods comprised in Item No. 22(1) of the First 
Schedule, includes bleacb.i~. dyeing, printing, shrink-proofing, ten-
tering. beat-setting, crease resistant processing or any other process 
or anyone or more of these processes;". 
3. In the Central Excises Act, in the First Schedule.--
(i) in Item 19. for sub-item I, the following sub-item shall be 
substituted, namely:--
s 
"I. Cotton fabrics, other than (i) embroidery in the piece, in 
strips or in motifs, and (ii) fabrics impregnated, coated or lami-
nated with preparations of cellulose derivatives or of other arti- 10 
ticial plastic materials-
(a.) cotton fabrics. not subjected 
to any process 
(b) cotton fabrics. subjected to 
the process of bleaching., mercerising. 
dyeing, printing. water-proofing, 
rubberising, shrink-proofing. organdie 
processing or any other process or 
any two or more of these processes 
Twen ty per cent. 
ad valorem. 
Twenty per cent. 
ad valorem, ",' IS 
(ii) in Item 21. for sub.item (1), 'the following sub-item shall be 20 
substituted, namely:-
"(1) Woollen fabrics. other than embroidery in the piece, in 
strips or in motifs-' . . 
(a) woollen fabrics not subjected 
to any process 
Twelve per cent. 
ad valorem. 2$ 
(b) woollen fabrics subjected to 
the process of milling. raising, 
blowing. tentering, dyeing or any 
other process or any two or more of 
these processes 
Twelve per cent. 
ad valorem."; 
(iii) ~ Item 22, for sub-item (1), the following sub-item shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(1) Man-made fabrics, other than (i) embroidery in the 
piece, in strips or in motifs. and (ii) fabrics impregnated" coated 
or laminated with preparations of cellulose derivatives or of other 3S 
artificial plastic . materials-
(a) man.made fabrics not subjected 
to any process 
(b) man-made fabrics subjected 
to the process of bleaching, dyeing. 
printing, shrink.proofing, tentering. 
hest-setting, crease resistant proce~sing 
or any other process or any two or 
more of these processes 
Twenty per cent. 
ad valorem plus 
rupees five per 
square metre. 
T~enty per cent. 
ad valorem plus 
rupees five per 
square metre.". 
4S 

3 
4. In the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) 
Act, 1957, in the First Schedule-
(i) in Item 19, for sub-item I, the following sub-item shall be 
substituted, namely:-
5 "I. Cotton fabrics, other than (i) embroidery in the piece, in 
10 
15 
25 
strips or in motifs, and (ii) fabrics impregnated. coated or lami-
nated with preparations of cellulose derivatives or of other 
artificial plastic materials-
(a) cotton fabrics, not subjected to 
any process 
(b) cotton fabrics, subjected to 
the process of bleaching, mercerising, 
dyeing, printing, water-proofing. rub-
berising. shrink-proofing, organdie 
processing or any other process or any 
two or more of these processes 
Five per cent. 
ad valorem. 
Five per cent. 
ad valorem!'; 
(ii) in Item 21, for sub . ..item (1), the following sub-item shall be 
substituted. namely:-
"(1) Woollen fabrics, other than embrOidery in the piece. in 
strips or in motifs-
(a) woollen fabriCS, not subjected to 
any process 
(b) woollen fabrics, subjected to 
the process of milling, raising. 
bloWing, tentering, dyeing or any 
other process or any two Or more of 
these processes 
Five per cent. 
ad valorem. 
Five per cent. 
ad valorem."; 
(iii) in Item 22, for sub-item (1), the following sub-item shall be 
substituted, namely:-
30 u(1) Man.made fabrics, other than (1.) embroidery in the 
40 
45 
piece. in strips or in motifs, and (ii) fabrics impregnated, coated 
or laminated with preparations of cellulose derivatives or of other 
artificial plastic materials-. 
(a) man..made fabrics, not subject-_ 
ed to any process 
. 
(b) man-made fabrics, subjected 
to the process of bleaching. dyeing, 
printing, shrink-proofing, tentering, 
heaLsetting, crease resistant proces-
sing Or any other process or any two or . 
more of these processes 
Seven and a half 
per cent. ad 
valorem plus 
rupees two per 
square metre . 
Seven and a half 
per cent. ad 
valorem plus 
rupees two per 
square metre.". 
Amend-
ment 
of Firat 
Schedule 
of Act 58 
of 1957. 

Spe~ial 
provisions 
as to 
dutieS of 
excise on 
cOttOll 
fahri~s. 
wf.Jol1en 
f8bri~s. 
man-made 
fabrics, 
etc .. during 
a certain 
past period 
and vali-
dation. 
4 
5. (1) Every Central Act as in force at any time during the period 
commencing with the appointed day and ending with the day immediate-
ly preceding the date of commencement of this Act, and providing/for 
or relating to the levy of duties of excise on-
(a) "cloth", "cotton cloth" or, as the case may be, "cotton fabrics"; 5 
(b) "woollen fabrics"; 
(c) "rayon or artificial silk fabrics" or. as the case may be, 
"man-made fabrics", 
shall have and shall be deemed to have always had effect during the 
said period as if- 10 
.. 
(i) such "cloth", "cotton cloth" or, as. the case may be, "cotton 
fabrics" comprised, for the purposes of the duty leviable under that 
Act,-
(A) a sub-item covering such "cloth". "cotton cloth" or 
"cotton fabrics" not subjected to any process mentioned in sub. IS 
clause (v) of clause (f> of section 2 of the Central Excises Act 
as amended by this Act; and 
(B) a sub-item covering such "cloth", "cotton cloth" or 
"cotton fabrics" subjected to any such process or any two or 
more such processes, 
and the rate of duty specified in such Act with respect to such "cloth", 
"cotton cloth" or "cotton fabrics" had been specified separately with 
respect to each of the aforementioned sub-items thereof; 
(ii) such woollen fabrics comprised for the purposes of duty 
20 
leviable under that Act- 2S 
(A) a sub-item covering such woollen fabrics not subjected 
to any process mentioned in sub-clause (vi) of clause (f) of 
section 2 of the Central Exoises Act as amended by this Act; 
and 
(B) p. sub.item covering such woollen fabrics subjected to 30 
any such process or any two or more such processes, 
and the rate of duty specified in such Act with respect to such 
woollen fabrics had been specified separately with respect to each 
of the aforementioned sub-items thereof; 
(iii) such "rayon or artificial silk fabrics" or "man-made fabrics" 35 
comprised for the purposes of duty leviable under that Act-
(AI) a sub.item covering such "rayon or artificial silk fabrics" 
or "man-made fabrics" not wbjected to any process mentioned 
in sub-clause (vii) of clause (/) of section 2 of the ·Central 
hebes Act as amended by this Act; and 40 

5 
10 
(B) a sub-item covering such "rayon or artificial silk fabrics" 
or "man-made fabrics" subjected to any such process or any two 
or more such processes, 
and the rate of duty specified in such Act with respect to such 
"rayon Or artificial silk fabrics" and "man-made fabrics" had been 
specified separately with respect to each of the aforementioned sub-
items thereof; and 
(iv) the amendments to clause <f) of section 2 of the Central 
Excises Act made by section 2 had been in force at all relevant 
times subject to the modifications that the reference therein-
(A) to the "goods comprised in Item No. 19 I of thp. First 
Schedule" shall be construed IlS a reference to such "cloth", 
"cotton cloth" or, as the case may be, "cotton fabrics"; 
'(B) to the ccgoods comprised in Item No. 21(1) of the First 
15 Schedule" shall be construed as a' reference to woollen fabrics; 
(C) to the ugoods comprised in Item No. 22(1) of the First 
Schedule" shall be construed as a reference to such "rayon or 
artificial sHk fabrics" or, as the case may be, uman-made fabrics"; 
anc:~ subject to such further modifications as the context may require. 
20 (2) Any rule or notification or any action, or thing made, issued, 
taken or done or purporting to have been made, issued, taken or done 
under a Central Act referre<i to in sub-section (1) before the date of 
commencement of this Act, with respect to or in relation ,!o the levy of 
duties of excise on-
2S (a) ICcloth", ucotton cloth" or, as the case may be, Ucotton 
fabrics"; 
(b) "woollen fabrics"; 
(e) "rayon or artificial silk fabrics" or, as the case may be, 
uman.made fabrics". 
30 ,hatJ for all nurposes be deemed to be and to have always been as 
validly and effectively made, issued, taken or done as if the provisions 
of this section had been in force at all material times and. accordingly. 
notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal 
or other authority-
35 (a) .all duties of excise levied, assessed or collected or purported 
to have been levied, assessed or collected, before the commencement 
of this Act on-
(i) Ucloth", "cotton cloth" and "cotton fabrics" subjected 
to any process; 
40 (ii) "woollen fabrics" subjected to any process; 
(iii) Urayon or artificial silk fabrics" and "man-made fabrics" 
subjected to any process, 
under any such Central Act shall be deemed to be, and shall be 
deemed always to have been, as validly levied, assessed or collected 
45 as if the provisions of this section had been in force on and from 
th~ appointed day; 

6 
(b) no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or continued 
in any court for the refund of, and no enforcement shall be made 
by any court of any decree or· order directing the refund of, any 
such duties of excise which have been collected and which would 
have been validly coUected if the provisions of this section had been S 
in force on and from the appointed day; 
(c) refunds shall be made of all such duties of excise which 
have been collected but which would not have been so collected if 
the provisions of this section had been in force on and from the 
appointed day; and 10 
(d) recoveries shall be made of all such duties of excise which 
have not been collected or, as the case may be, which have been 
refunded but which would have been collected or, as the case may 
be, would not have been refunded if the provisions of this section 
had been in force on and from the appointed day. 
(3) For- the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no act or 
omission on the part of any person shall be punishable as an offence 
which would not have been so punishable if this section had not come 
into force. 
Explanation.-In this section-
(a) "appointed day", in relation to-
(i) cotton fabrics, means the 1st day of January, 1949; 
(ii) man-made fabrics, means the 28th day of February, 
1954; and 
IS 
20 
(iii) woonen fabrics, means the 1st day of March,. 1955; tl.S 
• /t'---
(b) "Central Act" includes any 'provision, in a Bill introduced 
in the House of the People, in respect of which a declaration was 
made under section 3 of the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 
1931; 160fl931'1 
(c) "duties of excise" means dUties of excise levied under any 30 
Central Act whether as such or as additional duties of excise or 
auxiliary duties of excise or special duties of excise or by any other 
name. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Central Excise duty was levied for the first time on cotton fabricS 
in 1949, on man-made fabrics (rayon or artificial silk fabrics) in 1954 
and on woollen fabrics in 1955. From the very early stages of the 
textile tariff, with a view to achieving progression in the rate structure 
and to aligning excise control with the demands of different producing 
sectors, duties have been levied not only on grey fabrics but also at the 
stage of processing such as bleaching, dyeing and printing. 
'. I 
2. In its judgment dated 24th January. 1979 in the Real Honest Tex-
tiles and others Vs. Union of India (Special Civil Appl1cations No. 1552 
etc. of 1978), the Gujarat High Court has held that the term "fabric" as 
used in the tariff description "cotton fabric" would refer to something 
that is woven; hence it can relate only to cloth in the grey stage; pro-
cessing of the grey cloth either by bleaching, dyeing or pI;inting does 
not amount to manufacturing and both before and a.f.ter processing' it 
remains a fabric falling within the same item of Central Excise Tariff 
(item. 19-cotton fabric, of the First Schedule to the Central Excises and 
Salt Act). The Court arrived at a similar conclusion with respect to 
man-made fabrics falling under item No. 22 of the same Schedule. The 
Court observed that processing was an excisable activity covered by 
the residual tariff item No. 68 of the said Schedule. 
3. After the pronouncement ot the above judgment, a number of writ 
petitions by other parties agitating similar points have been filed in 
different High Courts. If these High Courts deliver similar judgments,' 
a considerable amount of revenue running into several crores of rupees 
may become refundable. An appeal against the judgment of the Guja-
rat High Court is pending in the Supreme Court. 
4. The judgment of the Gujarat High Court completely upsets the 
arrangement regarding levy of excise duties on textile fabrics which has 
been followed for several years and it will have the effect of disturbing 
the balance evolved between different sectors of the textile industry 
besides putting large amounts of revenue at stake. In so far as past 
assessments are concerned, refund~ ot. duties whose incidence would, in 
the normal course oJ business, have been passed on to consumers, would 
only mean fortuitous gains, to the excise assessees. 
5. The same problem which has arisen in the case of cotton fabrics 
and man-made fabrics as a result of the judgment ot the Gujarat High 
Couri may arise in the case of woollen fabrics as well. 
6. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Central Excises and Salt Act, 
1944 and the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) 
Act, 1957 (which also provides fur duties of excise on the aforemention-
ed fabrics) to overcome the difficulty which has arisen as a result of the 
judgment of the Gujarat High Court. It is also proposed to validate the 
levies which have been made in the past in respect of these fabrics. 
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 14th May, 1979. 
SATISH AGARWAL. 
7 

l>eftni-
tions. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CENTRAL ExCISES AND SALT ACT, 1944 
(1 OF 1944) 
• • • • • .' 
2. In this Act. unless there is anything repugnant in the mbject or con-
text,-
• • • • • • 
(f> "manufacture " includes any process incidental or ancillary to 
the completion of a manufactured productj and 
• • • • 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 3) 
• 
._---_._ .. ---------------
Item 
No. Description of goodS 
• 
-------
Rate of duty 
------- _____ .0 ____ 00_- ____ _ 
(1) (2) 
• • • • 
19. COTTON FABRICS-
"Cotton fabrics" means all varieties 
of fabrics manufactured either wholly or 
partly from cotton and includes dhoties, 
sarees, chadders, bed-sheets, bed-spreads, 
counter-panes, table-olot~, embroidery in 
the piece, in strips or in motifs and fab-
rics impregnated, coated or laminated 
with preparations of cellulose derivatives 
or of other artificial plastic materials, 
if (i) in such fabrics cotton predominates 
in weight, or (ii) such fabrics contain 
more than 40 per cent. by weight of cot-
ton and 50 per cent. or more by weight 
of non-cellulosic fibres or yam or both: 
Provided that in the case of embroi-
dery in the piece, in strips, or in motifs 
and fabrics impregnated, coated or lami-
nated with preparations of cellulose 
derivatives or of other artificial plastic 
materials, slllch predominance or percent-
ages, as the case may: be, shall be in 
relation to the base fabrics which are 
8 
(3) 
• • 
j , 
.',' 

9 
I 
embroidered or impregnated, coated or 
~am1na'ted, as the case may be-
l. Cotton fabrics other than (i) em-
broidery in the piece, in strips or in mo_ 
tifs, and (ii) fabrics impregnated, coat-
ed or laminated with preparations of 
cellulose derivatives or of other artifi .. 
Gis! plastic materials. 
• • • • 
Twenty J;>er cent. ad 
valorem. 
• 
Explanation I.-"Base fabrics" means fabrics falling under sub-item 
I of this item which are subjected to the process of embroidery or which 
. are impregnated, coated or laminated with preparations of cellulose deri-
• - vatives or of other plastic materials. 
Explanation II.-Where two or more of the f~llowing fibres, that is to 
, say, 
(a) man-made fibre of cellulosic origin; 
(b) cotton; 
(c) wool; 
(d) silk (including silk noil) ; 
(e) jute (including Bimlipatam jute or mesta fibre); 
(f) man-made fibre of non-cell'Ulosic origin; 
(g) flax; 
(h) ramie, 
in any fabric are equal in weight, then, such one ot those fibres the pre-
(iaminance ot which would render such fabric faLl under that Item (here-
·after in this Explanation referred to as the applicable Item) among the 
Items Nos. 19,20,21,22, 22A and 22AA, which, read with the relevant notifi-
. cation, if any~ for the time being in force issued under the Central 
EXcise Rules, 1944, involves the highest amount of duty, shall be 
deemed to be predominant in such . fabric· and accordingly such fabric 
;shall be deemed to faLl under the applicable Item. 
Erpla.nation III __ This Item does not include floor coverings, fall-
ing under Item No. 2,2G. 
21. WOOLLEN FABRICS--
,"Woollen fabrics" means aLl varie-
ties of fabrics in which wool predomi-
nates in weight or which contain more 
than 30 per cent. of wool and 50 per 
cent. or more of non-cellulosic fibre 
or y~ or both: 
Provided that in the case of em-
broidery in the piece, in strips or in 
motifs, such predominance or percent-
ages, as the case may be, shall be in 
1'e1ation to the base fabrics which 
are em.brotd&M~ 
(1) Woollen fabrics, other than 
em.broidttry in the piece, in strips or 
in motifs. 
/ 
* * ... • 
Twelve per cent. . . ad t1aZorem. 
• 

10 
ExPlanation I.-"Base fabrics" means fabrics falling under sub-ite;n.:. 
(1) of this Item which are subjected to the process_ of embroidery, 
Explanation II.-Explanation II under Item No. 19 shan, 80 far 88-
may be, apply m relation to this Item as it applies in relation to that. 
Item. 
Explanation III.-This Item does not include fioor coverings, falling. 
under Item No 22G. 
22. MAN-MADE FABRICS-
"'Man-made fabrics" means all 
varieties of fabrics manufactured either 
wholly or partly from man-made fibres 
or yarn and includes embroidery in the 
piece, in strips or in motifs and fab-
rics impregnated, coated or laminated 
with prepa,:-ations of cellulose derivatives 
or 01. other artificial plastic materials, in 
each of which man-made 
(i) cellulosic fibre or yarn, or 
(ii) non-cellulosic fibre or predomi-
nates in weight: 
Provided that in the case of embroi-
dery in the piece, in strips or in motifs 
and fabrics impregnated, coated or lami-
nated with preparations of cellulose de-
rivatives or of other artificial plastic ma-
terials, such predominance shall be in 
relation to the base fabrics which are 
embroidered or impregnated, coated or 
laminated, as the case may be-
(1) Man-made fabrics other than (i) 
embroidery in the piece, in strips or in 
motifs, and (ii) fabrics impregnated, 
coated or laminated with preparations of 
ceLlulose derivatives or of other artifi-
cial plastic materials. 
• • • • 
Twenty per cent. ad'~ 
, va.lorem plus rupees. 
five per square 
metre. 
• 
Explanation I.-"Base fabrics" means fabrics falling under sub-item 
(1) of this Item which are subjected to the process of embroidery or which 
are impregnated, coated or laminated with preparaticms bf cellulose de-
rivatives or of other plastic materials. -
Explanation II.-This Item does not include glass fabrics or fabrics" 
falling under Item No. 19 or Item No. 21. 
Explanation III.-Erplan.a.tion II under Item No. 19 shall, 80 far 88: 
may be, apply in relation to this Item as it applies in relation to that. 
Item. 
E~lanation IV.-This Item does not include fioor coverings, falling;,~ 
under Item No. 22G. 
• • • • • • 

ErmAcTs FROM THE ADDITIONAL Dunm OF EXCISE (GOODS OF SP!JClAL 
IMPORTANCE) ACT, 1957 
.. • 
(58 OF 1957) 
• 
THE -FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 3 (1)] 
• 
Item No. 
in the First 
Schedule to 
the Central 
Excises and 
Salt Act. 
1944 
Description of 
goods 
Rate of 
Additional duty 
--.- ---------
(1) (2) 
-------------- - --'-_. 
• • • • 
19. COTTON FABRICS-
L Cotton fabrics other than (i) 
embroidery, in the piece, iD. strips or 
in motifs, and (ii) fabrics impregnated, 
coated or laminated with prepara-
tions of cellulose derivatives or of 
other artificial plastic materials. 
• • • • 
21. WOOLLEN FABRICS-
(1) Woollen fabric~, other than em-
broidery in the piece, in strips or in mo-
tifs. 
• • • • 
22. MAN-MADE FABRICS-
r .'''_ .. \ ~,~ 
(1) Man-made fabrics other than 
(i) embroidery, in the piece, in strips or 
in motifs, and (ii) fabrics impregnated, 
coated or laminated with preparations 
of cellulose derivatives or of other 
arl!ficial plastic materials. 
• • • • 
(3) 
• 
Five per cent. ad 
valO1'em. 
• 
Five per cent. ad: 
valorem. 
• 
Seven and' a half 
per cent. ad valo-· 
rem plus two ru-
pees per square: 
metre. 
• 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BU..L 
.furtber to amend the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, and the Addi-
tional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 . 
.. (Shrl Sctish Agcmocl. MiftiBter of State in the 
Minist11l of Finance.) 