As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
Bill No. 80 of 1976 
THE COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1976 
A 
BILL 
>. 'c· 
further to amend the Companies Act, 1956. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-seventh year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Companies (Amendment) Act, 1976. 
2. In the Companies Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the princi-
S pal Act), in secti'on IOE, in sub-section (4D), for the words, letters and 
5 of 1898. figures "Chapter XXXV of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898", the 
words, letters and figures "Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Pro-
2 of 1974. cedure, 1973" shall be substituted. 
3. In section IOSH of the principal Act, the words, brackets, letters and 
10 figures 'and, any reference in sections I08A, I08B and l08e to "same 
management" shall be construed as a reference to "same management" 
as defined in clause (g) 0'£ section 2 of the Monopolies and Restrictive 
54 of 1969. Trade Practices Act, 1969' shall be inserted at the end. 
JS 
4. In section 220 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1), aftt~r the words "balance sheet and profit 
and loss account were so laid", the words ", or, where the annual 
Short title. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
IDE. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
l08H. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
220. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
293. 
Amend_ 
ment ot 
section 
~93A. 
!nsel1Ju .. 
of new 
section 
293AA. 
Restric-
tions on 
thepoweJ 
of non-
Govern-
mentcom-
panies to 
make 
political 
contribu-
tiolUl. 
I I 
2. 
general meeting of a company for any year has not been held, there 
shall be filed with the Registrar within thirty days from the latest 
day on or before which that meeting should have been held in ac-
cordance with the provisions of this Act,-" shall be inserted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), after the words "does not adopt the ba- 5 
lance sheet", the words ", or, if the annual general meeting of a 
company for any year has not been held," shall be inaerted. 
5. In section 293 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause 
(e), for the words "twenty-five thousand rupees", the words "fifty thou-
sand rupees" shall be substituted. 10 
8. In section 293A of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "neither a company", the 
words "neither a Government company" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the word "company", wherever it 
occurs, the words "Government company" shall be substituted. I, 
7. After section 293A of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"293AA. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 
293, neither a company in general meeting nor its Boarlt of directors 
shall, after the commencement of the Companies (Amendment) 20 
Act, 1976, contribute-
(a) to any political party, or 
(b) for any political purpose to any individual or body, 
any amount or amounts which, or the ag.gregate of which, will, in 
any financial year, exceed fifty thousand rupees or five per cent. 25 
of its average net profits as determined in accordance with the pro-
visions of sections 349 and 350 during the three financial years im-
mediately preceding, whichever is greater. 
Expl.anation.-Where a portioo. of a financial year of the com-
pany falls before the oommencement of the Companies (Amend- 30 
ment) Act, 1976. and a portion fall'S after such commencement, the 
latter portion shall be deemed to be a financial year within the mean-
ing, and· for the PUrpOReS, of this sub-section. 
(2)' Every company shall disclose in its profit and loss account any 
amount 1()1' amounts contributed by it under 'Sub-section (1) to any 3S 
political party or for any political purpose to any individual or body 
during the financial year to which that account relates, giving par-
ticulars of the total amount contributed and the name C1f the party, 
individual or body to which, or to whom, such amount has been 
contributed. 
(3) If a oompany makes default in complying with the proviSions 
of sub-section (2), the company, and every officer of the company 
who is in default, shall be punishablp. wi·th flne which may extend til 
five thousand rupees. 
40 

I 
, , ... ,;. 
(4) Nothlng contained in this section shall apply to a Govern-
ment company.". 
8. In section 620 of the principal Act, for ..uo-section, :(2)', tlie follow-
ing sub-section shall be substituted, and shall be c1C!emed to liave been 
S substituted with effect from the 1st day of February, 1975, namely:'-
.. (Z) A copy of every notification, proposal tQ be iBSuC!d under 
sub-section (1), shall be laid, in draft, before euch house of Parlia-
ment, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive ses-
10 sions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately follow-
ing the lession or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the notification, the notification shall 
not be issued or, as the case may be, shall ibe issued only in such 
IS modified form as may be agreed upon by both the Houses.". 
20 
25 
9, After section 634 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"634A. Any orner made by the Company Law Board under sec-
tion 17, section 18, section 19, section 79; section 141 or section 186 
may be enforced by that Board in the same manner as if it were a' 
decree made by a court in a suit pending therein, and it shall be law-
ful f01' that Board to send, in the case of its inability to execute such 
order, to the court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction,-
(a) in the case of an order against a company, the regis-
tered office of the company is situated, or 
(b) in the case of an order against any other person, the 
person concerned voluntarily resides, or carries on business or 
personally works for gain.". 
10, In section 635 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the fol-
30 lowing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
3S 
" (4) Where any orner made by the Company Law Board under 
section 17, section 18, section 19, section 79 or section 186 is requir-
ed to be enforced by a court, a certified copy of the order shall be 
produced to the proper officer of the court required to enforce the 
order and the prOVisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) shall, as far as 
may be, apply to every such order in the same manner and to tJie 
same extent as they apply to an order made by a court.". 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 
620 • 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
634A. 
Enforce-
mentof 
orders of 
Company 
Law 
Board. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
635, 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS ANn REASONS 
In State of Bombay v. Bandan Ram Bhandani [AIR (1961) SC 186], 
the question arose as to whether the company and its officers are liable 
to be prosecuted under the 1913 Act for not laying the balance sheet and 
the pro,ftt and loss account before the company in annual general meet-
ing where the annual general meeting of the Company was not held. 
~ll that case, the Supreme Court took the view that a person charged 
with an offence could not rely on his own default as a defence to the 
charge. If he was responsible for not calling the annual general meet-
ing, he could not be heard to say in his defence to the charge that as 
the annual general meeting was not held, the balance-sheet and profit 
and loss account could not be laid before the company in annual general 
meeting. A different view has, however, been taken on the point by 
the Supreme Court in the case of State of Andhra Pradesh v. Andhra 
Pradesh Provincial Potteries Ltd. [AIR (1973) Be 2429]. 
Persons in charge of the management of some of the companies some-
times omit to convene the annual general meeting of the company and 
by such omissWn keep the shareholders as well as the creditors of the 
company in the dark about the affairs of the company and its financial 
condition. Further, by such omission, they also evade the necessity of 
filing the balance-sheet and the profit and loss account with the Regis-
trar of Companies. When a document is filed with the Registrar of Com-
panies, it is open to any shareholder or creditor to inspect such docu-
ment and to obtain a copy thereof. In the circumstances, it is absolute-
ly eJSential that even where the annual general meeting of the com-
pany has not been held, the balance-sheet and profit and loss account 
should be filed with the Registrar of Companies to enable the sharehol-
ders and other persons to find o,ut, from inspection of the said docu-
ments, the affairs of the company and its financial condition. The Bill, 
therefore, seeks to amend section 220 to achieve the said object. 
Under section 293 of the Companies Act, 1956, a company is empower-
ed to make donations for charitable purposes up to five per cent. of its 
average net profits during the preceding three years or up to Rs. 25,000, 
whichever is greater. The ceiling of Rs. 25,000 was fixed long ago 
and it is felt that in the present context, the said ceiling should be rais-
ed to Rs. 50,000. The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend section 293. 
Section 293A imposes a complete ban on contributions by companies 
to a.ny political party or to any individual or body for political purposes. 
Experience has shown ·that the said ban has not produced the desired 
rl:!sult. It is, therefore, proposed to amend section 293A so as to remove 
the said ban in relation to non-Government companies. 
New Section 293AA is proposed to be inserted to enable non-Govern-
ment companies to make contributions to political parties or to any in-
4 

~ 
divic:1ual or body lQr political purposes up to a limit 01 Ave per cent. ot 
its average net profits during the preceding three years or Rs. 50,000, 
whichever is greater. 
Section 620 of the Companies Act, 1956, empowers the Central Gov-
ernment to modify, by notification, any of the provisions of the Act in 
its application to a particular Government company or to Government 
companies in general. Every n.otification proposing to make such modi-
fication is requir.ed to be placed, in draft, before each House of Parlia-
ment for a period of not less than 30 days while it is in session. Since 
the said period of 30 days cannot, sometimes, be completed in one session, 
it is necessary to amend the section to permit the period of 30 days to be 
completed in one session or in two or more luccessive sessions. The Bill 
seeks to amend section 620 to achieve the said object. 
Other amendments included in the Bill are of a consequential or for-
mal nature. 
NEW DELm; H. R. GOKHALE. 
The 16th August, 1976. 

Constitu-
tion ot 
Board ot 
Company 
Law 
Adminis-
tration. 
Construc-
tion 
otrefer-
ences to 
"shares" 
or "share 
capital" 
in sections 
108A to 
108D. 
Three 
copies of 
balance 
sheet, etc., 
to Be flIed 
with 
Reiistrar. 
Restric-
tions on 
powers of 
Board. 
ANNEXURE 
EX'mACTB FROM THE COMPANIES ACT, 1956 
(1 OF 1956) 
• • • • • 
lOE. (1) • • • • 
(40) Every Bench shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purpos-
I1S of section 195 and Chapter XXXV of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1898, and every proceeding before the Bench shall be deemed. to be a 
judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the 
Indian Penal Code and for the purpose of section 196 of that Code . 
• • • • • 
IOSH. References in sections l08A, l08B, l08C and 1080 to shares or 
flhare capital, as the case may be, shall be construed as references to 
shares or share capital, respectively, of a body corporate owning any 
undertaking to which the provisions of Part A of Chapter III of the Mo-
nopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969, apply. 
• • • • • 
220. (1) After the balance sheet and the profit and loss account have 
bP.en laid before a company at an annual general meeting as aforesaid, 
there shall be filed with the Registrar within thirty days from the date 
on which the balance sheet and the profit and loss account were SO laid-
• • • • • 
(2) If the annual general meeting of a company before which a ba-
lance sheet is laid as aforesaid does not adopt the balance sheet, a state-
ment of that fact and of the reasons therefor shall be annexed to the 
balance sheet and to the copies thereof required to be filed with the 
Registrar. 
• • • • • 
293. (1) The Board of directors of a public company, or of a private 
company which is a subSidiary of a public company, shall not, except 
with the consent of such public company or subsidiary in general meet-
ing,-
• • • • • 
(e) contribute, after the commencement of this Act, to charita-
ble and other funds not directly relating to the business of the com-
pany or the welfare of its employees, any amounts the aggregate of 
which will, in any financial year, exceed twenty-five thousand ru-
pess, or five per cent. of its average net profits as determined in ac-
Ci 
5 of 1898. 
45 of 1860. 
54 of 1969. 

7 
cordance with the provisions of sections 349 and 350 during the three 
financial years immediately preceding, whichever is greater. 
• • • • • 
Z93A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision 
of this Act, neither a company in general meeting nor its Board of direc-
tol'fl shall, after the commencement of the Companies (Amendment) Act, 
17 of 1969. 1969, contribute any amount or amounts-
(a) to any political party, or 
(b) for any political purpose to any individual or body. 
(2) If a company contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1), then-
(i) the company shall be punishable with fine which may ex-
tend to five thousand rupees; and 
(ii) every officer of the company who is in default shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years and shall also be liable to fine. 
• • • • • 
6ZO. (1) • • • • 
(2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub-sec-
tion (1) shall be laid in draft before both Houses of Parliament for a 
period of not less than thirty daY'S while they are in session and if within 
that period, either House disapproves of the iSSlle of the notification or 
approves oil such issue only with modiftcations, the notification shall not 
be issued Of, as the case may require, shall be issued only with such 
modificationa as may be agreed on by both the Houses. 
• • • • • 
Prohibition 
regarding 
making of 
political 
Contribu-
tiona. 
Power to 
modify 
Act in 
relation to 
Govern-
mentcom-
panies. 

LOK SABHA 
a. 
BILL 
further to amend the Companies Act, 1956. 
(Shri H. R. Gokhale, 
Minister of Law, 
Justice and Company 
Affairs) . 