1
THE  TOURISM PROMOTION CORPORATION OF INDIA BILL, 2015
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a Tourism Promotion Corporation of India to promote and
develop tourism in the country and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Tourism Promotion Corporation of India Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the  Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(ii) "Director-General" means the Director-General of Tourism Promotion
Corporation of India established under section 3;
(iii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
 (iv) "tourist centre" means a centre declared as a tourist centre by the appropriate
Government.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 80 of  2015
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN  LOK SABHA

2
Tourism
Promotion
Corporation
of India.
Corporation
to be headed
by Director-
General.
Fund of the
Corporation.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Corporation to be known as the Tourism Promotion Corporation of India with its
headquarters at New Delhi.
(2) The Corporation shall have its office in the capital city of each State and Union
territory:
Provided that the Corporation may also set up its offices at any tourist centre or other
places with the prior approval of the Central Government.
4. (1) The Corporation shall be headed by a Director-General to be appointed by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Each office of the Corporation shall be headed by a Director who shall be appointed
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and other staff as
may be required for efficient functioning of the Corporation and its offices.
(4) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of the Director-General, Directors and Officers and staff of the Corporation shall be such
as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Corporation shall have a Fund with an initial corpus of rupees five thousand
crore.
(2) The Central Government shall, from time to time, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, credit such sums to the Fund as may be necessary for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by the Director-General or by any Director of the
Corporation authorized by him in this behalf.
6. The Corporation shall :—
(i) formulate a tourism policy in consultation with the State Governments;
(ii) give wide publicity to its policies and programmes through all means of
communication including print and electronic media;
(iii) advise Central Government with regard to financial assistance to be provided
to State Governments for creating/improving infrastructure at all tourist centres;
(iv) provide better connectivity to all places of tourist importance by way of
creation of adequate infrastructure;
(v) set up tourist facilitation centres at all airports and railway stations with a
view to facilitate travelling, boarding and lodging for the tourists including reservation
in air services, trains, buses, hotels and motels;
(vi) conduct organised tours to different tourist centres;
(vii) set up hotels, restaurants and motels at all tourist centres with a view to
catering to the needs of different categories of tourists;
(viii) prepare a list of paying-guest accommodation available at places having
inadequate hotel or motel accommodation;
(ix) make arrangements for provision of adequate paying-guest accommodation
for tourists at tourist centres having no hotels run by the Corporation;
(x) organise cultural functions in cooperation with the appropriate Government
and other organisations concerned at various tourist places at regular intervals with
a view to creating awareness among the general public and foreign tourists about the
Indian culture and tradition;
Functions of
the
Corporation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(xi) organise cultural functions in various countries in co-ordination with
Indian Embassies/High Commissions in those countries with a view to depicting
Indian culture and tradition;
(xii) send experts in the fields of art, music and such other activities as it may
deem fit, to various countries for participating in programmes aimed at depicting Indian
culture;
(xiii) impart training to tourist guides and tour operators regarding historical
background of tourist centres and courtesies to be extended to tourists, especially
foreign tourists;
(xiv) set up health resorts based on Indian system of medicine at various tourist
places in consultation with the appropriate Government;
(xv) make necessary arrangements for security of foreign tourists at various
tourist centres in consultation with the appropriate Government; and
(xvi) coordinate with the Archaeological Survey of India with a view to preserving
and promoting monuments declared as of national importance.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force, dealing with any of the matters dealt within this Act.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act not to be
in derogation
of other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is a large country having vast tourism potential. However, it has not been exploited
fully to the advantage of the country. Every year, close to 20 million foreign tourists visit our
country from all over the world, while the volume of domestic tourists is about 740 million.
It is a known fact that the foreign tourists face hardship and suffer unpleasant
experiences while they travel in our country. They get cheated by middlemen, touts and
others for arranging reservations for journey, hotels, etc. Many of them carry a bad impression
about our country on their return. As a result, prospective tourists are discouraged from
visiting our country. Consequently there is a heavy loss of foreign exchange to the country.
India is a vast country having different cultures and traditions and various languages.
People of one region are not aware of culture and tradition of people belonging to the other
regions. As such they face a lot of difficulties while visiting important tourist places. Moreover,
the tourist centres in many places require adequate facilities and the States are not in a
position to spend the money. Security to foreign tourists also has to be taken into
consideration. Therefore, it is proposed to establish a Tourism Promotion Corporation of
India with a view to promote tourism in the country and attract foreign tourists in large
numbers. It is also proposed to provide that the Corporation shall function with a professional
approach in order to promote tourism.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT  DUBEY
February 2, 2015

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall establish up a Corporation
to be known as the Tourism Promotion Corporation of India with its headquarters at
New Delhi and an office in each State and Union territory. Clause 4 provides that the
Corporation shall consist of a Director-General, a number of Directors and Officers. Clause 5
provides for constitution of a Fund with an initial corpus of rupees five thousand crore and
it also provides for supply of adequate funds by the Central Government from time to time for
carrying out the purposes of this Act. Clause 6 provides that the Corporation shall perform
various functions such as providing connectivity to tourist places, giving publicity to its
policies and programmes, setting up of hotels, motels and restaurants, organizing functions
in the country and abroad to promote Indian culture, conduct tours and training for tourist
guides, etc. to augment infrastructural and other facilities for tourists in all tourist places.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five thousand crore is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a Tourism Promotion Corporation of India to promote and
develop tourism in the country and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4764LS(S3)—05-03-2015.