5
i.

As IntRopUucED IN Lok SABHA

By vu &

Bill No, 80 of 2004.

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004
By
‘Suri S.P.Y. Reppy, M.P.
re
BILL
Surther to amend the Income Tax Act, 1961.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (/) This Act may be called the Income Tax (Amendment) Act, 2004.
(2) Itextends to the whole of India.

(3) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. After section 4 of the Income Tax Act, 1961, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—

"4A, (1) Any person may voluntarily deposit rupees one crore as tax in respect
of his annual total income within ninety days from the beginning of the financial year
in respect of the assessment year concerned:

Short title,
extent and
‘commencement.

Insertion of
new section
4A

Special
provisions for
voluntarily
deposit of
income-tax.


2
Provided that this shall not apply to persons mentioned in clauses (ii) to (vii) of sub-
section (31) of section 2 of this Act:

Provided further that the amount of rupees one crore shall be subject to review after
every five years,

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a person who deposits tax in
respect of his annual total income for the next assessment year shall not be—

(a) required to file income-tax return for the year;

(b) subject to any inquiry or investigation;

(c) subject to house search or raids on his residential or office premises; and

(d) subject to any other proceeding in connection wit
said assessment year.

(3) The tax once paid under sub-section (1) shall be deemed as the final settlement of
the income tax for the assessment year.

is income tax for the

(4) No suit, prosecution or any other legal proceedings shall lie in any court for
assessment or re-assessment or refund or recovery in respect of income-tax paid by any
person in respect of his annual total income under sub-section (1).


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Oflate, the number of persons who are not filing their income-tax returns, or suppressing
their income or evading payment of income-tax deliberately is gradually going up. This leads
to an unmanageable accumulation of income-tax revenues year after year. It generates black
money and the corpus of which, by all accounts, is running a parallel economy in the
country. This is a very serious situation and unless controlled in time it will spell an all round
ruin for us.

Itis, therefore, proposed to create a clean and free atmosphere and ensure transparency
in the tax system where people will voluntarily submit returns and pay tax without any fear
or harassment. This will lead to a scenario which will encourage to unleash the creative
energies of our entrepreneurs, businessmen and other professionals and productive forces
of the society which is one of the six basic principles for the country's governance as
enshrined in the Common Minimum Programme which is the charter of the United Progressive
Alliance Government.

Hence this Bill.

New Dent; S.P-Y. REDDY.
July 16,2004

PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 274
OF THE CONSTITUTION

[Copy of letter No. 155/28/2004-TPL, 28 September, 2004 from Shri P. Chidambaram,
Minister of Finance to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha].

The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Income Tax
(Amendment) Bill, 2004 (Insertion of new section 4A) by Shri S.P.Y. Reddy, M.P., has
recommended under articles 117(1) and 274(1) of the Constitution the introduction of the Bill
in Lok Sabha.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INCOME Tax AcT, 1961.

(43 oF 1961)
. ’ * . . .
CHAPTERII
BASIS OF CHARGE
. . . * . .
Charge of 4. (1) Where any Central Act enacts that income-tax shall be charged for any

imcome-tax. assessment year at any rate or rates, income-tax at that rate or those rates shall be charged

for that year in accordance with, and subject to the provisions including provisions for the
levy of additional income-tax of, this Act in respect of the total income of the previous year
of every person:

Provided that where by virtue of any provision of this Act income-tax is to be charged
in respect of the income of a period other than the previous year, income-tax shall be charged
accordingly.

(2) Inrespect of income chargeable under sub-section (1), income-tax shall be deducted
at the source or paid in advance, where it is so deductible or payable under any provision of
this Act. 4

* * * * * .


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Income Tax Act, 1961.

(Shri S.PY. Reddy, M.P)

MGIPMRND—2460LS—16. 10.2004.