AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

0.5 may 2000

08 है 8018

1G

Bill No. 80 of 2000

THE SPECIAL EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES (FOR CHILDREN OF
PARENTS LIVING IN RURAL AREAS) BILL, 2000.

By
Suri 0, Putta Swamy Gowna, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for establishment of educational institutions and other facilities to the children
of parents living in the rural areas and for matiers connected therewith.

Bg it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Special Educational Facilities for Children of Parents Short title and
Living in the Rural Areas Act, 2000. extent.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:— Definitions.

(a) “appropriate Government” means the Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may be;

(8) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and

(c) "rural areas" means such areas which are located outside the radius of twenty
kilometers away from the town or city.


institutions,

Facilities to
children born of
parents living in
rural areas.

Scholarships.

Power to make
mules,

2

3. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish adequate number of schools,
institutions of higher learning including institutions of medical and technical education
in rural areas, in addition to existing schools, institutions, as may be prescribed, to
impart the best education to the children of, parents living in rural areas.

(2) The schools including tions of medical and technical education
established under sub-clause (/) shall be provided with all modern facilities, equipments,
laboratories, infrastructure and adequate number of teaching staff at par with the
schools, institutions of higher learning, medical and technical education provided in
the urban areas of the State.

4. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide to every child born of
Parents living in rural areas, the following facilities, namely:—

(०) free education from primary school ievel to the post-graduate level
including medical and technical education;

(6) free hostel facilities, uniform, books, meals and such other assistance
and facilities as are required for the proper education of children.

5. The appropriate Government shall provide scholarships upto a maximum of
Tupees two thousand and four hundred per annum, in deserving cases, to the children
of parents living in rural areas while they are pursuing their education.

6. The Central Government, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Nearly seventy per cent. of the total population of our country lives in the rural areas.
Their income is so meagre that they cannot provide good education to their children. A
large number of our children bom of such parents leave schools because of the poor financial
position of their parents. A country cannot even think of development without proper education
of its young generation, It is the foremost duty of the Government to establish a classless and
creedless society. Hence the Governments at the Central as well as at the State level should
make adequate provisions for free educational facilities to the children of parents living in
rural areas. In this way the children so educated will get better jobs and can compete with -
children educated in urban areas successfully. Their standard of living will also rise and
country will progress immensely.

Hence this Bili.

New DELHI; G. PUTTA SWAMY GOWDA
April 1, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall establish adequate
number of schools, institutions of higher education including medical and technical
institutions in rural areas and these institutions shell be provided with adequate facilities,
infrastructure etc.

Clause 4 provides for free education including medical and technical education by
the appropriate Government to children bom of parents living in rural areas. It also seeks to
provide for facilities such as free hostel, uniform, meals etc. to such children. Clause 5
provides that the appropriate Governnient shal! provide scholarships upto a maximum of
Tupees two thousand and four hundred per annum in deserving cases, to such children. The
Central Government has te bear the expenditure to be involved in respect of Union territories.
The respective State Government shail bear the expenditure involved in respect of their
States. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, wil! involve expenditure fiorn the Consolidated Fund
of India, It is estimated that arecurring expenditure to the tune of rupees two hundred crore
is likely to be incurred per annurn.

Anon-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be incurred.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
the purposes of the Bill. These rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

,
|
|
|
|
।


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for establishment of. educational institutions and other facilities
to the children of parents living in the rural areas and
for matters connected therewith.

(Shri G. Putta Swamy Gowda, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—116LS—18-04-2000.