1
THE PROHIBITION OF USING TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEM FOR HOAX CALLS
BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMA TI DARSHANA VIKRAM JARDOSH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition of using telecommunication system for making hoax calls and
short message service and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Using Telecommunication System for
Hoax Calls Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
Bill No. 80 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5

(b)"telecommunication system" means any mode of electronic
telecommunication and includes any landline telephone, public telephone booth,
mobile phone, satellite phone or internet phone; and
(c) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code, 1860, the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 and the Information
Technology Act, 2000 shall have the same meaning as is respectively assigned to
them in those Acts.
3. (1) The use of any telecommunication system for hoax calls or hoax Short Message
Service (SMS) or for any other similar purpose is hereby prohibited.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be
guilty of committing an offence of making a hoax call under this Act.
4. Any person who is found guilty of making a hoax call or hoax Short Message
Service (SMS) with an intention to spread fear or panic in public shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a minimum term of five years which may extend upto fifteen
years and with fine of fifteen lakh rupees.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
every offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
6. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in  force.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Prohibition of
using
telecommunication
system for hoax
calls or hoax
Short Message
Service.
Penalty.
Offence to be
cognizable.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
2
45 of 1860.
13 of 1885.
21 of 2000.

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The menace of hoax calls or Short Message Service (SMS) made from local public
telephone booths, mobile phones, internet phones etc. for spreading false information
aimed at spreading fear or panic or sexual harassment has reached alarming levels.
Everyday the newspapers are filled with reports of misuse of the telecommunication system
by anti-social elements for making false/hoax calls or SMS raising a serious security concern
for our nation which adversely affects the functioning of police forces and disrupts public
services at large.
The culprits of such nefarious acts are encouraged to continue their activities since
the punishment for such terrible acts is very minimal. It is felt that if harsh punishment is
imposed on perpetrators of such heinous acts, they would discontinue their activities.
Therefore, it is proposed to provide for harsher punishment for making hoax calls to curb
this nuisance.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DARSHANA VIKRAM JARDOSH
March 30, 2017.

4
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition of using telecommunication system for making hoax calls and
short message service and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Darshana Vikram Jardosh, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—131LS(S3)—15-06-2017.