THE ANGANWADI WORKERS (REGULARISATION OF SERVICE
AND OTHER BENEFITS) BILL, 2010
By
SHRI HANSRAJ GANGARAM AHIR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for regularisation of the services of anganwadi workers, conferring the status
of permanent employee of the Government on them and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Anganwadi workers (Regularisation of Service and
Other Benefits)  Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the Union territories only.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent  and
commence-
ment.
Bill No.  80 of 2010
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “anganwadi” means an anganwadi centre set up under Integrated Child
Development Services Scheme of the Central Government;
(b) “anganwadi worker” means any person working in an anganwadi and
includes anganwadi helper; and
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, take
steps to regularise the services of anganwadi workers and confer the status of Group “D”
employees of the Government on such anganwadi workers who are serving in  anganwadi
centres immediately before the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every anganwadi worker whose service has been regularised shall be entitled to
such tenure, terms and conditions of service including remuneration, leave, provident fund,
retirement and other terminal benefits as are available to Group “D” employees under the
Central Government.
4. The Central Government shall take steps to provide accommodation to all anganwadi
workers within the vicinity of their workplace.
5. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty.
6. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
7. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both  Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Regularisation
of services of
anganwadi
workers.
Accommoda-
tion to
anganwadi
workers.
Power of
Central
Government
to remove
difficulties.
Savings.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Anganwadi centres were started in the country by the Central Government for
implementation of the Integrated Child Development Services Scheme which includes women
literacy, health awareness and child welfare schemes. These anganwadi centres are
contributing a lot to the development of society in rural and remote areas for the last many
years. Anganwadi workers are properly performing the work of dissemination, publicity and
implementation of various schemes of the Government in rural areas. In view of the importance
of services provided in these anganwadi centres, the strength of anganwadi workers has
increased from 8 lakh to 14 lakh in the country. However, these anganwadi workers do not
have any job security and are paid paltry sum as honorarium for their work. This may
adversely affect the working of these anganwadi workers.
It is improper to pay very low remunerations to anganwadi workers who are working
as an important chain between the Government and the people at village level for effective
implementation of women and children related welfare schemes. Therefore, the services of
these workers should be recognized and they should be given the status of 'Group D'
employees of the Government.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; HANSRAJ  GANGARAM  AHIR
July 10, 2010.
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for regularisation of services of anganwadi workers and
other benefits to them analogous to the Group “D” employees of the Central Government.
Clause 4 provides for the provision of accommodation to the anganwadi workers within the
vicinity of their workplace. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of about five thousand crore is likely to
be incurred.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate only to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative powers is of a normal character.
5

GMGIPMRND—3128LS(S3)—03-08-2010.
LOK  SABHARAJY A  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for regularisation of the services of anganwadi workers, conferring the status
of  permanent employees of the Government on them and for matters connected
 therewith.
————
(Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir, M.P.)