5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 80 of 2024
THE COMPULSORY MILITARY TRAINING IN SCHOOLS AND 
OTHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2024
By
Shri Shrirang Appa Barne, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory military training in schools and other educational institutions  
in order to promote discipline, physical fitness, national unity  
and preparedness among the youth of the nation.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Military Training in Schools and Other 
Educational Institutions Act, 2024.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,– 
 (a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
State and in all the other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “educational institution” means any school, college, university or other 
institution imparting education at primary, secondary, senior secondary or higher 
education, as the case may be; 
(c) “military training” includes basic training in physical fitness, drill, discipline, 
self-defense, first aid and knowledge of the military heritage and values of the country; 
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 
(e) “student” means any person enrolled in an educational institution.
3. ( 1) The appropriate Government shall include compulsory military training in 
curriculum for students from classes ninth to twelfth and in undergraduate level.
(2) The military training referred to in sub-section (1) shall be conducted for a minimum 
of two hours per week by the educational institutes.
(3) Every educational institution shall establish a Military Training Coordination 
Committee (MTCC) to manage and coordinate the military training activities in such 
manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The Military Training Coordination Committee (MTCC) established under  
sub-section (3) shall submit bi-annual reports on the progress and effectiveness of the military 
training program to the appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. ( 1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Union Ministry of 
Defence and the Ministry of Education, prescribe the curriculum and training modules for 
the military training to the students.
(2) The curriculum and training module for military training to the students under  
sub-section (1) shall include,–
(a) physical fitness exercises;
(b) drill and ceremonial parades;
(c) basic self-defense techniques;
(d) first aid and emergency response training;
(e) awareness of national security and defense mechanisms; and
(f) education on military heritage and values of the country.  
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall, in consultation with the Union Ministry 
of Defence, appoint instructors for imparting military training to students in such 
manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Instructors appointed under sub-section (1) may be retired military personnel, 
members of the National Cadet Corps (NCC) or such other individuals as deemed suitable 
by the appropriate Government.  
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall, in consultation with the Union Ministry 
of Defence, establish a monitoring and evaluation mechanism to assess the impact of 
the military training program.
(2) The monitoring of evaluation mechanism established under sub-section (1) shall 
include periodic reviews and audit of the military training program to ensure its quality and 
effectiveness in such manner as may be prescribed.        
7. The Central Government shall provide requisite funds including infrastructure 
and resources necessary for carrying out purposes of this Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Definitions.
Compulsory 
Military 
Training to 
students.
Curriculum 
and Training 
Modules for the 
Military training 
to the students.
Training 
Instructors.
Monitoring and 
Evaluation.
Central 
Government to 
provide funds.
2
45

8. The appropriate Government shall ensure that every educational institution complies 
with the provisions of this Act. 
9. (1) If any educational institution fails to comply with the provisions of this Act, it 
shall be liable to such penalties as may prescribed. 
(2) The penalties referred to in sub-section (1) may include fines, reduction in grants, or 
such other actions as may be deemed appropriate by the appropriate Government.
10. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years 
from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Gazette of India, make rules 
and regulations for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule and regulation or both 
the Houses agree that the rule and regulation should not be made, the rule and regulation 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule and regulation.
3
Compliance.
Penalty.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to make 
rules.
5
10
15
20
25

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Bill seeks to introduce compulsory military training in schools and other educational 
institutions to foster discipline, physical fitness, national unity, and a sense of preparedness 
among the youth. This initiative aims to imbue students with essential life skills and a 
deeper understanding of national security and defense mechanisms. Through structured 
military training, it is sought to create a disciplined, aware, and resilient generation ready to 
contribute positively to the nation’s progress and security. 
Compulsory military training in schools and other educational institutions in India 
could be advocated for several reasons, but it is also important to consider the potential 
drawbacks and the complexity of implementation. 
Military training instills a sense of discipline, responsibility, and respect for authority, 
which can positively influence students’ personal and academic lives and regular physical 
training can improve students’ health, fitness levels, and overall well-being. It can also help 
combat the growing issue of sedentary lifestyles and obesity. 
Military training can foster a sense of patriotism and national pride. Understanding 
the sacrifices made by armed forces can enhance students’ respect for their country and its 
values with Students can acquire various skills such as leadership, teamwork, survival skills, 
and crisis management, which are valuable in both personal and professional contexts. 
Military training can prepare students to respond effectively in emergency situations, 
such as natural disasters, by equipping them with basic first aid and survival skills and 
exposure to military training can open up career opportunities in the defense sector and 
related fields. It can also help students make informed decisions about pursuing a career 
in the armed forces. Shared experiences in training can build camaraderie and break down 
social barriers among students from diverse backgrounds, promoting social cohesion and 
mutual respect. 
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                   S H R I R A N G  A P P A  B A R N E  
July 8, 2024.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall appoint instructors for 
imparting military training to students. Clause 6 provides that the appropriate Government 
shall establish a monitoring and evaluation mechanism to assess the impact of the military 
training program. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite 
funds including infrastructure and resources necessary for carrying out purposes of this 
Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund 
of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees five thousand crore is likely 
to be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two thousand crore is likely to be involved. 
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to provide for compulsory military training in schools and other educational institutions  
in order to promote discipline, physical fitness, national unity  
and preparedness among the youth of the nation.
(Shri Shrirang Appa Barne, M.P .) 