THE DISPLACED FARMERS (REHABILITATION AND OTHER
FACILITIES) BILL, 2007
By
SHRI HANSRAJ GANGARAMJI AHIR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for rehabilitation of farmers who are displaced as a result of acquisition of
their land  for setting up of industrial units, sharing by such farmers in the profits made
by industrial units and  for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament  in the Fifty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This  Act may  be called the Displaced Farmers (Rehabilitation and Other Facilities)
Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means the Central Government or a State
Government, as the case may be;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  80  of  2007.
5

2
(b) "farmer" means a person whose agricultural  land is acquired by the appropriate
Government for establishing any industrial unit, by whatever name called; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3.  (1)  The appropriate Government shall prepare a comprehensive plan for the
rehabilitation of farmers displaced as a result of acquisition of their agriculture land for
setting up of any industrial unit.
(2) The rehabilitation plan under sub-section (1) shall include provisions of  housing,
adequate  compensation, employment  to one member of the family of a farmer in the
industrial unit, agricultural land at a new site and such other facilities to the farmers, as
the appropriate  Government may deem necessary.
4. (1) There shall be paid to every farmer, such share of profits of the quarterly net
profits of the industrial unit, as may be prescribed.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the management of industrial unit shall—
(a) maintain true accounts and publish them quarterly; and
(b) deposit the share of every farmer in the profits of the industrial unit in the
bank accounts of farmers before the tenth day of the month following each quarter.
(3)  It shall be the responsibility of the appropriate Government to ensure implementation
and monitoring of delivery by the management of the industrial units to the farmers of the
share of their profits from the profits of the industrial units.
5.  (1) Any farmer aggrieved by the violation of any of the provisions of this Act may
file a complaint in writing with such authority, as the appropriate Government may designate.
(2) The designated authority, either on his own or on a complaint filed under
sub-section (1), shall cause an enquiry to be made in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(3) Where the inquiry under sub-section ( 2) is made on a complaint filed under
sub-section ( 1), the inquiry shall be completed within one month of the making of the
complaint.
(4) On completion of inquiry, the designated authority may order such action as may
be appropriate and necessary to fulfill the objectives of this Act:
Provided that where the management of an industrial unit fails to comply with the
orders of the designated authority, the designated authority may impose such fine, not less
than rupees ten lakh, on the management, as  it may deem fit.
6. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
7.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total  period of  thirty days which
may be comprised in one session  or  in two or  more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of  the session immediately  following the session or  the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only  in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be;  so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Comprehensive
rehabilitation
plan for
farmers.
Payment of
share of
profits to
farmers out
of the profits
of industrial
unit.
Procedure
regarding
filing of
complaint,
etc.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Agriculture is a prominent sector of Indian economy.  About two-third population
of the country is dependent on agriculture for their livelihood. Usually, land is the only
resource for a farmer. The loss of this asset adversely affects the livelihood of a farmer.
Due to poor compensation and lack of proper rehabilitation, the living conditions of
farmers deteriorate and ultimately they fall in debt trap. In many cases, after displace-
ment, they have to move to cities and live in miserable conditions. At the same time, the
industrial units and projects, which are established on the land acquired from farmers at
cheap rates, earn a huge profit due to a favourable economic policies of the Govern-
ment. Thus, it is necessary that proper provisions are enacted for compensation, reha-
bilitation, employment and sharing by farmers in the profits made by  such industrial
projects so that livelihood of farmers is not jeopardized and their conditions do not
become pitiable. It must also be ensured that the interests of farmers are protected
while moving ahead on the path of economic development of the country. They should
become a partner in the economic growth and the growth should also reach them.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; HANSRAJ GANGARAMJI AHIR
August 10, 2007
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for comprehensive plan for rehabilitation of farmers
displaced as a result of acquisition of their agricultural land. As regards the expenditure
involved in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill in the States, it shall be borne out
of the Consolidated Funds of the respective States. However, in case of Union territo-
ries, the expenditure shall be met out of the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to
involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause  7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of  this Bill. The rules will  relate to matters of detail only.
The delegation of  legislative power  is, therefore, of a normal character.
5

LOK    SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for rehabilitation of farmers who are displaced as a result of acquisition of  their
land for setting up of industrial units, sharing by such farmers in the profits made by
industrial units and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Hansraj Gangaramji Ahir, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4273LS(S-5)—07.11.2007.