1
Bill No.  80 of  2020
THE NATIONAL  WASTE MANAGEMENT COUNCIL BILL, 2020
By
DR. RAMAPATI RAM TRIPATHI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a National Waste Management  Council for managing
waste and suggest required policy measures for waste management and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called The National Waste Management  Council Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) 'Chairperson' means the chairperson of the National Waste Management
Council;
(b) 'Council' means the National  Waste Management Council constituted under
section 3;
(c) 'member' means a Member of the Council;
(d) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules under this Act; and
10
5
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(e) 'recycling' means the process of transforming segregated non-biodegradable
solid waste into new material or product or as raw material for producing new products
which may or may not be similar to the original products.
3. On and from the commencement of this Act, there shall be established a Council
to be called the National  Waste Management Council for the purpose of performing
functions assigned to it under this Act.
4. (1) The Council shall consist of,—
(a) a Chairperson, who is or has been  Chief Justice of India or is or has been
a Judge of Supreme Court or is an eminent person of impeccable integrity and
outstanding ability having special knowledge and expertise of not less than
twenty-five years in the matters relating to environment and handling and
management of waste; and
(b) five members, from amongst persons of ability, integrity and standing who
are having experience in law, trade unionism, management of an industry or
organisation committed to managing of waste in a systematic manner and creating
an environment friendly atmosphere for all:
Provided that not less than fifty per cent of the members of the Council shall be from
amongst the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes,  Other
Backward Classes, Minorities and Women.
(2) The Chairperson or a Member shall not be—
(i) a member of Parliament or a member of the Legislature of any State or Union
territory; or
(ii) a person convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude; or
(iii) a person who has been removed  or dismissed from the service of the
Union or a State.
5. (1) The Chairperson and Members shall be appointed by the President after
obtaining the recommendations of a Selection Committee consisting of—
(a) the Prime Minister of India—Chairperson;
(b) the Chief Justice of India or a Judge of the Supreme Court nominated by
him—Member;
(c) the Speaker of the House of People—Member;
(d) the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People—Member;
(e) one eminent jurist or environmentalist, as recommended by the Chairperson
and Members referred to in clauses (a) to (d) above, to be nominated by the President—
Member.
(2) No appointment of a Chairperson or a Member shall be invalid merely by reason of
any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
(3) The Selection Committee shall regulate its own procedure in a transparent manner
for selecting the Chairperson and Members of the Council.
6. The President shall take or cause to be taken all necessary steps for the appointment
of a new Chairperson and Members at least three months before the expiry of the term of the
Chairperson or Member, as the case may be, in accordance with the procedure laid down in
this Act.
Establishment
of National
Council for
Waste
Management.
Constitution
of the
National
Council for
Waste
Management.
Appointment
of Chairperson
and Members
on recom-
mendations of
Selection
Committee.
Filling of
vacancies of
Chairperson
or Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
7. The Chairperson and every Member shall, on the recommendations of the Selection
Committee, be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal and hold
office as such for a term of three years from the date on which he enters upon his office or
until he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier:
Provided that he may—
(a) by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his office; or
(b) be removed from his office; in the manner provided in section 8.
8. The President shall remove a person from the office of Chairperson or a Member, if
that persons,—
(a) becomes an undischarged insolvent;
(b) gets convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence involving
moral turpitude;
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting;
(e) is without obtaining leave of absence from the Council, absent from three
consecutive meeting of the Council:
Provided that no person shall be removed until that person has been given a
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
9. The salary, allowances and other conditions of service of—
(i) the Chairperson shall be the same as those of the Chief Justice of India; and
(ii) other Members shall be the same as those of a Judge of the Supreme Court.
10. (1) The Central Government shall provide the Council with such officers and
employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of the functions of the Council
under this Act.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of the Council shall
be such as may be prescribed.
11. The Council shall perform all or any of the following functions, namely:—
(a) to consult with and advise the Union and State Governments with respect
to policy, programmes, goals and operations of waste management, including solid
and hazardous waste management functions and responsibilities, with particular
emphasis on long-range planning and public education;
(b) to review implementation of current legislations in force on the waste
management;
(c) to file annually a report of its deliberations and the recommendations sent to
the Central Government;
(d) to set up research and development centers across all States and Union
Territories for efficient, cost effective and less polluting mechanisms to recycle and
manage various types of wastes;
(e) to guide industries to ensure manufacturing of quality products which last
longer, resulting in its delayed disposal as waste; and
(f) any other matter which may be referred to it by the Central Government.
Term of
office of
Chairperson
and Members.
Removal of
Chairperson
and Member
from the
office.
Salary,
Allowances
and other
conditions of
service of
Chairperson
and Members.
Officers and
other
employees of
the council.
Function of
the Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
12. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, pay to the Council by way of grants such sums of money as the Central
Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
13. (1) The Council shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Council shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor
General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in
connection with such audit shall be payable by the Council to the Comptroller and Auditor
General.
14. The Council shall prepare in such form and at such time, for each financial year, as
may be prescribed, its annual report, giving full account of its activities during the previous
financial year and forward a copy thereof to the Central Government.
15. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Grants by the
Central
Government.
Accounts and
audit.
Annual
Report.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
With the ever growing population and the basic need of fulfilling the promise of 'ease
of living' and 'living healthy' for all India, it is imperative that the waste that we create is
managed properly. India is on the path of development, the buying power of the commoner
is increasing and with this the consumption of everything is bound to increase. This will
also result in the increase of waste that will be generated.
The waste can be domestic, construction, medical, bio-medical, industrial, e-waste,
etc. If no efficient mechanism is devised for proper disposal of such wastes, it can lead to
major environmental issues. The waste management in our country is regulated by Ministry
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change in coordination with State Pollution Control
Boards. However, the biggest impediment in current waste management and disposal
mechanism is lack of systematic and robust system of waste management wherein various
stakeholders and industry experts come together to formulate most sustainable and
environment friendly waste management mechanism. By managing the waste, in a systematic
manner, the country will not only save tremendously in its natural resources, but also create
an environment friendly atmosphere for all.
The Bill thus aims to create a National Waste Management Council that shall consult
and advise the Union and various State Governments with respect to policy, programmes,
goals and operations of the waste management; review implementation of current legislations
in force regarding the aforesaid subject matter; set up research and development centers
across all States and Union territories for efficient, cost effective and less polluting
mechanisms to recycle and manage various types of wastes; guide industries to ensure
manufacture of quality products which last longer, resulting in its delayed disposal as
waste.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above-mentioned objectives.
N
EW DELHI; RAMAPATI RAM TRIPATHI
February  27, 2020.
5

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of National Waste Management Council
for suggesting, advising and consulting with Union and State Governments for management
for waste disposal across the country. Clause 4 provides for establishment of the Council
which will have six persons, including Chairperson. Clause 9 of the Bill, provides for salary,
allowances and other conditions of service of Chairperson and Members. Clause 10 provides
for appointment of necessary manpower, materials and other services for carrying out the
purposes of this Act. Clause 11 provides for setting up research and development centres
across all the State and Union territories for efficient, cost effective and less polluting
mechanisms to recycle and manage various types of wastes. Clause 12 provides that the
Central Government shall provide funds for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of about one hundred crore from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of National Council for Waste Management for managing
waste and suggest required policy measures for waste management and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5547LS(S3)—05-03-2020.