+ उप कं)

AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

Bill No. 81 1999

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999
By
Stier Kiarr Somarva, MP.

A
Buu

further to amend the Constitution of India.

Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1999.

2. After article 75 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
|

“75A. Notwithstanding anything contained in articles 74 and 75—

(4) The House of the People shall express its lack of confidence in the Prime
Minister and his Council of Ministers only by electing his successor through a composite
‘motion supported by a majority of the total members of the House and presenting an address
to that effect to the President, who shall then appoint the person so elected as the new
Prime Minister.

(2) In the event of failure of the Council of Ministers to secure, or retain the
confidence of the House of the People, and if the House is not able to elect a person to be
appointed as the new Prime Minister in accordance with the provisions laid down in
clause (1), the President shall, upon the advice of the Council of Ministers, dissolve the
‘House of the People within ten days, unless the House elects another person to be appointed
as Prime Minister within this period.”.

Short title

Insertion of
new article
TSA.

Provisions as to
confidence in
the Council of
Ministers.


‘Amendment of
article 85,

Insertion of
new article
164A.

Provisions.as 10
confidence in
the Council of
Ministers.

Amendment of
article 174.

EEF Spare

3. In article 85 of the Constitution, in clause (2), the following proviso shall be
added at the end, namely:—

2

“Provided that the power under sub-clause (b) of clause (2) shall be exercised
subject to the provision of article 75A.".

4, After article 164 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely

“164A. Notwithstanding anything contained 1n articles 163 and 164—

(J) The Legislative Assembly shall express its lack of confidence in the Chief Minister
and his Council of Ministers only by electing his successor through a composite motion
supported by a majority of the total members of the Assembly and presenting an address to
that effect to the Governor, who shall then appoint the person so elected as the new Chief
Minister.

(2) In the event of failure of the Council of Ministers [0 secure, or retain the
confidence of the Legislative Assembly, and if the Assembly is not able to elect a person to
be appointed as the new Chief Minister in accordance with the provisions laid down
clause (1), the Governor shall, upon the advice of the Council of Ministers, dissolve the
Legislative Assembly within ten days, untess the Assembly elects another person to be
appointed as Chief Minister within this period.”.

5, In article 174 of the Constitution, in clause (2), the following proviso shall be.
added at the end, narwly:—

“Provided that the power under sub-clause (b) of clause (2) shall be exercised”
subject to the provisions of article 164A.”.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The Indian political system has come under increasing stress due to lractured polity
wltiplicity of political partics. During the last five General Elections since 1989, no
political party could secure majority in the House of the People. This period was
ked by a succession of seven coalition or minority Governments resulting in frequent
8. This had a destabilising effect on the national psyche and our socio-economic

A question mark has also arisen on the credibility of the present constitutional
ork.

2. The Government has already decided to constitute a panel to review the Constitution, +>
with emerging trends in Indian polity. A new dispensation is needed to impart
to our polity.

3. Even within the existing constitutional framework, a provision is needed to assign
et and effective role to the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies for
an alternative Government when the Council of Ministers fails to secure, or retain
confidence of the House/Assembly. Such a provision will accord priority and activate
ole of the House of the People and the Legislative Assembly and eliminate the vice of
m political manoeuvres. Moreover, in that case, the dissolution of the House/
embly shall become the fast resort, and occur only when there ix an insuperable
tional impasse.

4. This Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives by insertion of two new articles
and 164A in the Constitution.

DELHI; KIRIT SOMATYA,
tober 21, 1999.


Sessions of
Parliament,

nm
and dissolution.

Sessions of the
State
Legislature,
prorogation
and dissolution,

ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * *

85. (1) The President shall from time to time summon each House of Parliat
‘meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene betweet
last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next sessi

(2) The President may from time to time—
(a) prorogue the Houses or either House:
(b) dissolve the House of the People.

* * * * * «a

174, (1) The Governor may from time to time summon the House or each Ho
the Legislature of the State to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six me
shall not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its
sitting in the next session.

(2) The Governor may from time to time—
(a) prorogue the House or either House:

(b) dissolve the Legislative Assembly.

* * * * * *


A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Kirit Somaiya, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)JMRNO—1725LS—9-11-99.