BUI No. II or It6a 
THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1962 
• 
(As INTRODUCBD IN LoB: SABRA 
ON 24TH AUGUST, 1962) 
N,.J ....•.. _ ....................... . 
UII.~ ~1 ·11· I 2--.. -............. ~ .... 

:a of 1914. 
BW Jlo. 81 ef I"a 
THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA.) 
A 
BILL 
juTther to amend the Reserve Bank of Iftdia Act, 1934. end to mAke 
ce,.tain consequential amendments in the State Bank of India 
Act, 1955. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the ·Thirteenth Year of the Re-
public of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Reserve Bank of India (Amend- Short tide. 
ment) Act. 1962. 
S '2. To sub-section (2) of section 8 of the Reserve Bank of India AmcndmeDt 
Act, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act). the follow- of lectloa I. 
ing proviso shall be added, namely:-
10 
"Provided that the Central Board may, if in its opinion it 
is necessary in the public interest so to do. permit the 
Governor or a Deputy Governor to undertake, at the request of 
the Central Government ar any State Government. such part-
time honorary work. whether related to the purposes of this Act 
or not. as is not likely to interfere with his duties as Governor 
or Deputy Governor. as the case may be.". 
IS 3. In section 17 of the principal Act,- AmcDcSmellt 
of MCtioa J7 • . . 
(a) in sub-clause (4) of clause (2), for the words "maturing 
within ninety days from the date of such purchase or re-dis-
count, exclusive of days of grace;" the following words shall 
be substituted, namely:-
20 fCmaturlng,-
1500(B) LS-l. 

2 
(i) in the case of bills of exchange and promissory 
notes arising out of any such transaction relating to the 
export of goods from India. within one hundred and 
eighty days, and 
(ii) iB any other case, within ninety days, S 
from the date of such purchase or re-discount, exclusive of 
days of grace;"; 
(b) in clause (3), for sub-clause (b), the following sub" 
clause ahall be substituted, namely:-
·'(b) the purchase, sale and re-discount of bills of ex- 10 
change (including treasury bills) drawn in or on any place 
in any country outside India which is Q member of the 
International Monetary Fund and maturmg,-
(i) in the case of bUls of exchange arising out of 
any bona fide transaction relating to the export of goods IS 
from India, within one hundred and eighty days. and 
(ii) in any other case, within ninety days, 
from the date of such purchase or Il'e-discount: 
Provided that. no such purchase, sale or re-discount 
Ihall be made in India except with a scheduled bank or a 20 
State co-ope1'8'tdve bank."; 
(c) after cla\lSe (3), the follOWing clause shall be inserted, 
name1y:-
"(3A) the making to any scheduled bank or State co- ' 
operative bank, of loans and advances, against promissory 25 
notes of such bank, I"epayable on demand or on the expiry 
of fixed periods not exceeding one hundred and eighty 
days: 
Provided that the borrowing bank furnishes a declara-
tion in writing, to the effect that- 30 
(i) it holds bills of exchange arising out of any 
transaction relating to the export of goods from India. 
of a value not less tb8ll the amount of such loans or 
advances,-
(a) drawn in India and on any place in any 3S 
country outside India which is a member of the 
International Monetary Fund or in any otha!: 

5 
3 
country notiAed in this behalf by the Bank in the 
Gazette of India, and 
(b) maturing not later than one hundred and 
eighty days from the date of the loan or advance; 
and 
(ii) it will. so long as any part of such loans and 
advances remains unpaid, continue to hold such bills of 
exchange of a value not less than the amount of such 
loans or advances outstanding for the time being;"; 
10 (d) to clause (4), the following proviso shall be added, 
namely:-
"Provided that loans and advances made against the 
security of bills of exchange and promissory notes arising 
out of any transaction relating to the export of goods from 
IS India shall be repayable on demand or on the expiry of 
fixed periods not exceeding one hundred and eighty daYI.", 
20 
2S 
30 
35 
4. In section 42 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) for the words "five per cent. of the demand liabili-
ties and two per cent. of the time liabilities", the words 
"three per cent. of the total of the demand and time 
liabilities" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the proviso, the following proviso shall be sub-
stituted. namely:-
"Provided that the Bank may, by notification in the 
Gazette of India, increase the said rate to such higher 
rate as may be specified in the notification so however 
that the rate shall not be more than fifteen per cent. 
of the total of the demand and time liabilities."; 
(iii) in the Explanation, in clause (e), for the words 
and brackets "Refinance Corporation for Industry (Private) 
Limited", the words "Refinance Corporation for Industry 
Limited" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub~ion (1A),-
(i) for the words "rates specifted in the notifteation , 
such additional ·balance being calculated with reference to 
the excess of the demand and time liabUities of the bank 
Arneadment 
or.lCdoa ~. 

.. 
u shown in the return referred to in sub-section (2) over 
its demand and time liabilities". the words "rate specified 
in the notification, such additional balance being calculated 
with reference to the excess of the total of the demand and 
time liabilities of the bank as shown in the return referred 5 
to in sub-section (2) over the total of its demand and time 
liabilities" shall be substituted; 
(ii) the proviso shall be omitted; 
(c) after sub-seclion (1A). the following sub-section Mall h~ 
inserted. namely: - 10 
"(1AA) Notwithstanding any1thing contained in sub-
section (1) or sub-section (1 A). it shall not be necesarv 
for any scheduled bank :to maintain wi·th the Bank anv 
balance which shall be more than fifteen per cent. of the 
total of its demand and time liabilities as shown in .the return IS 
referred to in sub-section (2) ."; 
(d) in sub-section (1B). the following proviso shall hf" 
inserted at the end. namely:-
"Provided further that where the Bank does not. under 
sub-section (5). demand the payment of the penalty im- 20 
POled by 8ub-section (3). it may pay interest at such rate 
or rates as may !be determined by the Bank from time to 
time on the amount actually maintained with it by the 
scheduled bank, notwithstanding that such amount is less 
than the balance required to be maintained in pursuance of 25 
a notification issued under the proviso to sub-section (1) or 
under sub-section (1A) ."; 
(e) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall b.-
lubstituted. namely:-
"(5) (a) The penalties imposed by sub-sections (3) ancl 30 
(4) shall b.e payable within a period of fourteen days from 
the date on which a notice issued by the Bank demandin~ 
the payment of the same is served on the scheduled bank, 
and in the event of a failure of the scheduled bank to pay 
the same within such period. mav be levied by the dirp.c-35 
tion of the principal civil court havin~ jurisdiction in the 
area where an office of the defaulting bank is situated. such 
direction to be made only unon an application made in this 
behalf to the court by the Bank; 
(b) when tlle court makes a direction under clause 40 
(a). it shall issue a certificate specifying the sum payable 

5 
by the scheduled bank and every such certificate shall be 
enforceable in the same manner as H it were a decree made 
by the court in a suit; 
(c) notwithstanding anything contained in this section. 
if the Bank is satisfied that the defaulting bank had suffi-
cient cause for its failure to comply with the provisions of 
sub-eection (1), (IA) or (2), it may not demand the pay-
ment of the penal interest or the penalty, as the case may 
be" 
5. In section 43A of the principal Act, after the words and figures Amendment ofleCtlon 
"or aection 43", wherever they occur, the words and figures and 4,A. 
letter "or in pursuance of the provisions of Chapter IlIA" shall be 
inserted. 
e. In the principal Act, after Chapter III, the following Chapter Inlertion of 
Ihall be inserted. namely: - ftfK~r 
"CHAPTER rnA 
Cou.BcTrON AND FUBNISHING OF CREDIT INPORMA'l'ION 
45A. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise require<: - Definition,. 
(a) "banking company" means a banking company as 
deftned in section 5 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949. 
and includes the State Bank of India or any other banking 
or ftnancial institution notified by the Central Government 
In this behalf; 
(b) "borrower" means any person to whom any credit 
limit has been sanctioned by any banking company, whe-
ther availed of or not, and includes-
(i) in the case of a company or corporation, its 
subsidiaries; 
(ii) in the case of a Hindu undivided ~Uy, any 
member thereof or any firm in which such ·member is a 
partner; 
(iii) in the case of a firm, any 'Partner thereof or 
my other firm in which such partner is a partner; and 
(iv) .in the case of an individual, any firm in which 
such individual is a partner; 
(c) "credit information" means any information relat-
ing to-' 
(i) the amounts and the nature of loans or advances 
and other credit facilities granted bya banking com-
pany to any borrower or class of borrowers; 

Power of 
Bank to 
cellcct credit 
information. 
Power to 
call for re. 
turDl COD-
taiDlnl cre-
dJt iDforma-
tion. 
Procedure 
for furnish-
ing credit 
information 
to banking 
:ompanie8. 
Ditcl08ure of 
information 
prohibited. 
6 
(ii) the nature of security taken from any borrower 
for credit facilities granted to him; and 
(iii) the guarantee furnished by a banking company 
fot any of its customers. 
45B. (1) The Bank may- 5 
(a) collect, in such manner as it may think fit, credit 
information from banking companies; and 
(b) furnish such information to any banking company 
in accordance with the provisions of section 45D. 
45C. (1) For the purpose of enabling the Bank to discharlIe 10 
its functions under this Chapter, it may at any time direct 
any banking company to submit to it such statements relating 
to such credit information and in such form and within such 
time as may be specified by the Bank from time to time. 
(2) A banking company shall, notwithstanding anything IS 
to th~ contrary contained in any law for the time being In 
force or in any instrument regulating the constitution thereof 
or in any agreement executed by it, relating to the secrecy of 
its dealings with its constituents, be bound to comply with any 
direction issued under sub-section (1). 20 
45D. (1) A banking company may, in connection with any 
financial arrangement entered into or' proposed to be entered 
into by it, with any person, make an application to the Bank in 
such form as the Bank may specify requesting it to furnish the 
applicant with such credit information as may be specified in 25 
the application. 
(2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the 
Bank shall, as soon as mny be, furnish the applicant with such 
credit information relating to the matters specified in the ap-
plication, as may be in its possession: 30 
Provided that the information so furnished shall not dis-
close the names of the banking companies which have sub-
mitted such information to the Bank. 
(3) The Bank may in respect of each application levy such 
fees, not exceeding .twenty-five rupees, as it may deem fit for 35 
furnishing credit information. 
45E. (1) Any credit information contained in any statement 
submitted by a banking company under section 45C or furnished 
by the Bank to any banking company under section 45D, shall 
be treated as confidential and shall not, except for the purposes 40 
of this Chapter, be published or otherwise disclosed. 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
30 
35 
7 
(2) Nothing in this sect!on shall apply to-
(a) the disclosure by any banking company, with the 
previous permission of the Bank, of any information fur-
nished to the Bank under section 45C; . 
(b) the publication by the Bank, if it considers necessary 
in the public interest so to do, of any information collected. 
by it under section 45~, in such consolidated form 88 it 
may think fit without disclosing the name of any banking 
company or its borrowers. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the 
time being in force, no court, tribunal or other authority shall 
compel the Bank or any banking company to produce or to 
give inspection ctf any staJtement submitted by that banking 
company under section 45C or to disclose any credit information 
furnished by the Bank to that banking company under section 
45D. 
45F. No person shall have any right, whether in contract Certain 
or otherwise, to any compensation for any loss incurred by claims for 
:reason of the operation of any of the provisions of this Chapter. ::P:d. 
45G. (1) If any banking company-
(a) fells to submilt any statement required under sec-
tion 45C or submits under that section a statement which is 
fabe in any material particular; or 
{b) faill to comply with any condition imposed Wlder 
this Chapter, 
every director or other officer of the company and every other 
person who is knowingly a party to the breach shall be punish-
able with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees. 
(2) If any person discloses any credit information, the dis-
closure of which is prohibited under section 45E, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months 
or with tine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with 
both.", 
PcDalticl. 
7. In the State Bank of India Act, 1~,-
Amendment 
(i) in section 33, in clause' (zixb), after the words "classes ~k of tate 
of industries", the words "or in such business or trade or classes India N:t. 
of bUliness or trade" shall be inserted; 1955. 

8 
(ii) in section 34, to 9ub-stoction (3), the following provisO 
shall be added, namely:-
uProvided that nothing in sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) 
shall apply where the State Bank holds by way of. a eolla-
tera! security any negotiable instrument or security which 
does not mature within six months from the date aforesaid 
in respect of any loan, advance or ea~ e:redit .D.CtiOlled 
under this Act.". .. . 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND RE~SONS 
The Reserve Bank of India Act does not permit the Bank to 
make any loans or advances or to grant financial accommodation in 
any other form to commercial banks for periods in excess of ninety 
days. It is also not possible for the Bank to make any such loans 01' 
to granti any such accommodation on the security of documents bear-
ing only a single signature on behalf of any borrowing institution. 
As it has been represented that these restrictions render it difficult 
for banks to extend to exporters 'credit facilities for the periods for 
which or the conditions on which such credit may be required by 
them, it is prcposed to amend the r~levant provisions of the Act, so 
as to permit the Reserve Bank to grant loans and advances or other 
financial accommodation, so far as exports are concerned. on some-
wholt more liberal terms and for any period up to one hundred and 
eighty days. 
The State Bank of India Act as it now stands does not enable the 
bank to grant term credits to exporters for periods in excess of six 
months. The Bill seeks to amend the relevant provisions of the Act 
so as to enable the bank to grant medium-term credits against ex· 
ports for periods up to seven years. 
It has' been represented that in the absence of any regular and 
systematic arrangement for the collection, pooling and supply of 
particulars relating to the loans and advances or other credit facm· 
ties granted by the various banks and financial institutions to those 
borrowing any amounts from them, individual banks or other finan-
cial institutions are handicapped in obtaining reliable information 
about the credit-worthiness or financial position of the various per-
sons to whom credit has been or may have to be granted. The Bill 
seeks to enable the Reserve Bank to collect and supply the relevant 
Information in a consolidated form to the lending institutions. 
In view of the changes in recent years in the pattern of deposits 
of the scheduled banks, it is proposed that the balances which they 
are required to keep with the Reserve Bank should be prescribed at 
the uniform rate of three per cent. of ,the total liabilities, the overall 
limit for such balances or any additional balances or special 
9 

10 
deposits as the case may be being fixed consequentially at fifteen per 
cent. of the total liabilities.' 
The scope and object of the various amendments are further ex-
plained in the notes on the various clauses of the Bill. 
Nzw DI:LRI; MORARJI DESAI. 
The 17th August, 1962. 

Notes on clause, 
Clause 2.-Sub-section (2) of Section 8 of the Reserve Bank of 
india Act as it now stands requires the Governor and the Deputy 
Governors of the Reserve Bank to devote their wholetime to the 
affairs of the bank. It is proposed to add a proviso to this sub-aee-
~ion, so as to permi t the Governor or a Deputy Governor to under .. 
take, at the request of the Central Government or of a State Go,-
ernment, any part time honorary work, even though It may not be 
strictly related to or connected with the affairs of the bank. 
Clause 3 seeks to amend sub-clause (a) of clause (2) and sub-
clause (b) of clause (3), of Section 17 of the Reserve Bank of India 
Act and to add a new clause, namely, clause (3A) and a provtso 
nelow the existing clause (4) in that Section so as to provide that: 
(a) the period of maturity of eligible bills of exchange (in-
cluding treasury bills) and promissory notes, whether drawn on 
or in India or drawn on or in any other country 
which is a member of tlie International Monetary 
Fund. may be increased from' ninety days to one 
hundred and eighty days if the bills of exchange or the promis-
CIIOry notes as the case may be relate to the export of goods from 
India; 
(b) loans to scheduled banks or to state cooperative Lanks 
may be granted against the signature of the borrowing institu-
!ions themselves, instead of on the basis of two good signature. 
as now prescribed in the Act if the borrowing institutions fur-
nish declarations to the effect that they are holding and will con-
tinue to hold so long as the advances granted to them by the 
Reserve Bank remain outstanding bills drawn by Indian ex-
porters on foreign countries maturing within one hundred and 
eighty days; and 
(e) normal banking accommodation to the scheduled bank. 
or to the state cooperative banks may be granted for one hund-
red and eighty instead of ninety days if the accommodation ta 
for the purpose of financing exports. 
r.Za1Lsp. 4.-Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act now pro-
vides for the maintenance by scheduled banks with the Reserve 
Bank of India of balances to the extent of two per cent of their time 
II 

12 
liabilities and five per cent of their demand liabilities. In view of the 
marked increase in time as distinguished from demand liabilities in 
the last few years, the actual balances required to be maintained 
with the Reserve Bank are now somewhat less than in the .past and 
will diminish further if the present trend were to continue. The sub-
stantive portion of sub-section (1) of Section 42 is, therefore, pro-
'posed to be amended so as to require the banks to maintain a uni-
form percentage of three per cent of the total time and demand 
liabilities. 
The proviso to suh-6ection (1) of Section 42 permits the Reserve 
Bank to increase the minimum balances which are required to be 
maintained with it to eight per cent and twenty per cent in the case 
of time and demand liabilities respectively. An overall limit in 
terms of these percentages is also laid down for normal and increas-
ed balances under SUb-section (1) and special deposits under sub-
sectioa (lA) considered tClgether. The ceilings mentioned in the 
proviso to' sub-section (1) and the overall limit are proposed to be 
aUered to fifteen per cent. of the total liabilities. 
The Reserve Bank does not pay any interest on the normal mini-
mmn balances, but is permitted to pay interest at a rate determined 
by it on the increased balances or special deposits, if there is no 
default on the part of any scheduled bank in maintaining such 
balances or deposits. It is proposed to add a new proviso to sub-
section (lB) in Section 42 to empower the Reserve Bank to pay in 
its discretion interest on any balances or deposits which may be in 
excess of the normal minimum balance but less than the increased 
minimum balance or special deposit which is required to be main-
tained.. 
A minor amendment to clause (c) of the Explanation below sub-
section (1) seeks to delete the word "private" from the title of the 
Reftnance Corporation for Industry which is now a public limited 
company and sub-section (5) as recast provides for the sums deter-
mined by a Court as penalties due from banks to be recovered as 
decreed amounts. 
Clause 5 provides for the amendment of Section 43A of the Re-
serve Bank of India Act so as to extend the prot~ion which is now 
afforded to the Reserve Bank and its officials to anything w'hlch is 
done in good faith, in the exercise of the bank's functions in regard 
to the collection and supply of credit information. 
Clause 6 seeks to add a new Chapter to the Reserve Bank of 
India' Act defining the duties and obligations of the bank in regard 
to the pooling consolidation and pUblication of credit information. 

13 
Section 45A defines the expressions used in the Chapter. The words 
"banking company" as used in this Chapter will include in addition to 
commercial banks any financial institution which may be notified 
for this purpose. Every banking company will be required, not-
withstanding the provisions of any other law or instrument to sup-
ply any infonnation relating to any constituent which may be re-
quired. by the Reserve Bank and will be entitled on an application 
accompanied by the payment of a fee not exceeding twen.ty-five 
rupees to consolidated information relating to all the loans granted 
by the banking companies to any person borrowing or intending to 
borrow from it. Suitable penalties are proposed to be prescribed 
for any failure on the part of banking c'ompanies to comply with 
any of the provisions of the Chapter, including those prohibiting the 
further publication by the banking companies of any information 
supplied to them and the Reserve Bank is also proposed to be in-
demnified against any action on the ground that the supply of credit 
information by it to the banking companies has been unauthorised 
or that the rights of any constituent have been violated. 
CZau8e 7 seeks to amend clause (xixb) of Section 33 of the State 
Bank: of India Act, 1955 so as to enable the State Bank to grant term 
loans for periods in excess of six months but not in excess of seven 
years to persons engaged in such business or trade or classes of 
business or trade as may be approved by the Central Board. The 
intention is that loans for these periods should be granted, ii neces-
sary, to Indian exporters in order to enable them to offer competi-
tive terms to the customers abroad. Sub-section (3) of Section 34 
of the same Act so as to enable the State Bank to obtain and hold as 
collateral security any negotiable instrument relating to or arising 
out of exports from India and maturing after a period of six months. 

Business 
which the 
Bank. may 
transact. 
Cash 
reserves of 
ICheduled 
banks to be 
kept with 
the Bank. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934 (2 OF 1934) 
• • • • • 
17. The Bank shall be authoris~ to carry on and transact the 
seveIUl kinds of business hereinafteJ; ,specified, namely:-
(1) the accepting ef money on deposit without interest from, 
and the collection of money for the Central Government, the 
Stalte Governments, local authorities, banks and any other 
persons; 
(2) (a) the purchase, sale and rediscount of bills of 
exchange and promissory notes, drawn on and payable in India 
and arising out of bona fide commercial or trade transactions 
bearing two or more good signatures, one of which shall be that 
of a scheduled bank or Q State co-operative bank, and maturing 
within ninety days from the date of such purchase or rediscount, 
exclusive of days of grace; 
• • • • • 
(3) (b) the purchase, sale and rediscount of bills of 
exchange (including treasury bills) drawn in or on any place in 
any country outside India which is III member of the Inter-
national Monetary Fund and maturing within ninety days from 
the date of purchase, provided that ·no such purchase, sale or 
rediscount shall be made in India except with III scheduled bank. 
• • • • • 
42j. (1) Every bank included in the Second Schedule shall main-
tain with the Bank an average daily balance the amount of which 
shall not be less thM five per cent. of the demand liabilities and 
two per cent. of the time liabilities in India of such bank as shown 
in the return referred to in sub-section (2): 
Provided that the Bank may, by notification in the Gazette of 
India, increase the said rates to such higher rates as may be specified 
in the notifioot.ion so however, thart the rate shall not be more than 
twenty per cent., in the case demand liabilities and more than eight 
per cent., in the case of time liabilities. 
14 

IS 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "average daily balance" shall mean the average of the 
balances held at the close of business on each day of a week; 
(b) "week" shall mean the period from Saturway to the 
following Friday, both days inclusive; 
(c) "liabilities" shall not include the paid-up capital or the 
reserves or any credit balance in the profit and loss account of 
the bank or the amount of eny loan taken from the Bank or 
from the Refinance Corporation for Industry (Private) Limited, 
or from the State Bank or from any other bank notified by the 
Central Government in this behalf. 
(IA) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
Bank may, by notification in the Gfizette of India, direct that every 
scheduled bank shall, with effect from such date as may be specified 
in the notification, maintain with the Bank, in addition to the balance 
prescribed by or under sub-section (1), an additionQI average daily 
balance the amount of which shall not be less than the rates specified 
in the notiiication, such additional balance being calculated with 
reference to the excess of the demand and time lita.biHties of the 
bank as shown in the return referred to in sub-section (2) over its 
demand and time liabilities at the close of business on the date 
specified in the notification as shown by such return so howev~r, 
that the additional balance shall, in no crase, be more than such 
excess: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section. shall make it necessary 
for any scheduled bank to maintain with the Bank any ball3nce 
which shall be more than twenty per cent. of its demand liabilities 
and eight per cent. of its time liabilities as shown in . the return 
referred to in sub-section (2). 
• • • • • 
(5) The penalties imposed by sub-sections (3) and (4) shall be 
payable on demand made by the Bank, and, in the even.t of a refusal 
by the defaulting bank to pay on such demand, may be levied by a 
direction of the principal civil court having jurisdiction in the area 
where an omce of the defaulting bank is situated, such direction to 
be made only upon application made in this behalf· to the court by 
the Bank . 
• • • • 
GA. (1) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie a.~ainst the protection 
Ba~k or any of its omcers for anything which is in good faith done :r=ir: 
or mtended to be done in pursuance of section 42 or section 43. ,ood faith. 

Power or 
the Central 
Board to 
make regu-
IatioDS. 
16 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against U1e Bank 
or any of its officers for any damage caused or likely to be caused by 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of section 42 or section 43 . 
• • • • • 
58. (1) The Centml Board may, with the previous sanction of the 
Central Government, make regulations consistent with this Act to 
provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or con-
venient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing provision, such regulations may provide for all or any of 
the follOWing matters, nam.ely:-
(f) the manner in which the business of the Ceutntl Board 
shall be transacted, and the procedure to be followed at meetings 
thereof; 
(g) the conduct ext business of Local Board! and the delega. 
tion to such Boards of powers and functions; . 
(h) the delegation of powers and funetions of the CeBtral 
Board to Deputy Governors, Directors or ofticers of the Bank; 
(i) the formation of Committees of the Central Board, the 
delegation of powers and functions of the Central Board to such 
Committees, and the conduct of business in such Committees; 
(j) the constitution and management of staft and super-
annuation funds for the officers am.d servants of the Bank; 
(k> the manner and form in which contmcts binding on the 
Bank may be executed; 
(t) the provision of a.n official seltl of ,the Bank and the 
manner and effect of its use; , 
(m) the manner and form in which the ,balanee--sheet of the 
Bank shall be drown up, and in which the accounts shall De 
maintained; l 
(11.) the remuneratiOJl of Directors of the Bank; 
(0) the relations of the scheduled banks with the Bank and 
the returns to be submitted by the scheduled banks to the Bank; 
(p) the regulation of clearing-houses for the scheduled 
~ I ' 

11 
(q) the circumstances in which, and the conditions IBIld 
limitations subject to which, the value of any lost, stolen, muti-
hited or imperfect currency note of the Govt!rnment of India or 
bank note may be refunded; and 
(r) generally, for the- efficient conduct of the business of the 
Bank.: I 
(3) Copies of all regulations made under this section shall be 
awilable to the public on payment_ 
• • • • • 
EXTRACT FROM THE STATE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1955 (23 OF 1955) 
• • • • • 
33. Subject to the other provisions contained in ihis Act, the State Other 
Bank may carry on and transact any of the following kinds of bu~inelS • which the 
busme6S, namely: - State Bank 
• •• • • • 
(ri%b) the advancing or lending of money to persons engag-
ed in such industries or classes of industries as may be specified 
by the Central Board by directions issued in this behalf, for any 
period in excess of six months but not exceeding seven years, 
and subject thereto and to such directions as may be issued by 
the Central Board, such advance or loan may be made on such 
terms and conditions and upon such security (including the 
security of any immovable properiy) as the State Bank may 
deem 1iti. I • • • • • 
may 
transact. 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, and to 
make certain consequential amendments in the State Bank 
of India Act, 1955. 
(Shri Morarji DesGi, 
Mi"ister of FiftQllCe.) 