12 of 1953 
10 
As INTRODUCED IN Lolt SABHA ON 
. " 
1::1 ~.tJ(' U 
BUI No.8! of 19]0 
THE KHADI AND OTHER HANDLOOM INDUSTRIE~ 
DEVELOPMENT (ADDITIONAL EXCISE DUTY ON 
CLOTH) A,V1ENDMENT BILL, 1970 
.. 
BILL 
further -~o amend the Khadi and vater Handloom Industries Development 
(Additional Excise Duty on C!oth) Act, 1953. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Khadi and other Handloom Industries 
~ev.elopme!lt (Additional Excise Duty on Cloth) Amendment Act, 1970. 
i. In section 3 of the Khadi and other Handloom !ndustries Develop-
ment (Additional Excise Duty on Cloth) Act, 1953 (hereinafter referred 
to' as the principal Act), in sub-section (1), for the proviso, the following 
proviso shall be substituted, and shall be deemed to have been substi-
tuted with effect from the 10th day of January, 1917"namely:-
"Provided that no such duty shall be levied on cloth-
(i) which is exported out of India, or 
(ii) which is used in the manufacture of gooch which are 
exported out of India.", 
Short 
title. 
Amend. 
mentof 
section 3. 
3. In sub-section (2) of sectkln 5 of the principal Act, in clause (e), Amend-
after the w~rds "exempt from ", the words "the whole or any part of" ment of 
IS shall be inserted. and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect IeCti0'll5. 
from the lst day of March, 1960. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Section 3 of the Khadi and other Handloom Industries Development 
(Additional Excise Duty on Cloth) Act, 1953 (12 of 1953) provides for 
the levy of an additional duty of excise (commonly known as handloom 
cess) on all cloth manufactured in India. The proviso to that section 
prohibits the impositio'Il of such duty on cloth which is exported out of 
India. In pursuance of the proviso, no duty was levied from the 10th 
January, 1957, in respect of cloth used in the manufacture of garments 
and wearing apparel. Doubts have been expressed about the validity of 
exempting garments and wearing apparel from the levy of duty as the-
proviso appeared to apply to cloth alone and not also to garments made 
therefrom. It is, therefore, proposed to amend section 3 of the Act retros-
pectively from the 10th January, 1957, so as to specifically provide that 
no additional excise duty shall be levied on garments QT wearing apparel 
made out of cloth and exported out of India. 
2. Under section 5 (2) (e) of the said Act, cut-pieces of cotton fabrics 
(popularly known as fents) and hand loom woollen fabrics were exempt 
from the payment of duty leviable under it from the 1st March, 1960 and 
the 24th April, 1962, respectively. It has been pOinted out that under the 
said provision, Government was not empowered to grant such exemption 
in the case of fabrics which were not wholly exempt from the duty of 
exclse leviable under the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944. It is proposed' 
to amend that section so as to empower the Central Government to 
grant exemption even in cases where the fabrics are partially exempt 
frem the excise duty leviable under the 1944 Act and to make the amend-
ment retrospectively from the 1st March, 1960, s<1 as to validate t.he ex-
emptions granted in the past. 
NEW DELHIj L. N. MISHRA. 
The 22nd July, 1970. 

MEMOBANDUII REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend section 5 (2) (e) of the principal 
Act so as to empower the Central Government to grant exemption from 
the handloam eesa under the Act even in respect of those fabrics which 
are partially elrempt from the excise, duty imPQled under th~ Central 
Excises and Salt Act. 1144. 'The matter in respect of which such rules may 
he made is 0IIe of procedure and detail. The delegation of legislative 
Jjl(l,,'er' i5 thas tJf a normal character. 
3 ' ...... 

Levy of 
:additional 
dutyot 
excise on 
cloth. 
Power to 
make 
rule •. 
-, 
EXTRACTS FROM THE KHADI AND OTHBR HANDLOOl'I INMlEIUU ~~LCWMi"1 
(ADDl'nONAL EXCISE DUTYOIll CLOm) ACT, 1953. . 
(Uor l.~ 
.. • • • 
3. (1) There shall be levied and colleoted on aU cloth manufactured 
an or after the appointed day in India, -.dOD all eleth lying in stock on 
the appointed day in any factory where cloth is manufactured or in any 
premises appurtenant thereto, a duty of excise at the rate of 1.9 naye 
paise per square metre: 
Provided that no such duty shall be levied on cloth which is exported 
out of India. 
• 
S. (1) • • • • • 
• • • • • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality <Yf the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for-
• • • • • 
(e) the exemption from the whole or any part of the duty of 
excise levied under this Act of any variety of cloth which is for the 
time being exempt from the duty of excise imposed under the Central 
Excises and Salt Act, 1944. 1 of 1944 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Khadi and other Handloo:n Industries Development (AdditioD81 
Excise Duty on Cloth) Act, 1953, 
(Shri Lalit Narayan Mishra, 
Mim'ster oj Foreign Trade ,) 