30 of 1954. 
As INTRODUCED IN L01(; SABHA ON 
1 3 J U l \j tj " 
• 
Bill No. 81 of 1982 
THE SALARY, ALLOWANCES AND PENSION OF MEMBERS 
OF PARLIAMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1982 
A 
BILL 
further to amend ti,e Salary, ,Wowances and Pension of ~emberb1 of 
Parliament Act, 1954. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-:-
1. This Act may be called the Salary, Allowances and Pension of 
Members of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1982. 
5 ~ In section 8A of the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of 
Parliament Act, 1954, in sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be 
inserted at the end, namely:-
"Provided that any pension (whether known as Swatantrata Saini1 
, • II'" .,. 
,amman pension or by any uthc'r name) received by such P'I''-;:; 'bis 
10 freedom fighter shan not be taken into account for tl .... ~::A'P;;8ion in • b . d h ,.,-1- .. 8U -secbon an stle person shall be entitled 1~ ... ~:!loII (1).". ,..., .. , .addltiDm. to th'l pellsion to whid. hI; is ImlJ1k'fI 
Short 
title. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
B.A. 

• 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
There has been a demand both in Parliament and outside that the 
pension received by an ex-Member of Parliament Or provisional Parlia-
ment as a freedom fighter should not be taken into'account for the purpose 
of determining the pension payable to him with respect to his services 
as such Member under the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members 
of Parliament Act, 19".14. The Joint Committee on Salary and Allowances 
of Members of Parliament have also recommended that the Act should 
be suitably amended so that such Members receive their pension under 
the Act in addition to the pension to which they may be entitled to as 
freedom fighters. The pension payable to freedom fighters under the 
Swatantrata Sainani Samman Pension Scheme is really for the purpose 
of honouring those Who participated in the freedom struggle. It is, ther~ 
fore, proposed to amend sub-section (3) of section 8A of the Act suitably 
to ensure that any pension received on account of participation in the 
freedom struggle is not taken into account for the purpose of determining 
the pension payable under the Act. 
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object. 
NEW DELHI; BHISHMA NAR~IN SINGH 
The 29th June, 1982. 
• 
• 

10K SABRA 
CORRI GENDUM 
to 
THE SALARY, ALLOWANCES AND PENSION OF KHMBERS OF 
P ARLIAlvIl!"iT (Jt1ENDHE1\;T) BILL, 1982 
ITo bt;C. s introduced in Ipk Sabha 7 
Page 2, line-12,-
1Q!: "Swatantrata Sairiani Samman Pension Scheme" 
~ "Swatantrata Sainik SaJnmari Pension Scheme" 
NEW DEIHl; 
~uly 9. aq82 
Asadha 1 ~ 1904 (S8.ka) .. 

FINANCIAL MEMbRANOtiM 
By virtue of the amendment which clause 2 of the BiU seeks to make 
in sub-section (3) of section SA of the principal Act, an ex-Member of 
Parliament or provisional Parliament entitled to pension under sub-section 
(1) of that s~ction would receive such pension in addition to any pension 
to which he may be entitled to as a freedom fighter. It is estimated that 
this provision would involve an expenditure of about Rs. 7.50 lakhs per 
annum. The provisions of the Bill do not involve any other expenditure 
of a recurring or non-recurring nature. 
9 

Pension. 
ANNEXURE 
EXI'RACT FROM THE SALARY, ALLOWANCEs AND PENSION OF MEMRERS OF 
PARLIAMENT ACT, 1954 ' 
(30 OF 1954) 
'" '" '" '" '" 
SA. '(1-) • 
'(3) Where any person entitled to pension under sub-section (J) is also 
entitled to any pension from the Central Government or any St~te. Gov-
ernment, or any corporation owned or controlled by the, Central Govern-
ment Or any State Government, or any local authority, under any law 
. or otherwise, then,-
(a) where the amount of pension to which he is entitled under 
such law or otherwise, is equal to or in excess of that to which he is 
entitled under sub-section (1), such person shall not be entitled to 
any pension under that sub-sec~ion; and 
(b) where the amount of pension to which he is entitled under 
such law or otherwise, is less than that to which he is entitled under 
sub-section (1), such person shall be entitled to pension under that 
sub-section only of an amount which falls short of the amount of 
pension to which he is otherwise entitled under that sub-section. 
'" '" '" • '" 