19 of 1929. 
~ ot 1898. 
2 of 1974. 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
2 5 AUr. lC'7S 
BiD No. 81 af 1976 
THE CHILD MARRIAGE RESTRAINT (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1976 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 and to make 
certain consequential amendments in the Indian Ohristian Marriage 
Act, 1872 and the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-seventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Child Marriage Restraint (Amend- Short 
ment) Act, 1976. title. 
5 2. In section 2 of the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 (hereinafter Amend-
referred to as the principal Act), for clause (a), the following clause ment of 
10 
IS 
shall be substituted, namely: _ section 2. 
'(a) "child" means a person who, if a male, has not completed 
twenty-one years of age, and if a female, has not completed eighteen 
years of age;'. ,.. , 
3. In section 8 of t~e principal Act,- Amend-
ment of 
(a) for the words and figures "Code of Criminal Procedure, section 8 
1898", the words and figures "Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973" 
shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words "Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the 
first class", the words "Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magis-
trate of the first class" shall be substituted. 

Amend-
mentof 
seetion 10. 
Amend-
ment of 
C'erta1n 
enact-
ment.. 
2 
4. In section 10 o~ the principal Act, for the words and figures uCode 
of. Criminal Procedure, 1898", the words and figures "Code of Criminal II of 1898. 
Procedure, 1973" shall be substituted. 2 of 1974. 
5. The enactments specified in the Schedule are hereby amended in 
the manner mentioned therein. S 
Year No. 
(I) (2) 
1872 IS 
1955 25 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 5) 
Short title 
(3) 
The Indian 
Christian 
Marriage Act, 
1872 
Amendments. 
In section 60,- 10 
(.) in condition number (1), for the words 
"eighteen years" and "fifteen years", 
the words ''twenty-one years" and 
"'eighteen years" shall respectively be IS 
substituted ; 
(it) the proviso shall be omitted. 
The Hindu (I) In section 5,-
Marriage Act, 
1955· (i) in clause (iii), for the words "eighteen 20 
years" and "fifteen years", the words 
"twenty-one years" and "eighteen years" 
shall respectively be substituted; 
(iI) clause (vi) shall be omitted. 
(2) Section 6 shall be omitted. 
(3) In section 12, in sub-section (I), in clause 
(c), for the words and figure "is required 
under section 5", the words and figures 
"was required under section 5 as it stood 
immediately before the commencement of 30 
the Child Marriage Restraint (Amendment) 
Act, 1976" shall be substituted. 
(4) In section 18,-
(.) for the brackets, letters and word 
", (II) and (vi)", the word, brackets and 35 
letter "and (v)" shall be subltituted.; 
(it) in clause (b), the word "and" occurr-
ing at the end shall be omitted., 
(iit) clause (c) shall be omitted. 

• \ STAtEMtN''t OF OBJECTS ANt> ~NS 
The Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929, was enacted with a view 
to prevent child marriages, namely, a marriage to which either of the 
contracting parties is under a specified age. Originally, the age limit 
for a male was eighteen years and for a female fourteen years. The 
age limit was subsequently raised in the case of females from fourteen 
to fifteen by the Amending Act 41 of 1949. Violation of the provisions 
of the Act is made punishable. 
2. The question of increasing the minimum age of marriage 1ior males 
and females has bean considered in the present context when there is 
an urgent need to check the growth of population in the country. S"uch 
increase of the minimum age of marriage will result in lowering the 
total fertility rate on account of lesser span of married life. It wm also 
result in more responsible parenthood and in better health of the mother 
and child. It may be mentioned that the Committee on Status of Women 
have in their Report observed that the policy of law which permits the 
marriage of a girl before she is physically and mentally mature is open 
to serious question, and, therefore, increasing the marriage age of girls 
to 18 years is desirable. 
3. The Bill seeks to amend the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929, to 
increase the minimum age of marriage from ftfteen to eighteen for 
females and from eighteen to twenty-one for males and to make conse-
quential amendments in the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, and the Indian 
Christian Marriage Act, 1872. 
NEW DELHI, H. R. GOKHALE. 
The 12th Au.gust, 1976. 
3 

Deftni-
tions. 
Jurisdic-
tion 
under 
this Act. 
Prelimi-
nary 
inquiries 
into 
otfences. 
On what 
conditions 
malTiages 
of Indian 
Christians 
maybe 
certified. 
ANNEXURE / 
ExTRACTS FROM THE CHILD MARRIAGE REsTRAINT ACT, 1~9 
(19, OF 1929) 
'. • • '" • 
( 
i 
i 
/ , 
i 
Z. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context,-
(a) "child" means a person· who, if a male, is under eighteen 
years of age, and if a female, is under fifteen years of age; 
• '" • • • 
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 190 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898, no Court other than that of a Presidency 
Magistrate or,.a Magistrate' of the first class shall take cognizance of, or 
try, any offence under this Act. 
• • • • '" 
10. Any Court, on receipt of a complaint of an offence of which it is 
authorised to take cognizance, shall, unless it dismisses the complaint 
Under section 203 o~' the Coda of Criminal Procedure, 1898 either itself 
make an inquiry under section 202 of that Code or direct a Magistrate 
subordinate to it to make such inquiry. 
'" '" '" '" '" 
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872 
(15 OF 1872) 
• • • • • 
60. Every marriage between Indian Christians applying for a certifi-
cate, shall, without the preliminary notice required under Part III, be 
certified under this Part, if the following conditions be fulfilled, and not 
otherwise: -
(1) the age of the man intending to be married shall not be under 
eighteen years, and the age of the woman intending to be married 
shall not be under fifteen years; 
'" '" '" • • 
Provided that no marriage shall be certified under this Part when 
either of the parties intending to be married has not completed his or her 
eighteenth year, unless such consent as is mentioned in section 19 has 
been given to the intended marriage, or unless it appears that there is 
no person living authorized to give such consent. 
• '" • • • 
5 of 1898. 
5 of 1898. 

• 
s 
Ex'11lAC1'S FROM THE HINDU MAR.luAGE Ac:r, 1955 
(25 OF 1955) 
• • • • 
5. A marriage may be solemniz~d between any two Wndus, if the fol-
lowing conditions are fulfilled, namely:-
• • • • • 
(iii) the bridegroom has completed the age of eigliteen years and 
the bride the age of fifteen. years as the time of the marriage; 
• • • • • 
(vi) where the bride has not completed the age of eighteen years, 
the consent of her guardian in marriage, if any, has been ~btained for 
the marriage. 
6. (1) Wherever the consent of a guardian marriage is necessary for 
a bride under this Act, the persons entitled to give such consent shall be 
the following in the order specified hereunder, namely:-
(a) the father; 
('b) the mother; 
(c) the paternal grandfather; 
(d) the paternal grandmother; 
(e) the brother by full blood; as between brothers the elder being 
preferred; 
(f) the brother by half blood; as between brothers by half blood 
the elder being preferred: 
Provided that the bride is living with him and is being brought 
up by him; 
(g) the paternal uncle by full blood; as between paternal uncles 
th~ elder being preferred; 
(h) the paternal uncle by half blood; as between paternal uncles 
by half blood the elder being preferred: 
Provided that the bride is living with him and is being brought 
up by him; 
(i) the maternal grandfather; 
(j) the maternal grandmother; 
(k) the maternal uncle by full blood; as between maternal uncles 
the elder being preferred: 
Provided that the bride is living with him and is being brought up 
by him. 
(2) No person shall be entitled to act as a guardian in marriage under 
the provisions of this section unless such person has himself completed his 
or her twenty-first year. 
(3) Where any person entitled to be the guardian in marriage under the 
foregOing provisions refuses, or is fur any cause unable or unfit, to act as 
such, the person next in order shall be entitled to be the guardian. 
Condi-
tions for 
a Hindu 
marriage. 
Guardian-
ship in 
marriage. 

6 
(4) In the absence of any such person as is referred to in sub-section 
(1), the consent of a guardian shall not be necessary for a marriage under 
this Act. 
(5) Nothing in this Act shall affect the jurisdiction of a court to pro· 
hibit by injunction an intended marriage, if ia the interests of the bride 
for whose marriage consent is required, the court thinks it neeessary to 
do so. 
• • • • • 
Voidable 12. (1) Any marriage solemnized, whether before or after the com-
marriagel. mencem.ent of this Act, shall be voidable and may be annulled by a 
decree of nullity on any of the following grounds, namely:-
Punish-
ment for 
contra-
vention ot 
certain 
other 
condi-
tionatox-
a Hindu 
marriage. 
• • • • • 
(c) that the consent of the petitioner, or where the consent of 
the guardian in marriage of the petitioner is required under section 5, 
the consent of such guardian was obtained by force or frlMld; or 
• • • • • 
18. Every person who procures a marriage of himself or herself to 
be solemnized under this Act in contravention of the conditions specified 
in clauses (iii), (iv) , (v) and (vi) of section 5 shall be punishable-
• • • • • 
(b) in the calle of a contravention of the condition specified 
in clause (i'V) or clause (v) of section 5, with simple imprisonment 
which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees, or with both; and 
(c) in the case of a contravention of the condition specified in 
clause (vi) of, section 5, with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
--
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 and to make 
certain consequential amendments in the Indian Christian Marriage 
Act, 1872 and the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. 
(Bhri H. R. Gokhale, 
Minister of Law, Justice 
and Companll Affair •. ) 