Bill No. 81 of IPO 
THE TRIPURA ,EXCISE LAW (REPEAL) 
BILL, 1960 
(As' INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 25TH NOVEMBER, 1960) 

Bill No. 81of 1"0. 
THE TRIPURA EXCISE LAW (REPEAL) BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide fCYr the repeal of the Tripura Excise Act. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic 
of Indlia as folIows:-
1. This Act may be called the Tripura Excise Law (Repeal) Act. Short title. 
1960. 
Bengal Act V S 
of 15109. 2. On and from the date on which the Bengal Excise Act, 1909 is Reftca1 of 
extended by notification under section 2 of the Union Territories ~cf.~t. ... 
(Laws) Act, 1950, to the Union territory of Tripura, the Tripura 30 of J950. 
Excise Act of 1296 T.E. (Abkari Ain) shall stand repealed. 
3. (1) The repeal of the Tripura Excise Act of 1296 T.E. (Abkari SaviDp. 
Ain) by section 2 shall not aft'ect-
(a) the previous operation of the said Act or anything duly 
done or suffered thereunder; or 
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, 
accrued or incurred under the said Act; or 
IS (c) any penalty, forfeit~ or punishment incurred in respect 
of any offence committed against the said Act; or 
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect 
of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfei-
ture or punishment as aforesaid; 
20 and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be 
iMtituted, continued or enforced and any such penalty, forfeiture ur 
punishment may be imposed, as if the said Act had not been repealed. 

2 
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), any-
thing done or any action taken (including any appointment or dele-
gation madle, notification, instruction or direction issued, permit, ijara 
or licence granted) under the Act repealed by section 2 shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the cotTesponding provi- S 
sions of the Act extended by notification as provided in that section 
to the Union territory of Tripura, and shall continue to be in force 
accordingly unless and until superseded by anything done or any 
action taken under the Act last mentioned above. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Tripura Excise Act (II) of 1296 T.E., which was enacted by 
the then Ruler of 'fripura, is now in force in the Union territory. In 
actual practice, its provisions are found to be inadequate. For 
instance, no procedure has been laid down for the levy and collection 
of the excise duty, and no power has been conferred on the Chief 
Conunissioner to make rules for the working of the Act. In the cir-
cumstances, it is considered desirable to replace that Act by the 
Bengal Excise Act, 1909 (Bengal Act V of 1909), which is more ex-
haustive. . 
2. Under section 2 of the Union Territories Laws Act, 1950, an 
enactment in force in a State may be extended. to the Union territory 
by notification, but the corresponding law in force in the Union 
territory cannot be so repealed. It is, therefore, proposed: to repeal 
the Tripura Excise Act now in force in the Union territory. 
Nr:w DELHI; MORARJI DESAI. 
The 14th OctobE!1', 1960. 
3 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the repeal of the Tripura Excise Act. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article 117 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the 
introduction of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Morarji Desai, 
Minister of Finance.) 