THE KERALA STATE LEGISLATURE 
(DELEGATION OF POWERS) 
BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCBD IN LoB: SABRA 
ON 20m NOVEMBER, 1959) 

, " 
But No. 81 or 1959 
THE KERALA STATE LEGISLATURE (DELEGATION 
OF POWERS) BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to confer on the President the power of the Legislature of the State 
of Kerala to make laws. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Kerala State Legislature (Delegation Short title. 
of Powers) Act, 1959. 
5 2. In this Act, "Proclamation" means the Proclamation issued on the Definition. 
31st day of July, 1959, by the President under article 356 of the Consti-
tution. 
3. (1) The power of the Legislature of the State of Kerala to make Conferment 
laws, which has been declared by the Proclamation to be exercisable ~~~~~ o~~he 
10 by or under the authority of Parliament, is hereby conferred on the power of the 
P 'd State Legis-reSl ent. ' lature to 
(2) In the exercise of the said power, the President may, from time 
to time, whether Parliament is or is not in session, enact as a Presi-
dent's Act a Bill containing such provisions as he considers necessary. 
IS Provided that before enacting any such Act, the President shall, 
whenever he considers it practicable to do so, consult a committee 
constituted far the purpose, consisting of,-
(a) thirty members of the House of the People nominated 
by the Speaker among whom shall be included all members 
make Ilw'I. 

2 
who for the time being fill the seats allotted to the State of 
Kerala in that House; and 
(b) fifteen members of the Council of States nominated 
by the Chairman among whom shall be included all members 
who for the time being fill the seats allotted to the State of Kerala S 
in that House. 
(3) Every Act enacted by the President under sub-section (2) 
shall, as soon as may be after enactment, be laid before each House of 
Parliament. 
(4) Either House .0£ Partiam.ent may, by resolution passed within 10 
seven days from the date on which the Act has been laid before it 
under sub-section (3), direet any mod.ifications to be made in the 
Act, and, if the modifications are agreed to by the other House of Par-
liament during the session in which the Act has been so laid before 
it or the session succeeding, such modifications shall be given effect to IS 
by the President by enacting an amending Act under sub-section (2): 
Provided that nothing in this Sub-section shall affect the validity 
of the Act or of any action taken thereunder before it is sa amended. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the Proclamation of the President dated the 31st July, 
1959, the powers of the Legislature of the Kerala State are now 
exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament. Such legis-
lative measures as may be necessary for the State can be taken up 
by Parliament only by postponing its business and even then, it tis 
likely that Parliament may not have the time to deal with all 
legislative measures for the State. It is therefore, proposed that 
Parliament should, in accordance with the provisions of article 
357 (1) of the Constitution, confer by law on the President the power 
of the Legislature of the State of Kerala to make laws for the State. 
The present Bill is intended to give effect to this proposal. 
NEW DELHI; G. B. PANT. 
The 16th NovembeT, 1959. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to confer on the President the power of the Legislature of 
the State of Kerala to make laws. 
(Shri Govind Val/abh Pant, 
Minister of Home Affairs). 