As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

24 ॥ 999

Bill No. 81 of 1998
ee
THE PATENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998
By
Dr. V. Sarosa, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Patents Act, 1970
क्‍ it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as

1. (/) This Act may be called the Patents (Amendment) Act, 1998. stot title
(2) Itshall come into force at once. mencemcat,
2. Inssection 53 of the Patents Act, 1970, in sub-section (1),— Amendment
of section 53.

(In clause (a), the words “or as a medicine or drug” shall be omitted;
(ii) after clause (a), the following clause shall be added, namely:—

“(aa) in respect of an invention claiming the method or process of manufacture
of a substance, where the substance is intended for use, or is capable of being used, as
amedicine or drug, be eighteen years from the date of sealing of the patent, or twenty
years from the date of the patent, whichever period is shorter;”,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS:

Patents Act was enacted in the year 1970. Since then no major amendments have
made in the Act. At present, the term of patent for a medicine or drug is just five |
period of patent should be increased considerably to atleast twenty years for the followi
reasons:—

(a) to ensure manufacture of quality drugs to meet competition from internatic
companies;

(0) to encourage invention of new process of a drug or medicine;
(c) to stabilise the prices of medicines.

Therefore, it is essential to amend the Patents Act, 1970 suitably to increase the
of patent for a drug or medicine.

Hence this Bill.

New Deut; V. 582
June 26, 1998.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE Patents Act, 1970
(39 oF 1970)

* * * * *

53. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the term of every patent granted under Term of Patent.
Act shall—

(a) in respect of an inventing claiming the method or process or manufacture of
asubstance, where the substance is intended for use, or is capable of being used, as
food or as a medicine or drug, be five years from the date of sealing of the patent, or
seven years from the date of the patent whichever period is shorter; and

(b) in respect of any other invention, be fourteen years from the date of the
patent.

(2) A patent shall cease to have effect notwithstanding anything therein or inthis Act
on the expiration of the period prescribed for the payment of any renewal fee, if that fee is not
id within the prescribed period or within that period as extended under this section.

(3) The period prescribed for the payment of any renewal fee shall be extended to such
od, not being more than six months longer than the prescribed period, as may be
ified ina request made to the Controller if the request is made and the renewal fee and
prescribed additional fee paid before the expiration of the period so specified.

* * * * *


LOK SABHA

BILL

further to amend the Patents Act, 1970.

(Dr. V. Saroja, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRNO—1343L S-—10.7.1998.