As neRODUCED IN.Lok SaunA .

21 || 293

Bill Na; 61 of 2002
LNG 81 of 2002
THE RELIEF AND. COMPENSATION ‘TO AND REHABILITATION
OF VICTIMS OF Mass MIOLENCE AND INJUSTICE BILL, 2002
7 »

Suni G.M. Bandana, MP
ce
oes ho BILE.
rOvide JOr relief and compensation ii and rehabilitation’ af victims
injustice and to. Drovide' for the ‘CONSTituton: of a Commission
iniplemeniaron ‘Of the Net arid Jor miatteny connected therewith or in
Be it enacted by Parliament ia the Fiftyethird Year of the:
10७58:--० Ss) & ९ : she
iL

of mass Violence
to monitor the
cidental thereta:

Republic of India as
se cu the Relief and Compensation ७ and Rehabilbtion of

‘Short. title,
e and Injustice’ Aet,-2002: extent ‘and
 Teextendls to the whole’ of aidig ce ; mene
lt shall. come into. force at once: हु

Je this Act, uns the context otherwise requires : Definitions:
i}: Commission’ Meshs-a Commission constitited under Sub-section (1) of

same. meaning as. ig assigned to it in |
the Prevention: and ‘Punishment of the



* Baxeigeation ane 3. The'next of kin of any. berson killed or foand missing consequent toisnnes viollice.

Rouen, and the Central Government shall wedettake:repzirs'to.or. rebuilding: of the diomaped: ©
house or provide thé victine with such other suitable accommodation as may be acceptable
आए. >

किसका: camps 2.17) Om ereption of any mass violence, ihe Central Government shall open ए एल,

“xine

2

{cd "mass. violence” includes communal tiot, caste violence: genocede, terrotist tot
and unkiofub-subversive activity or distirbanice:

{a} pleacribed™ means prosctibod by nulés made under this Act:

न fe) "State" means के State’apecified in the. First Schedule tg’ the Constilstion and
shall include'a ‘Union: 1eéititary;

4). "victisn” means a vietii of tiass violence.

| pemeinan as: shalt be paid by the Central Government: कर

उ९%3/श५: thoes
vied ६0) an ex-gratin grant of ‘sack’ amount not being test thas two lakh rupecs as
कक: Seay be prescribed:
(Gyamonthly persion at वे rage not being ies than two thousand rigers ak may
be presevtbed. :
Employment 4. Where a person kified or found missing consequent to macs vidlence was the sot

to be. given 10. ‘Carniey member of a fimily, the Central Government shall provide appropriate enuployiacnt
seen! ani’: to at Beast ‘me eligible member of the family of the viction withis these neonthe of the
Joss, of sole... incident of kittiag or found tnissing:

member, Provitied that where there ino eilgible member af the family for immediate
employment, the Ceitral Goverament shall provide, free of cost, proper education,
technical or othtewise, to a messber of the fumily of the victim and thereafter provide

ios with gainfial employment.
‘Ex-gratia, 5. Where: victim of mass violence — :
fiuy or (०) के permanently incapacitated, tie Central Goverment shall pay.him:~~
deabitity.

(iyaniex-gratin, grant of not fess than two आधी rapees; and
i} monthly pension of mot less than two thousand rupees:

.. @) bas soffered a grievous injury or partial disability. the Central Governinient

(i) the tall cost of medical treatment inchading surgery; ond
(ian ex-gratia gent of at teast fifty thousand rupees:
(c} has svdfered | mitior tajincy, the Central Govertinent shall: pay his «
‘compensation of not lea than five thousmad rapees, mM
Assistance am |: 6 A-viction whose house hos been damaged, either fully or partially, shall be provided :
damage +... with inunediots temporary shelter te thancH oir relief comp set up by the Central Government

relief: 1” to he opened: adequite mamber of relief canips: with. all anienities incloding, sanitation,

inmates.

drimking water and general cleanliness and shall. provide the folloveluy, facililies frec of
cost to. the victiins, their families and those affected by mass viokdiite oF int need of security,

(a) boarding aind lodkgitig;
{hyelothing atid other necessities: °°,
(c}medical treatment; :
“2 5 (di edticational Ineliities for the schooV/callege students amet:
"(gj आस relief articles:incioding necessary houschold kis.



Ginidetings 16)
‘Stateas! 1

‘Adjustinent of

ANCHE OF,
relief ete or:
Of benefits. to.
‘victinis:

‘Contribution:
tobe: made: by.
States,

Constitution:
of,
Comimission
to monitor:
implementation:
of Act ~

Compensation:

On ibiatae: dt

‘abuse ‘of laws.
SA Tones,

13. The Central Government may, from time to time, 5206 such guidelines to the:
State: Governments:in ‘respect: of relief, exsgratia: grants-and compensation 10: and
rehabilitation of vietins.dnd thelr families ag it may-deém fit..."

14. Where-a:vietint: or: his-family ‘receives: ariy’ relief, aid, ex-gratia gravit-or’
compensation or any benefit: towoards. rehabilitation fromthe State Government
concermed, necessary adjustments may be made with respect. to payinents or benefits:
under the provisions of this Act!

Provided that no such adjustment shall be made in respect of ex-gratia grants

payable under: claitse: (a): of section 3. or urider sub-clause. (iy of clause:.(a)-of.
section S.::

15, In order to mect its obiligation under. the provisions of this-Act, the Central
Government may’ require the Stat Government; under whose jurisdiction the mass
violence occtirred, to-puly to the Central Governunient sich aniount as thay be prescribed.

16. (1) ‘The Central Government shall; by notification in: the Official Gazette,
constitute 9 Commission to monitor the implementation of the provisions of thivAct.

(2) The Conmission’ shait-consist-of: three: members; जाए of whomshall be the
Chairperson.

-.. (3) The members and:the Chai'person of the Commission’ shall be appointed by thé
Central Government in corsiltation with the. Chief Justice of India, the Speaker-of the
Lok Sabtia and: the Leaders. of the Opposition in.the. two. Houses of the-Partiament:

(4) A ember of the Commission shall Hold office for a term of three years. front the:
date of his: appointment:

(3) Provisons as regards resignation, disqualification and removal of Chairperson. or
membery of the Commission and as regards filling up of casual vacancies shall be such as
may be prescribed.

(6) The Commission shall, subject-to.thé. approval of the Central Government, make
rules govertiing the convenitig fits ineetinigs and the procedure arid coriduct of the business
dt:its meetings:

(7) Any aggrieved victim.ot.a member of his family may approach the Commission.
for due implementation of the: provisions ofthis Act in hig favour.and the orders of the
Commission in this respect shall be binding upon the Central Government.

(8) The Commission may, on its own niotion or. otherwise, give such directions to the
Central Government as regards due-and timely iiiplementation of the provisions of this Act
as.it ay deem fit-and appropriate: and. such.directions shall. be binding apon the Central:
Government

(9) The commission. shall-prepare.and. submit to:the Central. Government हा annual
report’ oi the inpleinentation -of hie: provisions of this. Act and the Centéal Government
shat! cause’ stichy annual report to be faid before cach House’ of Parliament.

(20)-The Commission -may;. whenever. it may deem. fit or necessary, submit interim.

steport or reports to. the Central Government. who shall cause the said repart of reports to ba

laid before each House: of Parliament. without any. delay.
20%, Whenver. under. the provisions of any law: forthe. time. being, in force, itis.
concludedie-. 7

(a}that there:was no sufficient cause forthe detention of a petson; or

(6) that the: accused. person is: innocent of the. charges or alleged charges. have
not-heen proved to-ment-conviction, we

then the authority o the court;as the case maybe, that so concluded shall determine the:

amotnitiof compensation for los of earning, physical harassment and mental agony nd

legal expenditure, If any, suffered by suck person or accused and direct the concerned.

ent to pay the said compensation to him..

Gove

s

0

25

3a

35.

4at

AS

Ble



ges

thisAct:

(2) Every rule:made by the Ceniral Gavernment under this Act shall'be laid: as acon

‘as may be-after it is made; before each House of Parliament; While it is tir sessiog, for atotal
"period of thirty days which may.bo contprised:in one session. or in-two or more successive
sessions, aid if, before: the expity of the session itainediately' following’ the session or the.
‘successive sessions afdresuid, bith Houses agree:in makingany Modification. in the rule or.
both Houses agree that the rule should not be mad, the rule shall thereafler have effect only
in'such modified form or-be of no: effect, ‘ag 118 cage thay. be; 80 however, that ‘any suck
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previdusly.
done: under that rile, हे

38:47) The Central Government inay. make rules for carrying out the provisions aff.” Fawer:to:



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS ": :

Mais violence such as communal arid caste ridts, terrorist violence, genocide, untawlul
subversive activities, हर, fave: Chinied lives: df'ddatge number‘of innticent. citizen-of the:
“Country ind have niined a great number of families. : s :
The Contral Government spends a huge amount: on relief and rehabilitation, of the
uinforiunate. victims, 1 also issues. guidelines to Stites arn] Union territories. af regards.
relief, excwratia’ grants and compensation: to ‘and. rehabilitation: of the. victims, The
implementation of thesd: pinidelines is far'fron satisfactory. The courts too, have, from time
(oti asyed: direction: as fegards rele! compensation und retiabilitation.
“Mass violonee in the nature of conimunal and caste riots, genucide, terrorist violence,

८६७. dre Abt there: 4४ जाएं order situation. It is’ also: the constitutional duty of the Centrat
Govertmient 10: preter States andthe: people tronimass disturbances. The. Cesitral
Government cannot remain indifferent to the trauma caused by. these: large scale disturbances.
Ttexténds considerable financial and other help under such’ situations. It ts necessary: to.
bring about uniformity in provision’ of retiel, compensation and rehabilitation assistance,
{o give these measnses a statutory. status and to regniated then.
‘Tho Bilt requires the Central Government to provide for relief and compensation: to

and rehabilitation of the victiing and their families. The Central Government may. require.
the concerned State Government to contribute towards these costs.

“The, Bil also provides for compensation to the victims of the misuse and abuse of the
laws in force by the concerted Governments.

‘New Deut, . LM. BANATWALLA,
November. 14, 2002



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM :

Clases 31614 of the: But provide forralief, grants, pensiowand: ‘comipesisation toand
rehabilitation af viewing: ‘Clause 15: provides thar the ‘Central Government may require the
‘Concerned Stalc Governments to codtribute to these costs: Clause 16 provides for constitution
‘af 2 Commission 16 monitor the implemeniation of 08 provisions of the: Bilt ‘Cletise $7
provides for compensation to be paid on misuse or abuse of taws for thé time being in force:
‘The Bill if enacted, will involve expenditure front the Consolidated Fund of India,



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION.

Clause: L8-of the: Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying
‘out the purposes:of the Bill, In: particular; tiles: will have-also:to: be. framed; ursuant-to
clause: 3,-sub-clause (2) of clause 7; sub-clause (3) of clause: 8,:clause: 10, clause: 15:and.
Sub-dlaiide (5) of clause 16. Since the rulés will relate. to: the: matters! of detail only, tie
delegation of legislative powor:is of a normal character:

%



FCAT TSS TS RO.

LOK SABHA

a
BILL.

19 provide {cr जि! and compensation it snd rehabilitation of vi
auch injustice and te. provide for the eeusatinatisas
गाए cembritation of the Act and for

of a Commission to monitor the
tatters connected therawih or incidentat therets;

(Shai CM. Banatwalla, M.P)

MGIPMAND—4023¢S—26-4 7.2059.