1
THE FISHERMEN (PROTECTION AND WELFARE) BILL, 2017
By
ADV. NARENDRA KESHA V SAWAIKAR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the socio-economic protection and welfare of the fishermen of the
 coastal States of the country by establishing a Welfare Fund for their benefit and
 for providing adequate life insurance cover against accidents, medical care,
 financial assistance for fishing nets, boats and other necessities,
 unemployment allowance during lean periods, free education
including  vocational education and training to their
children and  for matters connected
 therewith or incidental
thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Fishermen (Protection and Welfare) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the coastal States of India having substantial population of fishermen.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  81 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "accident" means an accident caused during the course of fishing including
drowning;
(b) "administrator" means an administrator appointed under section 5;
(c) "appropriate Government" means in the case of State, the Government of
State having coastline and in the case of Union territories having coastline, the
Central Government;
(d) "fisherman" means a person who earns his livelihood by catching fish from
the sea including traditional fishermen and whose only source of income is the money
he earns from selling such fish and includes a person working as fisherman’s helper;
(e) "Fund" means the Fishermen Welfare Fund established under section 4;
(f) "partial disablement" means disablement which has reduced the working
capacity of a fisherman temporarily which he was capable of having before the accident;
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(h) "total disablement" includes any disablement which incapacitates a fisherman
for all work which he was capable of performing prior to the accident.
3.  The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within one year from the
commencement of this Act, formulate, in consultation with the appropriate Government,
a long term national policy for the welfare of fishermen and their families and protection of
their fishing rights and interests against the onslaught of big fishing companies including
the multinationals.
4. (1) The Central Government shall,  by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Fund to be known as the Fishermen Welfare Fund for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) The initial corpus of the Fund shall be ten thousand crore rupees which shall be
provided by the Central Government after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf.
(3) After the establishment of the Fund, moneys to the Fund shall be provided by the
Central Government and the appropriate Governments in such proportion as may be agreed
to from year to year and the money received by way of donations from individuals, body
corporates, financial and other institutions shall also form the corpus money of the Fund.
5.  The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
such number of Administrators who shall administer the Fund and entertain the claims
for payment of compensation and other facilities under this Act.
6.  The Fund shall be utilised for,—
(a) maintaining digital data of fishermen and their dependant family members
for every district of the State and Union territory having coastline;
(b) life insurance cover to the fishermen and their families;
(c) free medical care to the fishermen and their family members;
(d) financial assistance to the fishermen for the purchase and repair of fishing
nets, boats and other equipments required for fishing;
(e) unemployment allowance during illness or financial crisis during lean periods;
(f) free education including technical and vocational education to the children
of fishermen; and
(g) such other purposes as may be prescribed.
Long term
National
Policy for the
welfare of
fishermen.
Establishment
of Fishermen
Welfare Fund.
Appointment of
administrators.
Utilisation
of the Fund.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
7. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the amount of compensation payable to a
fishermen sustaining injury resulting in his death or partial or total disablement or in case of
his drowning or sweeping away by the water currents or in his disappearance in a storm or
cyclone or tsunami, shall be such as may be specified by the Central Government from time
to time by notification in the Official Gazette.
(2) In case of death of a fisherman, the compensation fixed under sub-section (1) shall
be paid to the spouse of the deceased or to his legal heir or to the children, as the case may
be, and in case the deceased being unmarried, the compensation shall be paid to his parents.
(3) Every claimant for payment of compensation under this Act shall apply to the
Administrator in such form and giving such details, as may be prescribed.
(4) Every claim for compensation under this Act shall be finalized by the Administrator
and payment thereof shall be made within sixty days from the date of filing of claim.
8. The appropriate Government shall—
(a) establish adequate number of schools and vocational training institutes and
healthcare centres in and around the areas inhabitated by fishermen for their benefit
including their families and children;
(b) provide adequate and hygienic marketing facilities to the fishermen for
their catch;
(c) provide subsidy on kerosene and petrol;
(d) protect the fishing rights and interests of the fishermen by preventing
national and multinational companies from fishing in such areas in the sea as are
allocated to fishermen by the Central Government from time to time;
(e) encourage the fishermen to use latest technology for fishing and impart
training to fishermen for using safety measures during fishing;
(f) through the Coast Guard and Navy, prevent the trespassing by fishermen of
other countries into the Indian waters;
(g) take up issue of release of Indian fishermen who stray into waters and
economic maritime zone of neighbouring countries and detained with their boats and
nets by such countries;
(h) set up rehabilitation centres for fishermen during emergencies with all
basic facilities; and
(i) take such other measures as it may deem necessary for the protection and
welfare of fishermen.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law applicable to fishermen for the time being in force.
10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments and Union territories
administrations having coastline for carring out the purposes of this Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Fixation of
compensation
and payment
thereof.
Miscellaneous
provisions.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
funds.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There are millions of fishermen and their families spread over Southern, Eastern and
Western parts of the country. Their main occupation and means of livelihood is catching fish
and selling it in the market and they are doing this for generations. However, the fishermen
and their families live in abject poverty nearly hand to mouth whereas the middlemen,
wholesalers and retail traders of fish flourish at their cost as the sea food is becoming
popular not only in the country but worldwide. Sea products are very much in demand but
the status of fishermen has remained the same. Many of the fishermen are carried away by
water currents particularly during storms and cyclones and they lose their lives. Similarly
they get drowned during fishing or receive injuries leading to partial or total disablement. But
there is nobody to look after them except their hapless poor families. In fact the disablement
or death of a fisherman ruins his family who remain at the mercy of fate alone.
Since the poor fishermen are part and parcel of our society and ours being a welfare
State, it is necessary that the fishermen too are provided with adequate insurance against
accidents, healthcare, financial assistance in case of need, educational facilities for their
wards, etc. They should also get subsidy on kerosene and petrol and cold storage and
marketing facilities for their catch. Sometimes fishermen from neighbouring countries trespass
into our water and carry the catch which need to be stopped. In fact the nation has to give
maximum security and facilities to the fishermen of the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NARENDRA KESHAV SAW AIKAR
April 10, 2017.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Fishermen Welfare Fund.
Clause 5 provides for the appointment of Administrators. Clause 8 provides for certain
facilities for fishermen. Clause 10 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate
funds to the States for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of
rupees twenty thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees twenty thousand crore may also involve.
5

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the socio-economic protection and welfare of the fishermen of the
 coastal States of the country by establishing a Welfare Fund for their benefit and
 for providing adequate life insurance cover against accidents, medical care,
 financial assistance for fishing nets, boats and other necessities,
 unemployment allowance during lean periods, free education
including  vocational education and training to their
children and  for matters connected
 therewith or incidental
thereto.
————
(Adv. Narendra Keshav Sawaikar, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—554LS(S3)—16-06-2017.