As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

(१4 No. 200

Bill No. 81 of 2006

THE FRUIT AND VEGETABLE BOARD
BILL, 2006

By
Suri Mouan Sineu, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for measures for the development, storage and marketing of fruits and
vegetables and their products and for matters connected therewith.

Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows :—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Fruit and Vegetable Board Act, 2006.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) Itsshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:

Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act
and for different States or different parts thereof.

2. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that the Union
should take under its control the fruit and vegetable industry.

Short title,
extent and
commencement.

Declaration as
to expediency
of control by
the Union,


2

Definitions 3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires —
(@ “Board” means the Fruit and Vegetable Board established under section 4;
(6) “dealer” means a dealer in fruits and vegetables;
(c) “Executive Director” means the Executive Director appointed under
section 6;

(@ “export” and “import” mean, respectively, taking out of and bringing into
India by land, sea or air;
(०) “Government” means the Central Government;
(0 “member” means a member of the Board and includes the Chairman; and
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Establishment 4. wo With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in
and constitu: the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established for the purposes of

tion of Fruit

and Vegetable this Act, a Board to be called the Fruit and Vegetable Board.

Pome (2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.

(3) The head office of the Board shall be at New Delhi and the Board may, with the
Previous approval of the Government, establish offices or agencies at other places in or
outside India.

(4) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:—

(०) A chairman to be appointed from amongst the fruit and vegetable growers
by the Government in such manner as may be prescribed ;

(0) three members of Parliament, of whom two shall be nominated by the
Speaker of the House of the People and one by the Chairman of the Council of
States;

(©) five members to be appointed by the Government to represent respectively:—

(i) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with agriculture;

(ii) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with commerce;

(iii) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with finance;

(iv) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with industrial
development; and

(२) the Indian Council of Agricultural Research;

(@ four members to be appointed by the Government from amongst the growers
of fruits;

(©) four members to be appointed by the Government from amongst the growers
of vegetables; and

(0 two members to be appointed by the Government from amongst the dealers
and exporters of fruits and vegetables.

(5) The Board shall elect, from amongst its members, a Vice-Chairman who shall
exercise such of the powers and perform such of the functions as may be prescribed and
as may be delegated to him by the Chairman.

(6) The term of office of the members and the procedure to be followed in the
“discharge of their functions by the members shall be such as may be prescribed.

we,



3

(7) The Executive Director and any such officer of the Government (not being a -

member of the Board), as is deputed by the Government in this behalf, shall have the right
to attend the meetings of the Board and take part in the proceedings thereof but shall not
have the right to vote.

(8) The Board may associate with itself in such manner and for such purposes, as may
be prescribed, any person whose assistance or advice it may require in complying with any
of the provisions of this Act and a person so associated shall have the right to take part in
the discussions of the Board relevant to the purposes for which he has been associated,
but shall not have the right to vote.

5. The Chairman shall be entitled to such salary and allowances and such conditions
of service as may, from time to time, be determined by the Government.

6. (1) The Government shall appoint an Executive Director to exercise such powers
and perform such duties as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the
Chairman.

(2) The Government shall appoint a Secretary to the Board to exercise such powers
and perform such duties as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the
Chairman.

(3) The Executive Director and the Secretary shall be entitled to such salaries and
allowances and such conditions of Service in respect of leave, pension, provident fund, and
other matters as may, from time to time, be determined by the Government.

(4) Subject to such control, restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed, the
Board may appoint such other officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient
performance ofits functions.

(5) The Chairman, the Executive Directof, the Secretary and other officers and
employees of the Board shall not undertake any work not connected with their duties
under this Act except with the prior permission of the Government.

7. (7) The Board may appoint such committees as may be necessary for the efficient
discharge of the duties and performance of its functions under this Act.

(2) The Board shall have the power to co-opt as members of any committee
appointed under sub-section (1), such number of persons who are not members of the
Board as it may think fit and the persons co-opted shall have the right to attend the
meetings of the committee and take part in the proceedings of the committee but shall
not have the right to vote.

8. (J) Itshall be the duty of the Board to promote by such measures as it thinks fit, the
development, storage and marketing of fruits and vegetables and the fruit and vegetable
products industry.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the
measures referred to therein may provide for—

(a) formulating policies for overall development and improvement of
production, quality, storage and marketing of fruits and vegetables;

(6) fixing annual production targets of fruits and vegetables;

(c) review of measures for attaining production targets, viz, supply of inputs
like fertilizer, water supply, plant protection measures, credit facilities, etc.;

(@ fixing import quotas for improved seeds;

(©) advising the Government on extension of cold storage facilities;

Salary and
allowances and
other
conditions of
service of
Chairman.

Appointment
of Executive
Director, etc.

“Committees
of the Board.

Functions of
the Board.


4

(f) review of the price trends of fruits and vegetables;
(g) development of fruit and vegetable products industries;

(h) review of the cost of production of fruits and vegetables and the prices
received by the fruit and vegetable growers and to advise Government on the need
for price support and other measures to ensure fair prices to the growers; 5

(0 regulation, control and promotion of the export of fruits and vegetables
and fruit and vegetable products and review of the grading of fruits and vegetables;

() collection and maintenance of statistics on any matter relating to fruits
and vegetables and fruit industries;

(0 performing such other functions as the Government may, from time to 10
time, direct.
Dissolution of 9. (J) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette and for reasons
the Board. to be specified therein, direct that the Board shall be dissolved from such date and for
such period as may be specified in the notification:

Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Government shall givea 5
reasonable opportunity to the Board to make representation against the proposed
dissolution and shall consider the representations, if any, of the Board.

(2) When the Board is dissolved under the provisions of sub-section (1),—

(०) all powers and duties of the Board shall, during the period of dissolution,
be exercised and performed by such person or persons as the Government may 2
appoint in this behalf;

(8) all funds and other properties vested in the Board shall, during the period
of dissolution, vest in the Government; and

(c) as soon as the period of dissolution expires, the Board shall be reconstituted
in accordance with the provisions of this Act. ०]

Power to 10. (7) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
make rules. carrying out the purposes of this Act.

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the powers and functions of the Vice-Chairman of the Board; ऊ

(9) the term of office and other conditions of service of the members, the
manner of filling up of vacancies of the members among, and the procedure to be
followed in the discharge of their functions by the members;

(c) holding of minimum number of meetings of the Board every year;

(d) the circumstances in which and the authority by which a member may be 35
removed;

(९) the power which may be exercised and the duties which shall be performed
by the Executive Director and the Secretary;

(0 the procedure to be followed at the meetings of the Board for the conduct
of business and the number of members which shall form the quorum at a meeting; 40.

. (g) the maintenance of records of business transacted by the Board and the
a submission of copies thereof to the Central Government;

(h) the power of the Board, its Chairman, the Executive Director and
Committees of the Board with respect to the incurring of expenditure;



5

(@ the conditions subject to which the Board may incur expenditure outside
India; 1

() the preparation of budget estimates of receipts and expenditure of the Board
and the authority by which the estimates are to be sanctioned;

(& the form and the manner in which the accounts should be maintained by the
Board;

(0 the deposit of the funds of the Board in Banks and the investment of funds;
(७) the conditions to be observed by the Board in borrowing the money;

(n) the collection of any information or statistics in respect of fruits and
vegetables;

(0) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed by or provided for
by rules under this Act.

(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule, or both
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall, thereafter, have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any sucii
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.

11. (7) The Board may make regulations not inconsistent with this Act and the rules
made thereunder for enabling it to discharge its functions under this Act.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(०) the procedure to be followed at the meetings of the committees appointed
by the Board and the number of members which shall form a quorum at a meeting;

(b) the delegation to the Chairman, members, Executive Director, Secretary
or other officers of the Board, or any of the powers and duties of the Board under
this Act;

(०) the travelling and other allowances, leave and other conditions of: service of
officers (other than those appointed by the Government) and other employees of the
Board;

(d) the maintenance of the accounts of the Board;

(©) the maintenance of the registers and other records of the Board and its
various committees;

(f) the appointment by the Board of agents to discharge, on its behalf, any of
its functions;

(g) the persons by whom, and the manner in which, payments, deposits and
investments may be made on behalf of the Board.

(3) No regulation made by the Board shall have effect until it has been approved by
the Government and published in the Official Gazette, and the Government, in approving
a regulation, may make any change therein which appears to it to be necessary.

(4) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, cancel any

regulation which has been approved and thereupon, the regulation shall cease to have
effect.

Power to
make
regulations.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The fruits and vegetables are grown in the country on an extensive scale. With the
establishment of Horticulture Directorates in the States and the encouragement given to
horticulture, the production of fruits and vegetables is growing day by day. But there are no
adequate storage or good transport facilities for these commodities. The export and import
policies are also not well defined for these items.

At present there is a great scope for exporting of fruits and vegetables and the
products based on processing of fruits and vegetables. Therefore, to encourage production,
storage and export of fruits and vegetables and their products, it is expedient that the
Union Government takes under its control, the development of fruits and vegetables and
the fruit and vegetable products industry.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; MOHAN SINGH
July 25, 2006



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Fruit and Vegetable Board.
Clause 5 provides for payment of such salary and allowances to the Chairman of the Board
as may be determined by the Government. Clause 6(3) provides for payment of salaries and
allowances to the Executive Director and the Secretary to the Board. Clause 6(4) provides for
appointment of such other officers and employees as may be necessary for efficient
performance of the functions of the Board. Clause 7 provides for appointment of committees
and co-option of such persons as members thereon who are not members of the Board. Such
members of the Committees will have to be paid travelling and other allowances for attending
the meetings of the Committees. Under clause 8, the Board will take such measures as it
thinks fit to promote the development and improvement of production, storage and marketing
of fruits and vegetables and the fruits and vegetable products industry. It is estimated that
an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is likely to be involved from the
Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be incurred>


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Clause 11 empowers the Fruit and Vegetable Board to make
regulations, with the previous approval of the Central Government and by notification in
the Official Gazette, not inconsistent with the provisions of the Bill and the rules that
may be made thereunder.

The matters in respect of which rules or regulations may be made pertain to
Procedure or administrative detail only and as such the delegation of legislative power is
of a normal character.



LOK SABHA _

A
BILL

to provide for measures for the development, storage and marketing of fruits and
vegetables and their products and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Mohan Singh, M.P)

MGIPMRND—2783LS(S-5)—18.10.2006.