Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill  No.  81 of 2025
 THE COMPULSORY YOGA PRACTICE IN SCHOOLS
  BILL, 2025
By
 Sඁඋං Mൺඇඈඃ Tංඐൺඋං,  M.P.
A
BILL
    to  provide for compulsory yoga practice from primary to senior secondary level in
 all the schools throughout the country thereby ensuring good and sound health
 of students and for making it obligatory for the Central and State 
Governments to provide requisite infrastructure for the 
purpose and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Yoga Practice in Schools Act, 2025.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, extent and commencement.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of the 
State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(c) “school” means any Government school or a Government aided school or a 
private school, which imparts education from primary to senior secondary school level; 
and 
(d) “yoga” means a discipline based on an extremely subtle science which focuses 
on bringing harmony between mind and body through yoga postures, asanas, breathing 
exercise and such other yoga exercises as would promote the control of the body by 
bringing in flexibility, strength and endurance and of the mind by enhancing alertness 
and meditation.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than one year after 
date of commencement of this Act, formulate a National Policy for practice of yoga and 
ensuring requisite infrastructure and other facilities required for yoga practice in all schools 
of the country. 
(2) The National Policy referred to in sub-section (1) shall provide for,— 
(a) imparting free yoga practice to all the students as per their ability and 
physical condition in the schools; 
(b) encouraging yoga practice and creating awareness of the importance of 
yoga among the schools students; 
(c) ensuring the availability of yoga teacher in all the schools; 
(d) providing adequate funds for infrastructure development for yoga in all 
the schools; 
(e) incorporating yoga as compulsory subjects in all the schools; 
(f) preparing standard and qualitative syllabus for yoga as per the age and physical 
capacity of the students under the guidance of experts and universalisation thereof; 
(g) providing scholarship and stipend to those students whose performance in 
yoga has been outstanding; 
(h) providing weightage to marks obtained in yoga for admission in colleges, 
universities, and institutions of national importance; and 
(i) such other provisions as the Central Government may deem fit and necessary for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the National 
Policy formulated under section 3. 
(2) The appropriate Government shall review the progress and quality of yoga practice 
being imparted by the schools, from time to time, in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. Any school which violates the provisions of this Act shall be liable for punitive action 
by the appropriate Government, including withdrawal of recognition of the school in such 
manner and with such conditions, as may be prescribed.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds, from time to time, for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act. 
Definitions.
National policy 
for Yoga  
Practice and 
infrastructure 
thereof.
Appropriate 
Government 
to implement 
National policy. 
Penalty. 
Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 

7.  The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act. 
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
    
Act to 
supplement 
other laws.
Power to make 
rules.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Yoga is being practiced in our country since the time immemorial for good health and 
longevity. It keeps the body and mind healthy and sound and its various asanaas cure even 
serious diseases. Now, yoga is not confined to India only but has become international and 
International Yoga Day is held every year on 21st June throughout the world. 
Yoga is gaining popularity across the world. Considering the importance of yoga 
education, many western countries have already included yoga in their national school 
education system. It is well accepted that yoga not only improves the physical and mental 
health but also disciplines the mind and improves the power of concentration. Many studies 
show that the practice of yoga inhibits many curative qualities. Moreover, yoga education 
is cost-effective as it requires modest infrastructure and money. Yoga is a non-competitive 
activity as it enables the participants to enjoy physical workout without experiencing any 
pressure.
It is, therefore, felt that yoga should be introduced right from childhood to make it a part 
and parcel of everyone's life so that we can foster confidence and self-esteem in the minds 
of our upcoming generations in schools.
Introduction of Yoga in schools will make positive impact on the health and psycho-
social well-being of the students, enrich their thinking, understanding and imagination 
and improve the teaching and learning abilities. Yoga will not only enhance the ability of 
students to deal with the stress and pressures of daily life but also help in realizing them 
their full potential.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for making yoga practice compulsory in all 
educational institutions right from primary school level to senior secondary level in order to 
make it a part of school curriculum.
Hence this Bill.
 Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                           MANOJ TIWARI
  July 7,  2025.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the formulation of a national policy for providing yoga 
practice and infrastructure development in schools. It also provides for creating awareness 
of yoga among students, financial assistance for infrastructure development, scholarship 
and stipend for outstanding students in yoga in schools.  Clause 6 makes it obligatory for the 
Central Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The 
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
At this stage, it is difficult to give an exact estimate of the actual expenditure to be incurred 
on it. However, it is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore per 
annum would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore may also be 
incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India for creating various assets throughout the 
country. 
 
  
                               

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to  provide for compulsory yoga practice from primary to senior secondary level in 
all the schools throughout the country thereby ensuring good and sound health 
of students and for making it obligatory for the Central and State
 Governments to provide requisite infrastructure for the
 purpose and for matters connected therewith
 or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Manoj Tiwari, M.P .)