As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

29 JUL 200

Bill No. 81 of 2005

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BiLL, 2005
By
SHRI CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as foliows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2005.

2. After article 16 ofthe Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—

“166. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Constitution or any judgement, |

order or award of any court to the contrary, the State shall, within six months from the
passing of the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2005, make provision for reservation of
appointments or posts in the services under the State in favour of persons belonging
to economically backward class of the society.

Explanation. — For the purpose of this article, “persons beionging to

eccnomically backward class of the society” means persons whose family income —

from all the sources is less than rupees five thousand per month but shall not include
persons belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduied Tribes and socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens

Short title.

Insertion of
new article
16.6.

Reservation
of

appointments —
or posts in
favour of

economically
backward class

of the society.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Provision has been made for reservation in services for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes and Other Backward Classes, who are socially and educationally backward. But one
important segment of the society has been completely ignored i.e. the poor people
belonging to socially forward communities. These people need State support. Since they
unfortunately belong to upper castes, they are not given any benefit by the Government. —
Therefore, it is proposed to amend the Constitution with a view to making provision for
reservation in favour of economically backward class of citizens in services under the State. —

New Deut . a. CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE
May 13, 2005. =

1


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P)

MGIPMRND—1308LS—25.06.2005.