As introduced in Lok Sabha
                   
                                                       
          
Bill  No. 81 of  2024
THE SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT BILL, 2024
By
Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the segregation and re-cycling of municipal solid waste, use of re-cyclable 
waste in waste-energy plants for generation of energy and transportation of  
non-recyclable waste into landfills and for matters connected  
therewith or incidental thereto. 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Solid Waste Management Act, 2024.
(2)  It extends to the whole of India.
(3)  It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.  
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
5

2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "large manufacturing facility" means any manufacturing facility with an 
investment of more than rupees twenty crore;
(c) "municipal authority" means Municipal Corporation, Municipal Committee, 
Municipality, Nagar Palika, Nagar Nigam, Nagar Panchayat, Municipal Council 
including Notified Area Committee (NAC) or any other local body constituted under 
the relevant statutes and entrusted with the responsibility of management and handling 
of municipal solid wastes;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) "segregation" means separation of municipal solid wastes into organic, inorganic, 
bio-degradable, non-biodegradable, recyclable and non-recyclable waste and hazardous 
wastes;
(f) "waste-energy plants" means plants where solid waste is treated using different 
techniques to produce any form of energy; and
(g) "waste generating unit" means any entity, household or large manufacturing 
facility where waste is generated and which require waste disposal. 
   3. (1) The appropriate Government shall ensure that every waste generating unit within 
its jurisdiction segregates waste before its disposal.
   (2) In case of large manufacturing facility, the owner or the in-charge of the facility 
shall, as the case may be—
(a) ensure that the waste is segregated, re-used and re-cycled at source; and 
(b) undertake transportation of re-cyclable waste to waste-energy plants and the  
non-recyclable and non-biodegradable waste to the notified landfills, as the case may be.
   (3) The appropriate Government shall ensure that the waste generating units are liable 
to pay for the waste generated by them that is sent to the landfills on the basis of the weight 
of the waste in such manner as may be prescribed.
   4.  It shall be duty of the Municipal authority to—
(a) collect the segregated waste from the waste generating units;
(b) ensure that the segregated waste collected and transported is not mixed with 
any other waste or any material, to the extent that mixing would hamper its re-use,  
re-cycle, further treatment or its use in waste- energy plants; 
(c) undertake treatment of organic waste through bio-degradation such as 
vermin composting, mechanical composting, by window method or any other suitable 
method as approved by the Central Pollution Control Board or the State Pollution 
Control Board, as the case may be; and
(d) transport the non-recyclable waste, non-biodegradable waste to the notified 
landfills.
   5.  Whoever violates the provisions of this Act shall be punished with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend up to three months and fine which may extend up to rupees twenty 
thousand.
2
10
5
Definitions.
15
20
Duty of waste 
generating 
unit and large 
manufacturing 
facility.
Duty of the 
municipal 
authority.
Penalty.
25
30
35
40

   6.  The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State Governments for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act.
   7.  The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law, for the time being in force.
   8.   (1) The Central Government in consultation with the State Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
   (2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid before each House of the Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if,  before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive  sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the  
validity of anything previously done under that rule.
 
.
3
5
10
Central 
Government 
to provide 
requisite funds.
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law.
Power to make 
rules.
15

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 It is estimated that more than ten lakh tonnes of waste is generated in our country.  
The waste is largely composed of bio wastes, metals, plastics, paper, food, glass and presently 
majority of the waste is sent to the landfills with only a portion being used in waste-energy 
plants or recycled or reused. For this every municipal corporation should be provided with 
incinerators of different capacities depending upon the waste generated. This energy from 
waste can be used as an alternative to the depleting petroleum products and it would also 
keep the environment safe and clean. Waste is not a waste until it is wasted. 
 The Bill seeks to ensure that waste from landfills is segregated and recycled, reused as 
input to waste-energy projects. Non-recyclable wastes and hazardous wastes can be dumped 
in the notified landfills. Proper handling and disposal of municipal waste could result in 
generating employment and serve as an opportunity for entrepreneurs in the waste-energy 
sector. In various countries there are laws for proper disposal of wastes.
 Hence this Bill.
         New Delhi;    T. SUMATHY (A) THAMIZHACHI THANGAPANDIAN   
     July 8,  2024.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 4 of the Bill provides for certain steps to be taken by the municipal authorities 
for collection of Segregated municipal Solid Waste, transportation of recyclable waste to 
waste-energy plants and non-recyclable waste to the notified landfills. 
 Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite funds 
to State Governments to carry out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, if enacted, would 
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of 
rupees one thousand crore would be involved as a recurring expenditure per annum. 
 A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be involved.
 
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the segregation and re-cycling of municipal solid waste, use of re-cyclable 
waste in waste-energy plants for generation of energy and transportation of  
non-recyclable waste into landfills and for matters connected  
therewith or incidental thereto. 
————
(Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian, M.P.)