As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

raat

ae?

Bill No. 81 of 2004.

THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND SCHEDULED TRIBES
(RESERVATION OF VACANCIES IN POSTS AND
SERVICES) BILL, 2004
By
‘Suri Rampas ATHAWALE, M.P.
A
BILL
10 provide for reservation of vacancies for the members of scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes in posts and services under the control of the Government of India or of a State
Government and in all statutory authorities and autonomous bodies receiving money
‘from the Government of India or of a State Government and for providing punishment

‘for violation of reservation policy and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

Shorttitle,
1. (/) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes — commence-

(Reservation of Vacancies in Posts and Services) Act, 2004, ment and

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification plication
5 in the official Gazette, appoint.

(3) It shall apply to every establishment as defined in clause (8) of section 2.


Definitions,

Reservation of
vacancies for
Scheduled
Castes and
‘Scheduled
Tribes,

2

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “appointing authority” in relation to a service or post in an establishment means
the authority empowered to make appointment to such service or post;
(6) “establishment” means—
(@ any office of the Government of India or of a State Government;

(if) any public sector undertaking or statutory authority constituted under
any Central Act or a State Act for the time being in force;

(iii) a corporation in which not less than fifty-one per cent of the paid up
share capital is held by the Central Government or a State Government;

(iv) auniversity and its affiliated colleges, including medical and engineering
colleges affiliated to such university established under a Central Act or a State
Act;

(7 primary and secondary schools and other educational institutions which
are owned or aided by the Central Government or by a State Government;

(vi) any industry, trade, business or occupation owned, controlled or managed
by the Central Government or a State Government;

(vii) any Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies
Act, 1956 or a Corporation established by or under a Central Act or a State Act; and

(viii) all autonomous bodies and other institutions receiving monies out
the Consolidated Fund of India or Consolidated Fund of a State or grants-in-aid
from the Central Government or a State Government;

(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(d) “recruitment year” means the financial year during which recruitment is actually
made;

(४) “reservation” means reservation of vacancies in posts and services for Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes;

(0 “Scheduled Castes” shall have the same meaning as is assigned to them in
clause (24) of article 366 of the Constitution of India; and

(g) “Scheduled Tribes” shall have the same meaning as is assigned to them in
clause (25) of article 366 of the Constitution of India.

3. (1) There shall be reservation of vacancies in posts and services for the members of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes at all levels of recruitment including appointments
by promotion.

(2) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the vacancies reserved for the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall not be filled up by candidates not belonging to the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.

(3) The reservation of vacancies under sub-section (/) shall be at such percentage of the
{otal number of vacancies as the Central Government may, after taking into consideration the
percentage of population of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes to the total
Population of the country, as per the figures of the latest census; from time to time determine:

Provided that in no case such reservation shall be less than fifteen per cent. of the total
number of vacancies for the members of the Scheduled Castes and seven and a half per cent. of
the total number of vacancies for the members of the Scheduled Tribes at any given point of
time.


o

35

(4) Vacancies reserved for the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes under sub-section (/) shall be filled in such manner as may be prescribed:

Provided that any post falling vacant in any establishment from general category shall
be offered to the Scheduled Caste or the Scheduled Tribe candidate, as the case may be, to
fill up the gap of percentage of vacancies reserved under sub-section (3).

4. (1) The recruitment to a vacancy not reserved for the members of the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or for any other category shall be open to all eligible candidates
including the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.

(2) Where an unreserved vacancy is filled up by a candidate belonging to a Scheduled
Caste ora Scheduled Tribe on the basis of merit, either by direct recruitment or by promotion,
such vacancy shall not be adjusted against the percentage of vacancies reserved for the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be.

5. (7) Where the number of vacancies reserved for the members of the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, in a recruitment year cannot be filled up
due to non-availability of candidates from the respective categories, such vacancies shall
continue to reserved for that category for such number of recruitment years, as may be
prescribed.

(2) If after the expiry of the number of recruitment years prescribed under sub-section (1),
the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may
be, are not available to fill up the vacancies respectively reserved for them, such vacancies
shall be inter-changed between the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes with such
relaxation and in such manner, as may be prescribed.

6. (7) It shall be the responsibility of the appointing authority to ensure that the
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder are not violated,

(2) The Central Government may give such directions or prescribe such guidelines to
the appointing authority, as it may deem fit for the purposes of sub-section (/).

7. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall be in addition to and
not in derogation of any other law, for the time being in force, in respect of recruitment/
promotion of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes to the extent
that such law is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder,

8, For appointment of candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes—

(a) the upper age limit fixed for appointment to a service or a post shall be relaxed
by such number of years, as may be prescribed, but such relaxation in age, in no case,
be less than five years;

(6) the examination fees fixed for recruitment to a service or a post through
competitive examination or otherwise shall be reduced to such exterlt, as may be
prescribed.

(©) the requirement of percentage of marks, educational and other qualifications
including experience required for direct recruitment/promotion may be relaxed at the
discretion of the appointing authority if at any stage of selection the appointing

Vacancies not
reserved to be
open to all
candidates
including
candidates
belonging to
‘Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes,

Exchange of
vacancies
between
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes.

Appointing
authority to be
responsible for
implementa-
tion of the
provisions of
the Act.

Application of
other laws not

Relaxations
and conces-
sions.


Protections of
action taken in
00d faith.

Liaison officer.

Submission of
Annual

Reports and
maintenance of
other records
and inspection
thereof,

Punishment,

Punishment for
making false
claims.

authority is of the opinion that sufficient number of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled
Tribe candidates with requisite qualifications are not available to fill up the vacancies
reserved for them; and

(@ the appointing authority shall pay to the candidates such travelling allowance,
as may be prescribed, for the purpose of attending competitive examination and/orinterview.

9. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any establishment
or any other person for anything which has been done or intended to be done in pursuance
of giving effect to the provision of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.

10. (7) Every establishment shall designate one or more officers of such rank, as may
be prescribed, to act as liaison officer in respect of matters provided in this Act and to ensure
that the provision of this Act or rules made thereunder are not violated.

(2) The Liaison Officer, shall, in particular, be responsible for—

(व) ensuring coordination and proper implementation of the provisions of this
Act and the rules made or any order, instruction or direction issued by the Central
Government, thereunder;

(6) ensuring timely submission of the annual report, referred to in section 11 to
the Central Government;

(०) conducting annual inspection of records in such manner, as may be prescribed;
and

(d) doing such other incidental work, as may be necessary, for the proper
implementation of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder.

वा, (7) Every appointing authority shall maintain such records, as may be prescribed,
and shall furnish every year, in such manner and at such time, as may be prescribed, to the
Central Government an annual report on the appointments and promotions made by it
during the previous recruitment year:

Provided that the appointing authority shall maintain separate records of all
appointments and promotions made during the previous recruitment year for each category
of posts and services and each of such records shall specifically contain the number and
percentage of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes who
were appointed or promoted to fill up the vacancies against those posts and services during
that recruitment year.

(2) The Central Government may authorise any officer to inspect any records or
documents which are maintained in relation to appointments and promotions made in any
establishment by the appointing authority.

(3) It shall be the duty of the appointing authority to make available such records or
documents to—

(a) the officer authorised under sub-section (2) and furnish to him such
information and render such assistance as may be necessary for him to carry out his
functions under this Act; and

(8) any employee working under him on receiving a written request.

12. Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be punished with
imprisonment which may extend to one year or with fine amounting to rupees ten thousand
or with both.

13. Whoever knowingly makes a false claim that he is a member of the Scheduled Caste
or, as the case may be, the Scheduled Tribe, and whoever knowingly issues a false certificate to
this effect, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall be not less than three
years or with fine which may extend to rupees ten thousand or with both.

ow


35

45

5

14. The Central Government may, by order give such directions, as it may deem fit,
from time to time, to give effect to the provisions of this Act and every establishment shall be
bound by all such directions issued by the Central Government,

15. (7) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, to be published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary for removing
the difficulty.

(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.

16. The Central Government shall, every year, lay before each House of Parliament,
a report giving full account of the working of the provisions of this Act during the preceding
recruitment year:

Provided that the report shall also include details of penal action taken against the
appointing authorities for violating the provisions of this Act.

17. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the percentage of vacancies to be reserved for the members of the Scheduled.
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes under sub-section (3) of ¢ction 3;

(6) the manner of filling vacancies reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes under sub-section (4) of section 3;

(0) the number of recruitment years for carrying forward reserved vacancies not
filling in a particular recruitment year and the manner of interchange of vacancies
between the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes under section 5;

(d) relaxation in upper age limit;

(०) reduction in quantum of fee to be charged for admission to competitive
examination/interview;

(0 the rate at which the travelling allowance, referred to in clause (d) of section
8, may be given to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes;

(g) rank of officer to be designated as liaison officer under section 10;

(A) the manner in which records may be maintained by the appointing authority
and the manner in which and the time at which an annual report on the appointments
and promotions made by the appointing authority during the previous year may be
furnished under sub-section (/) of section 11;

(0 the manner of conducting inspection of records under section 11;

(7) procedure that may be followed by the appointing authority for verification of
the caste status of the appointee and the procedure that may be followed by the higher
authority in case an appeal is filed by the appointee against the action of appointing
authority; and

(&) any other matter which may be prescribed or in respect of which rules are
required to be made by the Central Government.

(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions

Power of
Central

Government 10
give directions,

difficulties

Annual Report

Power to make
rules.


Act to have
over riding
effect,

6

aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
rule,

18. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Articles 38, 39 and 46 of the Constitution require the State to promote educational and
economic interests of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in order to render
social ju: to them and since employment including promotions in service is an aspect of
economic interest of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, it is the duty of the
State to give adequate protection to the economic interests of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes. Moreover, it has been our national policy to make special provisions for
the advancement of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in matters relating to
their employment or appointment, including promotions, torany office under the State, This
view was also upheld by the Supreme Court in Rangachari's case in 1962 and ever since many
judgements have been delivered by the Supreme Court on the above principle including the
judgements in the Thomas' case and the Railway Karamachari Sangh's case.

However, in the recent Mandal case the Supreme Court took the view that reservation
is confined only to initial recruitment and does not include promotion and, as such, reservation
in promotion is not covered under article 16(4) of the Constitution. The decision of the
Supreme Court is enforceable throughout the territory of India under article 142 of the
Constitution unless a law is made by the Parliament annulling the effect of the decision of the
Supreme Court.

In such circumstances it has, therefore, become necessary to amend article 16 and
Ninth Schedule to the Constitution making reservation in promotion as a part of reservation
scheme and such reservation of appointment and posts, which includes reservation in
promotion in services and posts under the State, may not be subject to any judicial
scrutiny.

However, it is all the more important that a separate Act should be made providing for
ensuring reservation in appointments and posts for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes, including reservation for them in promotions in all the departments of the Central
Government and State Governments, nationalised banks, public sector undertakings, statutory
authorities, autonomous bodies, companies or corporations, societies, local authorities,
universities, educational institutions affiliated to the universities or those recognised by the
Central Government or receiving aid from the Central Government, etc. Moreover, penal
provisions have to be provided to ensure effective implementation of the Act and to ensure
that the reservation is not less than fifteen per cent. of the total number of vacancies for
members of the Scheduled Castes and seven and half per cent. of the total number of
vacancies for members of the Scheduled Tribes at any given point of time.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New Dewi; RAMDAS ATHAWALE.
August 20, 2004


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 8(d) of the Bill provides that the appointing authority shall pay to the
‘Scheduled Caste and the Scheduled Tribe candidates such travelling allowance, as may be
prescribed, for the purpose of attending competitive examination and/or interview. Clause 11
provides that every appointing authority shall maintain such records, as may be prescribed,
and shall furnish every year, in such manner and such time, as may be prescribed, to the
Central Government an annual report on the appointments and promotions made by it during
the previous recruitment year. Clause 16 provides for the preparation and laying of an annual
report on the working of the Act before each House of Parliament. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve
an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore from the Consolidated
Fund of India.

No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 17 ofthe Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. The matters in Fespect of which rules may be made are matters of
Procedure and detail and since it is not possible to incorporate the same in the Bill, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character,


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for reservation of vacancies for the members of scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes in posts and services under the control of the Government of India or of a State
Government and in all statutory authorities and autonomous bodies receiving money
from the Government of India or of a State Government and for providing punishment
for violation of reservation policy and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.

(Shri Ramdas Athawale, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—2450LS—15-10-2004,