THE POPULA TION CONTROL BILL, 2021
By
DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for measures to control the population in the country
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Population Control Act, 2021.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of that
State, and in all other cases, the Central Government.
Bill No.  81 of  2021
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
Definitions.

(b) “Committee” means the District Population Stabilisation Committee constituted
under section 5;
(c) “Fund” means the National Population Stabilisation Fund constituted under
section 9; and
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
this Act shall apply to married couples, where the boy is not less than twenty-one years of
age and the girl is not less than eighteen years of age.
4. The Central Government shall ensure that contraceptive devices are available at
reasonable rates at all health centres in the country.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall constitute Committees to be known as District
Population Stabilisation Committees in one hundred districts having highest recorded
population growth rates.
(2) The Committee shall consist of,–
(a) the Chief  Medical Officer of the district;
(b) the District Collector; and
(c) one representative from each Panchayat Samiti in the district.
(3) The Committee shall take steps to encourage and motivate married couple to use
contraceptive methods to control the population growth rate in their concerned district in
such manner as may be prescribed.
6. (1) If either the husband or the wife voluntarily undergoes sterilization, after one
living child, the appropriate Government shall—
(a) give preference to the single child in admission to institutes of higher education;
(b) give preference to parents or single child in Government jobs; and
(c) provide such other benefits to the family as may be prescribed.
(2) Where either the husband or the wife voluntarily undergo sterilization, and such
couple is living below poverty line, the Central Government shall pay to such couple a lump
sum amount of sixty thousand rupees if the single child is a boy or one lakh rupees if the
single child is a girl.
7. Where a married couple procreates more than two living children, they shall be
ineligible to: —
(a) be chosen to fill a seat in the House of the People, the Council of States, State
Legislative Assemblies, State Legislative Councils, Panchayats and other similar elected
representative bodies;
(b) get promotion in Government service;
(c) apply to ‘Group A ’ posts under the appropriate Government; and
(d) receive any kind of Government subsidy, in case such married couple falls in the
above poverty line category as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
8. The appropriate Government shall introduce a compulsory subject as to population
control in all senior secondary schools in the State.
9. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constituted
a Fund to be known as the National Population Stabilisation Fund for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
Act to apply
to married
couples.
Availability of
contraceptive.
Constitution
of District
Population
Stabilisation
Committee.
Facilities to
single child.
Disqualification
for married
couples with
more than two
living
children.
Introduction
of compulsory
subject on
population
control in
secondary
schools.
15
5
10
20
25
30
35
40
Constitution
of National
Population
Stabilisation
Fund.
2

(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such a ratio as may be prescribed:
Provided that the ratio shall be such that the States with higher fertility rate shall
contribute in higher proportion compared to the State with lower fertility rate.
(3) The money collected under the Fund shall be redistributed in such manner as may
be prescribed, to those States and Union territories, which have been able to significantly
control their population growth rate.
10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
11.  After one year from the commencement of this Act, every employee of the Central
Government shall submit an undertaking in writing to the respective appointing authority
that he shall not procreate more than two living children:
Provided that if an employee who has more than two living children at the
commencement of the Act shall submit an undertaking that he shall not procreate any child.
12. (1) If any person who has any living child with disability, such person may seek
permission to have two living children.
(2) An employee of the Central Government who violates any provision of this Act
shall be liable for such disciplinary action as may be prescribed.
13.  The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
            14.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Undertaking
by the
Government
employees.
Miscellaneous
provisions.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
3

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is projected to become the world’s most populous country by the year 2024.
Currently, India adds fifteen million people to its population base every year which is by far
the largest in the world. The problematic aspect is that India accounts for about seventeen
per cent, of the world population but has only 2.2 per cent of the world’s land mass. The
increasing population has resulted in an increasing pressure on the country’s limited natural
resources. As a result, we have witnessed a range of socio-economic issues in the past few
decades such as large-scale environmental degradation, urban air pollution and the reduction
of the size of agricultural holdings. Additionally, the state of the infrastructure in the country
has failed to meet the demands of the growing population. Most parts of the country are
suffering due to absence of education and health facilities.
In the past three decades, India has made significant progress in decreasing population
growth. As per the World Bank, the fertility rate in the country has decreased from 5.19 in
1975 to nearly 2.4 in 2015. It is expected in the coming decade that the fertility rate in India will
soon reach the replacement level of 2.1. However, despite the decrease in fertility rate,
according to United Nations World Population Prospects report, India’s population will
continue to increase up till 2050. Given the array of socio-economic issues arising as a result
of over population, it is important that India as a country starts focusing on steps to decrease
population rather than just stabilising it. Moreover, the population growth is very uneven
across the country. While some States have successfully been able to stabilize their population,
northern States have witnessed and continue to witness high population growth. It is essential
to focus on specific districts with high population growth rates to tackle the problem effectively.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to introduce incentives for adopting small family norms and
provides for constitution of the National Population Stabilisation Fund to assist the States
and Union territories to take measures for population control. It is vital for us to realize that
population control and enforcement of two child norms for central government employees
are immediate measures, however steps such as providing contraceptive devices and
encouraging family planning can possibly play a stronger role in decreasing the population
growth rate in the long run.
Hence this Bill.
     NEW DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY
January 16, 2020.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for constitution of District Population Stabilization
Committees to encourage and motivate married couple to use of contraceptive methods for
population control. Clause 6 provides for payment of lump sum cash amount to married
couples living below poverty line as an incentive for population control. Clause 8 provides
for the introduction of a compulsory subject on population control in all schools. Clause 9
provides for the establishment of the National Population Stabilization Fund. Clause 10
provides that the Central Government shall provide funds for carrying out the purposes of
the Act. The expenditure in respect of Union territories shall be borne by the Central
Government. The expenditure in respect of States shall be borne by the State Government
concerned out of their respective Consolidated Funds. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would
involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore per annum from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for measures to control the population in the country and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
________
(Dr. Nishikant Dubey,  M.P .)