THE EDUCATIONAL INNOVATIONS COMMISSION
BILL, 2018
By
SHRI OM PRAKASH YADAV,  M.P.
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT, INCORPORATION AND COMPOSITION OF INDIA EDUCA TIONAL
INNOV ATIONS COMMISSION
3. Establishment  of Commission.
4. Headquarters of Commission.
5. Composition of Commission.
6. Qualifications of Executive Chairperson and of certain Members.
7. Search Committee.
8. Terms and conditions of office of Executive Chairperson and of members other than
ex-officio members.
9. Filling up of vacancy.
10. Disqualifications.
11. Removal and resignation of Executive Chairperson and member.
12. Meetings of Commission.
13. Officers and employees of Commission.
14. Acts and proceedings presumed to be valid.
CHAPTER III
O
BJECTS, FUNCTION AND POWERS OF COMMISSION
15. Objects of Commission.
16. Functions of  Commission.
17. Powers of Commission.
Bill No.  81  of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

CLAUSES
CHAPTER IV
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND ANNUAL REPORT OF COMMISSION
18. Fund of Commission.
19. Budget.
20. Account and audit.
21. Annual report.
CHAPTER V
E
DUCA TIONAL INNOV ATIONS COUNCILS, COMMITTEES AND FELLOWS
22. Constitution of Educational Innovations Councils.
23. Appointment of committees and delegation of functions and powers.
24. Fellows.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
25. Temporary associations of persons with Commission or a Council.
26. Authentication of orders and other instruments.
27. Power of Central Government to issue directions to Commission.
28. Power of Commission to issue directions to Councils.
29. Members, officers and employees of Commission to be public servants.
30. Protection of action taken under the Act.
31. Returns and information.
32. Power to make rules.
33. Power to make regulations.
34. Power to remove difficulties.
(ii)

Bill No.  81  of  2018
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE EDUCATIONAL INNOVATIONS COMMISSION BILL, 2018
By
SHRI OM PRAKASH YADAV,  M.P.
A
BILL
to promote conception, experimentation and implementation of educational innovations
in the country by establishing the Educational Innovations Commission and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Educational Innovations Commission Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Commission;
(ii) "Commission" means the Educational Innovations Commission established
under section 3;
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(iii) "Committee" means a Committee appointed under section 23;
(iv) "Council" means a Council constituted under section 22;
(v) "Executive Chairperson" means the Executive Chairperson of the Commission;
(vi) "Fellow" means a person duly appointed as a fellow of the Commission
under section 24;
(vii) "Fund" means the Fund of the Commission established under section 18;
(viii) "Member" means a Member of the Commission nominated or appointed
under sub-section (3) of section 5;
(ix) "prescribed"  means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(x) "regulations" means regulations made under section 33; and
(xi) "Vice-Chairperson" means the Vice-Chairperson of the Commission.
CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT, INCORPORA TION AND COMPOSITION OF INDIA EDUCATIONAL
INNOVATIONS COMMISSION
3. (1) For the purpose of promoting conception, experimentation and implementation
of educational innovations in the country, the Central Government shall, by notification in
the Official Gazette, establish a Commission by the name of the Educational Innovations
Commission with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification.
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession and common
seal and may sue or be sued in its corporate name and shall, subject to be provisions of this
Act, be competent to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and
to contract and do all things necessary for the purposes of this Act.
4. The headquarters of the Commission shall be at Delhi or at such other place, as the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
5. (1) The Commission shall consist of the Chairperson and twelve other members,
namely:—
(a) the Prime Minister of the India, ex-officio Chairperson;
(b) the Minister of Human Resource Development, ex-officio Vice-Chairperson;
(c) the Executive Chairperson nominated under sub-section (2);
(d) the Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Human Resource
Development, ex-officio member;
(e) the Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Finance, ex-officio
member;
(f) the Additional Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Human
Resource Development, Department of Higher Education, ex-officio member;
(g) the Vice-Chancellor of a University, by rotation in such manner as may be
prescribed from amongst the Vice-Chancellor of Central Universities, ex-officio member;
(h) the Chairman of the Central Board of Secondary Education, ex-officio member;
(i) the Director, National Council of Educational Research and Training,
ex-officio member;
(j) one Member for innovation in science, technology and vocational courses;
Establishment
of
Commission.
Headquarters
of
Commission.
Composition
of
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(k) one Member for innovations in programmes relating to humanities, art, craft
and other cultural courses and value-oriented education;
(l) one Member for innovations in pedagogical methods including those related
to curriculum, evaluation and teaching-learning aids;
(m) one Member for innovations in physical education including courses related
to gymnastics, aquatics, athletics, combatives, Indian and universal games, Y ogic
(physical and psychological) exercise, health, Scouts and Guides, National Cadet Corps
and National Service Scheme programmes.
(2) The Executive Chairperson referred to in sub-clause (c) of sub-section (1) shall be
nominated by the Chairperson from a panel of three persons recommended by the Search
Committee appointed under section 7:
Provided that the first Executive Chairperson shall be nominated for a period of two
years.
(3) Each Member referred to in clauses (j) to (m) of sub-section (1) shall be nominated
by the Central Government from a panel of three persons recommended by Search Committee
appointed under section 7:
Provided that the first appointment of the Members referred to in this sub-section,
shall be made by the Chairperson on the recommendation of the Executive Chairperson from
amongst such persons as he thinks fit.
6. (1) A person to be nominated as an Executive Chairperson under sub-section (2) of
section 5, shall,
(a) be a citizen of India;
(b) be a renowned educationist, devoted to educational reforms and innovations;
(c) have proven record of reforms and innovations;
(d) have actual experience in experimentation and implementation of reforms and
innovations;
(e) be well versed in the educational philosophy of—
(i) pioneering educationist of India, and
(ii) leading pioneers of educational innovations in the world; and
(f) have sound knowledge of Indian and universal culture.
(2) A person to be nominated as a Member under sub-section (3) of section 5, shall:—
(a) be a citizen of India;
(b) be a renowned educationist, devoted to educational reforms and innovations;
(c) have proven record of reforms and innovations in the relevant fields of
sciences, technology, vocational courses, humanities, arts, crafts and other cultural
courses and value oriented courses, pedagogical courses and methods, physical
education, yoga, health, Scouts and Guides, National Cadet Corps and National Service
Scheme programmes;
(d) have actual experience in experimentation and implementation of reforms and
innovations;
(e) be well versed in the educational philosophy of—
(i) pioneering educationist of India, and
(ii) leading pioneers of educational innovations in the world; and
(f) have sound knowledge of Indian and universal culture.
Qualifications
of Executive
Chairperson
and of
Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
7. (1) For the purpose of nomination of Executive Chairperson and Members under
sub-sections (2) and ( 3) of section 5, the Central Government shall appoint a Search
Committee consisting of three persons who, in the opinion of the Central Government, are
eminent educationists having wide knowledge of educational reforms and innovations and
are of high repute and integrity.
(2) The Central Government shall designate one of these persons as the Chairperson
of the Committee.
(3) The Search Committee shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed.
(4)  A member of the Search Committee shall not be entitled to receive any compensation
for his service but shall be reimbursed for the travelling and other expenses incurred by
him in discharge of his duties.
(5) The expenses referred to in sub-section (4) shall be paid out of the Fund.
8. (1) The term of office of Members, other than ex-officio members, who are appointed
on the recommendation of the Executive Chairperson, shall be two years from the date of
their nomination.
(2) The term of office of the Executive Chairperson and Members, other than ex-officio
members, who are nominated on the recommendation of Search Committee, shall be five
years from the date of their nomination.
(3) The term of office of an ex-officio member shall continue so long as he holds office
by virtue of which he is such a member.
(4) The terms and conditions of office of the Executive Chairperson and the Members
other than ex-officio members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The Executive Chairperson and the Members sub-section shall be whole time
salaried persons.
(6) The salaries and other emoluments of—
(i) the Executive Chairperson shall not be less than that of the Secretary to the
Government of India; and
(ii) the Members other than ex-officio members shall not be less than that of
the Additional Secretary to the Government of India.
9. (1) On occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Executive Chairperson due to
death, resignation or any other reason, the same shall be filled in by the Chairperson by
nominating a person in the manner provided in section 5.
(2) On occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Members due to death, resignation
or any other reasons, the same shall be filled in by the Central Government by appointing or,
as the case may be, nominating a person in the manner provided in section 5.
10. A person shall be disqualified for being appointed or nominated or being an
Executive Chairperson or a Member of the Commission if such person,—
(a) is, or any time, being adjudged insolvent;
(b) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by the competent court;
(c) is or has been convicted of any offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves normal turpitude; or
(d) has, either directly or indirectly, any financial or other interest which is likely
to affect prejudicially his functioning.
11. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of section 8, the
Chairperson or, as the case may be, the Central Government may, at any time, remove the
Executive Chairperson or any Member from office if, in its opinion, such Executive Chairperson
Search
Committee.
Terms and
conditions of
office of
Executive
Chairperson
and of
Members
other than ex-
officio
members.
Filling up of
vacancies.
Disqualifi-
cations.
Removal and
resignation of
Executive
Chairperson
and Member.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
or a Member,—
(a) is, or has become subject to any the disqualifications mentioned in
section 10;
(b) has been guilty of misconduct in discharge of his duties;
(c)  has become physically or mentally incapable of discharging duties as an
Executive Chairperson or member;
(d) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest; or
(e) has, without reasonable cause, refused or failed to perform his duties for a
period of not less than three months:
Provided that the Executive Chairperson or a Member shall not be removed from
his office unless an opportunity of being heard is given.
(2) The Executive Chairperson may, by writing under his hand addressed to the
Chairperson resign his office.
(3) Any Member, who is appointed, may, by writing under this hand addressed to the
Chairperson, resign his office.
(4) Any Member, who is nominated may, by writing under his hand addressed to the
Central Government, resign his office.
12. (1) The Commission shall meet at such time and at such place and shall, subject to
sub-sections (2) to, observe such rules of procedure with regard to transaction of its business
at the meetings as may be provided by regulations:
Provided that the Commission shall meet at least once in every month.
(2) If the Chairperson, for any reason, is unable to attend any meeting, the Vice-
Chairperson or in his absence, the Executive Chairperson shall preside over the meeting of
the Commission.
(3) All questions at a meeting of the Commission shall be decided by a majority of
votes of the members present and voting, and in case when there is an equality of votes, the
Chairperson or in his absence, the Vice-Chairperson or in his absence, the Executive
Chairperson shall have and exercise a second or casting  vote.
(4) The quorum at the meeting of the Commission shall not be less than three.
13. (1) The Commission, in order to enable it to perform its functions, may—
(a) with the approval of the Central Government.—
(i) appoint a Secretary, and
(ii) determine such number  and category of other officers and employees, and
(b) appoint other officers and employees so determind.
(2) The manner of recruitment of, the salary and allowances payable to, and other
conditions of service of the Secretary, officers and other employees, shall be such as may be
determined by the Commission by regulations.
14. (1) No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be questioned or be invalid on
the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the
Commission.
(2) No act done by any person acting in good faith as an Executive Chairpersons or a
member shall be deemed to be invalid merely on the ground that he was disqualified to be an
Executive Chairperson or a member or that there was any other defect in his appointment or
nomination.
Meetings of
Commission.
Officers and
employees of
Commission.
Acts and
proceedings
presumed to
be valid.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
CHAPTER III
OBJECTS, FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF COMMISSION
15. The objectives of the Commission shall be as follows,—
(a) to conceive, experiment upon and implement such innovative proposals in the field
of education and learning as would transform the objective, contents and methods of
education in the  light of the vision of great pioneers and educationists of freedom movement
in the country and of progressive educationists of the world and in light of the needs of the
contemporary world in its march towards a future that would be in harmony with the ideals of
liberty, equality and fraternity;
(b) to introduce and nurture innovations in the educational system so as to reflect
perennial spiritual knowledge of the country, robust intellectuality and creativity and the
ideals of man-making education, integral development of personality, synthesis of scientific
realism and artistic imagination, child-centered  education, value-oriented education and
skill-oriented education;
(c) to study and derive lessons from the ongoing experiments in education that are
taking place in the country as also elsewhere and to foster all the valuable innovative work
and promote the same for larger expansion and utilization;
(d) to develop a system of education that reflects the highest ideals of Indian culture
and imparts among students vibrant spirit of patriotism and deepest concern for the highest
welfare of humanity, world peace and world unity;
(e) to evolve, in particular, programmes and methods of studies that would instill,
among students and promote in various sectors of the educational system, devotion to the
duties enumerated in article 51A of the Constitution;
(f) to promote, sustain and foster all innovative programmes related to the entire human
life-style including earliest stages of pre-natal care and scaling up to the highest levels of
excellence and leadership contributing to the growth of the individual, covering thus the
entire gamut of the educational system appropriate to a knowledge society and the ideal of
unending education.
16. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Commission shall conceive, experiment
upon and implement such innovative proposals in the field of education and learning as
would transform the objectives, contents and methods of education so as to promote the
objectives of the Commission.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing function, the
Commission shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(i) to promote experimentation, designing and development of the contents of
learning which would inspire pupils to foster the over-arching aims of education to be
achieved by the Commission;
(ii) to promote, explore and invent new methods of pedagogy and evaluation so
as to make the learning process interesting, instructive, experimental and practical;
(iii) to experiment upon the contents and methods of learning at its own innovative
institutions or innovative institutions selected by it from those existing;
(iv) to promote and recommend, on the basis of results of its experiments carried
out on its own innovative institutions or innovative institutions selected by it as are
found by it to be appropriate to achieve the objectives of the Commission;
(v) to establish institutions (including institutions for education and training of
teachers) for experimentation and implementation of the educational innovations
promoted, explored and invented by it and for education and training of teachers for
that purpose;
Objects of
Commission.
Functions of
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(vi) to recognise as a recognised institution, any institution for experimentation
and implementation of the educational innovations recommended by it and for education
and training of teachers for that purpose;
(vii) to withdraw recognition of an institution for breach of conditions of
recognition after giving it an opportunity of being heard;
(viii) to establish teachers' education and training institutions of innovative
education and to provide for education and training of teachers for implementation of
educational innovations recommended by them;
(ix) to experiment, promote and develop the courses which facilitate students to
switch over from existing system of education to the innovative system of education
developed by it;
(x) to promote innovations in evaluations and to establish appropriate testing
service;
(xi) to support innovations in schools and Universities and educational
institutions of research, experimentation, training and extension services;
(xii) to evolve programmes of innovations in regard to the aims, methods and
contents of education;
(xiii) to endeavour to enrich the present system of education so as to make it
more responsive to the ideals of Indian Nationalism and Internationalism;
(xiv) to develop new system of education as supplementary or alternative to
existing system of education;
(xv) to perform such other functions as are necessary for, and conducive to, the
promotion of the objectives of the Commission.
17. (1) The Commission shall have the power to do all such things as  are necessary
for, and conducive to, the efficient performance of its functions under this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the
Commission shall have following powers, namely:—
(i) to carry out research in aims and contents of education and methods of
pedagogy and evaluation;
(ii) to institute fellowships and scholarships for carrying out research in aims
and contents of education and methods of pedagogy and evaluation;
(iii) to organize workshops, conferences, symposia and such other meetings to
elicit ideas for educational innovations;
(iv) to have access to all the materials, including books, manuscripts, lithographs,
inscriptions on walls of ancient buildings and such other places, which are available
with, or is in possession of, any authority established, by or under any law within the
gountry and is relevant to the aims and contents of education and methods of pedagogy
and evaluation;
(v) to recognize or establish and conduct innovative institutions of education
with special provision for innovative aims, contents and methods of teaching, learning
and evaluation;
(vi) to aim at excellence in the innovative system of education;
(vii) to grant to the students of that system, certificates equivalent to the
certificates granted by the established system of education at the appropriate level;
(viii) to determine standards of courses proposed or supported by it under its
functions related to innovations;
Powers of
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(ix) to allocate and disburse grants out of the fund—
 (a) for its innovations and for innovations in other institutions;
 (b) to institutions and courses (including institutions and courses for
teachers' education and training) recognized by it for the purpose of developing
them so as to promote experimentation and implementation of educational
innovations;
 (c) for grant of fellowships and scholarships to carry out research in areas
relevant to the aims and objects of the Commission;
(x) to appoint Secretary and other officers and employees;
(xi) to constitute council as mentioned in section 22;
(xii) to temporarily associate persons with the Commission;
(xiii) to appoint committees for performing its functions and exercising its powers;
(xiv) to consult and obtain concurrence of the various bodies in respect of recognition
and accreditation granted by the statutory boards and Universities for the purpose of arriving
at equivalence of the courses, programmes and evaluation system established by it with the
existing standards of education;
(xv) to conduct the processes of the consultation in the spirit of cooperation and
flexibility and to enhance and encourage innovations by transcending the barriers of rigidity
and obsolete methodologies;
(xvi) to promote the spirit of decentralisation, freedom of initiative and strictness in
regard to discipline and maintenance of high standards; and
(xvii) to collaborate, to negotiate and to arrive at agreements and arrangements with
the Government, as also with schools, Universities, centers and institutions (including
autonomous institutions).
CHAPTER IV
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND ANNUAL REPORT OF COMMISSION
18. (1) The Commission shall have its own fund and all receipts of the Commission
shall be carried thereto and all payments by the Commission shall be made therefrom.
(2) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, grant to the Commission such sums of money as it may consider necessary.
(3) The Commission may accept grants, subventions, donations and gifts from a local
authority or any individual or body, whether incorporated or not, for the purposes of this
Act.
(4) The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for the performance of its
functions under this Act and such sums shall be treated as an expenditure payable out of the
fund of the Commission.
(5) All moneys belonging to the fund of the Commission shall be kept in any
corresponding new Bank specified in column 2 of the First Schedule to the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, and in column 2 of the
First Schedule to the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings)
Act, 1980 and approved by the Central Government for the purpose or invested in securities
authorised by the Trusts Act, 1882, at the discretion of the Commission.
19. (1) The Commission shall, by such date in each year as may be prescribed submit
to the Central Government for approval a budget in the prescribed form for the next financial
year showing the estimated receipts and expenditure and the sums which would be required
from the Central Government during the financial year.
Fund of
Commission.
Budget.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5 of 1970.
40 of 1980.
2 of 1982.

9
(2) If any sum granted by the Central Government remains wholly or partly unspent
in any financial year, the unspent sum may be carried forward to the next financial year and
taken into account in determining the sum to be provided by the Central Government for
that year.
(3) No sum shall be expended by or on behalf of the Commission unless the expenditure
is covered by provision in the budget approved by the Central Government.
20. (1) The accounts of the Commission shall be prepared and maintained in such form
and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Commission shall cause to be prepared for each financial year an annual
statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed.
(3) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by an auditor duly qualified to act
as an auditor of companies under section 141 of the Companies Act, 2013 and appointed by
the Commission.
(4) Every auditor appointed to audit the accounts of the Commission under this Act
shall have a right to demand the production of books of accounts, connected vouchers and
other documents and papers, to inspect the offices of the Commission and to require such
information from the Commission as he may think necessary for the performance of his duty
as an auditor.
(5) The auditor shall send a copy of his report together with a copy of audited accounts
to the Commission which shall, as soon as may be after the receipt of the audit report,
forward the same to the Central Government.
(6) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after the receipt of audit report
under sub-section (5), cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
21. (1) The Commission shall, during each financial year, prepare, in such form and at
such time as may be prescribed, an annual report giving a true and full account of its
activities during the previous financial year and copies of such report shall be forwarded to
the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause every such report to be laid before both
Houses of Parliament within a period of six months from the date of its receipt under sub-
section (1).
CHAPTER V
E
DUCATIONAL INNOVATIONS COUNCILS, COMMITTEES AND FELLOWS
22. (1) There shall be constituted by the Commission, four Educational Innovations
Councils as follows, namely:—
(i) a Council for innovations in programmes relating to science, technology
and vocational courses;
(ii) a Council for innovations in programmes relating to languages, humanities,
value-oriented education, socially useful work, art, craft and other cultural courses
such as music, drama, dance;
(iii) a Council for innovations in pedagogical methods;
(iv) a Council for innovations in physical education.
(2) Each Council shall consist of the Executive Chairperson who shall be the
Chairperson of that Council.
(3) The member referred to in clauses (j), (k) and (m) of sub-section (1) of section 5
shall respectively be the member-secretary of the Councils referred to in clauses (i), (ii),
(iii) and (iv) of sub-section (1).
Accounts and
Audit.
Annual
report.
Constitution
of Educational
Innovations
Councils.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
18 of 2013.

10
(4) Each Council shall consist of four scholars to be nominated by the Commission as
members and shall be selected in such manner as may be prescribed by regulations from
amongst eminent educationalists in the subjects of innovations for which the Council is
constituted.
(5) The Council shall meet at such time and place and shall observe such rules of
procedure with regard to transaction of its business at the meetings as may be prescribed by
regulations.
(6) The Council shall perform such other functions and exercise such powers as may
be prescribed by regulations.
23. (1) The Commission may appoint one or more Committees consisting of not more
than five of its members or members of a Council or both, for performing such of the
functions or for exercising such of its powers as may be delegated by it.
(2) The Commission shall, while appointing a Committee under sub-section (1),
designate one member of the Committee as the Chairperson of the Committee.
(3) The Committee shall meet at such time and place, and shall observe such rules of
procedure with regard to transaction of its business at the meeting as may be determined by
it.
24. (1) For the purpose of carrying out research in educational innovations, there
shall be a scheme of fellowships which shall consist of not more than twenty-five fellows.
(2) Each fellow shall be selected by a committee appointed by the Commission for that
purpose, from amongst eminent educationists.
(3) Each fellow shall,—
(a) carry out research in such subject related to educational innovations as
assigned to him by the Commission;
(b) for the purpose of research in the subject assigned to him, organise,
consultation groups, seminars, workshops and conferences;
(c) during his term, write a thesis on the subject assigned to him; and
(d) make himself available to the Commission for any consultation necessary in
respect of the subject of research or thesis assigned to him.
(4) The term of each fellow shall be one year:
Provided that where the Commission is of opinion that in order to enable the fellow to
complete his research or thesis, it is necessary so to do, it may extend his term for a period not
more than one year.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to a fellow shall be such as may be determined
by the Commission by regulations.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
25. (1) The Commission may associate with itself in such manner and for such purpose,
as may be determined by the regulations, any person whose assistance or advice it may
require in performance of its functions.
(2) A person associated by the Commission with it under Sub-section (1) shall have
the right to speak in or otherwise to take part in the meetings of the Commission but shall not
have the right to vote thereat.
(3) The Commission may provide for payment of such allowances and expenses to a
person associated with it under sub-section clause (1)  as may be determined by regulations.
Appointment
of committees
and delegation
of functions
and powers.
Fellows.
Temporary
associations
of persons
with
Commission
or Council.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
45
40

11
(4) The Council may associate with itself in such manner and for such purpose, as may
be determined by the regulations, any person whose assistance or advice it may require in
performance of its functions.
(5) A person associated by the Council with it under sub-section ( 1) shall have the
right to speak in or otherwise to take part in the meetings of the Council but shall not have the
right to vote thereat.
(6) The Council may provide for payment of such allowances and expenses to a person
associated with it under sub-section (1) as may determined by bye-laws.
26. (1) All order and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the
signature of the Executive Chairperson or any other member authorised by the Commission
in this behalf and all other instruments issued by the Commission shall be authenticated by
the signature of the Secretary or any other officer of the Commission authorised by the
Commission in this behalf.
(2) All decisions of a Council shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairperson
of the Council.
(3) All decisions of a Committee shall be authenticated by the signature of the
Chairperson of the Committee or any other member of the Committee authorised by the
Chairperson in this behalf.
27. (1) In performance of its functions under this Act, the Commission shall be bound
by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to
it from time to time:
Provided that the Commission shall be given an opportunity to express its views
before any direction is given under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government, whether a question is one of policy or not,
shall be final.
28. (1) In performance of its functions under this Act, the Council shall be bound by
such directions on questions of policy as the Commission may give, in writing, to it from time
to time:
Provided that the Council shall be given an opportunity to express its views before
any direction is given under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Commission, whether a question is one of policy or not, shall be
final.
29. The Executive Chairperson, member, officer and employee of the Commission
shall, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or of any
rules or regulations made thereunder, be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
30. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Commission or
any member, officer or employee of the Commission for anything which is in good faith done
or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or any rules or regulations
made thereunder.
31. The Commission shall furnish to the Central Government such return or other
information with respect to its property or activities as the Central Government may, from
time to time, require.
32. (1)  The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Authentication
of orders and
other
instruments.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions to
Commission.
Power of
Commission
to issue
directions to
Councils.
Members,
officers and
employees of
Commission
to be public
servants.
Returns and
information.
Power to
make rules.
10
5
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
45 of 1860.

12
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
33. (1) The Commission  may, with the previous approval of the Central Government,
by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, and the rules made thereunder for enabling it to perform its functions under this
Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the matters expressly required or allowed by this Act
to be specified by regulations.
34. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appears to it to be necessary or expendient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two
years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
Power to
make
regulations.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The status of the educational system that is prevalent today needs to be innovated.
The stake-holders in the field of education have been voicing the need for such appropriate
changes that may cater to the multidimensional needs of students of modern India. Such
changes are possible only if the primacy of the child and youth is kept in centre of attention
of the society. Reformative ideas can be fruitful only if we keep in view the holistic nature
of education and indispensable interconnections between various stages of education as
also the aims, methods and contents relating to nationalism, internationalism, child-centered
education, value-oriented education and skill-oriented education.
Modern developments of communication technology need to be utilized so that the
process of transmission of knowledge are enriched. Development of different methodologies
need to be employed in order to ensure balanced growth of the Hand, Heart and Head, as
also of man-making education and integral education. This necessitates harmonious blending
of scientific, philosophical, aesthetic, ethical and spiritual pursuits. Educational researches
conducted by pioneering educationists of India and the would need to be pooled together
and fresh fields of research need to be developed, monitored and guided on a permanent
basis.
The spirit of India's perennial spiritual knowledge, robust intellectuality and abundant
creativity needs to percolate and inspire the renewal and updating of the curricula
throughout our system of education. At the same time, the   ideal of universe as a family
contained in the Indian Adage "Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam" has to guide the international
dimensions of our education system.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; OM  PRAKASH Y ADAV
February 9, 2018
13

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Educational Innovation
Commission. Clause 7 provides for appointment of a Search Committee. It also  provides for
reimbursement of travelling and other expenses to the members of  Search Committee.
Clause 8, and sub-clause (2) of clause 13 provide for salaries and allowances of the Executive
Chairperson, members other than ex-officio members, officers and employees of the
Commission, respectively.  Clause 18 of the Bill stipulates that the fund of the Commission
shall consist of all receipt of the Commission and stipulates that the Central Government
shall provide grants after due appropriation by law. Clause 24 provides for selection of
fellows.
Clause 25 provides for payment of allowance and expenses to the persons associated
with the Commission or a Council.  The Bill, therefore, if enacted  would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore is
likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
14

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
This Bill involves the delegation of legislative powers in the following respects:—
Clause 5.— Item (g) of sub-cluase (1) of this clause inter-alia empowers the Central
Government to prescribe by rules, the manner of appointment by rotation  of the Vice-
Chancellor of a University as a member of the Commission.
Clause 8.— Sub-clause (4) of this clause empowers the Central Government to prescribe
by rules, the terms and conditions of office of the Executive Chairperson and the members
other than ex-officio members of the Commission.
Clause 12.— Sub-clause (1) of this clause empowers the Commission to prescribe by
regulations, the time and the place of the meetings of the Commission and the rules of
procedure with regard to transaction of its business at the meetings.
Clause 13.— Sub-clause (2) of this clause empowers the Commission to determine by
regulations, the manner of recruitment, salary and allowances and other conditions of service
of the Secretary, officers and other employees of the Commission.
Clause 16.— Item(XV) sub-clause (2) of this clause empowers the Commission to
prescribe by regulations, such other functions to be performed by the Commission.
Clause 19.— Sub-clause (1) of this clause empowers the Central Government to
prescribe by rules, the date for submission of budget of the Commission to the Central
Government and the form in which the budget shall be prepared.
Clause 20.— (i) Sub-clause (1) of this clause empowers the Central Government to
prescribe by rules, the form and the manner in which the accounts of the Commission shall
be prepared and maintained;
(ii) Sub-clause (2) empowers the Central Government to prescribe by rules, the form in
which the Commission shall prepare an annual statement of accounts.
Clause 21.—Sub-clause (1) of this clause empowers the Central Government to
prescribe by rules, the form in which and the time at which the Commission shall prepare its
annual report and submit to the Central Government.
Clause 22.—(i) Sub-clause (4) of this clause empowers the Commission to prescribe
by regulations, the manner in which the four scholars for each council shall be selected
amongst eminent educationalists in the subject of innovations;
(ii) Sub-clause (5) empowers the Commission to prescribe by regulations, the time and
the place of meetings of the Council and the rules of procedure for transaction of business
at its meetings;
(iii) Sub-clause (6) empowers the Commission to prescribe by regulation, the other
functions to be performed and other powers to be exercised by the Council.
Clause 23.—(i) Sub-clause (1) of this clause empowers the Commission to delegate
its functions to be performed and its powers to be exercised by the Committee as may be
appointed by the Commission;
(ii) Sub-clause (2) empowers the Committee to determine the time and the place of
meeting of the Committee and the rules of procedure to be observed for transaction of
business at the meeting.
Clause 24.—Para (ii) of Sub-clause (4) of this clause empowers the Commission to
determine by regulations the salary and allowances payable to a fellow.
15

16
Clause 25.—(i) Sub-clause (1) of this clause empowers the Commission to determine
by regulations, the manner in which and the purpose for which the Commission may associate
with itself, any person whose assistance or advise is required;
(ii) Sub-clause (3) empowers the Commission to determine by regulations, the
allowances and expenses payable to a person associated with it;
(iii) Sub-clause (4) empowers the Commission to determine by regulations, the manner
in which and the purpose for which the Council may associate itself, any person whose
assistance or advice is required;
(iv) Sub-clause (6) empowers the Council to determine by bye-laws, the allowances
and expenses payable to a person associated with it.
Clause 27.—This clause empowers the Central Government to issue directions to the
Commission, on questions of policy as may be required in performance of its functions.
Clause 28.—This clause empowers the Commission to issue directions to the council,
on questions of policy as may be required in performance of its functions.
Clause 32 .—This clause empowers the Central Government to make rules, by
notification in the Official Gazette, generally for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
Clause 33.—This clause empowers the Commission to make regulations, by notification
in the Official Gazette, with the previous approval of the Central Government, not inconsistent
with the provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder and to provide for all or any
other matters expressly required or allowed by the Act to be prescribed by regulations.
Clause 35.—Sub-clause (1) of this clause empowers the Central Government to remove
difficulties, by order published in the Official Gazette, arising within two years from the date
of commencement of the Act.
As the  delegation of legislative powers will relate to matter of detail only and is of a
normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to promote conception, experimentation and implementation of educational innovations in
the country by establishing the Educational Innovations Commission and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Om Prakash Yadav, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4167LS(S3)—05-03-2018.