1
THE TIMELY FILLING OF VACANCIES IN CENTRAL PUBLIC
SECTOR ENTERPRISES BILL, 2016
By
SHRI BAIJAY ANT PANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
to require the Central Government and the Public Enterprises Selection Board to
make timely arrangements so that board-level vacancies in central
public sector enterprises are filled expeditiously.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Timely Filling of Vacancies in Central Public Sector
Enterprises Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 81 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Board-level vacancy" refers to those posts in public sector enterprises for
which the Public Enterprises Selection Board recommends a name for appointment,
namely, the posts of Chairperson, Managing Director or Chairperson-cum-Managing
Director (Level I) and Functional Director (Level II);
(b) "Public Enterprises Selection Board" refers to the board of the same name
constituted by the Government of India by a resolution dated August 30th 1974 and as
reviewed from time to time;
(c) "anticipated vacancy" refers to a vacancy for a post that arises due to the
superannuation of the personnel who is occupying that post; and
(d) "unanticipated vacancy" refers to a vacancy for a post that could not have
been reasonably foreseen, such as when the vacancy arises due to the death or
resignation of the personnel who is occupying that post.
3. For every anticipated vacancy, the Public Enterprises Selection Board shall—
(a) send the job description of the post sixteen months in advance to the
concerned ministry for comments;
(b) finalise the job description of the post within fifteen days of complying with
clause (a), irrespective of whether the concerned ministry has responded with comments
or not;
(c) cause advertisement of the vacancy to be issued one year in advance; and
(d) take all such steps as may be necessary to ensure that a final recommendation
as to who should be appointed to fill the vacancy is sent to the concerned ministry six
months in advance.
Explanation.—This provision shall operate without prejudice to any other function
or act of the Public Enterprises Selection Board that is not inconsistent with the requirements
under this Act, such as selecting a reserve recommendation for a post and keeping it in a
sealed cover, to be disclosed only if necessary.
4. For every anticipated vacancy, once the requirements of section 3 have been fulfilled
by the Public Enterprises Selection Board, the Central Government shall, two months in
advance of the vacancy, finalise and notify the details of the personnel who has been chosen
to fill the post once it becomes vacant.
Explanation.—This provision shall be satisfied if a designated mechanism of the
Central Government, such as the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet, finalises and
notifies the details of the personnel who has been chosen to fill the post once it becomes
vacant.
5. Once the requirements of section 4 have been fulfilled, the Central Government shall
also take steps to ensure that the personnel whose details have been notified shall, as early
as possible, work closely with the personnel currently occupying the post to understand the
characteristics of the role, including by providing that the former shall shadow the latter in
the performance of his functions, where possible.
6. For every unanticipated vacancy, the Public Enterprises Selection Board shall take
all such steps as may be necessary to ensure that a final recommendation as to who should
be appointed to fill the vacancy is sent to the concerned ministry within four months of the
arising of vacancy.
7. For every unanticipated vacancy, the Central Government shall, within one month of
receiving the recommendation from the Public Enterprises Selection Board under section 6,
finalise and notify the details of the personnel who has been chosen to fill the post.
Definitions.
Role of Public
Enterprises
Selection
Board for
anticipated
vacancies.
Role of
Central
Government
for
anticipated
vacancies.
Role of
Central
Government
in achieving
continuity.
Role of Public
Enterprises
Selection
Board for
unanticipated
vacancies.
Role of
Central
Government
for
unanticipated
vacancies.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
8. Within one month of the coming into force of this Act, the Central Government shall
notify an official, not below the rank of Additional Secretary, who shall be responsible for
ensuring that the Central Government fulfils its obligations under sections 4 and 7.
9. (1) Failure of the Central Government to fulfil its obligations under sections 4 and 7
shall make the official referred to in section 8 liable to—
(a) a fine of one thousand rupees for each day of delay in finalizing and notifying
a personnel as provided for under these sections;
(b) such other disciplinary action as the Central Government may deem fit:
Provided that no penalty shall be imposed if the official proves that the failure to
fulfil these obligations was due to circumstances beyond his or her control.
(2) Failure of the Public Enterprises Selection Board to fulfil its obligations
under sections 3 and 6 shall make its Chairperson liable to a fine of one thousand
rupees for each day of delay in making a recommendation as provided for under these
sections:
Provided that no penalty shall be imposed if the Chairperson proves that the
failure to fulfil these obligations was due to circumstances beyond his or her control.
10. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any officer,
employee, agency or any person exercising any power or performing any duty under this Act
for anything which is in good faith done on intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each house of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Designated
Officials.
Penalties.
Protection of
actions taken
in good faith.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Central public sector enterprises constitute a key element of our economy. Ensuring
proper management and corporate governance of these enterprises is crucial not just because
of our obligation to utilize taxpayer money in the most efficient way, but also because
ineffective leadership at these enterprises can have adverse ramifications for the economy
as a whole.
Currently, there exist guidelines from the Public Enterprises Selection Board and the
Appointments Committee of the Cabinet which prescribe practices that aim to ensure that no
board-level vacancy in public sector enterprises lies unfilled for a long period of time. However,
there is a need to provide statutory force to these practices, especially as we continue to see
large number of board-level posts remaining vacant today despite these guidelines. There is
also a need to fix responsibility, accompanied by penalties for breaching the same, so that
every incentive exists for the timely filling of vacancies that arise. Finally, there is a need to
recognise that the advance identification of personnel who will fill vacancies once they arise
is important not just for avoiding delays, but also for ensuring some continuity in the
management of the public sector enterprises.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BAIJAYANT PANDA
February 24, 2016.
4

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—29LS(S3)—16.04.2016.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to require the Central Government and the Public Enterprises Selection Board to
make timely arrangements so that board-level vacancies in central
public sector enterprises are filled expeditiously.
————
(Shri Baijayant Panda, M.P .)