As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
2 4 AUG 10 87 
Bill No. 82 of 1987 
THE LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITIES BILL, 1118'7 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
THE NA'r,IONAL LEGAL SERVICES AUTlWRlTY 
3. Constitution of the National Services Legal Authority. 
4. Functions of the Central Authority. 
5. Central Authority to work in coordination with other agencies. 
CHAPTER III 
STATE LEGAL SERVICE AUTHORITY 
6. Constitution of State Legal Services Authority. 
7. Functions of the State Authori'ty. 
8. State Authority to act in coordination with other agencies and 
. be subject to directions given' by Central Government, etc. 
9. Constitution of District Authorities. 
10. Functions of the District Authority. 
11. Distnct. Authority to act in coordination with other agencies 
and be subject to directions given by the Central Authority, 
etc. 
CHAPTER IV. 
ENTITLEMENT TO LEGAL SERVICES 
12. Criteria for giving legal service. 
13. Entitlement for legal service. 
i 

,. 
11 
CHAPTER V 
CLAUSES 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
14. Grants by thle iCentral Government. 
15. National Legal Aid Fund. 
16. State Legal Aid Fund. 
17. District Legal Aid Fund. 
18. Accounts and audit. 
CHAPI'ER VI 
LoK ADALA.TS 
19. Organisation of Lok Adalats. 
20. Cognizance of cases by Lok Adalats. 
21. Award of Lok Adalat. 
22. Powers of Lok Adalats. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
23. Members and staff of Authorities and Lok Adalata to be public 
servants. 
24. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
25. Act to have overriding effect. 
26. Power to remove difficulties. 
27. Power of the Central Government to mal,. rul • .-
28. Power of the State Government to make juju 
29. Power to make regulations. 
30. Laying of rules and regulations. 

Bill No. 82 of 1987 
THE LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITIES BILL, UJ87 
A 
BILL 
to constitu.te legal services ~utkorities to provide free and competent 
legal s'f') dces to the weaker section.<; of the society to enti:tLre that 
opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen by 
reason of economic or other disabilities, and to (}rgani.se Lok Adalats 
to secure that the operatilon of the legal system promotes justice on 
a basis Of equnl opportunity. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
'CHAPTE!t I 
l'uLIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Legal Services Authorities Act, 
1967. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into fo.rce on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification appoint; and different dates may be ap-
10 pointed for different prOVlSlOns of this Act and for different 
States, and any reference to commencement in any provision of this Act 
in relation to any State shall be construed as a reference to the comm~­
cement of that provision i~ that State, 
Short 
title, ex-
tent and 
commence-
ment. 

Defini-
tions. 
Consti-
tution of 
the Na· 
tional 
ll'gal 
Servicel!l 
Authority. 
2 
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Central Authority" means the National Legal Services 
Authority constituted under section 3; 
(b) "District Authority means a District Legal Services Autho-
rityconstituted under section 9; 5 
(c) "Legal service" includes the rendering of any service in the 
condu'ct . of any case or other legal proceeding before any court or 
other authority or tribunal and the giving of· advice on any legal 
matter; I 
(d) "Lok Adalat" means a Lok Adalat organised under Chapter 10 
VI; 
(e) "notification" means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette; 
<f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(g) "scheme'" means any scheme framed by the Central Autho- 15 
rity, a State Authority or a District Authority for the purpose of giv-
ing effect to any of the provisions of this Act; 
(h) "State Authority" means a State Legal Services Authority 
constituted under section 6; 
(i) "State Government" includes the administrator of a Union 20 
territory appointed by the President under article 239 of the Consti-
tution. 
(2) Any reference in this Act to any other enactment or any provision 
thereof shaU, in relation to an area in which such enactment or provision 
is not in force, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law or 25 
the relevant provision of the corresponding law, if any, in force in that 
area. 
CHAPTER II 
THE NATIONAL LEGAL SERVICES AumoRITY 
3. (1) The Central Government shan constitute a body called the 30 
National Legal Services Authority to exerciRe the powers and penorm the 
functions eonferred on a Central Authority under this Act. 
(2) The Central Authority shall consist of-
(a) the Chief Justice of India who shan be the Patron-in-Chiefl. 
(ib) a serving or retireld Judge of the Supreme Court. nominated 35 
by the President serving in consultation with the Chief Justice of 
India, "'00 shall he the Exeeutive Chairman; and 
(e) such other members, possessing such experielnce and qualifi-
cations as may be prescribed and nominated bY' the Central Govem-
ment. - .40 
(3) The Central Govemment shan appoint an officer of th~ Department 
of Legal Affairs of the Ministry of Law and Justice of the Govemment 
of India. not lower in rank than that of a Special Secretary to that Gov-
ernment as the Member-~retary of the Central Authority. 
(4) The terms and conditions of service of the members of the 45 
Central Authority shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Gov-
ernment. 

3 
(5) The Central Gove,rnment shall provide the Central Authority 
with such other officers and employees as it considers necessary for 
carrying out the functions of that Authority under this Act . 
. . (6) The administrative expenses of the Central Authority. including 
5 the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the officers and staff of 
the Central Authority shall be defrayed out of thel Consolidated Fund of 
India. 
(7) All orders and decisions of the Central Authority shall be 
authenticated by the Member-Secretary or any other officer of the 
10 Central Authority duly authorised by him in this behalf. 
(8) No act Or proceeding of the Central Authority shall be invalid 
merely on the ground of the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect 
in the constitution of, the Central Authority. 
4. The Central Authority shall, subject to the general directions of 
15 the Central Government, perform all or any of the, following functions, 
namely:-
(a) lay down policies and principles for making legal services 
available under the provisions of this Act; 
(b) frame the most effective· and economical schemes for the 
20 purpose of making legal services available under the provisions of 
this Act; 
(c) utilise the funds at its disposal and make appropriate allo-
cations of funds to the State Authorities and District Authorities; 
(d) take necessary steps by way of social justice litigation with 
25 regard to consumer protedion, environmental protection or any other 
matter of special concern to the weaker' sections of the society and 
. for this purpose, give training to socia~ workers in legal skills; 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
(e) organise legal aid camps, especially in rural areas, slums 
Or labour colonies with the dual purpose of educating the weaker 
sections of the society as to their rights as Wrell as ~ncouraging the 
settlement of disputes through Lok Adalats; 
(f> encourage the settlement of disputes by way of negotia-
tions, arbitration and conciliation; 
(g) undertake and promote research in the field of legal ser-
vices with special reference to the need for such services among 
the poor; 
(h) to do all things necessary for the purpose of ensuring com-
mitment to the fundameiltal duties of citizens under Part IVA of 
the Constitution; 
(i) monitor and evaluate implementation orthe legal aid prog-
rammes at periodic intervals and provide for independent evaluation 
of programmes and schemes implemented in whole or in part by 
funds provided under this Act: 
(j) recommend to the Central Government grants-in-aid for 
specific schemes to various voluntary social welfare institutions and 
the State and District Authorities, from out of the amounts placed at 
its disposal fO.r the implementation of the legal services schemes 
under the provisions of this Act; 
(k) develop, in consultation with the Bar Council of India, 
programmes for clinical legal educati-on and promote guidance and 
supervise the establishment and working of legal services clinics 
in univerSities, law college:; and other institutions; 
Func. 
tions of 
the 
Central 
Authority. 

Central 
Authority 
to work 
in coordi· 
nation 
with 
other 
agencies, 
. Constitu-
tion of 
State 
Legal 
Services 
Autho-
rity, 
4 
(0 take appropriate measures for spreading legal literacy and 
legal awareness amongst the people and, in particular, to educate 
weaker sections of the society about the rights, benefits and privileges 
guaranteed by social welfare legislations and othe.r enactments as 
well as administrative programmes and measures; 
(m) make special efforts to enlist the support of voluntary, 
social welfare institutions working at the grass-root level, particu-
larly among the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, women 
and rural and urban labour; and 
(n) coordinate and monitor the functioning of State and District 10 
Authorities and other voluntary social welfare institutions and 
other legal services organisations and give general directions for the 
proper implementation of the legal services programmes. 
5. In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the Central 
Authority shaU, wherever appropriate, act in coordination with other 15 
governmental and non-governmental agencies. universities and others 
engaged in the work of promoting the cause of legal se.rvices to the poor, 
CHAPTER III 
STATE LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITY 
6, (1) Every State Government shall constitute a Legal ServiCes 20 
Authority for the State to exercise the powers and perform the functions 
conferred on a State Authority unde.r this Act. 
(2) A State Authority shall consist of-
(a) the Chief Justice of the High Court, or any other serving 
or retired Juge of the High Court nominated by the Governor in 25 
conl'lultation with the Chief Justice, who shall be the Chairman of 
the State Authority; and 
(b) such other members, possessing such experience and quali-
fications as may be prescribed and nominated by the State Govern-
ment. 30 
(3) The State Government shall appoint the Law Secretary or the 
Judicial Secretary of the State as the Member-Secretary of the State 
Authority. 
(4) The terms and conditions of serviee of the members of the State 
Authority shall be such as may be p.rescribed by the State Government. 35 
(5) The State Government shall provide to the State Authoritv with 
such officers and empleyees as it considers necessary for carrying ~ut the 
functions of that Authority under this Act. I ' 
(6) The administrative expenses of the State Authority, including the 
salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the Member-Secretary and 40 
other officers and staff shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund 
of the State. 
(7) All orders and decisions of the State Authority shall be authenti· 
cated by the Member-Secretary or any other officer of the State Autho· 
rjt: dul;r authorised by him in this behalf, tS 

(8) No act or proceeding of a State Authority shall be invalid merely 
on the ground of the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the 
constitution of, the State Authority. 
7. (l) It shall be the duty of the State Authority to give effect to 
5 the policy and directions of the Central Authority. 
10 
IS 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the functions referred to 
in sub-section (1.), the State Authority shall perform all or any of the 
following functions, namely: - I • 
(a) give legal service to persons who satisfy the criteria laid 
down under this Act; 
(b) conduct Lok Adalats; 
(c) undertake preventive and strategic legal aid programmes; 
and 
(d) perfo.rm such other functions as the State Authority may, in 
consultation with the Central Government, fix by regulations. 
8. In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the State Authority 
shall, wherever appropriate, act in coordination with other governmental 
agencies, non-governmental voluntary social welfare institutions, :uni ... 
versities and others engaged in the work of promoting the cause of legal 
20 services to the poor and shall be guided by such directions as the Central 
Government, the State Government or the Central Authority may give 
to it in Wi'iting. 
9. (1) Every State Government shall constitute a Legal Services 
Authority for every District in the State to exercise the powers and 
25 perform the functions conferred on the District Authority under this Act. 
(2) A District Authority shall consist of-
(a) the District Judge, who shall be its Chairman; and 
(b) such other members possessing such qualifications and 
experience as may be prescribed and nominated by that Government. 
30 (3) The State Government shall also appoint one of the members of 
the District Authority as the Secretary of that Authority. 
(4) The terms and conditions of service of the members of the District 
Authority shall be such as may be presc.ribed by the State Government. 
(5) The State Government shall provide every District Authority 
35 with such staff as it considers necessary for carrying out the functions 
assigned to the District Authorities under this Act. 
(6) The administrative expenses· of every District Authority, includ-
ing the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the Secretary of 
every District Authority and the other staff shall be defrayed out of the 
40 Consolidated Fund of the State. 
(7) All o.rders and decisions of a District Authority shall be authenti-
cated by the Secretary or any other officer of the Authority duly 
authorised by him in this behalf. 
Func-
tions of 
the 
State 
Authority. 
State 
Autho-
rity to 
act in 
coordina-
tion 
with 
other 
agencies 
and be 
subject 
to direc-
tioos 
given by 
Central 
Govern_ 
ment, 
etc. 
Constitu-
tion of 
District 
Authori_ 
ties. 

Func-
tions of 
the Dist-
rict Au-
thority. 
District 
Autho-
rity to 
act in 
coordin-
ation 
with 
other 
agencies 
and be 
subject 
to direc-
tfons 
given 
by tbe 
Central 
Autho-
rity etc. 
Criteria 
for 
giving 
legal 
service. 
(8) No act or proceeding of a District Authority shall be invalid 
merely on the ground of the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect 
in the constitution of, the District Authority. 
1,1). (1) It shall be the duty of every District Authority to perform 5 
such of the functions of the State Authority in the District as may be 
delegated to it from time to time by t~ State Authority. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the functions referred to 
in sub-section (1), the District Authority may perform all or any of the 
following functions, name1y: _ 1 
(a) coordinate the activities of legal services in the District; 
(b) organise Lok Adalats within the District; and 
(c) perform such other functions as the State Authority may, 
in consultation with the State Government, fix by regUlations. 
10 
11. In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the District 
Authority shall, wherever appropriate, act in coordination with other 15 
governmental and non-governmental institutions, universities and others 
engaged in the work of promoting the cause of legal services to the poor 
and shall also be guided by such directions as the Central Authority or 
the State Authority may give to it in writing. 
CHAPTER IV 
ENTITLEMENT TO LEGAL SERVICES 
12. Every person who has to file or defend a case shall be entitled to 
legal service under this Act if that person is,-
(a) a member of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe; 
20 
('b) a victim of trafficking in human being" or begar as referred 25 
to in article 23 of the ConstUutioDl, 
(c) a woman or a child; 
(d) a mentally ill or otherwise disabled person; 
(~) a person under circumstances of undeserved want such as 
being a victim of a mass disash:ll', ethnic violence, caste a.trocity, flood, 30 
drought, earthquake or industrial disaster; or 
(f) an industrial workman; or 
(g) in custody, including custody in a protective home within the 
meaning of clause (g) of section 2 of the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) 
Act, 1956, or in a juvenile homeo witbin the meaning of claUSe! (j) of 35 104 of 1956 
section 2 of the .Juvenile Justice Act, 1986, or in a psychiatric hospital 53 of 1986. 
or psychiatric nursing home within the meaning of clause (g~ of sec-
tion 2 of the Mental Health Act, 19871. or 
(h) in receipt of income less than nine thousand rupees if the 
case is before a court other than the Supreme Court, and less than 40 
twelve thousand rupees or such other amount as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government if the case is before the Supreme Court. 
14 of 1987 

13. (1) Persons who satisfy all or any of the criteria specified in sec-
tion 12 shall be entitled to receive legal service provided that the con-
cemed Authority is satisfied that such person has a prima facie case to 
prosecute or to defend. 
s (2) A.n affidavit made by a person as to his income may be regarded 
10 
as sufficient for making him eligible to the entitlement of legal services 
under this Act unless the concerned Authority has reason to disbelieve 
such affidavit. ~ 
CHAPrER V 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
14. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Central Authority, by way 
of grants, such sums of mon~y as the Central Government may think fit 
for being utilised fOr the purposes Of this Act. i 
Entitle-
ment for 
legal 
&eMcee. 
Gran. 
by the 
Centr&l 
Govern-
men;' 
Na":--- 1 
15 15. (1) The Central Authority shall establish a fund t9 be called the -
National Legal Aid Fund and there shall be credited thereto,- ~r Fund. 
(a) all sums of money given as grants by the Central Govern-
ment under section 14; 
(b) any grants or donations that may be made to the Central 
20 Authority by any other person for the purposes of this Act; 
(c) any amount received by the Central Autho.rity under the 
orders of any court or from any other source. 
(2) The National Legal Aid Fund shall be applied for meeting,-
(a) the cost of legal services provided under this Act including 
2S grants made to State Authorities; 
(b) any other expenses which are required to be met by the 
Central Authority. 
16. (1) A State Authority shall establish a fund to be called the State State 
Legal Aid Fund and there shall be credited thereto,- ~~Fund. 
30 (a) all sums of money paid to it or any grants made by the 
Central Authority for the purposes of this Act; 
(b) any grants or donations that may be made to the State 
Authority by the State Govemment or by any person for the purposes 
of this Act; 
3S (c) any other amount received by the State Authority under the 
orders of any court or from any other source. 
(2) A State Legal Aid Fund shall be applied tor meettng,-
(a) the cost of functions referred to lin section 7; 
(b') any other expenses which are required to be met by the 
40 State AuthOrity. . 

Accounts 
and 
Audit. 
Oraaniaa-
tion .. 
Lok 
Malat •. 
8 
17. (1) Every District Authority shall establish a fund to be called 
the District Legal Aid Fund and there shall be credited thereto,-
(a) all sums of money paid or any grants made by the State 
Authority to the District Authority for the purposes of this Act; 
(b) any grants or donations that may be made to the District 5 
AuthOrity by any person for the pw-poses of this Act; 
(c) any other amount received by the District Authority under 
the orders of any court or from any other sou.rce. 
(2) A District Legal Aid Fund shall be applied for meeting,-
(a) the cost of functions referred to in section 10; 10 
(b) any other expenses which are l't!4.l.<u,t!d Lo be met by the 
District Authoflty. 
18. (1) The Central Authority, State Authority or the District Autho-
rity (hereinafter referred to in this section as 'the Autaority'), as the case 
may be, shall maintain proper accounts and otner rdevant records and 15 
prepare an annual statement of accounts UlC1UCl.lllg ihe incume and ex-
penditure account and the balance-sheet In sUCh Icrm and in such 
manne,r as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation 
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the AuthoritIes shall oe audited by the Cumpt- 20 
roller and Auditor-General of India at sUch inU:l'vals as may be speci-
fied by hIm and any expenditure incurred in cunnection wi.th such audit 
shall be payable by the Authority concerned to the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor.;(iene.ral 01 India and any other 25 
person appointed by him in connection with the auditing of the accounts 
of an Authority under this Act shall have the same nghts and privileges 
and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroiler and 
Auditor-General of India has in connection with the audIting of the 
Government accounts and, in particular, shall haVe the right to demand 30 
the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other docu-
ments and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Authorities under 
this Act. 
(4) The accounts of ~e Authorities, as certified by the Comptroller 
this behalf together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded 35 
this beAalf together with the audit report thereon, shall be fowarded 
annually by the Authorities to the Central Government Or the Slate 
Government, as the case may be. 
CHAPTER VI 
LoK AnALATS 
19. (1) The State or District Authorities may organise Lok Adalaui' 
at such intervals and places and for exercising such jurisdiction and for 
such areas, as they think fit. I 
40 
(2) Every Lok Adalat o.rganised for an area shall consist of such 
judicial officers of the area as may be specifieu by the State or District 4S 
Authority organising the Lok Adalat and such other members possessing 
such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed by the State 
Government. 

'1 of l$"O~ 
9 
(3) A Lok Adalat shall have jurisdiction to determine and arrive at 
a compromise Or settlement between the parties to a dispute in respect 
of any mDtter falling within the jurisdiction of any civil, criminal or 
revenue court or any tribunal constituted under any law for the time 
5 being in force in the area for which the Lok Adalat is organised. 
20. (1) Where. in any suit or other proceeding which is capable of 
being taken cognizan ::e of by a Lok Adalat under the provisions of this 
Act and pending before any court or tribunal, if the parties thereof 
make a joint npplic'ation to the court or tribunal indicating their inten-
lOtion to compromise the matter or to arrive at a settlement, the presiding 
otncer of the court or tribunal, as the case may be, may, instead of pro-
ceeding to effect a compromise between the parties or to arrive at a 
settlement himself, and notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, pass an order that the suit or 
15 proceeoin,g shall stand transferred to the Lok Adalat for arriving at a 
compromise Or settlement. 
(2) Notwlth~l andinf~ ~"Rvthing contained in any other law for the 
time b('inQ' in force the District Authority may, on receipt of an appli-
c~tion from anv per~on that any dispute or matter pending for a com-
20 promise or settlernent needs to be determined by a Lok AdaIat, refer 
such dispute or m:lttCl:' to the Lok Adalat for determination. 
(3) Where ?n\' f;l1H (1" proceeding is transferred to a Lok Adalat 
under suh-sedion (7) nr where a reference has been made to it under 
,mb-section (2). the Lok Analat shall proceed to dispose of the suIt, 
25 proceedinr-. dist1ute or matter and arrive at a compromise or settlement 
between the pnrties. I 
(4) Every Lok j\,bl'1j shgll. while determining anv proceeding before 
it under ihis t..ct. nd wifh lltmost exnerJition to arrive "at a compromise 
or settlement he t w(>f>'1 l],<, n'dies and shall be J!Uided by legal principles 
30 and the nrin('inlf's ('-I' ill~ti"e. equity anti fair play. 
(.1) 'Vhere nr, [lW"lr,l i" mane hv the Lok Adalat on the !V'ound that 
• no comprnmise I')r set+1rm"'1t rould be arrived at between the parties, it 
, shall he open t(' th". n"'riioC' to a s11it or proceeding transferred from 
,. a court or trihllt1f11 "n.'~pr C'llh-sF'ction (1) to continue such suit or pro-
3:; ceenin(f bei'ore snrh rnllrt "r trihunal or if it is a disoute or matter 
re'flrred to :1 Lnk"-'hl'1t 'mner sl1h-sPt'tion (~, any of the persons may 
institute fl nrrv'eer'linC' in 1n annrnpriate court. 
(6) '\Vh('rf". 1l"'!Hr' <:1111-~,e,..tinn (5), t.he l)~rtiPs to a suit OT' l)1'oreedin~ 
intend to C'ontinlll' j ',p Twn""'f'ninJ1 in such suit or OTOC'eedino: before the 
40 court. or trihlln:11 f'·"m "'hi"h it. was trAnsferred. s1lch court 01' tribunal 
sh;tlJ ororped to ne::Jl v'ith such suit or proceerling from the stAge at 
which H WAS before tbl' suit or proceeding was transferred to the- Lok 
Adalat. ' 
" ~ .; 21. (1) Eve"\' nwarr1 t)f the Lok Aoalat shall be deemed to be a decree 
45' of n civil ('ourt or or~p", of nnv other court or tribunal ancl where a 
'
comnromise I'1r sl"ttll"tylp"'t h:l~ been :::Irrivecl at. bv a Lok Adl!lat in a suit 
or pror'eeilinrr tr:msi'prrprl to .. it unrler Sllh-se('tion (1) of section 20. tbe 
court fee oai.iI in s11ch sPit or proCePdino: shall be refunded in the manner 
provided under the ("(lurt-fee A'ct, 1870. 
Cop.t,. 
zance 01 
cue. bJ 
Lok 
Adalatl. 
Award 
of Lok 
Adalat. 

Power. 
of Lok 
AdalatI. 
Members 
and staff 
of Autho-
rities and 
Lok Ada-
lata to 
be p"blic 
ecrvants. 
Protec-
tion of 
action 
taken in 
gOod 
faith. 
(2) Every award made by a Lok Adalat shall be final and binding 
on all the parties to the dispute, and no appeal shall lie to any court 
against the award. 
22. (1) The Lok Adalat shall, for the purposes of holding any deter-
mination under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in· a 5 
civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit 5 ot 1908. 
in respect of the following matters, narnely:-
(a) ·the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness 
and examining him on oath; 
(b) the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 
(d) the requisitioning of any public !,ecord or document or copy 
of such reco.rd or document from any court or office; and 
(e) sucll other matters .as may be prescribed. 
10 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers contained in 15 
Bub-section (1), every Lok Adalat shall have the requisite powers to 
specify its own procedure for the determination of any dispute coming 
before it. 
(3) All proceedings before a Lok Adalat shall be deemed to be judi-
cial prceedings within the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228 of the 20 
Indian Penal Code and every Lok Adalat shall be deemed to be a civil 45 of 1860 
court for the purpose of sectio)) 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973. 2 of 1974. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
23. The members of the Central Authority. the State Authorities and 
the District Authorities, and officers and other employees provided to 
such Authorities and the members of the Lok Adalats shall be deemed 
to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian 
25 
Penal Code. 30 
24. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the Central Government or State Government or against the Chainnan 
or any other member of any Central State or District Authoritv of any 
other person authorised by such Chainnan or other member -for an~­
thing which is in good faith done or intended to be done ~nder the 35 
provisions of this Act or 'lny -rule, regulation or order made thereunder. 

II 
%5. The provisions of this Act shall have effect nCltwithstanding any-
thing inconsistant therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law 
other than this Act. 
5 26. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official 
Gnette, make· such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the 
diffkulty: 
10 Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a 
period of two years from the date on which this Act receives the assent 
of the President. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be 
after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 
15 27. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules 
to carry out the provisions -of this Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all matters in respect of which rules are required 
to be made by the Central Government under this Act. 
20 28. A State Government may, by notification, make rules to provide 
for any matter, not being a matter specified in section 'J:T, in respect of 
which rules are required to be made by the State Government under 
thi~ Act. 
29. The Central Authority and every State Authoritv may, by noti-
25 fication, make regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act 
and the rules made thereunder, to provide for all matters in respect 
of which regulations are required to be made by the Central or state 
Authorities under this Act. I 
30. (1) Every rule made under this Act by the '""Central Government 
30 and every regulation made by the Central Authority thereunder shall 
be laid, 115 soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia-
ment. while it is in session, for a total petiod of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and 
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
35 or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or regulation, Or both Houses agree that the 
rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shRll there-
after have effect only in such modified form or be of no eff'ect. as the 
caRe may be. so, how("ver. that any such modification or annulment shall 
40 be without prejudire to the vaUdity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation. 
(2) Every rule made under this Act by a State Government and· 
every regulation made by a State Authority thereunde .. shall be laid, 
JLS soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature. 
Act to 
have 
overri· 
dina 
effect. 
Power to 
remove 
~. 
tieL : r 
Power 
of tho 
Central 
GoYern. 
ment to 
make 
rule •. 
Power 
of the 
State 
Govem· 
ment to 
mab 
rule., 
power 
to make 
re-gula-
tioDII. 
Laying 
of rules 
and regu-
lation. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Article 39A of the Constitution provides that the State shall secure 
that the operation of the legal system promotes justice, on a basis of 
equal opportunity, and shall, in particular, provide free legal aid, by 
suitable legislation or schemes or in any other way, to ensure that 
opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen by reason 
of economic or other disabilities. 
2. With the object of providing free legal aid, Government had, 
by a Resolution dated the 26th September, 1980 appointed the "Com-
mittee for Implementing Legal Aid Schemes" (CILAS) under the chair-
manship of Mr. Ju!?tice P. N. Bhagwati (as he then was) to monitor and 
implement legal aid programmes on a uniform basis in all the States 
and Union territories. CILAS evolved a model scheme for leg'll aid 
programme applicable throughout the country by which several legal 
aid and advice Boards have been set up in the States and Union terri-
tories. CILAS is funded wholly by grants from the Central Govern-
ment. The Government is accordingly concerned with the programme 
of legal aid lUI it is the implementation of a constitutional mandate. But 
on a review of the working of the CILAS, certain deficiencies have come 
to the fore. It is, therefore, felt that it will be desirable to constitute 
statutory legal service authorities at the national, State and District 
levt>ls so as to provide for the effective monitoring of legal aid pro-
C'Tammes. The Bill provides for the composition of such authoritieS 
and for the funding Of these authorities by means of grants from the 
Central Government and the State Governments. Power has also been 
given to the National Committee end the State Committees to super-
vise the effective implementation of legal aid schemes. 
3. For some time now, Lok Adalats are being constituted at va,rious 
pl'lces in the country for the disposal, in a summary way and through 
the process of arbitration and settlement between the parties, of a large 
number of cases expeditiously and with lesser costs. The institution of 
Lok Adalats is at present functioning as a voluntary and conCiliatory 
agency without any statutory backing for its decisions. It has proved 
to be very popular in providing for a speedier system of administration 
of ;ustice Tn view of its growing popularity, there has been a demand 
fOr providing a statutory backing' to this institution and the awards 
given by Lok Adalats. It is felt that such a statutory support would 
not only reduce' the burden of arrears of work in regular courts, but 
would also take jU$tice to the door-steps of the poor and the needy and 
make justice quicker and less expensive. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. The Notes on clauses 
explain the provisions of the Bill in detail. 
H. R. BHARDWAJ. 
The 24th JuJy. 1987. 

Notes on. clawe. 
CllL'lUe 2.-This clause defines various expressions used in the Bill 
Clause 2 (c) defines "legal service" to include the rendering of any 
servIce in the conduct of any case before any court, authority or tribunal 
and the giving of advice on any legal matter. 
Clau.se 3.-This clause provides that the Central Government shall 
constitute a National Legal Services Authority consisting of the Chief 
Justice of India as its Patron-in-Chief and a serving or retired Judge 
of the Supreme Court as its Executive Chairman. The Central Govern-
ment will also nominate other members possessing the presctibed quali-
fications and experience. ;~:i J" I 
Clause 4.-This clause deals with the functions of the National Legal 
Services Authority to be known as the Central Authority and provides, 
amung othe·r things, that the Central Authority will, subject to the 
directions of the Central Gove,rnment, lay down policies and principles 
for making available legal services effective and economical, allocate 
funds to various State Authorities and District Authorities, take steps 
to promote the cause of social justice in various areas, organise legal aid 
camps, promote legal aid research, encourage settlement of disputes by 
way of Lok Adalats, etc. 
Clause 5.-This clause provides that the Central Authority will act 
in coordination with governmental and non-governmental agencies, 
universities, etc. 
Cl:auses 6 and 7.-These clauses proviCie for the constitution and 
functions of Legal Services Authorities at the State level A State 
Authority will consist of the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court 
or any serving or retired. Judge of the High Court nominated by the Gover-
nor in consultation with the Chief Justice who will be its c.ha.4man with 
such other members nominated by the State Government possessing the 
prescribed qualifications and experience. Important functions of the 
State Authority are: providing legal ai!i to the persons who satisfy the 
criteria laid down under the Act, conducting of Lok Adalats, undertaking 
of preventive and strategic legal aid programmes, etc. 
Clause 8.-'fhis clause is analogous to clause 5 and provides that the 
State Authority will act in coordination with other governmental and 
non-governmental agencies, Universities, etc., and will be guided. by the 
directions of the Central or State Government or the Central Authority. 
C~ause$ 9 and lO.-These clauses provide for the constitution and 
functions of Legal Service Authorities at the District level. 
Clause 11.-This clause is similar to clauses 5 and 8. The District 
Authority will act in coordination with universities, etc., and will be 
guided by the directions of the Central and State Authority. 

14 , 
I ...... ,~.~.U 
Clauae, 12 and 13.-These clauses provide the criteria fOr entitlement 
to legal services to certain categories of persona such as the Scheduled 
Castes, the Scheduled: Tribes, victims of trafficking in human beings, 
forced labour. women. and children detained in women's homes and 
juvenile homes and persons undergoing psychiatric treatment in psy-
chiatric hospitals, etc. 
Clause, 14 to 17.-These clauses relate to the provisions of finance, 
accounts and audit. Under clause 15, a National Legal Aid l"und will be 
constituted by the Central Authority with the grams provided by the 
Central Government and with the grants or donations that may be made 
to that Authority by any person. A similar Fund will be established by 
every State Authority under clause 16 as also by the District Authority 
(clause 17). The State and District Legal Aid Funds will consist of 
grants paid by the Central Government, the State Government or by 
any other person for the purposes of the Act. 
ctause H~.-This clause provides for the proper maintenance of 
accounts by the three Legal Services Authorities and for the preparation 
by them of annual statements of accounts including income and expen-
diture accounts and balance-sheets in the prescribed manner and will 
be auclited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any 
person appointed by him. 
Clause I9.-This clause provides that Lok Adalats are to be organised 
at such intervals and places as the State or District Authority thinks fit. 
The Lok Acialat will have the same jurisdiction as a civil, criminal or 
revenue court or tribunal constituted under any law for the time being 
in force. The qualifications and experience of the members of the Lok 
Adalat other than judicial officers will be as prescribed by the Legal 
Service Authority the State Government. 
Clause 20.-If the parties to a suit or other proceeding makes a joint 
application to a court or tribunal indicating their intentlOn Ito com-
promise the matter of their dispute, the Presiding Officer of the court 
or tribunal. may pass an order transferring the suit to the Lok Adalat 
for arriving at a settlement. The Lok Adalat will proceed to dispose 
of the suit, proceeding, dispute, etc., on the basis of mutual settlement 
or compromise between the parties. 
Clause 21.-This clause provides that every award of the Lok Adalat 
will be deemed to be a decree of a civil court. 
ClauBe 22.-1'hi.v clause provides that the Lok Adalats will have the 
same powers as that of a civil court for purposes of holding an inquiry, 
for summoning the parties, for production of documents, for receiving 
evidence on affidavits, fo,r requisitioning public records, documents etc. 
Clame 23.-This clause provides for a deeming provision to the effect 
that the members, officers and employee/> of the various Legal Services 
Authorities and Lok Adalats will be public servants. 
Clame 24.-This clause provides that no suit or other legal proceeding 
will lie against the Central or State Gov~nment or against the Central, 
State or District Authority for acts done in good faith. 
Clause 25.-This is an overriding provision to the effect that the pro-
visions of the Act will, notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, prevaUs. 

15 
Clause 26.-This clause provides for power to the Central Government 
to remove difficulties in giving effect to the provisions of the Act for a 
limited period. 
Clause 27.-This clause provides for rule making powers of the Cen-
tral Government. 
Clause 28.-This clause provides for rule making powers of the State 
Government. 
Clause 29.-This clause authorises the Central Authority and every 
State Authority to make regulations under the Act. 
Clause 30.-This clause provides for the laying of rules before th& 
Houses of Parliament and State Legislature. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause ::I of the Bill enables the Central Gove.rnment to constitute 
b body to be called ~he National Legal Services Authority and it shall 
consist of the Chief Justice of India and some other members. An 
officer not low'er in rank than a Special Secretary to the Government 
of India will be appointed as Member-Secretary of the Central Autho-
rity. Clause 12 of the Bill provides for the persons who shall be entitled 
to legal service. Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Govern-
ment to pay to the Central Authority by way of grants such sums of 
money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for 
the purposes of this Act. 
2. The grants to be granted by the Government and all expenses 
incurred in connection with the administration of the National Legal 
Services Authority will be met from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
The National Legal Services Authority replaces the existing Committee 
for ¥nPlementing Le!,al Aid Schemes, The total 'budgehry require-
ment is estimated at Rs. 73.26 lakhs (Rs. 58 lakhs as grants-in-aid) for 
the year 19&7-88. This includes Rs. 43.25 lakhs as the sanctioned budget 
grant for the Committee for Implementing Legal Air Schemes for the 
year 1987-88. of which Rs. 30 lakhs was t9wards grant.in-aid for legal 
aid programmes. This also includes a sum of Rs. 2.01 lakhs for ~he 
appointment of one Special Secretary, by upgrading the post of the 
existing Secretary, CILAS, and for the three posts of the supporting 
staff to the Special Secretary and a one time, non-recurring expenditure 
on furniture, telephones and other facilities to the new functionary. 
16 

Ml!:MORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 27 of the Bill empow~s the Central Government to make 
lules to carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation. These 
rules woaid relate to matters which are required to be made by the 
CClltral Government under the provisions of :he Bill. Clause 28 of the 
13ill empowers a State Government to make rules to provide for any 
matter, ~lOt hemg a matter specified in section 27, in respect of which 
rules are required to be made Ly the State Government. Clause 29 of 
the Bill enables the National Legal Services Authority and every State 
Legal Services Authority to make regulations to provide for all matters 
in respect of which regula:ions are required to be made by. such autho-
rities under the proposed legislation. 
~. The matters in respect of which rules may be made by the 
Central Government and the State Governments and the regulations by 
the varicus legal services authorities mentioned abo~e would relate to 
matiers ot adminis~rative detail and procedure. The delegation of legis-
lative power is, therefore, of a nonnal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
10 constitute legal services authorities to provide free and competent 
legal services to the weaker sections of the soclety to ensure that 
opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen by 
reason of economic Or other disabilities. and to organise Lok Adalats 
to secure that the operation of the legal system promotes justice on 
a basis of equal opportunity. 
I • 
Skri H. R. BhG.rdwaj, Minilter of Stelte-in the Ministry of LotI) elM 
( JUBtice.) 
,0_,'1' .. ,'.';"- _ 