As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

24 JUL 1998

Bill No. 82 of 1998
—_——

THE PATENTS (AMENDMENT)BILL, 1998
By
Sunt CHANDRASHEKHAR Sanu, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Patents Act, 1970.

‘Wuereas India is a signatory to the agreement for the establishment of the World

Organisation including the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual

perty Rights for the purpose of reduction of distortions and impediments to international
and promotion of effective and adequate protection of intellectual property rights:

AND WHEREAS with a view to meeting India’s obligations under the said Agreement
ile safeguarding its interests, it has become necessary to amend the Patents Act, 1970 in
nformity with the obligations under the Agreement that signatory countries, in formulating
॥ amending their laws and regulations, may adopt measures consistent with the said
‘ment, necessary to protect public health and nutrition and to promote public interest
sectors of vital importance to their socio-economic and technological development;

Be itenacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Patents (Amendment) Act, 1998.

(2) Itshall be deemed to have come into force on the Ist day of January, 1995.

Short title and
commencement.


Amendment of
section 5

Insertion of new
Chapter IVA

Application for
grant of
exclusive rights

Grant of
exclusive rights,

be re-numbered as sub-section (/) thereof and after sub-section (1) as so re-number
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—

namely:—

2. Section 5 of the Patents Act, 1970 (hereinafter referred to a

the principal Ac) st
|.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a claim for pate

provisions of this Act, in the manner provided in Chapter IVA.".

3. After Chapter 1५ of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be ins

CHAPTER IVA

EXxciusive MARKETING RIGHTS

24A. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/) of section]
the Controller shall not, under that sub-section, refer an application in respect
claim for a patent covered under sub-section (2) of section 5 to an examiner for mi
areport till the 31st day of December, 2004 and shall, where an application for
exclusive right to sell or distribute the article or substance in India has been mad
the prescribed form and manner and on payment of prescribed fee, refer the appli
for patent. to an examiner for making a report to him as to whether the inventionis|
an invention within the meaning of this act in terms of section 3 or the inventionis
invention for which no patent can be granted in terms of section 4

(2) Where the Controller, on receipt of a report under sub-section (1) and भी
such other investigation as he may deem necessary, is satisfied that the inventi
not an invention within the meaning of this Act in terms of section 3 or the inyenti
isan invention for which no patent can be granted in terms of section 4, he shall
the application for exclusive right to sell or distribute the article or substance.

(3) Ina case where an application for exclusive right to sell or distribu
article or a substance is not rejected by the Controller on receipt of a report under sul
section (/) and after such other investigation, if any, made by him, he may proc
grant éxclusive right to sell or distribute the article or substance in the manner pro
in section 24 8.

been made and the applicant has,—

(a) where an invention has been made whether in India or in a cot
other than India and before filing such a claim, filed an application forthe:
invention claiming identical article or substance in a convention country 0

section 5; or

(b) where an invention has been made in India and before filing ४
claim, made a claim for patent on or after the Ist day of January, 1995 for met
or process of manufacture for that invention relating to identical artiel
substance and has been granted in India the patent therefor on or after the:
of making a claim for patent covered under sub-section (2) of section 5,

and has received the approval to sell or distribute the article or substance from th
authority specified in this behalf by the Central Government, then, he shall have th
exclusive right by himself, his agents or licensees to sell or distribute in Indi
article or the substance on and from the date of approval granted by the Controll


this behalf till a period of five years or till the date of grant of patent or the date of
rejection of application for the grant of patent, whichever is earlier.

(2) Where, the specifications of an invention relatable to an article ora substance
covered under sub-section (2) of section 5 have been recorded in a document or the
invention has been tried or used, or, the article or the substance has been sold, by a
person, before aclaim for a patent of that invention is made in India or in aconvention
country, then, the sale or distribution of the article or substance by such person, after
the claim referred to above is made, shall not be deemed to be an infringement of
exclusive right to sell or distribute under sub-section (1):

Provided that nothing in this sub-s«
makes or uses an article 01

ction shall apply in a case where a person
substance with a view to selling or distributing the same,
the details of invention relatable thereto were given by a person who was holding an
exclusive right to sell or distribute the article or substance.

24C. The provisions in relation to compulsory licences in Chapter XVI shall,
subject to the necessary modifications, apply in relation to an exclusive right to sell or
distribute under section 24B as they apply to, and in relation to, aright under a patent
to sell or distribute and for that purpose the following modifications shall be deemed
tohave been made to the provisions of that Chapter and all their grammatical variations
and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly, namely:—

(a) throughout Chapter XVIL—

(i) working of the invention shall be deemed to be selling or
distributing of the article or substance;

(ii) references to "patents" shail be deemed to be references to
"right to sell or distribute";

(iii) references to "patented article" shall be deemed to be references
to “an article for which exclusive right to sell or distribute has been
granted";

(b) three years from the date of sealing of a patent in section 84 shall be
deemed to be two years from the date of approval by the Controller for exclusive
right to sell or distribute under section 24B;

(c) the time which has elapsed since the sealing of a patent under section

५ 85 shall be deemed to be the time which has elapsed since the approval by the
Controller for exclusive right to sell or distribute under section 24B;

(d) clauses (वी) and (९) of section 90 shall be omitted.

24D. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of any other law for the time being
jin force where, at any time after an exclusive right to sell or distribute any article or
substance has been granted under sub-section (/) of section 24B, the Central
Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient in public interest to sell or
distribute the article or substance by a person other than person to whom exclusive
right has been granted under sub-section (/) of section 24B, it may, by itself or through
any person authorised in writing by it in this behalf, sell or distribute the article or
substance

(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette and at
| time after an exclusive right to sell or distribute an article or a substance has been
granted, direct, in the public interest and for reasons to be stated, that the said article

or substance shall be sold at a price determined by an authority specified by it in this
behalf.

248, All suits relating to infringement of a right under section 24B shall be dealt
with in the same manner as if they are suits concerning infringement of patents under
Chapter XVIII.

Compulsory
licences.

Special provision
for selling or
distribution.

Suits relating to
infringements.


Omission of
section 39.

Amendment of
section 40.

Amendment of
section 64.

Amendment of
section 118.

4. Section 39 of the principal Act shall be omitted.

5. In section 40 of the principal Act, the words and figures "or makes or causes

made an application for the grant of a patent outside India in contravention of section’
shall be omitted.

6. In section 64 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), in clause (४), the words:
figures “or made or caused to be made an application for the grant of a patent outside
in contravention of section 39" shall be omitted.

7. In section 118 of the principal Act, the words and figures “or makes or causes
made an application for the grant of a patent in contravention of section 39" shalll be omit



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

} has signed the agreement for the establishment of the World ‘Trade Organisation
) including the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
). The WTO Agreement has come into force on Ist January, 1995. With a view to

meeting India's obligations under the TRIPs Agreement, it has become necessary to amend
Patents Act, 1970.

8 certain conditions by such applicants, granting
I the expiry of a period of five years or until the
5 earlier. In India, the Patents Act, 1970 does not
field of agricultural chemicals and pharmaceuticals.

Exclusive Marketing Rights (EMR) til!
itent is granted or rejected, whichever i:
ide for grant of product patents in the

3. Government of India set up an Expert Group for making Suggestions for safeguarding
ur interests while fulfilling our obligations and for making specific suggestions for

ndments to the Patents Act, 1970, Government has considered the suggestions made
the Expert Group and while formulating measures to meet the obligations have provided
orthe following safeguards in public interests: —

(0) examination of applications to ensure, that Provisions of sections 3 and 4 of
the Patents Act, 1970 are not violated;

(ii) for inventions made in India, the applicant does not have to obtain a product
patent and marketing approval in some other country but has the option of obtaining
4 process patent for an identical invention in India;

(iit) deletion of section 39 of the Patents Act, 1970 which places restrictions on
filing of applications for patents outside India;

(iv) Government intervention in case the EMR is used against public interest or
in any other circumstance of extreme emergency; and

(v) expansion of compulsory licensing provisions in the case of KMR also.
4, The Bill seeks to achieve above objective.

New Deut; CHANDRASHEKHAR SAHU
June 11,1998.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

The Bill seeks to add a sub-section, namely, sub-section (2) in the existing section
insertion of a new Chapter, namely, Chapter IVA, deletion of section 39, amendments it
sections 40, 64 and 118 of the Patents Act, 1970. The insertion of a new sub-section i
section 5 and insertion of a new Chapter in the Patents Act, 1970 is expected to result it
receipt of applications for product patents in agricultural chemical and pharmaceuticals and
for grant of exclusive marketing rights and it may become necessary to strengthen the office
of the Controller General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks in terms of additional manpower
and modern office equipments, etc., to handle the increased work-load, which may involve
recurring and non-recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, itis,
not possible, at this stage, to readily estimate this amount of expenditure which may have to.
be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Sub-section (1) of section 24A proposed to be inserted by clause 3 of the Bill empowers
the Central Government to prescribe the form and manner of making applications and payment
of fees in connection with applications for exclusive marketing rights. These matters relate
to matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for
them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.



Residents not to
apply for patents
outside India
without prior
permission,

Liability for
contravention of
section 35 or
section 39.

Revocation of
patents.

Contravention
of secrecy
provisions
relating to
certain
inventions

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE PATENTS Act, 1970
(390F 1970)

* * * *

39. (1) No person resident in India shall, except under the authority of a written
granted by or on behalf of the Controller, make or cause to be made any application
India for the grant of a patent for an invention unless—

(०) an application for a patent for the same invention has been made in
less than six weeks before the application outside India; and

(७) either no directions have been given under sub-section (1) of sectit
relation to the application in India, or all such directions have been revoked,

(2) The Controller shall not grant written permission to any person to m
application outside India without the prior consent of the Central Government.

(3) This section shall not apply in relation to an invention for which an applical
protection has first been filed in a country outside India by a person resident outsi

40. Without prejudice to the provisions contained in Chapter XX, if in respec
application for a patent any person contravenes any direction as to secrecy gi
Controller under section 35 or makes or causes to be made an application for the gra
Patent outside India in contravention of section 39, the application for patent under!
shall be deemed to have been abandoned and the patent granted, if any, shall be liable
revoked under section 64.

* * * *

64. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in this Act, a patent, whether
before or after the commencement of this Act, may, on the petition of any person inte
or of the Central Government or ona counter-claim in a suit for infringement of the p
revoked by the High Court on any of the following grounds, that is to say—

नि + * .
(n) that the applicant contravened any direction for secrecy passed under

or made or caused to be made an application for the grant of a patent outside
contravention of section 39;

& * * *
CHAPTER XX
PENALTIES

118. If any person fails to comply with any direction given under section 35 or
or causes to be made an application for the grant of a patent in contravention of secti¢
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years,
fine, or with both.

* * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Patents Act, 1970.

,

(Shri Chandrashekhar Sahu, M.P.)~

MGIP(PLU)MRNO—1249LS—13-7-98.