BILUNo.ra.a of 12S1 @ 
THE BANARAS HINDU UNIVERSITY 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 

8m No. 8a of It5' 
TIIE BANARAS HINDU UNIVERSITY (AMENDMENT) 
BILL,1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
Jurther '0 ame71d the Banaras Hindu Univerrity Act, 1915. 
Bl it enactp.d by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
o[ India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Ban.a.ru Hindu University (Amend- Short 
ment) Act, 1958. title. 
of I9IS. 5 2. For section 9 oi the Banaras Hindu University Act, 1915 (here- Substitu-
inafter referred to as the principal Act), the following section shall tion of 
b b · ted I new sec-e su stltu ,name y:- tion for 
section 9. 
"9. The Court shall be an advisory body and its functions The Court 
shall be-
10 (a) to advise the Vis~tor in respect of any matter which 
may be referred to it for advice; 
(b) to advise any authority of the University in respect 
of any matter which may be referred to the Court by such 
authority; and 
(c) to perform such other duties and exercise such other 
powers as may be assigned to it by the Visitor or under this 
Act!'. 

Insertion 
of new section 
12A. 
Proceed-
ings of 
University authorities or bodies not to 
be invali-dated by 
vacanciies, 
etc. 
Amend-ment of 
section 
17. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
18. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
19. 
Amend-
ment of 
Statutes. 
2 
3. After section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"12A. No act or proceeding of any authority or body of the 
University shall be invalid by reason only of the existence of 
any vacancy nmong its members or any defect in the constitu- 5 
tion thereof.". 
4. In section 17 of the principal Act, for sub-sections (3), (4), (5), 
(6) and (7), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
-ly:-
,. (3) The Executive Council may, from time to time, nmke 10 
new or additional Statutes or may amend or repeal the Statutes; 
but every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amend-
ment or repeal of a Statute shall require the previous approval 
of the Visitor who may sanction, disallow or remit it for further 
consideration.". IS 
5. In section 18 of the principal Act, for sub-sections (5), (6), (7) 
and (8), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:-
"(5) Where the Executive Council has rejected the draft 
of an Ordinance proposed by the Academic Council, the Am-
demic Council may appeal to the Visitor who may pass such 20 
order thereon as he thinks fit. 
(6) All Ordinances made by the Executive Council shall 
b~ submitted, as soon as may be, to the Visitor who may dis-
allow any such Ordinance or remit it to the Executive Council 
for further consideration. 25 
(7) The Visitor may, by order, direct that the operation of 
any Ordinance shall be suspended until he has had an opportu-
nity of exercising his power of disallowance, and any order of 
suspension under this Bub-section shall cease to have effect on 
the expiration of one month from the date of such order.". 30 
6. In section 19 of the principal Act, the proviso to sub-section 
(3) shall be omitted. 
7. The Statutes of the University shall be amended as follows:-
(i) in clause (2) of Statute 4 and clauses (2) and (3) of 
Statute 6, the words "at the next annual meeting of the Court" 35 
shall be omitted; 
(ii) in Statute 12,-
(4) clause (2) shall be omitted; 
(b) in clause (5) (a), the words "and the Court" shall 
be omitted; 40 

3 
(iii) for Statute 14, the following Statute shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"14· (1) The Court shall consist of the following mem- TChe ourt. bers, namely:-
(a) the Chancellor, ex officio, 
(b) the members of the Executive Council, ex officio, 
(c) two representatives of the Department:;; and 
Colleges of the University, nominated by the Visitor, 
(d) two representatives of the teachers of the Uni-
versity other than Professors, nominated by the Visitor, 
(e) five representatives of the old students of the 
University, nominated by the Visitor, 
(f) three representatives of Parliament, two to be 
nominated by the Speaker of the House of the People 
from among the members thereof and one to be nomi-
nated by the Chairman of the Council of States from 
among the members thereof, 
(g) twenty-nine persons nominated by the Visitor 
from among persons who have special knowledge or 
practical experience in education or have rendered 
eminent services in the cause of education or are men 
of standing in public life. 
(2) Seventeen members of the Court shall form a 
quorum."; 
(iv) Statute 16 shall be omitted; 
(v) for Statute 17, the following Statute shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"17. (I) The Executive Council shall consist of the fol- The --
lowing members namely: _ Executive , COUncil 
(a) the Vice-Chancellor, ex officio, 
(b) seven persons nominated by the Visitor, 
(c) one person nO'l1in'dted by the Chief Rector. 
(2) Five members of the Executive Council shall form 
a quorum."; 
(vi) in Statute 18,-
(a) in clause (1), the words "subject to the control of 
the Court," and the words "not otherwise provided for" shall 
be omitted; 
(b) in clause (2), (viii), the words "otherwise than by 
an act of the Court" shall be omitted; 

Selec-
tion 
Com-
mittee. 
Screen-
ing 
Com-
mittee. 
(vii) in Statute 20, in item (i), the words "the Court or" 
shall be omitted; 
(viii) in Statute 28, for the words "The Court, the Execu-
tive Council", the words "The Executive Council" shall be '3ubs-
~~; , 
(ix) for Statute 29, the following Statute shall be 'Substi-
tuted, namely:-
"29. (1) There shall be a Selection Committee for 
making recommendations to the Executiw Council in res-
pect of appointments to the posts of Professor, Reader, 10 
Lecturer and Registrar, and the Selection Committee shall 
consist of such number of persons as the Executive Council 
may appoint. 
(2) The procedure to be followed by the Selection 
Committee in making recommendations shall be determined IS 
by the Executiw Council. 
(3) If the Executive Council is unable to accept. any 
recommendations made by the Committee, it shall record 
its reasons and submit the case to the Visitor for final 
orcrers." ; 
(x) for Statute 30, the following Statute shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"30. (1) There shall be a Screening Committee consisting 
of the following persons, namely:-
20 
(a) a person who is or has been a Judge of a High 2S 
Court, nomina~ by the Central Government, who 
shall be the Chairman of the Committee, 
(b) two persons nominated by the Central Govern-
ment from among persons who have had administrative 
or other experience in educational matters. 
(2) The meetings of the Committee shall be convened 
by such person as may be appointed for this purpose by the 
Chairman. 
30 
(3) It shall be the duty of the SCn!ening Committee to 
examine the cases of all. persons who on the 14th day of 3S 
June, 1958, were holding teaching, administrative or other 
posts in the University in r.espect of whom there is reason 

to believe that their continuance in office would be 
detrimental to the interests of the University, and to 
forward its n!commendations to the Executive Council; and 
the Executive Council shall take such action thereon as it 
5 may think fit: 
10 
15 
Provided that before taking any such action against the 
person concerned, the Executive Council shall give him a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard."; 
(xi) in Statute 35, for the words "the Annual Meeting", 
the word "meetings" shall be substituted; 
(xii) in Statute 36, for the words "an Annual Meeting", 
the words "a meeting" shall be substituted, and the words "or 
as a member of the Court or of the Executive Council" shall 
be omitted; 
(xiii) Statute 42 shall be omitted. 
8. (1) Every person holding office as a member of the Court or Tt.rans1·i-lona the Executive Council, as the case may be, immediately before the provi-
14th day of June, 1958, shall on and from the said date cease to hold sion. 
office as such: 
20 Provided that where any such person held immediately before 
such date any other office in the University, nothing contained in 
this sub-section shall be construed to affect his continuance in such 
other office. 
(2) Until the Court or the Executive Council is constituted in 
25 accordance with the provisions of clause (iii) or clause (v), as the 
case may be, of section 7, the Visitor may, by general or special 
order, direct any officer of the University to exercise the powers and 
discharge the duties conferred or imposed by or under the principal 
Act, as amended by this Act, on the Court or the Executive Council 
30 as the case may be. ' 
19S'. 9. (1) The Banaras Hindu University (Amendment) Ordinance, 
1958, is hereby repealed. 
... 
(2) NotWithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action Repeal 
taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done an~ 
35 or taken under this Act, as if this Act had commenced on the 14th savmg. 
day of June, 1958. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
On receipt of reports indicating a serious stare of a1fairs prevail-
ing at the Banaras Hindu University the President, as the Visitor 
of the University, appointed in July, 1957, a Committee to enquire 
into the state of affairs at the University. The Committ~ com-
menced its sittings on the 31st July, 1957, and submitted its report 
in April, 1958. 
The report revealed certain disquieting features and unhealthy 
influences which had been undermining the discipline of the 
University. According to the Committee, the personnel of the 
Executive Council itself had been, to a large extent, responsible 
for the prevailing state of affairs in the University. 
After giving very careful consideration to the obS'ervations and 
recommendations made by the Committee, the Government of India 
came to the conclusion that it was necessary to reconstiture the 
Executive Council and the Court so as to put an end to existing 
malpractices and improve the day-to-day working and administra-
tion of the University, and that these measures should be under-
taken immediately in view of the reopening of the University in 
July, 1958. As Parliament was not in session at that time, the Presi-
dent promulgated the Banaras Hindu UniverSity (Amendment) 
Ordinance, 1958, on the 14th June, 1958. 
The present Bill seeks in the main to replace the Ordinance by 
an Act of Parliament. 
The main features of the Bill are:-
(a) the reconstitution of the Court of the University as an 
advisory body, and reduction in the number of its membership; 
(b) the reconstitution of the Executive Council as a compact 
body; 
(c) the provision for a Selection Commitree for making 
recommendations to the Executive Council in respect of appoint-
ments to the posts of Professor, Reader, Lecturer and Registrar 
in the University; 
(d) the provision for a Screening Committee to examine 
the caS'es of all persons who, on the 14th June, 1958, were hold-
ing teaching, administrative or other posts in the University in 
respect of whom there is reason to believe that their continuance 
in office would be detrimental to the interests of the University. 
NEW DELHIj K. L. SHRIMALI. 
The 7th August, 1958. 
6 ;. ~. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM 'nIB BANARAS HINDU UNIVERSITY ACT, 1915 
(16 OF 1915) 
... • • 
9. (1) The Court shall be the supreme governing body of Un i- The Court. 
versity and shall have power to review the acts of the Executive 
Council, the Academic Council. and the Standing Committee of the 
Academic Council (save when these authorities have acted in 
accordance with powers conferred on them under this Act, the 
Statutes or the Ordinances), and shall exercise all the powers of 
the University not otherwise provided for by this Act or the 
Statutes. 
• oil ... • 
17. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may Statu •• 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the constitution, powers and duties of the Court, the 
Executive Council, the Academic Council, the Standing Com-
mittee of the Academic Council, the Finance Committee and 
such other bodies, as may be deemed necessary to constitute 
from time to time; 
(b) the election and continuance in office of the members 
of the said bodies, including the continuance in office of the 
first members, and the filling of vacancies of members, and all 
other matters relative to those bodies for. which it may be 
necessary or desirable to provide; 
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of 
the University; 
(d) the constitution of a pension or provident fund and the 
establislunent of an insurance scheme for the benefit of the 
officers, teachers and other employees of the University; 
(e) the confennent of honorary degrees; 
(f) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificaJes and 
other academic distinctions; 
(g) the establislunent and abolition of faculties, depart-
ments, halls, colleges and institutions; 
(h) the conditions under which colleges and other institu-
tions may be admitted to the privileges of the University and 
the withdrawal of such privileges; 
•• 1 L.S.-2 

8 
(i) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, 
exhibitions, medals and prizes; and 
(;) all other matters which by this Act are to be or may 
be provided by the Statutes. 
(Z) The first Statutes shall be those set out in Schedule I. 
(3) The Court may, from time to time, make new or additional 
Statutes or may amend or repeal the Statutes in the manner here-
inafter in this section provided. 
(4) The Executive Council may propose to the Court the draft 
of any Statute to be passed by the Court, and such draft shall be 
considered by the Court at its next meeting. 
(5) The Court may approve any such draft as is referred to in 
sub-section (4) and pass the Statute or reject it or return it to the 
Executive Council for reconsideration, either in whole or in part, 
together with any amendments which the Court may suggest: 
Provided ·that the Executive Council shall not propose the draft 
of any Statute or of any amendment of a Statute affecting the status, 
powers or constitution of any existing authority of the University 
until such authority has been given an opportunity of expressing an 
opinion upon the proposal, and any opinion so expressed shall be 
in writing and shall btl! considered by the Court. 
(6) Any member of the Court may propose to the Court the 
draft of. any Statute and the Court may either reject the proposal 
or refer such draft for consideration to the Executive Council, 
which may either reject the proposal or submit the draft to the 
Court in such form as the Executive Council may approve, and the 
provisions of this section shall apply in the case of any draft so 
submitted as they apply in the case of a draft proposed to the Court 
by the Executive Council. 
(7) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amend-
ment or repeal of a Statute shall require the previous approval of 
the Visitor who may sanction, disallow or remit it for further con-
sideration.; , 
Ordinances. 18. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the 
Ordinances may provide for all or any of. the follOWing matter!'!, 
namely: ---l 
(a) the admission of students to the University and their 
enrolment as such; , 
(b) the courses of study to he laid down for all degrees, 
diplomas and certificates of the University; 

9 
(c) the degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic 
distinctions to be awarded by the University, the qualifications 
for the same, and the means to be taken relating to the granting 
and obtaining the same; 
(d) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the Uni-
versity and for admission to the examinations, degrees and 
diplomas of the University; 
(e) the conditions of the award of fellowships, scholarships, 
studentships, exhibitions, medals and prizes; 
(f) the conduct of examinations, including the tenns of 
offtce and manner of appointment and the duties or examining 
bodies, examiners and moderators; 
(9) the maintenance of discipline among the students of the 
University;! 
(h) the conditions of residence of students at the Univer-
sity; 
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for 
the residence, discipline and teaching of women students, and 
the prescribing for them of special courses· of study; 
(j) the giving of religious instruction; 
(k) the emoluments and the terms and conditions of service 
of teachers of the University; 
(l) the management of colleges and other institutions 
founded or maintained under sub-section (1) of section 15; 
(m) the supervision and inspection of colleges and other in-
stitutions admitted to privileges of the University under sub-
section (2) of section 15; and 
(n) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes are 
to be or may be provided for by the Ordinances. 
(2) The Regulations of the University as in force immediately 
before the commencement of the Benares Hindu University (Amend-
55 of 1951. ment) , Act, 1951, shall be deemed to be the first Ordinances made 
under this section.! 
(3) The said Ordinances may be amended, repealed or added to 
at any time by the Executive Council : 
Provided that-
(i) no Ordinance shall be made affecting the conditions of 
residence or discipline of students, ex cept after consultation with 
the Academic Council; 

Ie 
(ii) no Ordinance shall be made-
(a) affecting the admission or enrolment of student. or 
prescribing examinations to be recognised as equivalent 
to the University examinations, or 
(b) affecting the conditions, mode of appointment or 
duties of ~xaminers or the conduct or standard of exami-
nations or any course of study, 
unless a draft of such Ordinance has been proposed by the Academic 
Council. 
(4) The Executive Council shall not have power to amend any 
draft proposed by the Academic Council under the provisions of 
sub~ection (3) but may reject the proposal or return the draft to 
the Academic Council for reconsideration, either in whole or in part, 
together with any amendments which the Executive Council may 
suggest. 
(5) Where the Executive Council has rejected the draft of an 
Ordinance proposed by the Academic Council, the Academic Coun-
cil may appeal to the Central Government and the Central Govern-
ment may, by order, direct that the proposed Ordinance shall be 
laid before the next meeting of the Court for its approval and that 
pending such approval it shall have effect from such date as may 
be specified in the order: 
Provided that if the Ordinance is not approved by the Court at 
such meeting, it shall cease to have effect. 
(6) All Ordinances made by the Executive Council shall be sub-
mitted, as soon as may be, to the Visitor and the Court, and shall 
be considered by the Court at its next meeting and the Court shall 
have power, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than 
two-thirds of the members voting, to cancel any Ordinance made by 
the Executive Council, and such Ordinance shall from the date of 
such resolution cease to have effect. 
(7) The Visitor may, by order, direct that the operation of any 
Ordinance shall be suspended until he has had an opportunity of 
exercising his power of disallowance, and any order of suspension 
under this sub-section shall cease to have effect on the expiration 
of one month from the date of such order or on the expiration of 
fifteen days from the date of consideration of the Ordinance by the 
Court, whichever period expires later. 
(8) The Visitor may, at any time after an Ordinance has been 
considered by the Court, signify to the Executive Council his dis-
all()wance of suah Ordinance, and from the date of receipt by the 
Executive Council of intimatioJ} ~f ~Hgq qis~llowance, such Ordinance 
shall cease to have effect. . . .. . 

II 
19. (1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations 
consistent with this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances-
(a) laying down the procedure to be observed at their 
meetings and the number of members required to form a quorum; 
(b) providing for all matters which by this Act, the Statu-
tes or the Ordinances are to be prescribed by Regulations; and 
(c) providing for all matters solely concerning such authori-
ties or committees appointed by them and not provided for by 
this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances. 
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations 
providing for the giving of notice to the members of such authority 
of the dates of meetings and of the business to be considered at 
meetings and for the keeping of a record of the proceedings of 
meetings. 
(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment, in such 
manner as it may specify, of any Regulation made under this section 
or the annulment of any such Regulation: 
Provided that any authority of the University which is dissatis-
fied with any such direction may appeal to the Court, whose decision 
in the matter shall be final. 
... ... ... ... 
THE STATUTES 
A~ adapted and modified by tJhe Central Government, in exercise 
of the powers conferred by Section 15 of the Banaras Hindu Univer-
sity (Amendment!) Act, 1951 (LV of 1951). (Vide page 434 of the 
Gazette of India, November 3, 1951, Part I-Section 1, notified by 
the Ministry of Education, New Delhi, No. F.27-15151 G.3 dated 
the 3rd November 1951). 
And further amended by Notification No. F. 27-15151 G.3 dated 
the 15th November, 1951, of the Ministry of Education, Govern-
ment of India, New Delhi. . 
-No. F. 27-IS/SI-G. 3.-ln exercise of the powers conferred by section IS of the Banaras 
Hindu University (Amendment) Act, 1951 (LV of 1951), the Central Government heret-y 
makes the following ada=-taf )08 and modifications in the statutes of the Banaras Hindu' 
University, namely :-
"In the Raid Statute5-
I. For the words mentioned j, column I below wherever they occur, the words ahown 
8iainst each in column 2 below shail be substituted :-
Benares Banaras 
Council Executive Council. 
Senate Academic Council 
Syndicate Stan.ding Committee of the Academic Council 
Regulation Ord!nance 
Regulations . Ordmances 
Rule . Rogulati~:m 
Rules . Regulations 

12 
And still further amended by Notification No. F.27-15151-G.3. 
dated the 28th January, 1952, of the Ministry of Education, Govern-
ment of India, New Delhi. (Vide Pages 131 to 136 of Gazette of 
India-Extraordinary Part I Section 1). 
And still further amended by the Government of India, Minis-
try of Education letter No. F-19FI53-H-1, da~ed 11th November, 
1953, letter No. F.19! 14! 55-A. 1 dated the 24th November 1955, letter 
No. F.1916154-A.1 daLed the 25thi26th November 1955, letter No. 
19-9155-A.1. dated the 29th March, 1956, letter No. F-19-18156-A.1 
dated 16th July, 1956; ltOter No. F-19-6153-A.1 dated 8th December 
1956; and letter No. F:19-20157-U.5 dated 27th Aug. 1957 and 18th 
Sept. 1957. 
Note-[The adaptations and modifications and amendments are 
within square brackets] 
Definitions 1. (1) In these Statutes-"The Act" means the [Banaras] Hindu 
Rectors 
University Act, 1915. 
(2) All words and expressions used herein and defined in the 
Act shall be deemed to have the meanings respectively attributed 
to them by the Act. 
2. [Omitted]. 
[3. The visitor may, on his own motion, or on the recommenda-
tion of the Court, appoint such persons, as he may think fit, to be 
the Rectors of the University.] 
Officers of [3A. The following persons in the service of the University are 
the lJniver- hereby declared to be offieers of the University, namely:-siry 
(1) Librarian 
(2) Provost 
(3) Chief Proctor. 
Appoint- [3B. 
menF of Li- Council brarlldl. Pro-
(1) The Librarian shall be appointed by the Executive 
and shall be a wholetime officer of the University. 
vost and 
Chief 
Proctor. (2) [Omitted]. 
(3) The Provost [and the Chief Proctor]. shall be app~inted by 
the Executive Council on the .recommendatIon of the Vlce-~han­
cellor and shall exercise such powers and perform such dutIes as 
may be assigned to them by the Vice-Chancellor. [Each of them] 
shall hold office for a term of two years. 

13 
• [Provided that, no person below the rank of a Professor in 
the University shall be appointed Provost]. 
4. [(1) The Chancellor shall be elected by the Court]. 
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a period of three years: 
. [Provided that, notwithstanding the expiry of the said 
period of three years, he shall continue to hold office until the 
election of his successor at the next annual meeting of the 
Court]. 
(3) In the case of a casual vacancy in the office of the Chancel-
lor, the Pro. Chancellor shall exercise the functions of the 
Chancellor until a new Chancellor is elected. 
r 
The 
Chancellor. 
5. (1) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the head Powers of 
of the University. Chancellor. 
(2) The Chancellor shall, if present, preside at the convocation 
of the University for conferring degrees, and at all [*] meetings 
of the Court. 
(3) [Omitted]. 
6. (1) [The Pro-Chancellor shall be elected by the Court]. The 
Pro-Chance-
(2) [The Pro-Chancellor shall hold office for a period of three lIor. 
years; 
Provided that, notwithstanding the expiry of the said period 
of three years, he shall continue to hold office until the election of 
his successor at the next annual meeting of the Court]. 
(3) [A casual vacancy in the office of the Pro-Chancellor shall 
be filled by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the Execu-
tive Council. The person so appointed shall hold office until the 
election of his successor at the next annual meeting of the Court]. 
7. [In the absence of the Chancellor, the Pro-Chancellor, if Powers of 
present, shall preside at a meeting of the Court]. ~~~Jjot 
8. (1) "The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor 
from among [a panel of at least three persons] * recommended by 
the Executive Council. 
Provided that, if the Visitor does not approve of anyone of the 
person so recommended, he may call for fresh recommendations 
from the Executive Council". 
"- . 
• Vide Govt. letter No. F. 19-9/S5-A-I. dated 29-3-56. 

Powen of 
the Vicc-
Chancellor. 
" I4 
(2) [The Vice-Chancel)or shall be a whole-time oftlcer of the 
University]. 
(3) [The Vice--ChanceDor shall hold office for a term of six 
years and shall not be eligible for reappointment: 
Provided that notwiths tanding the expiry of the said period of 
six years he shall continu.e in office until his successor is appointed 
and enters upon his o~;!. 
Provided fu.rther that the Visitor may direct that a Vice-
Chancellor, whose term of office has expired, shall continue in 
office for such period not exceeding one year, as may be specified 
in the direction]. . 
(4) [The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service 
of the Vice--Chancellor sl11111 be prescribed by the Ordinances]. 
(5) [In the case of a casual vacancy in the office of the Vice-
Chancellor, the Pro- Vice...chancellor shall, until the appointment of 
a new Vice-Chancellor, perform the functions of the Vice--
Chancellor: 
Provided that if the Pro- Vice-Chancellor is not able to act, the 
Registrar shall carry on the current duties of the Vice-Chancellor 
and take action under item (g) of clause (3) of Statute 13.] 
9. ,(1) [The Vice-ChaDICellor shall be the principal executive 
and academic officer of the University] and shall take rank in the 
University next to the Pro-Chancellor. He shall be the ex-officio 
Chairman of. the [Executive Council, the Academic Council, the 
Standing Committee of the Academic Council, and the Finance 
Committee,] and shall, in the absence of the Chancellor and the 
Pro-Chancellor preside at the Convocation to confer degrees. In 
the absence of the Chancellor and the Pro-Chancellor, he shall also 
preside at the meetings of the Court. [He shall be entitled to be 
present at and to addrE.6s any meeting of any authority or other 
body of the University but shall not be entitled to vote thereat 
unless he is a member of such authority or body.] 
(2) [It shall be the duty of the ViQe--Chancellor to see that the 
Act, the Statutes, the Ordinances, and the Regulations are faith-
fully observed. He shall have all powers necessary for the 
purpose.] 
(3) [The Vice-Chancellor shall have power to convene meetings 
of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic Council, and 
the Standini Committee of the Academic Council, and may do all 

is 
such acts as may be necessary to carry out or furthl!!r the provi. 
sions of the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances]. 
(4) [If, in the opinion of the Vice-Chancellor, any emergency 
has arisen which requires that immediate action should be ~en, 
the V ice-Chancellor shall take such action as he deems necessary, 
and shall report the same for confirmation at the next meeting to 
the authority which, in the ordinary course, would have dealt with 
the matter: 
Provided that if the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor is not 
approved by the authority concerned, he may refer the matter to 
the Visitor whose decision shall be final: 
Provided further that, where any such action taken by Vice-
Chancellor affects any persons in the service of the University, 
such person shall be entitled to prefer within thirty days from the 
date on which he receives notice of such action, an appeal to the 
Executive Council.] l····t 
(5) [The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise general control over 
the affairs of the University and shall give effect to the deciliiona 
of the authorities of the University.] 
10. (1) [The. Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Pre. Vlcc. 
Executive Council on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor ChaoceUor. 
and on such terms as may be laid down in the Ordinances. 
Provided that where the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor 
is not accepted by the Executive Council, the matter shall be refer-
red to the Visitor who may either appoint the person recommended 
by the Vice-Chancellor or asked the Vice-Chancellor to recommend 
another name to the Executive Council.] 
(2) [The term of office of the Pro- Vice-Chancellor shall ordi-
narily be coterminous with the term of office of the Vice-
Chancellor: 
Provided that, notwithstanding the expiry of the term of his 
office, the Pro- Vice-Chancellor shall continue in office until his 
successor is appointed and enters upon his office.] 
(3) [On the expiry of the term of his office, the Pro-Vice-
Chancellor shall be eligible for re-appointment.] 
11. (1) [The Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall assist Vice-Chancellor in p' """4ji . t 
all matters, administrative and academic, and, in the absence of the th~Pto-~cit. 
Vice-Chancellor, shall have and exercise all the functions and Chancellor. 
powers of the Vice-Chancellor.] 
681 L.S.--3 

The Tree-
IUter. 
Th.e~ 
.~nIl' •. 
16 
(2) [The Pro- Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at 
and to address any meeting of any authority or other body of the 
University but shall not be entitled to vote thereot unless he is a 
member of such authority or body.] 
[12. (1) The Treasurer shall be elected by the Court from among 
a panel of three persons nominated by the Executive Council, and 
the election shall be subject to the approval of the Visitor. He shall 
hold office for a term of five years.] 
(2) [He shall be an ex-otJicio member of the Court and the 
Executive Council.] 
(3) [A casual vacancy in the office of the Treasurer shall be 
filled by the Executive Council. The person appointed to fill such 
vacancy shall hold office until the election of his successor at the 
next annual meeting of the Court.] 
(4) The Treasurer shall exercise general supervISIOn over the 
funds of the University and shall advise it as regards its financial 
policy. 
(5) [The Treasurer shall-
(a) subject to the control of the Ex~utive Council, manage 
the property and investments of the University, and be respon-
sible for the preparation of the annual estimates and statements 
of accounts and for their presentation to the Executive Council 
'and the Court; 
(b) subject to the powers of the Executive Council; be res-
ponsible for seeing that all monies are expended on the purpose 
for whi,ch they are granted or allotted; 
(c) sign all contracts made on behalf of the Univers'ty; 
(d) COJlvene meetings of the Finance Committee, and 
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed by the 
Statutes and the Ordinances.] 
(6) [The receipt of the Treasurer or of the person or persons 
duly authorised in this behalf by the Executive Council for any 
money payable to the University shall be sufficient discharge for 
the same.) 
. [13. (1) The Registrar shall.be appointed by the Executive Coun-
. cil and shall be a whole-time officer of the University. The terms 
and conditions of service of the Registrar shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the Ordinances. 

17 
[(2) The Registrar shall be ex-officio Secretary of the Court, the 
Executive Cou,ncil, the Academic Council, the Standing Committee 
of the ~~cademic Council, the Finance Committee and the Faculties, 
but shaH not be deemed to be a member of any of these authorities.] 
(3) It shall be the duty of the Registrar:-
(a) to be the custodian of the records, Common Seal and 
such other property of the University as the [Executive Council] 
shall commit to his charge; 
(b) [to issue all notices convening meetings of the Court, 
the Executive Council, the Academic Council, the Standing 
Committee of the Academic Council, the Finance Committee, the 
Faculties, the Boards of Studies, the Boards of Examiners, and 
of any Committees appointed by the authorities of the Univer-
sity;] 
(c) [to keep the minutes of all meetings of the Court, the 
Executive Council, the Academic Council, the Standing Com-
mittee of the Academic Council, the Finance Committee, the 
Faculties, and any Committees .appointed by the authorities of 
the University;] 
(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the [Court, the 
Executive Council, the Academic Council and the Standing 
Committee of the Academic Council]; 
(e) to arrange for, and superintend the examinations of the 
University; 
(f) [to supply to the Visitor copies of the agendas of the 
meetings of the authorities of the University as soon as they are 
issued and the minutes of the meetings of the authorities ordi-
narily within a month of the holding of the meetings;] 
(g) [in an emergency, when neither the Vice-Chancellor 
nor the Pro-Vice-Chancellor is able to act, to call a meeting of 
the Executive Council forthwith and to take its directions for 
the carrying on of th~ work of the University;] and 
(h) to perform such other [duties] as may, from time to 
time, be [assigned to him by the Executive Council.] 
14. (1) [The Court shall consist of the following members,1'h:court. 
namely:-
Ex-Officio Members: 
(i) Chancellor, 
(ii) Pro-Chancellor or Pro-Chancellors (so long as there are 
more than one Pro-Chancellor) I 

(iii) Vice-Chancellor, 
(iv) Pro- Vice-Chancellor, 
(v) Treasurer, 
18 
(vi) All ex-Vice-Chancellors, 
(vi-A) Librarian, 
(vii) Provost, and 
(viii) Chief Proctor. 
Rep,-e,entatives of Departments and Colleges: 
(ix) Heads of Teaching Departments; 
(x) Principals of Colleges; and 
(xi) Professors who are not Heads of Teaching Departments. 
R~re,entatJive$ of University Teachers other than Professors: 
(xii) (a) Two Readers, by rotation according to seniority, 
who shall be members for a term of three years, 
(b) Three Lecturers, by rotation according to seniority, 
who shall be members for a term of three years. 
Representatives of Ex-Students: 
(xiii) Fifteen representatives to be elected by the Alumni 
(old Students) ASSOCiation, established in accordance with 
Statute 29 A. 
Donor,: 
(xiv) (a) Every person making to the University a donation 
of one lakh of rupees or upwards, or transferring property of the 
like value; 
(b) Representatives of persons m' :~ing to the Univ~r­
sty a donation of Rs. 25,000/- or upwards (excluding persons 
who have donated Rs. 1 lakh or more) elected from among 
themselves. There shall be one representative for every ten 
such persons, subjct to a maximum of two representatives: 
Provided that donors of Rs. 25,000/- or upwards who are 
registered as 8u<:h on the date of the commencement of the 
Banaras Hindu University (Amendment) Act, 1951 shall con-
tinue to be members of the Court for the unexpired portion of 
their present term; 
(c) RepresCltatives of persons making to the Universitv a 
donation of Rs. 10,000/- or upward~ (excluding those who have 
donated Rs. 25,000/- or more) elected from among themselves. 

19 
There shall be one representative for every twenty such persons. 
subject to a maximum of three representatives: 
Provided that donors of Rs. 10,000 or upwards who are regis-
tered as such on the date of the commencement of the Banaras 
Hindu University (Amendment) Act, 1951, shall continue to 
be members of the Court for the unexpired portion of their pre-
sent term; and 
(d) Representatives of persons making to the University 
a donation of Rs. 1,000/- or upwards (excluding persons who 
have donated Rs. 10,000/- or more) elected from among them-
selves. There shall be one representative for every fifty such 
donors subject to a maximum of ten representatives: 
Provided that all persons who before the date of the com-
mencement of the Banaras Hindu University (Amendment) 
Act, 1951, have made a donation of Rs. 500/- or upwards (exclud-
ing persons who have'donated Rs. 10,000/- or more) shall also 
be entitled to participate in the election of the representatives 
under this sub-item. 
gxpZanation 1: 
Every donor who makes to the University an annual grant of 
money, the payment of which is secured by mortgage of immov-
able property or in such other manner as the Executive Coun-
cil may apprOVe shall, subject to the provisions of Explanation 
3, have the same rights as to membership of and representation 
on the Court as if he had been a donor of such sum as representc; 
the capital value of such annual grant ascertained at the rate 
of interest of 3t per cent: 
Provided that, in the case of a body corporate, the Executive 
Council may dispense with any such security. 
Explanation 2: 
The amounts of donations specified in sub-items (a), (b), 
(c) and (d) may, for the purpose of qualifying the donors with-
in these provisions, be made up partly of money or of capitalised 
grants as provided in Explanation 1, or of property, or partly 
of any two or more of these. 
Explanation 3: 
When an annual grant is not fully paid up or fall; in arrf'ars 
the donor shall not be entitled to exercise any of th2 privileges 
conferred on him by any of the foregoing provisions of this 
Statute, unless and until the said arrears are paid up. 

Explanation 4: 
Where the donors of a sum are more persons than one. who 
constitute a joint Hindu family or a partnership firm, or a com-
pany or corporation, the Reg~trar shall call upon such donors 
to elect, within a time to be fixed by him, one of their memher~ 
to represent and act for them in voting at the election. If such 
donors fail to elect and notify the name and address of th ... per-
son so elected by them within the time specified in the notice. 
or within such further period of time as may be allowed by the 
Registrar, or are unable to agree as to the person who Sh(ll1ld 
represent them for the purpose of voting at the election, the 
Rgistrar shall lay the matter for orders before the Vice-Chlmcd· 
lor, who may nominate anyone of their number to repre~enr 
them at the election for the purpose of voting. The orders 01 
the Vice-Chancellor in this regard shall be final. The namf' of 
the person so elected or nominated to represent such donors 
shall be entered in the column of remarks against the names of 
such Q.onors, and for the purposes of serving all notices of elec-
tions, of making nominations of persons to be elected and for 
voting at the election, the person so noted as the representative 
of such donors. shall be deemed to be the person entitled to act 
as one of the electors. 
Explanation 5: 
Where the donor is a minor, or a person suffering trom a 
disability, or a ward of the Court, the legal guardian of such 
person shall be entitled to act for him at the election as a voter. 
so long as the minority or disability continues or so long as he 
is a ward of a Court. Where the same person is not the legal 
guardian of the person and property of a minor. the legal guar· 
dian of the property shall be deemed to be the legal guardian 
Persons representing Learned Professions, Industry and Commerce: 
(xv) Ten persons representing th~ learned professions, to be 
elected by the Court, of whom at least five shall be persons re-
siding outside the State of Uttar Pradesh; and 
(xvi) Five persons representing industry and commerce to be 
elected by the Court; 
Representatives of Parliament 
(xvii) Three representatives of Parliam~nt, two to be elected 
by the House of the People. in such manner as the Hon'ble the 
Speaker may direct and one to be elected by the Council of 
States, in such mannPT M the Chairman of the Council may 
direct: 

21 
Provided that until both Houses of Parliament are constitut· 
ed, the three members may be elected by the Provisional 
Parliament. 
Represematives of Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh and Jain Culture and 
Learning 
(xviii) (a) Five persons representing Hindu culture and learn-
ing to be elected by the Court. 
(b) Three persons, one each to represent the Buddhist, Sikh 
and Jain culture and Learning respectively, to be elected by the 
Court. 
Nominated Members 
(xix) (a) Not more than five persons to be nominated by the 
Visitor; 
(b) Not more than two persons to be nominated by the 
Chief Reactor; and 
(c) Not more than three persons to be nominated by the 
Chancellor: 
Provided that in making nominations under sub-items (a) 
and (c) due regard shall be had to the representation of the 
different areas of the country in view of the All-India character 
of the University: 
Provided further that no employee of the University shall 
be eligible to be a member under any of the items (xiii), (xiv). 
(xv), (xvi). (xvii), (xviii) or (xix).J 
[(2) If any body of the persons entitled to elect a member fails 
to do so within the time prescribed by the Court, the Court may 
appoint as member any person whom that body of persons could 
have elected as a member: 
Provided that, in the case of the first elections to the Court, the 
powers conferred upon the Court Ly this clause shall be exercisable 
by the Executive Council.] 
[(3) Save as otherwise expressly provided, a member of the 
Court shall hold office for a period of five years: 
[ (·n The method of election of members shall be as laid down in 
the Ordinances.] 
[(5) The proceedings of the first meeting of the Court, including 
any adjourned meeting thereof, after the commencement of the 
Banaras Hindu University (Amendment) Act, 1951, shall be valid 

2~ 
notwithstanding the existence of vacancies under items (xiii) to 
(xix), inclusive, of clause (1) of this Statute.] 
15. [Omitted] 
16. (1) [Omitted] 
(2) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held [on a date to 
be fixed by the Executive Council unless some other date has been 
fixed by the Court in respect of any year.] At such [annual] meeting, 
a report of the proceedings of the [Executive] Council and [a report 
of working] of the University {during the previous year] 
together with a statement of the receipts and expenditure 
and the balance-sheet as audited, [and the financial estimates] 
shall be presented by the [Executive] Council to such meeting, and 
any vacancies among the officers of the University or among the 
members of the Court or [Executive] Council which ought to be 
filled up by the Court shall be [so] filled up. 
(3) A copy of the statement of receipts and expenditure and of 
the balance-sheet [and the financial estimates] ri!ferred to in 
clause (2) shall be sent to every member of the Court at least seven 
days before the date of the annual meeting, and shall be open to the 
inspection of all members of the Court and Academic Council at 
the office of the University during the year following such annual 
meeting, at such reasonable hours and under such conditions as the 
Executive Council may determine. 
(4) [Twenty-five] members of the Court shall ferm a quorum. 
(5) [Special meetings of the Court may be convened by the Exe-
cutive Council or the Vice-Chancellor or, if there is no Vicc-
Chancellor, by the Pro. Vice-Chancellor, or, if there is no Pro-Vice-
Chancellor, by the Registrar: 
Provided that a special meeting of the Court shall also be called 
if one-third of the members of the Court or fifty members, which-
ever number is less, make a requisition in writing in this behalf.] 
The Execu- 17. [(1) The Executive Council shall consist or the following 
,Ive Coun:il. members, namely:-
(i) Vice-Chancellor; 
(ii) Pro-Vice-Chancellor; 
(iii) Treasurer; 
(iv) two Deans, by rotation according to seniority; 
(v) Principals of four Colleges, other than the Principlas of 
Women's Colleges, to be members in rotation for a term of three 
yean; 

23 
(vi) Principal of the Women's College. But if there are more 
than one such College, the Principal of one such College in rota-
tion according to seniority; 
(vii) Provost; 
(viii) Chief Proctor; 
• (ix) Five persons, none of whom shall be an employee of 
the University, elected by the Court from among its members, 
of whom at least three shall be persons residing outside the 
State of Uttar Pradesh; 
(x) Two persons nominated by the Visitor; 
(xi) One person nominated by the Chief Rector; and 
(xii) One person nominated by the Chancellor. 
(2) Members of the Executive Council referred to in items (v), 
(vi) and (ix) to (xii) shall hold office for a term of three years. 
(3) [Seven members of the 
quorum.] 
Executive Council shall form a 
18. (1) The [Executive] Council shall, subject to the control of Powers of 
the Court, have the management and administration of the whole ~rV~) ~:~ii 
revenue and property of the University and the conduct of all 
administrative affairs of the University not otherwise provided for. 
(2) subject to the provisions of the Act, the Statutes and [the 
Ordinances,] the [Executive] Council shall, in addition to all other 
powers vested in it, have the following powers namely: 
(i) To appoint, from time to time, [the Registrar], 
[Librarian,] Principals of Colleges [and institutions established 
by the University], and such Professors, Readers, Lecturers and 
other members of the teaching staff, as may be necessary, on 
the recommendation of [Selection Committees] constituted for 
the purpose: 
[Provided that no action shall be taken by the Executive 
Council in respect of the number, qualifications, and the emolu-
ments of teachers otherwise than after consideration of the 
recommendations of thf' Academic Council;] 
[(ii) to appoint members of the administrative staff or to 
delegate the power of appointment to such authority or authori-
ties, or officers as the Executive Council may, from time to 
time, by resolution, either generally or specially direct;] 
·Vide Govt. letter No. F. 19-9ISS-A-I. dated 29-3-56. 
681 L.S.-4 

24 
L (ii-A) to grant leave of absence to any officer of the Uni-
versity, other than the Chancellor, the Pro. Chancellor and the 
Vice-Chancellor, and to make the necessary arrangements tor 
the discharge of functions of such officer during his absence;] 
(iii) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, invest-
ments, property, busines, and all other administrative affairs of 
the University and, for that purpose, to appoint such agents as 
it may think fit. 
(iv) to invest any money belonging to the University, includ-
ing any unapplied income, in such stocks, funds, shares or securi-
ties, as it shall, from time to time, think fit, or in the purchase 
of immovable property in India, with the like power of varying 
such investment from time to time. 
(v) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or im-
movable property on behalf of the University. 
(vi) to provide the buildings, premises, furniture, apparatus, 
and other means needed for carrying on the work of the Uni-
versity. 
(vii) to enter into, vary, carry out, and cancel contracts on 
behalf of the University. 
(viii) To entertain, adjudicate upon, and, if thought fit, to 
redress any grievances of the officers of the University, the 
teaching staft', [*] and the University's servants, who may, for 
any reason, feel aggrieved, otherwise than by an act of the 
Court; 
[(Lx) to appoint Examiners and Moderators and, if neces-
sary, to remove them, and to fix their fees, emoluments and 
travellipg and other allowances ~fter considering the recom-
mendations of the Standing Committee of the Academic Council 
and the recommendations, if any, of the Academic Council.] 
(x) to maintain a register of donors to the University. 
(xi) to select a Common Seal for the University, and pro-
vide for the custody and use of the Seal; 
[(xii) to make such special arrangements as may be neces-
sary for the residence and discipline of women students, after 
consulting the Advisory Board of Women's Education, the es-
tablishment and functions .of which are to be prescribed by the 
Ordinances;] and 
·Vide Govt. letter No. F. 19-9/SS-A-I dated 29-3-56. 

lS 
(xiii) "to exercise such other powers and perform such othet 
duties as may be conferred or imposed on it by this Act, [x] 
the Statutes * [and the Ordinances.]" 
18A. [Omitted] 
19. (1) The [Academic Council] shall consist of the following Academic 
Councl. [members,] namely:-
[(i) Vice-Chancellor; 
(ii) Pro. Vice-Chancellor; 
(iii) Deans of Facilities; 
(iv) Heads of Teaching Departments; 
(v) Not more than four Professors who are not Heads of 
Teaching Departments, to be members in rotation; 
( vi) Principals of Colleges; 
(vii) Provost; 
(viii) Chief Proctor; 
(ix) Librarian; 
"(x) *"'Four teachers of the University elected frotn among 
themselves by the teachers other than those falling under [(iii) 
to (viii) ."] 
Provided that at least one such teacher shall be a Reader 
and one a Lecturer. 
(xi) Six persons, not being employees of the University, 
co-opted by the Academic Council for their special knowledge.] 
(2) [All members of the Academic Council, other than e.T-officio 
members, shall hold office for a term of three years: 
Provided that a member elected or co-opted in his capacity 
as a member of a particular body or as the holder of a particular 
post shall hold office so long only as he continues to be a member 
of that body or the holder of that post.] 
(3) [Twenty members of the Academic Council shall form a 
quorum.] 
20. [III] Subject to the Act, the Statutes and [the Ordinances, the Powers of 
Academic Council] shall, in addition to all other powers vested in jt~ th~ Acade-. 
have the following powers, namely:- mlc CouncIl. 
(i) To report on any matter referred to or delegated to [it] 
by the Court or the [Executive] Council. 
·Vide GOYr. letter No. F. 19-9155 A-I dated Z9-3-56. 

26 
[(ii) to make recommendations to the Executive Council 
with regard to:-
(a) the creation of teaching posts in the University 
and the Colleges and the abolition thereof; and 
(b) the classification of the posts referred to in sub-item 
(a) and the emoluments and the duties attaching thereto;] 
(iii) to formulate and modify or revise schemes for the 
organisation of Faculties, and to assign to such Faculties their 
respective subjects and also to report to the [Executive] 
Council as to the expediency of the abolition or sub-division 
of any Faculty or the combination of one Faculty with 
another; 
(iv) To promote research within the University and to 
require, from time to time, reports on such researcA; 
[(v) to consider proposals submitted by the Faculties;] 
[(vi) to recognise diplomas and degrees of other Universities 
and institutions and to determine their equivalence with the 
diplomas and degrees of the Banaras Hindu University;] 
[(vii) to make special arrangements, if any, for the teaching 
of women students and for prescribing for them special 
. courses of study, after consulting the Advisory Board of 
Women's Education;] 
[(viii) to make such arrangements for the instruction and 
examination of persons, not being members of the University, 
as may be necessary; and] 
[(ix) to perform in relation to academic matters, all such 
duties and to do all such acts as may be necessary for the 
proper carrying out of the provisions of the Act, the Statutes, 
and the Ordinances.] 
Honorary *20. (A) [(I) The Degree of Doctor of Letters (D.Litt.) 
Deerees. HonO'Tis Causa shall be conferred upon such persons as have 
contributed substantially to the advancement of Literature, 
Philosophy, Art, Music, Painting or other subjects assigned to the 
Faculty of Arts, or for conspi~uous service rendered by them to 
the cause of education.l 
Vide Govt.letter No. F. 19-14/55 A. I dated 24-II-55. 

}7 
[(') The Degree of Doctor of Science (D.Sc.) Honoris Causa 
shall be conferred upon such persons as have contributed substan-
tially to the advancement of any branch of Science or Technology 
or to planning, organising or developing scientific and technologi-
cal institutions in the country.] 
[(3) The Degree of Doctor of Laws (LL.D.) Honoris Causa 
shall be conferred upon such persons as are distinguished lawyers, 
judges, or jurists, statesman or have made noteworthy contribution 
to public good.] 
[(4) Honorary Degree shall be conferred at the Annual Convo-
cation of the University or at a Special Convocation convened for the 
purpose.] 
[(5) The Vice-Chancellor shall recommend a name/names for 
the award of Honorary Degree/Degrees to the Standing Committee 
of the Academic Council. The Standing Committee shall forward 
such a name/names as are approved by it to the Academic 
Council. No proposal for the award of Honorary Degree/Degrees, 
which has not been recommended as aforesaid, shall be entertained 
byi the Academic Council. The proposal/proposals which has/ 
have been accepted by the Academic Council for the conferment 
of Honorary Degree/Degrees shall be forwarded to the Chancellor 
for ratification.] 
[(6) The Chancellor may, in special or urgent cases, act on the 
recommendations of the Vice-Chancellor and accept proposals for 
the award of Honorary Degrees.] 
[(7) Any Honorary Degree conferred by the University with the 
approval of the Academic Council or the Chancellor may be with-
drawn for sufficient cause by the Chancellor from such date as he 
may fix.] 
21. (I) The [Standing Committee of the Academic Council] shall Standi~g 
be the executive body of the [Academic Council,] and shall consist of ~~~~~ 
tne Vice-Chancellor the Pro. Vice-Chancellor, [Deans of Faculties demic 
and Principals of fourteen Colleges in rotation according to seniority. I Council. 
[(2) The PrincipGls of Colleges shall be members of the Standing 
Committee of the Academic Council for a term of three years.] 
[(3) Seven members of the Standing Committee of the Academic 
Council shall form a quorum.] 
22. [The duties of the Standing Committee of the Academic Duties oi 
Council shall be, subject to the revision and control of the Academic the Sta.DdiD~ 
C '1]' Comnuttee ounCl . - of the Aca-
(i) "to fix, subject to any conditions accepted by the [Execu- ~~~~jl. 
tive Council], the time, mode and conditions of competition for 
fellowships, scholarships and other prizes and to award the same." 

[(ii) to conduct examinations in conformity with the 
Ordinances and to fix dates for holding them;] 
[(iii) to declare the results of the various University examina-
tions, or to appoint committees or officers to do so, and to make 
recommendations regarding the conferment or grant of degrees, 
honours, diplomas, licenses, titles and marks of honour;] 
[ (iv) to award stipends, scholarships, medals, prizes and to 
make awards in accordance with the Ordinances and such other 
conditions as may be attached to the awards;] 
[(v) to make recommendations to the Executive Council in 
regard to the appointment of examiners, and if necessary, their 
removal and the fixation of their fees, emoluments end travelling 
and other allowances and the appointment of Boards of Exami-
ners and Moderators;] 
[(vi) to appoint, whenever necessary, Inspectors or Boards of 
Inspectors for inspecting Colleges applying for admission to the 
privileges of the University;] 
[(vii) to publish lists of prescribed or recommended text-book 
and to publish syl1abus of the prescribed courses of study;] 
[(viii) to prepare such forms and registers as are, from time 
to time, prescribed by the Ordinances;] 
[(ix) to appoint Committees for admissions to the University;] 
and 
[(x) to perform all such duties and to do all such acts, as 
may be necessary for the carrying out of the decisions and direc-
tions of the Academic Council and to perform all such functions 
as may be delegated to it by the Academic Council under the 
Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances."] 
Final.'::: "'22. (l) The [X] Finance Committee shell consist of [the follow-
Commirtee. ing members, namely: -] 
(i) Vice-Chancellor [X]· 
(ii) Pro. Vice-Chancellor 
(iii) Two persons nominated by the Visitor 
(iv) Two persons, who are not employees of the University, 
elected by the Court, at least one of whom shall be a person 
who is not a member of the Executive Council 
.(v) The Treasurer [Xl 
. . _. _.--. 
··Vide Govt. letter No. F. 19-9/SS-A. I. dated 29- 3-56. 

29 
(2) Three members of the [ X ] Finance Committee, shalI fonn 
e quorum. 
[(3) All members of the [ X ] Finance Committee, other tban 
ex-otficio members shall hold office for a term of three years.] 
[(4) The Vice-Chacellor shall preside at meetings of the [ X ] 
Finance Committee· In the absence of the Vice-Chancellor, the 
Treasurer shall preside at a meeting thereof.] 
[(5) A member of the [ X ] Finance Committee shall have the 
right to record e minute of dissent if he dissents from his colleagues.] 
[(6) The [ X ] Finance Committee shall meet at least twice every 
year to examine accounts and to scrutinise proposals for expen-
diture.] 
[(7)] The annual accounts and financial estimates of the Univer-
sity prepared by the [Troosurer] shall be laid before the Finance 
Committee for [consideration and comments] and thereafter [submit-
ted] to the [Executive] Council for approval. 
(8) The [ X ] Finance Committee shall fix limits for the total 
recurring expenditure and the total non-recurring expenditure for 
the year, based on the income and resources of the University (which, 
in the case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loens). 
No expenditure shall be incurred by the University in excess of the 
limi ts so fixed. 
(9) No expenditure other than that provided for in the budget 
shall be incurred by the University without the approval of the [ X ] 
Finance Committee. 
*23. (1) The University shall include the Faculties of-(1) Oriental 
Learning, (2) Theology, (3) Arts, (4) Science [ X ], (5) law [ X ], 
(6) Technology, (7) Medicine and Surgery [(Ayurveda)] and [(8) 
Music end Fine Arts], [ X ] and such other Faculties as may be 
established by the Statutes." 
[(2) Each Faculty shall deal with such subjects as are assigned 
to it by the Ordinances."] 
*24. (I) Each Faculty shall consist of [the following members, Constitution 
namely: - ] of Facul tit s. 
[(i) Dean of the Faculty, who shall be the Cbairman, 
(ii) Principals of the Colleges teaching subjects assigned to 
the Faculty; 
(iii) All Professors in the Faculty; 
--·-Vlde-Govt. 'lett;~-No~ F:-~9=9f5s-A~~~:d~~ed -;9:)-56. --- .. -- -------

3'0 
(iv) One Reader and one Lecturer, by rotation according to 
st:niority, from each Department in the Faculty; 
(v) One teacher concerned, by rotation 6ccording to senio-
rity, from each Women's College: 
Provided that the College provides instruction in any of 
the subjects assigned to the Faculty; 
... (vi) Persons not connected with the University having expert 
knowledge of the subject or subjects concerned co-opted by the 
Faculty, one for each Department of the Faculty. 
[Provided, that the number of members t.o be co-opted 
by the Faculty of Law under this sub-clause shall be five."] 
(vii) Five members elected by the Academic Council for their 
special knowledge of any subject assigned to the Faculty or of 
any allied branch; 
(2) All members of any Faculty, other than ex-officio members, 
shall hold office for a term of three years; 
(3) The conduct of the meetings of [a] Faculty, [the quorum 
required for each Ftaculty and the constitution of the Boards of 
Studies shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.] 
Appoint;nent 2:;. [(1) Every Head of a Department who is a Professor shall, by 
aDd term of rotation according to seniority, for a period of two years act as the 
~~~ o~Te Dean of the Faculty; provided that if in any Faculty there is no 
pemrrs of Professor, the seniormost Reader shall act as the Dean and if there 
aeu tICS. is no Reader, the Vice-Chancellor or the Pro. Vice-Chancellor, if so 
designated by the Vice-Chancellor, shall act 6S the Dean· 
Explanation: -
For the purposes of this clause, seniority shaH be determined 
according to the following rules, namely: 
(a) if there are more persons than one who rank equally 
for the purposes of seniority, that person sllall be deemed to be 
senior to the others who has for the longest period been conti-
nously the Head of a Department. 
(b). if there are more persons than one who rank equally 
for the purposes of seniority by reason of their being conti-
nuously the Heads of Departments, that person shall be deemed 
to be senior to the others who has for the longest period been 
continuously a Professor or Reader as the case may be.] 
-Vide Gov!. letter No. F. I9-9Iss-A-J. dateJ 29-3-S6. 

31 
26· The Faculties shall have such powers, and shall perform such 
duties, as may be assigned to them by the Statutes and the [Ordinan-
ces1. and shall, from time to time, appoint such and so many Boards 
of Studies, in different branches of knowledge as may be prescribed 
by the [Ordinances.] They shall also consider and make such recom-
mendations to the [Academic Council] on any question pertaining 
to their respective sphere of work os may appear to them necessary, 
or on any matter referred to them by the [Academic Council.] 
[26A. (1) Each Faculty shall consist of such Departments as may 
be assigned to it by Ordinances. 
(~) No Department shall be established or abolished except by 
the Statutes: 
Provided tImt all Departments which have been established 
in accordance with the Act, the Statutes or the l\egulations u in 
force immediately before the commencement of the Banaras 
Hindu University (Amendment) Act, 1951, shall be deemed to 
be Departments estt3.blished by these Statutes.· 
[(i) A Department of Spectroscopy be established inthc 
Faculty of Sciencet.] 
[(ii) A Department of Indian Philosophy and Religion be 
established in the Faculty of Arts:j:] 
$DEPARTMBNTS ESTABLISHED PRIOR TO NOV. 3. 1951. 
I. Department of Politics 
Mathematics 
Geography 
History 
Philosophy 
Economics 
Commerce 
21. Departmellt l,f Mining 
3 
4· 
5· 
fl. 
7. 
". [0. 
II. 
12. 
13. 
14· 
15. 
16. 
17· 
1 H. 
19. 
20. 
" 
" 
22. 
23· 
24· 
2~. 
26. 
27. 
Ancient Indian Hisotry 28. 
& Culture 
English 
Hindi 
Sanskrit & Pali 
Education 
Indo Sumerian Studies 
Art & Architecture: 
Botany 
Chemistry 
Geology . 
Physics 
Zoology 
Metallurgy 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33· 
34. 
35· 36. 
37-
311. 
39· 
40 . 
--------------
" Ceramics 
" 
" " 
" '.' 
" " " " 
.n 
Glass 
Pharmaceutics 
Ind. Chemistry 
E1ec. Engineering. 
Civil Ii: Mech. 
Engineering 
Agriculture 
Surgery 
Ayurveda 
Mlmanaa Be Dhar-
ma Shaatrll 
Vyakaran 
Jyotlsh 
Sihitya 
Danhan 
Theology 
Religious Instruction 
Law 
MUlLic & Fine Arts 
Arabic, Persian; & Urdu 
tVide Gov!. of India, Ministry of Education, letter No. F. 19-7/55 H.I. dated 
No\'. 11-1953. 
tVide Govt. of IIndill, Ministry of Education, letlcr No. F. 19-6/53 A. I. dated 
Dec. 11-1956. 
61ll L.S.-5 
Powers of 
tho Paculties 

32 
[(iii) the following departments be establishacl in the Faculty 
of Teachnology:-
(a) The existing Department of Industrial Chemistry 
be reconstituted into a new Department of Chemical Engine-
ering and Technology. 
(b) Department of Silicate Technology by absorbing 
the existing Departments of Glass and Ceramics. 
(c) Department of Civil and Municipal Engineering.] 
t[ (iv) The existing Department of Ancient Indian History 
& Culture be re-named as Department of Ancient Indkm 
History & Culture and Archaeology."] 
(3) tEach Department shall consist of the followine 
members, namely:-
(i) Teachers of the Department 
(ii) Persons conducting research in the Department 
(iii) Dean of the Faculty or Deans of the Faculties 
concerned 
H (iv) Honorary Professor, if any, attached to the 
Department 
t (v) Such other persons as may be members of the 
Department in accordance with the provisions of the 
Ordinances."] 
(4) Each Department shall have a Head who may be 
a University Professor or, if there is no Professor, a Reader 
and whose duties and functions, and terms and conditions of 
appointment shall be laid down by the Ordinances: 
Provided that if th2re are more Professors or, as the case may be, 
Readers than one in any Department, no person shall be appointed to 
be the Head of any Department except in accordance with the prnvi-
slom; made in respect thereof by the Ordinances: 
Provided further that if there is no Professor or Reader in 3 
Department, the Dean of the FsC'ulty concerned shall act as the HeRd 
of that Department. 
- . 
• Vide Oovt. of India, Ministry of E4uC8tion letter N(I, F. 19-18/56 A. 1. dated July 
16-19S6. 
tVide Ministry of Education letter No. F. 19-20/S7-U. 5 dated 27-8-.57 and 18-9-51. 
,Vide Ministry of Bducation letter No. P. 19-1-/SS-H. 1. dated Nov. 11-19S3· 

33 
[26B. (1) The establishment of Colleges and institutions and tJae 
abolition thereof shall be governed by the Statutes: 
Provided that all Colleges and institutions which have been estab-
lished in accordance with the Act, the Statutes or the Regulations in 
force immediately before the commen'cement of the Banaras Hindu 
University (Amendment) Act, 1951, shall be deemed to be Colleges 
and institutions established by these Statutes.] 
[26e. (1) Colleges and other institutions within a radius of fifteen 
miles from the main temple of the University may be admitted to such 
pdvileges of the University as the Executive Council may decide on 
the following conditions, namely-
(i) Every such College or institution shall have a regularly 
constituted Managing Body, consisting of not more than twenty 
persons, approved by the Executive Council and including, among 
others, at least two representatives of the University and at least 
three representatives of the teaching stafi', of whom the Principal 
of the College or institution shall be one; 
(ii) Every such College or institution shall 98tisfy the 
Executive Council on the following points; 
(a) the suitability and adequacy of its accommodation 
and equipment for teaching, 
(b) the qualifications and adequacy of its teaching staff 
end the conditions of their service, 
(c) the arrangements for the residence, welfare, discipline 
and supervision of its students, and 
(d) such other matters as are essential for the mRin-
tenance of the standards of Universi ty education, and 
(iii) No college or institution shall be admitted to any pri-
vileges of the University except on the recommendation of the 
Academic Council made after considering the report of a Com-
mittee of Inspection appointed for the purpose by the Standing 
Committee of the Academic Council. 
(iv) [Omitted.] 
(v) [Omitted.] 
* (2) Appointments to the teaching staff of such College or 
Institution shall be made on the recommendation of Selection 
Committee which shall include the Principal (unless the post to 
·Vlde Ministry of Education letter No. F. 19-9/SSA. I, dated 29-3-S6. 

Convoca-
tions. 
CoDUtlittec. 
Scloction 
Commin •. 
34 
be filled is that of the Principal), at least one of the [X] repre-
sentatives of the University on the Managing Body and one 
expert nominated by the Standing Committee of the Academic 
Council. 
(3) Every such College or institution shall be inspected at 
least once every year by a Committee appointed by the Standing 
Committee of the Academic Council, and the report of that Com-
mittee shall be submitted to the Standing Committee of the' 
Academic Council which shall forward the same to the Executive 
Council with such recommendations as it may deem fit to make. 
The Executive Council, after considering the report and the 
recommendations, if any, of the Standing Committee of the 
Academic Council, shall forward a copy of the report to the 
Managing Body of the College or institution with such remarks, 
if any, as it may deem fit, for suitable action. 
(4) The Executive Council may, after consulting the 
Academic Council, withdraw any privileges granted to a Coller,e 
or institution if at any time it considers that the College or insti-
tution is not fulfilling the requisite conditions: 
Provided that before any privileges ore so withdrawn the 
Managing Body shall be given an opportunity to repreSl'nt 
to the Executive Council why such action should not be 
taken. 
(5) Subject to the conditions set forth above, the Ordinances 
. may prescribe any other conditions which may be considel'f'd 
necessary and also the procedure for the admission of Colleges 
end institutions to the privileges of the University and for the 
withdrawal of those privileges.] 
27. Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees, 
or for other purposes, shall be held in a manner to be prescribed by 
[Ordinances.] 
28. The Court, the [Executive Council], [the Academic Council, 
the Standing Committee of the Academic Council] and the Faculties 
may, from time to time, appoint such and so many standing and 
special Committees or Boards as mny seem to them fit, and may, if 
they think fit, place on them persons who are not members of the 
appointing bodies. Such Committees may deal with any subject 
delegated to them, subject to subsequent confirmation by the appoint-
ing body. 
29. [(1) The Selection Committee for any appointment specified 
in column (1) of the Table hereto annexed shall consist of the Vice-
Chancellor, the Pro-Vice-Chancellor, a nominee of the Visitor and 

35 
the persons specified in the corresponding entry in column (2) of tIle 
said Table. 
The Table 
(1) (2) 
Professor (i) The Dean of the Faculty, 
(ii) The Head of the Department concemed, 1f he is 
a Professor, 
(iii) Three persons not connected with the Univer-
sity nominated by the Standing Committee of the 
Academic Council for their special knowledge of, or 
interest in, the subject with which the Professor will be 
concerned. 
Reader, ") 
Lecturer f 
(i) The Dean of the Faculty, 
Hegistrar 
(ii) the Head of the Department eoncerned, 
(iii) Two persons not connected with the University. 
nominated by the Standing Committee of the Academic 
Council, for their having special knowledge of, or interest 
in the subject with which the person to be appointed will 
be concerned. 
(i) Treasurer, 
(ii) Two members of the Executive Council nnmi-
llIBted by it.] 
[(2) The Vice-Chancellor or, in his absence, the Pro-Vice-
Chancellor shall preside at the meetings of a Selection Com-
mitte~.] 
[(3) The meetings of a Selection Committee shall be conven-
ed by the Vice-Chancellor or, in his absence, by the Pro-Vice-
Chancellor.] 
[(4) Th~ Selection Committee shall consider and submit to 
the Executive Council recommendations as to the appointments 
referred to it· If the Executive Council is unable to eccept th£' 
recommendations made by the Committee, it shall record its 
reasons and submit the case to the Visitor for final orders.] 
[29A. (1) There shall be an Alumni Association established for Alumni 
the. Banaras Hindu University. AIIoc:ialioll. 

Acts durin~ 
YlOlncie~ 
(2) The subscription for membership of the Association shalJ 
be prescribed by the Ordinances. 
(3) No member of the Association shall be entitled to vote 
or stand for election unless he has been a member of the Associa-
tion for at least one year prior to the date of the election ~md is 
a graduate of at least five year's standing of the University: 
Provided that the condition relating to the completion of one 
year's membership shall not apply in the case of the first election 
after the commencement of the Banaras Hindu University 
(Amendment) Act, 1951.] 
"[Provided further that all the registered graduates enrolled 
for life on the date of the commencement of the Banaras Hindu 
University (Amendment) Act, 1951, shall be members of the 
Alumni Association."] 
30. [No act or proceeding of any authority or body of the Univer-
sity shall be invalid by reason only of the existence of any vacancy 
among its members or eny defect in the constitution thereof.] 
Elected 31. Where, by the Statutes or [Ordinances], no provision is made 
chairman to for a president or chairman to preside over a meeting of any Univer-preside 
where no sity authority, Board or Committee, or when the president or chair-
=:~~l the man so provided for is absent, the members present shall elect one 
Statute} oi ttieir member to preside at the meeting. 
Re-appoint-
mcnt and 
re-election 
Resignation 
32. [Save, as otherwise provided in the Act, the Statutes or the 
Ordinances,] every officer of the University and every member of 
any University authority, whose term of office or of membership has 
expired, shall be eligible for re-appointment or re-election, as the 
ca;;e may be. 
:13. [(1) Any member, other than an ex-officio member, of the 
Court, the Executive Council, the Academic Council, or any other 
University authority may resign by letter addressed to the Registmr, 
and the resignation shall take effect as soon as such letter is received 
by the Registrar. 
(2) Any officer of the University, (whether salaried or other-
wise), other than the Dean, may resign his office by letter addres9f!d 
to the Registrar: 
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date 
from which the same is accepted by the authority competent to fill 
the vacancy.] 
• Vidl Govt. letter No. F. J9-9/s~A. J. dated z9-3-S6. 

31 
34. [(1) Any member of the Court, the Executive Council, or the Removal 
Academic Council, may be removed by a resolution of the Court, the 
EXE'Cutivt' Council or the Academic Council, as the case may be, 
passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of its members on 
pither of the following grounds, namely:-
(i) the member OOS become incapable of performing his 
duties; 
(ii) the member has been convicted by a Court of Law of 
an offence which, in the opinion of the Court, the Executive 
Council or the Academic Council, as the case may be, involves 
moral turpitude. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of his 
appointment, any officer of the University, salaried or otherwise, may 
be removed from tbat office by the authority which is competent to 
fill the vacancy on either of the following grounds, namely:-
(i) the officer has become incapable of performing his duties; 
(ii) the officer has been convicted by a Court of Law of an 
offence which, in the opinion of the Court, the Executive Council 
or the Academic Council, as the case may be, involves moral 
turpitude: 
Provided that nothing in this clause shell be deemed to affect 
any rights accruing to an officer appointed on contract in 
accordance with the terms of that contract.] 
[34A. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, no 
p~rson wh(J is n~t ordinary resident in India shall be eligible to be 
an officer of the University or a member or any authority of the 
University.] 
34B. (1) Whenever, in accordance with these Statutes, any person 
is to hold an office or be a member of any authority of the University 
by rotation, according to seniority, such seniority shall be determined 
according to the length of continuous service of such person in his 
~rade or post, as the case may be, and in accordance with such other 
principles as the Executive Council may, from time to time, prescribe. 
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain, 
in respect of each class of persons, to whom the provisions of this 
Statute apply, a complete and up-to-date seniority list in accordance 
with the provisions of the foregoing clause. 

Notice of 
Annual 
Meetinls 
38 
('1) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service 
in a particular grade or post, or the relative seniority of any person 
or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may on his own motion, 
and shall, at the request of any such persons, submit the matter to 
the Executive Council, whose decision thereon shall be final. 
34C. Notwithstanding anything contained in these Statutes, a 
person who h)lds any post in the University or is a member of any 
authority or body of the University in his capacity as a member of a 
particular authority or body or as the holder of a particular appoint-
ment shall hold office so long only as he continues to be a member 
of that particular lQuthority or body, or the holder of that particular 
eppointment, as the case may be. 
Statutes made by the Court under Sub-section (3) of Section 17 of 
the Act· and adapted and modified Q.8 mentioned above 
35. Notices of the Annual [X] Meeting of the Court shall be issued 
by the Secretary, at least 30 days before the date of the meeting, 
with an Agenda paper, and, no business, not arising out of matters 
noted or mentioned in such Agenda paper, shall be considered unless 
the consent of at least two-thirds of the members of the Court present 
;Jt tne meeting be obtained thereto. 
Notice of 36. Every member who intends to bring forward any special 
~~:~d~~n~~ bU5iness at an Annual Meeting, or to propose any person for election 
as Chan~ellor, Pro-Chancellor, [ •• ] or as a member of the Court or 
of the Executive Council, shall give notice of such business, or of the 
oome of the person to be proposed, to the Secretary, at least 20 days 
b~fore the day appointed for such meeting. Every member who 
intend" to propose an amendment shall give notice thereof to the 
Secretary ten days before the date fixed for the meeting. 
Noti~e of 37. [A notice of twentyone days] of any special [X] Meeting, 
~~~~~l ;;tating generally the nature of the business to be transacted, sOOlJ be 
Meetin~K !len l to each member of the Court and no such meeting shall bE' 
and bUSlne;s b' he h h t t' ed' tL 
to be tr8n- competent to transact any usmess ot r t an t a men lOn In lie 
sacted notice or directly arising out of it. [Any member desiring to send 
CI proposal reletmg to the nature of the business specified in the 
notice shall send such proposal to the Secretary so as to reach him at 
least ten days before the meeting.] 
Proc«;dure III 38· The procedure at meetings shall be in accordance with Regu-
bee~~IB~a:~d l&tions to be made by the Court in thet behalf. 
by rufes to _ ' .' . . ' ..' _. "--"-' ... -.... _. 
be made by .Recdvcd the approval of the Vi,itor under Sub-section 5 of Section 17 of the Act 
the Court on the 12th and the 30th August, 1916. 

39 
39. Contracts made by or on beh'If of the University shall be valid Contracts. 
and hinding on the University if n.de as follows:-
(a) Any contract which if made between private persons 
would by law be required to be in writing and, if required by the 
law in force in [X] India to be registered, may be similarly made 
on behalf of the University in writing under its corrunon seal and 
registered, and such contract may in the same manner, be varied 
or discharged.. 
(b) Any contract which if made between private persons 
would by law be required to be in writing and signed by the 
parties to be charged therewith, may be made on behalf of the 
University in writing signed by any person acting under the 
express or implied authority of the [Executive] Council, and such 
contract may in the same manner be varied or discharged. 
(c) Any contract which if made between private f?ersons 
would by law be valid, although made verbally only and not 
reduced into writing, may be made either in writing or verbally 
on behalf of the University by any person acting under the 
express or implied authority of the [Executive] Council, and 
such contract may be in the zame way varied or discmrged: 
Provided always that no contract exceeding Rs. 500 in amount 
or value shall be made except in writing. 
(d) The Executive Council shall from time to time appoint 
such person or persons as it m63.Y think proper, either by office 
or by name, to enter into, execute and sign contracts for ~nd on 
behalf of the University, and to present them for registration and 
to register the same according to the law in force for the time 
being. 
40. [Omitted.] 
41. [The names and addresses of all persons who bave paid 
Hs. 500 or upwards before the commencement of the Banaras Hindu I . t ,IS 
University (Amendment) Act, 1951, or may after such commence- dODN~. 
ment pay a sum of Rs. 1,000 or upwards to the University shall, 
from time to time, be entered in a list kept for the purpose by the 
Secretary of the Court.] 
Explanation.-In this Statute, the term "Secretary" means the 
Secretary of the Court or, in his absence for any cause or where there 
is no person holding the post of Secretary such person as the Vice-
Chancellor may nominate to perform for the time being, the duties 
tlf the Secretary under these Statutes. 
621 L.S.-6 
of 

Rqiatered 
jonora. 
40 
42. Every person whose name is entered in the said list shall be deemed to be a registered donor within the meaning of the Statutes 
an9 entitled to vote at the election. 
43. [Omitted.] 
". [Omitted.] 
45. [Omitted.] 
46. [Omitted.] 
4'1. [Omitted.] 
48. [Omitted.] 
49. [Omitted.] 
SO. [Omitted] 
51. [Omitted.] 
52. [Omitted.] 
53. [Omitted.] 
54. [Omitted.] 
55. [Omitted.] 
56. [Omitted.] 
5'1. [Omitted.] 
58. [Omitted.] 
59. [Omitted.] 
60. [Omitted.] 
61. [Omitted.] 
6!. [Omitted.] 
63. [Omitted.] 
M. [Omitted] 
85. [Omitted] 
66. [Omitted.] 
67. [Omitted.] 
68. [Omitted.] 
89. [Omitted.] 
10. [Omitted.] 
n. [Omitted] 

41 
72. [(1) The Executive Council shall make provision for the Pr<?vision rC'r 
maintenance of the Central Hindu School and other schools which ~c~~~~ll("e 
have been established in accordance with the Act, the Statutes, or Hindu 
the rlegulations in force before the commencement of the Banaras School. 
the Ordiances to be made in this behalf.] 
(2) [The management of such schools shall be in accordance with 
the Ordinances to be made in this behalf.] 
73. [Omitted.] 
74. [Omitted.] 
75. [Omitted.] 
76. [Omitted.] 
77. [Omitted.] 
78. [Omitted.] 
79. [Omitted.] 
80. rOmitted.] 
81. The [Schools referred to in Statute 72 and all their] buildings, Pro) pe,"!ies . • be ongmg to propertIes, furnIture, apparatus and books and accounts shall be the the School 
property of the University. to b~ pro-
urnes of the 
Statutes 1·elating to Provident Fund made by the Court under Section niversity. 
16A of the Act,· an1 amended and adapted as mentioned abot.'e 
8Z. Every employee of the University, appointed permanently to 
B substantive post, cl!.rrying a salary of rupees twenty per mensem or 
upwards, shall, as a condition of his service, contribute to the Pro-
vident Fund six and a quarter per cent of his salary. Such contribu-
tion shall be deducted from his salary every month. In making the 
deduction, fractions of a rupee of the salary shall be omitted. 
83. [The University shall contribute to the Fund a sum equal to 
such percentage of the salary of each employee as may be approved 
by the Central Government. The contribution so made by the 
University, shall be credited to the account of such employee and 
char~ed in the University accounts under the head "Provident Fund".] 
-K4. The amount of the deduction made from the salary of an 
employee under Statute 82 and the amount of the contribution made 
by the University under Statute 83 shall be deposited in the Post 
Office Savings &ank or in the Imperial Bank, as the [Executive] 
Council of the University may direct, in the name of the Fund as 
early as practicable or at any rate within three days of the date on 
which the payment of the salaries is mede. 
- -" .... -
·Received the aooroval of His Excellencv the Visitor u'lder Sub-section S of Section 
71 of the Act on the 27th February, 1936. V.ae letter No. F/x73, dated 27th February, 1936. 

85. The University may, from time to time, invest such part of 
the Provident Fund, as may be considered expedient, in such Gov-
ernment securities as the [Executive] Council of the University may 
determine and may change the nature of the securities. All interest 
or profit realized from the securities or from any deposit or account 
IQrising out of the Fund, shall, after deducting the incidental expt'nses 
of investment or realization, be credited in the Provident Fund 
account to be distributed rateably in the account of each contributor. 
[85A. On a written application from a subscriber to the Provident 
Fund and with the approval of the Executive Council the University 
may allow premi9 on the Life Insurance policy of the subscriber to 
be paid out of the subscriber's share in his Provident Fund. In all 
such cases the Life Insurance policy for which the premia are so 
paid shall be assigned in favour of the University. On the retire-
ment of the subscriber from the service of the University, the policy 
shall be re-assigned to him by the University. In case of maturity 
of the policy during the pendency of the service of the subscriber in 
the University, the full amount of the policy shall be credited to the 
Provident Fund of the subscriber. In the case of the death of the 
subscriber, during the service of the University, the full amount of 
the policy shall be paid to the legal representative of the deceased 
entitled to the Provident Fund.l 
86. The amount at the credit of any employee sbIQU be payable:-
(a) on the death of the employee to the person or persons 
nominated by him or, when no such nomination is made, to his 
legal heir or heirs. 
(b) on his ceasing to be in the service of the University to 
such employee provided:-
(i) that no employee of the University, who has been 
dismissed for what is considered by the [Executive] Council 
as gross misconduct. shall, if the [Executive] Council so 
directs be entitled to the benefit or to receive any part of any 
sum at any time contributed by the University to the Fund 
or the interest or profit thereon; 
(ii) that if any employee resigns his appointment before 
putting in five years' service, the University may withhold 
the contribution allotted to him, together with the interest 
thereon, and pay to the employee only the balance at his 
credit without such contribution or the interest on or profit 
from contribution· 
87. The University shall not be entitled to recover, from the 
amount to the credit of IQny such employee in the said fund on account 

uf contributions made by him thereto (including interest on or profit 
from such contributions), any sum on account of any loss or damages 
Rustained by the University through the misconduct or negligence of 
any such employee or any other sum due by him. • Any such loss 
or damaf{e sustained by the University or other liability incurred by 
the employees to the University, shall, however, be recoverable from 
the contribution made by the University to his account including 
interest or profit thereon. 
88. Any contribution and interest or profit withheld under these 
Statutes, shall lapse to the University. 
89. In case of urgent necessity, which in the opinion of the 
[Executive] Council justifies the course, the University may allow a 
depositor an advance of a sum, not exceeding his salary for three 
months, out of the amount contributed by him with interest thereon 
(excluding the contribution of the University and the interest or 
profit thereof). The advance will be recovered by such number of 
monthly instalments, not exceeding twenty-four as the rExecutive] 
Council may fix, and shall be recovered by'deduction from the salary 
payable by the University to such employee. The amount of such 
instalments shall be fixed in round number, and the deductions shall 
commence from the first payment of a full month's salary, after 
such advance has been made, and the last instalment shall cover the 
entire balance then due. 
rP:-ovided that if an advance is required for the purpose of building 
or purchasing a house, the maximum limit of the advance may be 
equal to twelve month's salary of the subscriber out of his own 
contribution to the Fund, to be repaid in such instalments, not 
exceeding forty-eight, as the Executive Council may determine.) 
An em~loyee may at his option pay at any time any additional 
sum above the amount fixed. No subsequent advance will, however, 
be made until the lapse of three months from the date when the 
previous advance has been fully repaid. 
96. An employee, who is on lea/e on full pay, shall continue to 
pay his contribution to the Provident Fund and may do so at his 
option, if he is on leave on less than full pay. 
11· A separate account in Form A shall be annually kept in the 
office of the University on account of every employee contributin~ 
to the Provident Fund, and a copy of this account shall be furnished 
to every such employee at the end of each financial year and on his 
ceasing to be an employee. 
-.- - --.\1.odified bv R.~~l~ti~~ N;-~;-i-(b)-;;i-the Court held~n -'1.7-I I -lq43 .R~.ived 
the approval of the Visitor on October 16, 1944 under G. O. No. '1.S7I/.t-1V-GS/44. 

44 
FORMA 
PrOfJitk"t Fund Ba'laras Hindu Unitlllrsiry DlIposit Account for tM ylIar 
lind;,,, tM JIst of March, 195 
NUMH:dR 
Ac~tH .. 
N:\ME OF SUBSCRIBER APPOINTMENT 
G Deposits ., -E~~ --I:: ------ c:: ';j tJ ~ 
.!! ~ ~ ~'O'O ° ~ .. c;;.., 
-=::5 :! ... Ii .S "'0 .. a:l ow ... .- .. :s . .., I:: a:l u ... c~ till UN .: :I: ..c: ~ ~ 
j5'§CI;.., iii I.; :s ~ 
~g;i 
... ·S ~E ~ 
;.., ..... -5 7G u 8. §. 
u~ 
a 
0;.., ... ... .. 0° ~ Q 0 .:: U.o ~ U CC:°iil 
- 1'-- --- ---- --... -
I 2 3 4 S 6 7 9 
! ! I I , I I , 
! 
, , , I I I I I 
.. _--_ ...... 
.. ... ; 
a 
~ 
-to 
92. Amounts credited or debited to the Provident Fund shall on 
the same day be posted to the Provident Fund Ledger in form B, 
given below. The figures for column 6 in the ledger will be 
calculated yearly as also the net balance of each account entered 
in columns 7 and 10. 
C :s N8m~ of 
8 DepJsitor 
~ ... o 
~ 
I :z -------.-
FORM B. 
P,aoid,nt P"rId iAdgllr, Bana,as Hindu Unitllrsity, Banaras 
u 
C .. 
OJ 
a:l 
·f 
CIo 
o 
April to 
M~r;h 
------ ---- --- ------- ! 
taO 
.9 
o 
(3 
... 
'" :;, c 
U 
cc: 
No \oluntary deposits from employees will be credited to the 
Provident Fund. 
93. If a depositor dies or his services otherwise terminate, hi. 
account shall be closed, and the sum due to him shall cease to bear 
interest or carry any profit after the expiry of the month in which 
his .death or the termination of his services occurs. 

i5 
94. When an account is closed, any sum remammg unclaimed 
shall be removed from the Provident Fund Ledger and transferred 
to a deposit account at the end of the year and be dealt with like 
any ordmary deposit. 
95. Every employee, coming under these Statutes shall be 
required to sign a written declaration that he has read these Statutes 
and agrees to abide by them and hand over for registration in the 
University Office the names of the person or persons to whom he 
wishes the balance at his credit to be paid in the event of his death. 
When nominating more than one person, he may state the proportion 
in which the said balance may be paid to each of them respectively. 
In case his nominee or any of his nominees is a minor, he should 
state the date of his birth; and the payment shall be made to his next 
friend or guardian who may be authorised by law to receive payment 
on his behalf while he is a minor. 
The depositor may, from time to time, add to or change his 
nominee or nominees and the proportion in which the same is to be 
distributed, by written application to the University. 
A register of such nominees shall be kept in the University 
Office in Form C given below:-
FORM C. 
Name aJ d addless of his 
r.ominle with date of birth 
Name of de),ositor ar.d the rame of his next 
fricr.d if he is a minor 
Signature 
of 
Depositor 
3 
Signatut'e of the Pro. 
Vice-Char.cellor, 
B. H. U. 
4 
96. Notwithstanding anything contained in these Statutes, no 
employee of the University will be entitled to the benefit of these 
Statutes. who is otherwise entitled to a pension or on whose account 
the University contributes towards his pension and leave allowance 
or who has been appOinted by the University on a consolidated 
salary on special terms. 
Statutes Relating to Gratuity and Compassionate Fund made bu 
the Court· 
97. The University shall set apart a sum of Rs. lOOO/-t every 
year Rond invest the same at interest in order to form a fund for the 
-Received the approval of the Visitor under Sub-section 5 of Section 17 of the 
Act on the T~th of March, 1937. Vide G. O. No. 229G. 
tModified by Resolution No. 7b of Court dated 16th December, 1946. Received 
approval of Visitor on 20-9-1947, Vide G. O. No. A 7230 X/V. 

46 
payment of graluities to the servants or employees of the University, 
and for the payment of compassionate allowance to their families, 
as hereinafter provided. 
98. If the unspent balance of that Fund at the close of any 
financial year exceeds Rs. 3,000/- the University may stop further 
payment to thoe fund under the preceding Statutes till it falls 
below that amount or reduce the amount payable thereunder 10 as 
not to exceed that amount. 
99. No gratuity shall be payable to a servant or employees of less 
than ten years' standing or getting a salary of Rs. 20/- per mensem 
or over. 
100. Subject to Statute 99, a gratuity equal to half month's pay 
for ev€ry completed year of service may be paid to a permanent 
servant or employee of the University, if he has been permitted to 
retire from the service of the UniV'ersity on account of his physical 
incapacity to continue in its service provided that the total amount 
of such gratuity shall not exceed Rs. 240/- in any case. 
101. If such servant or employee dies while in the service of 
the University after completing a service of ten years such compas-
sionate allowance, not excePding the pay of sucn servant or employees 
for three months, may be paid to such members of his family, who 
may have been dependent on him for their livelihood as the 
[Executive] Council may, in view of the circumstaneee of each case, 
determine. 
102. The payment of the gratuity or compassionate allowance may 
be made either in a lump sum or by instalments or in such other 
manner as the [Executive) Council may determine . 
• 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Banaras Hindu University Act, 1915. 
CDr. K.L. Shrimali, 
Minister of Education.) 