AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

17 DEC 1999

Bill No. 82 of 1999

E SPICES AND CASH CROPS PRICES COMMISSION BILL, 1999
न By
© Suet Rawestt CHENNITHALA, MP,
A
BILL

"ide for the constitution of a Commission for the purpose of recommending to the
Government the remunerative prices for spices and other. cash crops.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth year of the Republic of india as
ws —

1. (7) This Act may be called the Spices and Cash Crops Prices Commission Act,

(2) It shal] come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notifi-
sation in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2, In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, 'spices' includes Cardamom,
Chinsamon, Cassia and such other crops as the Central Government may, by
ification in the Offical Gazette, include from time to time.

जय

3. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a body to be known as the Spices
Cash Crops Prices Commission, hereinafter referred to as ‘Commission’, to per-
m the funcions assigned to it under this Act.

Short title and
commence-
ment.

Constitution of
Spices and
Cash Crops
Prices
Commission.


(2) The Commission shall consist of a Chairman and four other members
shall be appointed by the President.

(3) The Chairman and the members so appointed to the Commission shall pos
special knowledge about the spices and cash-crops. ;

Term of office 4, (1) The Chairman and every member of the Commission shall hold office fa

and conditions period not exceeding five years.
of service of

ete ease (2) The salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and con
= of service of the Chairman and members shall be such as may be prescribed,
Officers and 5, (1) The Central Government shall provide the Commission with such Offic
other and other employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of the funcl
employees of of the Commission under this Act.

en (2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and ९

of service of, the officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of the
mission shall be such as may be prescribed.

Functions of the 6. It shall be the duty of the Commission to fix and declare the remunerativep
Commission. _of spices and cash crops.

Norms for 7, The Commission shall, before determining the remunerative prices, take

fixing consideration all relevant factors but in particular the following, namely:—
remunerative
ace (i the average capital investment made by the growers;

(ii) the average labour charges;

(iii) the expenditure on crop insurance scheme, if any;
(iy) the interest on loans borrowed for the purposes of production of spices;
(0) the maintenance cost of the farm;

(vi) any concession, rebate or subsidy given by the Government in cont
the production of spices;

(vii) the prevailing price of spices in the open market; and +

(viii) climatic conditions and incidence of natural calamities like floods, 0
hail-storm, untimely rains etc.

Remunerative 8. The Central Government shall accept the recommendations ‘of the Com
prices fixed by in full and the remunerative prices so fixed by the Commission shall be final at

the Commis-
Sion to be final, 0% the Government,

Power to make 9. The Central Government may by notification in the official Gazette,
४३७४ for carrying out the purposes of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS.

Spices and other cash crops constitute the backbone of the country of the State of
Kerala. Over a period of time, the prices of these crops haye tended to decline steeply

ig irreparable damage to the economy of the State as a whole and to the growers of
crops in particular and also loss of valuable foreign exchange. On one hand the cost
of production of these spices and cash crops has increased phenomenally and on the other
ices have declined steeply. Moreover, there is no effective mechanism for market
ntervention in event of steep decline in the prices of these crops.

A situation has thus arisen where il has become necessary to devise some institutional
nism to compute the cost of production of the spices and cash crops in a scientific
er and recommend a support price whicli is remunerative to the growers. This purpose
be achieved through the instrumentality of a statutory Commission.

The Bill, thus, provides for the constitution of such a Commission.

RAMESH CHENNITHALA


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of Spices and Cash Crops
Commission. The Commission shall consist of a Chairman and four other members.
4 provides for the salary and allowances payable to the Chairman and members of
Commission. Clause 5 provides for the appointment of officers and other emplo:
the Commission and also for the salary and allowances payable to them. The Bill,
fore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of the order of rupees twenty lakh is
to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five lakh is also likely to be involv,


lIORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
Of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as suck the
of legislative power is of a normal character,


LOK SABHA,

A
BILL

to provide for the constitution of a Commission for the purpose of |
Government the remunerative prices for spices and other cash crops.

(Shri Ramesh Chennithala, M.P)

MGIP(PLUJMRND—1715LS—17.11.1999.