Bill No. Sa of 1'57 
THE OPIUM LAWS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

I of 1878. 
BW No. 82 of 19S1 
THE OPIUM LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Opium Act, 1878 and the Dangeroul Drug. 
Act, 1930. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Opium Laws (Amendment) Act, Short tifle. 
1957. 
S Z. In the Opium Act, 1878 (hereinafter referred to as the Opium Ar=m ent 
Act), in the definition of "opium" in section 3, for clause (i), the 0 on 3. 
following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
"(i) the capsules of the poppy (Papaver somniierum L.), 
whether in their original form or cut, crushed or powdered, and 
10 whether or not juice has been extracted therefrom;". , 
3. In section 9 of the Opium Act, for the words ICshall, on convic- Amendmeat 
tion before a Magistrate, be punished for each such offence with ofaoction p. 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with 
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both;", the 
IS following words shall be substituted, namely:-
"shall, on conviction before a Magistrate, be punishable for 
each such offence with imprisonment which may extend to 
three years, with or without fine;". 

2 
~~'F~~ 4. In section 14 of the Opium Act, for the words "Any officer of 
o on. any of the departments of Excise, Police, Customs, Salt, Opium or 
Revenu.e superior in rank to a peon or constable, who may in right 
of his office be authorized by the State Government in this behalf, 
Amendment 
of IeCtion 2. 
and", the following words shall be substituted, namely:- S 
"Any officer of the department of Central Excise, Narcotics, 
Drugs Control, Customs, Revenue, Police or Excise, superior 
in rank to a peon or constable, authorized in this behalf by the 
Central Government or the State Government,". 
5. In the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 (hereinafter referred to as 10 2 of 1930. 
the Dangerous Drugs Act), in clause (e) of section 2, for sub-
clause. (£) ,the following sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:-
"(i) the capsules of the poppy (Papaver '8omntferu.m L.), 
whether in their original form or cut, crushed or powdered, 
and whether or not juice has been extracted therefrom;". IS 
Amendment 6. In sections 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15 of the Dangerous Drugs 
~fl~~,IO, Act, for the words "shall be punished. with imprisonment which 
14 and IS· may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both", tile words 
"ahall be punishable with imprisonment which nmy extend to three 
years, with or without fine" shall be substituted. 20 
Amendmeot 7. In sections 16 and 17 of the Dangerous Drugs Act, for the 
of sectiona 16 words "or to fine or to both" the words "with or without fine" and 17 " . shall be substituted. 
Amendment 8. In sub-section (1) of section 23 of the Dangerous Drugs Act, 
ofleCtion 23· for the words "Any officer of the department of Excise, Polie,2S 
Customs, . Sal t, Qpium or Revenue, superior in rank· to a peon or 
constable, authorized in this behalf by the State Government,", the 
following words shall be substituted, namely:.-
Oml8lionef 
lCCtion31. 
"Any officer of .the deparlment of Cenal Exc~, Narcotics, 
DI'1.lgs Control, ,Customs, Revenue, Police or Excile, ,superior 30 
in rank to a peon or constable, authorized in this behalf by the 
Central Government or the State Government,". 
"f. Section 31 of the Dangerous Drugs Act shall be omitted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Among the substances included in the definition of "opium" in 
the Opium Act, 1878 (1 of 1878) and in the Dangerous Drugs Act, 
1930 (2 of 1930) are capsules of the poppy (Papaver 80mniferum 
L,). ,Crushed capsules commonly called poppy husk or "bhuki", 
whether extracted or not, contain a certain percentage of morphine 
and are often used as addiction producing intoxicants. The 
Government has been administering the Acts in the view that 
C4psules ·included crushed capsules as well; but a recent decision of 
the Punjab High Court has ruled that the present definition of 
opium does not cover crushed capsules, that is, poppy husk. The 
definitions in the two Acts are now sought to be amended so as 
specifically to cover crushed capsules, 
2. Advantage is ,taken of this opportunity to enhance the 
punishment for certain offences relating to opium and other 
narcotic drugs as a measure of precaution against any possible 
increase in the smuggling of opium for illicit consumption after 
the 31st March, 1959,when consumption of opium except for 
medicinal or research purposes is to be completely eliminated. 
Power is also taken to empower other officers to exercise the 
powers of search, seizure and arrest under the two Acts. 
T. T. KRlSHNAMAOHARI. 
1bw;DDm:; 
The 13th November, 1957. 
3 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE OpIUM ACT, 1878 (1 OF 1878) 
• • • • 
Interpret 8- 3. In this Act, unless there be something repugnant in the 
tion c)auae. subject or context,-
"Opium" means--
(i) the capsules of the poppy (Papaver somniferum 
L.) ; 
• • • • 
Penalty for 9. Any person who, in contravention of this Act, or of rules 
illepl cu1ti- made and notified under section 5 or section 8,- • Vdtion of 
poppy. etc. 
Power to 
enter. arrest 
and seize, 
on informa-
tion that 
opium it 
unlawfully 
(a) possesses opium, or 
(b) transports opium, or 
(c) imports or exports opium, or 
(d) sells opium, or 
(e) omits to warehouse opium, or removes or does any act 
in respect of warehoused opium,. 
and any person who ~therwise contravenes any such rule, 
shall, on conviction before a Magistrate, be punished for each 
such offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
one year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, 
or with both; 
and, where a fine is imposed, the convicting Magistrate shall 
direct the offender to be imprisoned in default of payment of 
the fine for a term which may extend to six months, and such 
imprisonment shall be in excess of any other imprisonment to 
which he may have ;been sentenced. 
• • • • 
14. Any officer of any of the departtnents of Excise, Police, 
Customs, Salt, Opium or Revenue superior in rank to a peon or 
constable, who may in right 'of his office be authorized by the State 
Government in this behalf, and who has reason to believe, from 
personal knowledge or from information given by any person and 
4 

5 
taken down in writing, that opium liable to confiscation under this kept in any 
Act is kept or concealed in any building, vessel or enclosed place, ;l:.aed 
may, between sunrise and sunset,-
(a) enter into any such building, vessel or place; 
(b) in case of resistance, break open any door and remove 
any other obstacle to such entry; 
(c) seize such opium and any other thing which he has 
reason to believe to be liable to confiscation under section 11 or 
any other law for the time being in force relating to opium; and 
(d) detain and search, and, if he think proper, arrest, any 
person whom he has reason to believe to be guilty of any offenc~ 
relating to such opium under this or any other law for the 
time being in force. 
• • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE DANGEROUS DRUGS ACT, 1930 
(2 OF 1930) 
• • • • 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject Definitions. 
or context,-
• • • • 
(e) "opium" means-
(i) the capsules of the poppy (Papaver somniferum L.); 
• • • • 
CHAPTER III 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
.10. Whoever- Puniahment 
for contra-
(a) cultivates any coca plant or gathers any portion of a vention of· 
coca plant, section 4-
(b) manufactures or possesses prepared opium otherwise 
than as permitted under section 4, or 
(c) imports into India, exports from India, tranships or 
sells prepared opium, 
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or with both: 

6' 
P.rovided that this section shall not apply to the cultivation: of 
any coca plant or to the gathering of any portion thereof. on behalf 
of" the Government. 
Punishment 11. Whoever, in contravention of section 5, or any rule made 
for contra-vention of under. that: section, or of any condition of a licence granted there-
section s. under, 
Punishment 
for contra-
vention of 
section 6. 
(a) cultivates the poppy, or 
(b) , manufactures opium, 
shall· be punished. with imprisonment which may extend., to two 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
12. Whoever, in contravention of section 6, or any rule made 
under that section, or any condition of a licence granted thereunder, 
manufactures any manUfactured· drug, shall be punished with 
imprisonment which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with 
both. 
Puniehment 13. Whoever, in contravention of section 7, or any rule made 
for contra- under that section, or any condition of a licence granted thereunder, vention of 
scction 7. 
Puniehment 
for contra-
vention of 
acction 8; 
(a) imports into India, 
(b) exports from India, or 
(c) tranships, 
any dangerous drug, shall be punished with imprisonment which 
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
14. Whoever, in contravention of section 8, or any rule made 
under that section, or any condition of a licence issued tbereumler; 
(a) imports or exports inter-provincially, transporta f ~ 
ses or sells any manufactured drug or coca leaf, or 
(b) manufactures medicinal opium or any preparations 
containiDg morphine, diacetylmorphine or· cocaine, 
shall be punished with imprisonment which may earteadto t~"earsl 
or with fine, or with both. -

7-
15. Whoever, beins the owner or occupier or having the use of PUDilhmcnt 
any house, room, enclosure, space, vessel, vehicle, or place, knowing- ~%:!1:~ 
Iy permits it to be used for the commission by any other person of be UICd fo.r 
. 1 3 tbe comuu .. an offence purushable under section 10, section 2, section 1 , or lion of an 
section 14, shall be punished with -imprisonment which may extend oft'enc:e. 
to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
16. Whoever, having been convicted of an offence punishable Enbanc:ed 
under section 10, section 12, section 13, or section 14, is guilty of f:nc!t;::t 
any offence punishable under any of those sections, .. hall be ~ubject ofren;Cel after 
for every such subsequent offence to imprisonment which may ex- =:~:D. 
tend to four years, or to fine, or to· both. 
17. Whoever, having been convicted of an offence punishable ~~ 
under sectioI»15, is again gIIlilty of an oftence punishable under that ~iren:t 
section, shall be subject for every such subsequent offence to und~ 
•• • Bectlon IS ImprIsonment which may extend to four years, or to fine, or to after previoua 
both. conviction. 
• • • • 
23. (1) Any officer of the department of Excise, Police, Customs, POWer ~ 
Salt, Opium, or Revenue, superior in rank to a peon or constable, :f::e1C and 
authorized in this behalf by the State Government, who has reason arrest with-
to believe, from personal knowledge or from information given by out warrant. 
any person and taken down in writing, that any dangerous drug in' 
respect of which an offence punishable under Chapter III has been 
committed is kept or concealed in any building, vessel or enclosed 
place, may, between sunrise and sunset,-
(4) enter into any such nuilding, vessel or place; 
(b) in case of resistance, break open any door and remove 
any other obstacle to such entry; 
(c) seize such drug and all materials used in the manufac-
ture thereof and any other article which he has reason to 
believe to be liable to confiscation under section 33 and any 
document or other article which he has reason to belie'le may 
furnish evidence of the commission of an offence punishable 
under Chapter III relating to such drug; and 
(d) detain and search, and, if he thinks proper, arrest any 
person whom he has reason to believe to have committed 
an offence punishable under Chapter III relating to such drug: 

J uriedictioo 
to try 
oft'encea. 
s 
Provided that if such officer has reason to beHeve that a search 
warrant cannot be obtained without affording opportunity for the 
concealment of evidence or faci~ty for the escape of an offender, 
he may cter and search such building, vessel or enclosed place at 
any time between sunset and sunrise, after recording the grounds 
of his belief. 
• • • • 
31. No Magistrate shall try an offence under this Act unl~ he 
is a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class, or a 
Magistrate of the second class specially empowered by the appro-
priate Government in this behalf . 
• • • 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
Further to amend the Opium Aa, 1878 and the Dangerous 
Drugs Aa, 1930 
(Sian T.T. Kr;sJmamachari, Mint.ster oj F~.) 