As INTRODUCED In Lox Sanna

Bili No. 82 of 1993

THE AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA BILL, 1993

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES

CHAPTER I :
PRELIMENARY

Short title, comrescement and application.

CHAPTER II

Tre Ameorts AUTHORITY OF INDIA

incorporation of the Authority.

‘or office of member.

. Term of office and conditions of service of members.
. Vacation of office of member.
. Eligibility of member for re-appointment.

. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Authority.
. Appointment of officers and other employees of the Authority.

on business principles.
CHAPTER IIT © ;

FuNCTIONS OF THE AUTHORITY

Authority.
CHAPTER IV

ProPerty anp ConrrACT

the International Airports Authority and the

National Airports Authority to vest in the Authority.

International Airports Authortiy and th

vesting of undertakings in the Authority.
be deemed to have been granted to the,

enefit to continue to have effect

operative. ~

ficere and other employees of the
ne National Airports

land for the Authority.

CLAUSES
1.
2. Definitions.
3. Constitution and
4, Disqualification f
5
6
7.
8. * Meetings.
9.
10
11. Authority to act
12. Functions of the
13. Undertakings of
14, General effect of
15. Licences, etc., to
Authority.
16, Tax exemption or &
17. Guarantee to be
18. Provisions in respect of of
Authority.
19. Compulsory acquisition of
20. Contracts by the Authority.
21. Mode of executin

g contracts on behalf of the Authority.

@



@
CHAPTER ¥ . हे

FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT

CLauses ‘

22. Power of the Authority to charge fees, rent, etc |

23. Additional capital asd grant to the Authority by the Central
| Govenment. i

24, Fund of the Authority and its investment.

25. Allocation of surplus funds. H

26. Submission of programme of activities and financial estimates.

27. Borrowing powers of the Authority.

28. Accounts and audit. है 7 sy

CHAPTER VI .
MisceLLanpous

29. Submission of annual report. :
* 30. Delegation.

31. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Authority.

32. Officers and employees of the Authority to be public servants.

३३. Protection of action taken in good faith.

34. Custody and disposal of lost property.

35. Provisions relating to income-tax.
"36. Power of the Authortiy to undertake ‘certain works,

37. Power to issue directions.

38. Power of the Central Government to temporarily divest”

the Authority of the management of any airport.

39. Power of the Central Government to supersede the Authority.

40, . Power of the Central Government to issue directions,

41. Power to make rules. ' 7

42. Power to make regulations.

43. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.

44, Power to remove difficulties.

45. Amendment of Act 22 of 1934.

46, Repeal and saving. ‘ :

Bill.No, 82 of 1993.

‘THE AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA BILL, 1993

aA

BILL

to provide for the consiitution of the Airports Authority of India and for the
transfer and vesting of the undertakings of the International Airports
Authority of India and the National Airports Authority to and in the
Airports Authority of India sa constituted for the better administration

and cohesive management of airports and civil enclaves whereat air
‘ transport services are operated or are intended to be operated and of alt

aeronautical communication stations and for matters” connected there-

with or incidental thereto,

Bs it enacted by Parliament ia the Forty-fourth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—~

CHAPTER I . *
PRELIMINARY
5 हा 4. (7) fhis Act may be calied the Airports Authority of India Ah Shor
1993. i 1 file,
(2) 10 shall come. into force on such date as the’ Central Government — yence-
may, by notification in the Oticial Gazette, appoint. mew sod
tion.

(3) It applies to—

(a) all airports. whereat air transport services are operated or are
10 intended. to be operated, other than. airports and airfields belonging to,
or subject to the control of, any armed force of the Union;



| mumeration, whatsoever, for the transport by air of persons, mai or any

ret

(6) all civil enclaves:

(८) all aeronautical communication siaious; and ह

(4) ail taining stations, establisiments aad worsslops relating to
air transpoxt services. .
2. Im this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—~ 5

(a) “aeronautical communication staoa” 1 Ss a station a the
aeronautical communication service whica imcluces aeronautical practising
service, aeronautical lixed service, aeronautical iob.ie service and
aeronautical radio communication service;

(5) “airport” means a ianding and taking off area ior airoraits, 10
usually with runways and aircraft maintenance end passbager facilities
and includes aerodrome as defined in clause (2) of section 2 of the
Aureratt Act, 19345 हु

(c) “airstrip” means an area used of intended to be used for the
jandmg and take-olf of aiccratls wiua short take-orf and landing. charac: 15
teristics and includes ail buiidings and swuctures tuereon or appertaining
thereto; . eo eae 3

(d) “ait traffic service” includes fight information service, alerting
service, ait trailic advisory service, air tatlic controi service, area control
service, approach controi service and airport control service; 20

(८) “air wansport service” means any service, for any kind of re-

other thing, animate or inanimate, whether such service relates to a
single flight or series of flights; ,
GY) “appointed day” means such date as lhe Central Government 55
may, by Rotiication in the Oificial Gazette, appoint for the purposes
of section 3; . ini ; 4
(g) “Authority” means the Airports Authority of india constituted
‘under section 3;
(4) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson cf the Authority ap- 39
pinted under clause (@) of sub-section (3) of section 3;
(i) “civil enclave’? means the area, if any, alictted at an airport
belonging to any armed force of the Union, for use by persons availing
of any air transport services from such airport or for the handling of
baggage or cargo by such service, and includes land comprising of amy 35
building and structure on such area;
(1) “heliport” means an area, either at ground level or elevated on
a structure, used or intended to be used for the landing and take off of
helicopters and includes any area for parking helicopters and all build-
ings and structures thereon or appertaining thereto, hi 40
(४0. “International Airports Authority” means the International Ai-
parts Authority of India constituted under section 3 of the International
uthoril 3 43
Airports Authority Act, 1971; ; snc ‘3 of
() “member” means 3 member of the Authority and acs se s
i i i sections 4, 5,
Chairperson, but does not include, for the purposes 0! ;
and 7, an ex officio member referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (7)
of section 3; ‘ inn ‘
(m) “National Airports Authority’ means the National orts
Authority constituted under section 3 of the National Airports Authority
Act, 19888 ६

64 of
50 1985:

3 sa

(n) “prescribed means prescribed by rules made vader this Act;

(०) “regulations” means regulations made under this Aci.

CHAPTER. 11
Tas AIRPORT AUTHORITY oF LNDIA
3. (7) With effect froin the appoinied day, the Central Goverament shall rons
5 by noGication in the Oilicial Gazelle coustiture an authority te be called the 414
Alposis Authority of india, incorpo.
ration of

(2) The Authority shall be a body corparaie by the name aforesaid hav- the Au-
ing. perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provi- thority.
sions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of properiy both movable and
immovabie, and to coniract and shalt by the said name sue and be sued.

(9) The Authority shall consist of—
(8) a Chairperson to be appoimied by the Cential Goyerawens

1 (8) the Direcior General cf Civil Aviation, or an officer not below
the rank of the Deputy Director General of Civil Aviation, to be appoint
is ed by the Central Government, ex officio;

। (०) nof less than eight and not more than foarteen witmabers to be
appointed hy the Central Government,

(४) The Chairperson shall be a whole-time member and other members
referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (3) may be appointed as whole-time
20 Or part-time members as the Central Government may think fit.

(5) The Chairperson aad the members referred to in clause (८) of sub-
section (3) Shall be chosen from among persons who have special knowledge
and experience in. air transport or any other transport services, indusiry, com-
mercial or financial matters or administration and from among persons. who

25 are capable of representing organisations of workers and consumers.

हैं. A person shail be disqualified for being appointed as a member if he—

Disquali-
पु : . fication
(a) has bee nconvicted and sentenced to imprisonmint for an offence, for
which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; office of
or member.

30 (4) is an undischarged insolvent; or

(०) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by. a competent
court; or है हैं ३

“(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Govern-
ment or a body corporate owned or controlled by the Government; or

35 (e) has in the opinion of the Central Government such financial or
other interest in the Author'ty as is likely ‘to affect prejudicially the
discharge by bim of his functions as 2 member. .



Term of
ज्वीए्ड

गत
condi-
tions of
service
of
members.

Vacation
of office
ot

member.

Eligibi-
lity of
member
for
reap-
point-
ment.

4
5. (2. Subject to the provisions of section 6,
(1) every wholetime member (other than the ex-officio member)
shall hold office for a period of five yoars from the date on which he
assumes office or til] he attains the age of Sixty years, whichever is
earlier, and
the ea-officio member)

if art-time member (other than
God fie 1 ७८ date op which be

shall bold office for a period of three years. from thi
assiimes office:
Provided that the Central Goverment may-— हे है
(a) terminate the appointment of any whole-time member, who & 10
not a servant of the Government, after giving him notice for a period of
not less than three months or, in lieu thereof, on payment of an amount
equal 10 his salary and allowances, if any, for a period of three months;
(b) terminate the appointment of any part-time member who is not
a servant of the Government after giving him notice for such priod as 15
inay be prescribed; and
(०) terminate at any time the appointment of any member who is a
servant of the Government.
(2) The other conditions of service of the members shall be such as may

be. prescribed. 4

@) Any member may resign his office by giving notice in writing for such
period as may be prescribed, to the Central Government and, on such resigna-
tion being notified in the Official Gazette by that Government, such member
shall be deemed to bave vacated his office. :

6 The Central Government shall remove a member if he— "25
(a) becomes subject to any of the  disqualifications mentioned | in
section 4: !

Provided that no member shall be removed on the ground that he
has become subject to the disqualification mentioned in clause. (¢) of. that:
section, unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard 50
in the matter; or. हु

(8) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting; or

(८) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Authority, absent
from three consecutive meetings of the Authority, or '

(2) in the opinion of the Central Government, has. so. abused his 35
position as‘to render his continuance in office detrimental 10 the public
interest: हि +

Provided that no member shall be removed under this clause unless
he hay been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.

a है
7. Any person ceasing to be a member shall, unless disqualified under ३0
section 4, be eligible for reappointment.

5

8. (1} The Authority shall meet at such times and places, and shall Meetings,
observe such rules of procecure in regard to the transaction of the business
at its meetings (including the quorum at such meetings) as may be pre-
vided by regulations. . 7

5 A +
5 (2) The Chairperson, or, if for any reason he is unable to aitend any
meeting of the Authority, any other member chosen by the members

persent at the meeting shall preside at the meeting,

(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority

shall be decided by a majority of thé votes of the members present and

16 voting, and, in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson, or in his

absence. the person presiding, shali have and exerci: second or casting
pte,

9. No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalid merely by  Vacanci-

reason of— es, ete
हु not to
15 (a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the invali-
Authority; or है date
oe हि proceed.
(b} any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member ings of
of the Authority; or the
Authority,

; (c) ‘any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority no! affect-
- 20 ing the merits of the case.

10. (1) For the purpose of enabling it efficient! i i

हे रे ently tn discharge its fune- Appoint-
tions under this Act, the Authority shall, subject to the provisions of ment of
section 18 and to such rules as may be made in this behalf, appoint {whe- officers

ther on deputation or otherwise) such number of officers and other 74
25 emmpioyees as it may consider necessary: other
empla-

Provided that the appointment of such category of officers, as may be oF ane

specified after consultation with the Chairperson in such rules, shall be Autho-
subject to the approval of the Central Government. rity.

(2) Subject to the provisions of section 18 every officer or other

30 employee appointed by the Authority shall be subject to such conditions

of service and shall he entitled to such remuneration as may be determin-
ed by regulations. _

i. In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the Authority Autho-

shall act, so far as may be, on business principles. rity to
action
ueiness
princip-
les.
35 CHAPTER IIT

Funcrions or tHe AUTHorrry

“12. (1) Subject to the rules, if an: Cc G
int E | ए, made by the Central Government Func.
in regen) it small be the function of the Authority to manage the air- tions of
ports, the civil enclaves and the aeronautical MUN icati if the Au-
ao.clentiy. communication stations effi- thority,

(2) It shall be the duty of the Authority to provide air traffic service
and air transport seryiee at any airport and civil enclaves.



6

erality of the provisions coniained in

ft wejudice to the gem
हि wet) and Oy, the Authority may—

sub-section (1)

(a) plan, develop,

aprons and terminals
enclaves;

(b) plan, procure, instal and

nication equipment,

construct and maintain.
and ancillary buildings a

peacons and ground aids.

t the airports and civil:

maintain navig:

such locations as may be considere'
operation of airerafts:

(2) provide air safety services and search

in co-ordination with other agencies;
ions or cen!

lish schools or insticuti
(d) establish as or

its officers and employees in regar

the purposes of this Act;
(e) construct residenti:
(f) establish and maintain hotel:

near the airports;
tablish wart

© we or processing of goods;

al, money exchan{

passengers and other

al buildings for its

the
(h) arrange for ‘posti
focilities for the use of
and civil enclaves;
(i) make appropriate arrangements
airports and civil enclaves;
rol the plying 0:

for

Gj) regulate and cont
exit of passengers and vi
due regard to the security an
of India;

(k) develop and
ment setvices, and un ;
tion to airports, air-navigetion
cilities thereat;

provide consultancy,

or any fa

(0. establish and manage helicopters

yh transport facility as

‘ovide suc!
(mee engers tr:

५ Authority, necessary to the pass

(n) form one or more compa!

or under any other jaw rels 1
discharge of the functions impose

(०) take all such steps @s may ve ne दि
may be incidental to, the exercise of any
any function conferred or irap

(p) perform any other function consi

by the Central Governmen
tion of aircraft to, from and acros

(q) establish training ins
ivity at the airport:

हु i
(r) any other ac :
in. the best commercial interests of the

d necessary f

8, restaurants and restrooms at OF

ehouses and cargo complexes al

ge, insurance and telephone 20.

है on
f vehicles, and the enty and 250

sitors, in the airports ant
a protocol functions of thi

dertake operations inl
services, groun'

nies under the Compan

Jating to companies f
don it by this Act;

ecessary oF

osed on it by this
jdered necessary oF desirable

६ for ensuring the safe and e me
3 the air space of India;

titutes and workshops;

taxiways,

runways,

3

ational aids, commu
at the airports and at
or safe navigation and

and rescue facilities 10:

tres for the training of
ynatter connected with

15

employees;

t the airports for

persons at the airports

watch and ward at the

d civil enclaves with

७ Government

construction or ynanage-~

ndia and abroad in rela- 3

ते aids and safety services

and airstrips; \

are, in the opinion of the
avelling by air: :

jes Act, 1956
ies to further the efficient.

35.

convenient for, oF

power or the discharge of 40
ह Act; and
Pioient opera 7 2.

4

s and the civil enclaves
Authority, including argo:

rT हु पु

handling setting up of joint ventures for the discharge of any func-
tion assigned to the Authority.

(4) In the discharge of its functions under this section, the Authority
shall have due regard to the development of air transport service and
5'to the efficiency, economy and safety of such. service.

(5) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as—-

(a) authorising the disregard by the Authority of any Jaw for
the time being in force; or v

(b) authorising any person to institute any proceeding in respect
io of duty or liability to which the Authority or its officers or other
employees would not otherwise be subject,

CHAPTER IV
PROPERTY AND CONTRACT

43. (1) On and from the appointed day, there shall be transierred to,
15 and vest in, the Authority constituted under section 3 the undertaking
of the International Airports Authority and the National Airports Autho-
rity. :
(2) The undertaking of the International Airports Authority or: the
National Airports Authority which is transferred to, and which vests
20 in, the Authority under sub-section (J) shall be deemed to include all
assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all propertiés,
movable and immovable, real on personal, corporeal or incorporeal,
present or contingent, of whatever nature and ~ wheresoever
situate, including . lands, buildings, _ machinery, equipments,
25 works, workshops, cash balances, capital, reserves, reserve funds, invest-
ments, tenancies, leases and book debts and all other rights and interests
arising out of such property as were immediately before the appointed
day in the ownership, possession or power of the International. Airports
Authority, or as the case may be, the National Airports Authority, in
30 relation to its undertaking, whether within or outside India, all books
of account and documents relating thereto and shall also be deemed to
include all borrowings, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind then
subsisting of the International Airports Authority, or as the case may
be, the National Airports Authority in relation to its undertaking.

35 14. (J) All contracts, agreements and working arrangements sub.
sisting immediately before the appointed ‘day and affectng the ‘Inter.
national Airports Authority, or ds the case may be, the National Airports
Authority shall, “in so far ag they relate to the International Airports
Authority, or as the case may be, the National Airports Authority, cease to

40 have effect or be enforceable against the International Airports Autho-
rity, or as the case may be, the National Airports Authority and shall
be of as full force and effect against or in favour of the Autority in
which .the undertakings have vested by virtue of this Act and enforce.
able as fully and effectually as if, instead of the International Airports

45 Authority, or as the case may be, the National. Airports Authority, the
Authority had been named therein or had been a party thereto.

(2) Any proceeding, suit or cause of action pending or existing im.
mediately before the appointed day by or. against the International

Under-
takings
of the
Inter-
national
Airports
Autho-
rity

and

the पु
National
Airporty
Authority
to vest
in the
Authority.

General
effect of
vesting

of under-

taking
in the
Autho-
rity.



Licen-
ces, ete.
to be
deemed
to have
been
granted
to the
Autho-
rity.

‘Tax ex-
emption
or bene-
fit to

continue
to have
effect.

Guaran
toe to be
operatiy 8.

other धान
ployees
gf the

might have been enforced by or against the International Airports Au-

&

Airports Authority or the National Airports Authority in relation to its

undertakings may, as from that day, be continued and enforeed by or

against the Authority in which it has vested by virtue of this Act, as it

thority. or the ‘National Airporis Authority if this Act had not been 3
passed, and shall cease to be enforceable by or against the International

Airports Authority, or as the case may be, the National Airports.

Authority.

45. With effect from the appointed day, all licences, permits; quotas

and exemptions, granted to the International Airports Authority or the 10

National Airports Authority in. connection with the affairs and business

of the International Airports Authority, or as the case may be, the

National Airports Authority, under any law for the time being in force;

shall be deemed to have been granted to the Authority in which है the
undertakings of the International Airports Authority and the National J>

Airports Authority have vested by virtue of this Act.

16. (1) Where any exemption from, or any assessment with renpect: .

to, any tax has been granted or made or any benefit by way of set off.
दा

or carry forward, as the case may be, of any unabsorbed depreciation or.

investment allowance or other allowance or loss has been extended 20.
is available to the International Airports Authority or the Nationa

43.

Airports Authority, under the Income-tax Act, 1961, such exemption,

assessment or benefit shall continue to have effect in relation, to the

Authority in which the . undertakings of the International Airports

Authority and the National Airports Authority have vested by virtue 23.

of this Act. पु

(2) Where any payment made by the International Airports Autho-
rity or the National Airports Authority is exempt from deduction of

the tax at source under any provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961, the:

exemption from tax will continue to be available as if the provisions of 30:

the said Act made applicable to the International Airports Authority or

the National Airports Authority were operative in relation to the Autho.

rity in which the undertakings of the International Airports Authority

and the National Airports Authority have vested by virtue of this Act.

(3) The transfer and vesting of the undertakings or any part thereok 35
in terms of section 13 shall not be construed as.a transfer within tha
meaning of the Income-tax Act, 1961 for the purposes of capital gains.

43:

1%, Any guarantee given for or in favour of the International Air-

i Nati: i thority with. respect to any
orts Authority or the National Airports Au y wi ; हि
Toma or lease finance shall continue to be operative oo relation to the 4
Authority in which the undertakings of the International Airports Au
thority and the National Airports Authority have vested by virtue o'
this Act.

18, (7) (@) Every officer or other employee of the International 5
Airports Authority serving in its employment immediately before @ 4:
appointed day shall, in so far as such officer or other employee is em-
ployed in connection with the undertaking which has vested in the
Authority by virtue of this Act, becomes, as from the appointed ay an
officer or; as the case may be; other employee of the International Air-

ports Division of the Authority: 50

of 19417,

a

(4) Every officer or other empioyee of the National Airports Autho-
rity serving in its employmeni wmmeuuatery belore the appointed day
shall, ia so far as such officer or other employee is employed in con-
nection with the undertaking which has vested in the Authority by

3 virtue of this Act; becomes, as from the appointed day, an officer or, as
the case may be, other employee of the National Airports Bivision of
the Authority,

(2) Every officer or other employee of the International Airports
Authority or the National Airports Authority who becomes an officer
10 of, as the case may be, other employee of the Authority, as referred to
in sub-section (1), shall 1010 fis office or service therein by the same
tenure, at the same remuneration, upon the sathe terms and conditions;
with the same obligations and with the same tights and privileges as to
leave, passage, insurance, superannuation scheme, provident fund, other
15 funds, retirement, pension, gratuity and other benelits as he would have
held under the International Airports Authority or as the case may be,
the National Airports Authority if its undertaking had not. vested in the
Authority and shall continue to do so as on officer or other employee,
as the case may be, of the Authority or until the expiry of a-period of
29 one year from the appointed day if such officer or other employee opts
not to be the officer or other employee of the Authority within such
period:

Provided that if the Authority thinks it expedient to extend the
Period so fixed, it may extend the same up to a maximum period of
25 One year, पर

(3) Where an. officer or other employee of the International Air-
ports Authortiy or the National Airports Authority opts under “ sub-
section (2) not to be in the employment or service of the “Authority in,
which the undertakings of the International Airports Authority and the

30 National Airpoits Authority have vested, such officer of other employee
shall be deemed to have resigned from the respective cadre, है

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes

Act, 1947 or in any other law for the time being in force, the tratisfer of

the services of any officer or other employee of the International Airports

33 Authority or the National Airports Authority to the Authority shall not

entitle such officer or other employee to any compensation ‘under this

Act or under aay other Jaw for the time being in force and no such claim .
shali be entertained by any court, tribunal oz other authority,

(5) The officers and other employees who have retired before the

ap appointed day from the service of the Intemational Airports Authority
or the National Airports Authority and are entitled to any. benefits, rights

or privileges shall be entitled to receive the same benefits, rights or pri-
vileges from the Authority in which the undéttakings of the Interna-
tional Airports Authority and the National Airports Authority have
4s Vested.

(6) The trusts of the Provident Fund and Group Insurance and Super-
annuation Scheme of the International Airports Authority or the National
Airports Authority and any other bodies created for: thé welfare of
officers or employees would continue to discharge their futictions in the

#0 Authority as was being done hitherto in the International Airports

Tnter-
national
Airports
Authority
ond the
National
Airports
Authority,



10.

Authority or the National Airports Authority and tax exemption granted

to Provident Fund or Group Insurance and Superannuation Scheme would.

continue to be applied to the Authority.

movable property or for the lease of any such property for a term

exceeding thirty years and no other contract exceeding such value or

amount as the Central Government may, from time to time, by order, 30
fix in this behalf shall be made unless it has been previously approved
by.'the Central Government. ”

@) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the form and manner 30
in which any contract shall be made under this Act shall be such as may
be specified by regulations, -..- mee . 35.
है 5
(3) No contract which.is not in accordance with the provisions of
this Act and the regulations shall be binding on the Authority,
_ CHAPTER V~
हि 1. Finance, Accounts ann Avprr
Power’ of 22, ‘The Authority may,— 40
the Au- ~ -
thority to () with the previous approval of the Central Government, charge
charge fees or reht— : 40
fees .
rent etc, “(a} for the landing; housing or parking of aircraft. or. for

‘‘eny ‘other service or facility offered in connection with aircraft

of 1934,

‘operations. at any airport, heliport or. airstrip; 745

Th

Explaiiation—In this . sub-clause
an aircraft belonging to _ any

“aircraft” does not include
armed force of the Union and

“aitcraft, operations” does not. include operations of any aircraft
वि belonging to the said force;
(7) After the expiry of the period of one year, or the extended period, 5 " ः
as referred to in sub-section (2), all the officers nd other employees At 5 (8) _for providing alr taific services, _ ground safety services,
Aner oe का of the vere within such period shall be है Ne fronautical communications and navigational aids and meteoro-
governed by the rules and regulations made by the Authority in respect geal ion atin any airport and at any aeronautical cam;
of the service conditions of the officers and other employees of the said 10 गआपागंटक्पंणा station;
Authority. ; : ० © for the amenities given to the, passengers atid “Visitors at
Compul- 19. Any land required by the Authority for the discharge of its func- 1 any airport, civil enclave, heliport or airstrip; cn
sory ac- tions under this Act shall be deemed to be needed for a public purpose (0) for the ite and empl है wi .
quisition and such land may be acquired for the Authority under the provisions other services provided b the. Author हि 2 Persons of facilities and
‘end of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 or of any other corresponding Jaw for, heliport or airstrip y एप at any airport, civil enctaye,
1 : न
Authority, the time being in force. 15
| GD with due regard to i ions: C
Con- 20. Subject to the provisions of section 21, the Authortiy shall be com- 3 ernment may give to th ye insiuctions that the Central Goy-
tracts by petent to enter into. and perform any contract necessary for the discharge ° rent from persons who are given by Ye pan ue to pes Charge fees or
the धर फल hi ६ = rai uthority any facility for carrying
‘Authority, of its functions under this Act, on any trade or business at day airport, heliport or aitstrip, Ey
E e t i de by 23. ‘Tin “ :
Mode of ai, (1)Every contract shall, on behalf of the Authority, be mad ९ Central Government am ; sia ; ;
executing the Chairperson or such other member or such officer of the Authority as 20 Parliament by fay in dhs कक. ay, -after due appropriation mide by
contracts may be generally ot specially empowered in this behalf by the Authority ~#
on behalf "i sci in th ध18- gd ‘ वि हे :
and such contracts or class of contracts as may be specified in the regi 0 (@) provide any capital that . है
of the tions shall be sealed with the common seal of the Authority: the disch: fit 5 im ai may a required by the Authority for
‘Authority. . हि ther charge of its functions under this Act or for any purpose connected
Provided that on contract exceeding such value or amount as the wi ewith on such terms and conditions as that Government May deter-_.
Central Government may, from time to time, by order, fix in this behalf 25 8: A oe
i ° 7009]: roved by the Authority: पु
shall ke made unless it has been previously appro yy the y: (0) pay to the Authority, on such « mad conditions ee ae on
"Provided “further that no contract for the acquisition or sale of im- 25 tral Government coat determi

ine, by way of loans or gtants. such sums of
may consider necessary for the efficient dis-
tts functions under this Act. ५ cy

money a§ thei
charge by the Authority of
24. (1) The Aathority

Authority shal} be eredited
be made therefrom,

shall है have its own fund and all receipts of “the
thereto and all Payments of the Authority shall

(2) The Authority shall have power, subject to the provisions ‘of this Act,
to spend Such sums as it thinks fit to cover all administrative expenses of the
Authority and off objecty of for Purposes authorised by this Act: and
Sums shall be treated as expenditure out of the fund of the Authority.

such

®) All moneys Standing at the credit of the Authority which cannot im-
mediately be applied as provi

४080 in sub-section (2), shall be—

; (b) invested in the securities. of
manner as may be prescribed.
ह Explanation, —Ip, this sub-section, “
ing as in clause (९) of section 2 of. the

the Central Governinent or in such

‘scheduled bank” ‘has the 7 ;

Addi-
tional
capital
and
giant to_
the.-
Autho- ,
ity by. |
the Cen-
tral

Govern ..* ,

ment, ..

Fund

of the
Authority
and its
invest.
ment,



Afleca-
tion of
surplus
funds.

Submis-
sion. of
prog.
tamme of
activities
and
financial
estimates,

Rorrow-
ing
powers
of the

Authority,

2

25. (7) The Authoriiy may, irom time to Line, sen apart such amounts
as it thinks fit as a xeserve fond or funds for the purpose of expanding esis
ing facilities or services or creating new facilities or services al any _airpor >
civit enclave, heliport or aizstrip or for the purpose of providing against any
temporary decrease of reveoue oF increase of expenditure from transient causes 5
er for purposes of replacement of for meeting expenditure arising from loss or
damage from fire, cyclone, air-crash or other accident, or for meeting any
liability arising ont of ‘any act for omission ia fhe “discharge of its functions
under this Act:

Provided that without prejudice to the right of the Authority of establish
specific reserves for one or more specific purposes, the Authority shall also 19
have the power to establish a general reserve :

Provided further that the sums set apart annually in respect of each or
any of the specific and general reserves and the aggregate at any time of such
sums shal] not exceed such limits as may, from time.to time; be fixed in that
behaif by the Central Government, . : 5

(2) After making provision for such reserve ftind or’ funds and for bad:
and doubtful debts, depreciation in assets and all other matters which are
usually provided for by conipanies registered and incorporated.under the Com-
panies Act, 1956, the Authority shall pay the balance of its annual पर्स profits
to the Central Government. 0

26. (7) The Aiithority shall, before the commencement of each financial
year, prepare a statement of the programme of its activities during the forth-
coining financial year as well as financial estimate in respect thereof.

(2) The statement prepared under sub-section (1)..shalll;, not. less than
three ‘months before the commencement of each financial year, be submitted 25
for approval to the Central Government.

(3) The statement and the financial estimates of. the. Authority may, with
the approval of the Central Government, be revised by the Authority.

27, (2) The Authority may, with the consent of the Central Government
or in accordance with the terms of any gencral or special authority given 19 45
it by. the Central Government, “borrow money’ from any ‘source by the issue.
of bonds, debentures or such other mstrumients as it may deem fit for dis-
charging all or any of its functions under this Act. हर

(2) The Central Goveroment may guarantee in such mamer. as it thinks
fit, the repayment of the principal and the payment of interest thereow with 35
xespect to the loans borrowed by the Authorily under sub-section (1).

(3) Subject to stich limits as the Central Government may, from time to
time, lay down, the Authority may borrow temporarily by way of overdraft
or otherwise such amounts as it may require for discharging its functions

under this Ach 40

13

28. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper aéeounts and other rele-
vant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the
profit and loss account and the baliance-sheet in such form 2s may be
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comp-

§ troller and Auditor-Genera! of India.

(2) The accounts of the Authority shali be audited annually by. the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any expenditure incurred
by hin in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Authority
to the Comptrolier and Auditor-Genera) of India.

10 (3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any persot
appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the
Authority shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General has
in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular,

15 shal] have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connec-
ted vouchers, documents and papers and inspect any of the offices of the
Authority,

(4) The accounts of the Authority, as certified, by the Comptroller’

and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him ‘in

20 this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded

annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the
same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.

CHAPTER VI

MISCELLANEOUS

25 29. (1) The Authority shall, as soon as may be after the end of each
financial year, prepare and submit to the Central. Government in such
form as may be prescribed a report giving an accunt of its activities
during that financial year and the report shall also give an account of
the activities which are likely to be undertaken by the Authority during

30 fhe next financial year.

(2) The Central Government shall cause such report to, be laid before
both Houses of Parliament as soon as may be after it is submitted.

30. The Authority may, by general. or special order in writing, dele-

gate to the Chairperson or any other member er to any officer of the

35 Authority, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be

specified in the order, such of its. powers and functions. under. this Act
{except the powers under section 42) as it may deem necessary.

@1. All orders and decisions of the Authority shall. be authenticated

by the signature of the Chairperson or any other member authorised by

40 the Authority in this behalf and ‘all other instruments executed by the

Authority shall be authenticated by the signature of an officer of the
Authority authorised by it in this behalf,

Aveounts
and
sudit.

Submis-
sion of
annual
report,

Delega-
tioin.

Authenti-
cation

of orders
aod

other
instru-
iments

of the
Autho-
rity,



Officers
and em--
ployees
of the
Autho-
rity to be
public
servants.

Protec-
tion of
action
taken
in

good
faith,

Custody
and
disposal
of lost
property.

Provi-
sions
relating
to
income-
tax.

Power of
the
Autho_
tity to
under-
take
certain
works,

Power to
issile
direc-
tions.

4

32, All officers and employees of the Authority shall, while acting of
purporting to act in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or of any
rule or regulation made thereunder, be deemed to be public servants
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.

33, No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shail He against the 5
Authority or any member ot any officer or other employee of the Authority
for anything which is in good faith done. or intended to be done in pursuance
of this Act or of any rule or rogulation made thereunder or for any damage
sustained by any aircraft or yehicle in consequence of any defect m any of
the airports, civil enclaves, heliports, airstrips, aeronautical communication 10
stations ot other things belonging to or under the control of the Authority.

34, Subject to such regulations as the Authority may make in this be-
half, the Authority shall provide for securing the safe custody and restoration
of any property which, while not in groper custody, is found on any premises
belonging to the Authority or under its overall control or in any aircraft on any [5
such premises,
tax Act, 1961 or any other enactment
come-tax or any other tax on income;

d to be a company within the
] be liable to tax accordingly 0D 95

35, For the purposes of the Income
for the time being in force relating to in
profits or gains, the Authority shall be deeme
meaning of the Yncome-tax Act, 1961 and shall
jts income, profits and gains.

36. The Authority may undertake to Carty out on ‘behalf of any person
any works or services og any class of works of services 00 such om ant
conditions as may be agreed upon between the Authority and the per: :

concerned. x 25.

specially authorised by it m this

A ‘The Authority or any officer b a
a ae J jgsue directions, consistent with the

behalf may, from time to time, by order, mn
srovisions of the Aircraft Act, 1934, and the rules made therennder, with

respect to. any of the matters specified in clauses (1). (8), @, @, (४), (m)-
(p), (44) and (7} of sub-section (2) of section 5 of that Act, ° any कक 30
or persons engaged in aircraft operations or Using any airport, hel port a ae
or civil enclave, in any. case where the ‘Authority or the officer is satis! * pal
in the interests of the security of India of for secuting the security of the ait

craft it is necessary to do 80. है
(2) Every direction. issued under sub-gection (1) shall be complied with 35
by the person or persons to whom: such direction js issued.

. (3) ॥ aty orion wilfally fails 46 comply with any direction issued under
this section, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, छा 40

with both.

के

22 of

15

38. (7) If, at any time, the Central Government is of opinion that in the
public interest it is. necessary or expedient so: to do, it may, by order, direct the
Authority to entrust the administration, management or similar other functions

5 of any airport, heliport, airstrip, civil enclave, aeronautical communication
station, or any other agency or department of any airport, heliport, airstrip
civil. enclave or aeronautical commumication station with effect from such date
and to such person as may be specified in the order and the Authority shall be
bound te comply with such direction:

Provided that before an order is made under this sub-section the Authority
10 shall be given a teasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.

(2) Where the management of any airport, heliport, airstrip, civil enclave
or aeronautical communication station or any other agency or depariment
thereof is entrusted to any- person specified ander sub-section (1) (hereafter
referred to inthis section as the authorised persen}, the Authority shall cease
15 to exercise and discharge all its powers aad functions under this Act ia relation
to such airport, heliport, airstrip, civil enclave or aeronautical communication
station ot any other agency or department thereof and such powers and func~
tions shall be exercised and discharged by the authorised person im accordance
with the instructions, if any, which the Contral Government may give to the
2g authorised persou from time to time:

Provided that uo such power or function as may be specified by the
Central Government by a general or special order shall be exercised or dis-
charged by the authorised person except with the previous sanction of the
Central Government,

25 (8) Ap order made under sub-section (1) shall, unless rescinded, be in
operation for a period of six months from the date on which the management
of the airport, heliport, airstrip, civil enclave or acronautical commusication
station or any other agency or department thercof is ontrusted to the authoris-
ed person:

30 Provided that the Central Government may extend such period for a fur-
ther period or periods not exceeding cighteen months.

(4) During the operation of an order made under sub-section (), it shall °
be: competent for the (Central Government to issus, from time to time, such
directions to the Authority as are necessary to enable the authorised person

35 to exercise the powers and discharge the functions of ihe. Authority under this.
Act in relation to the airport, heliport, airstrip, civil enclave or aeronaetical. »
commsnication stations, or any other agency or department thereof the.
manageitient of which has been entrusted to him and in particular to transfer
any sum of money from the fund of the Authority to the authorised persoa

40 for the management of the airport, heliport, airstrip, civil enclave or aeronauti-

cal coramunication station or any other agency or department thereof and
every such direction shall ‘be complied with by the Authority.

(SY On the cesser of operation of any order made under sub-section (9
jn relation to any airport, heliport, airstrip, Civil enclave or aeronautical. com
45 tounication station, or any other agency or department ‘thereof the authorised
person shall cease to exercise and perform’ the powers and functions of ‘the
Authority under this Act in relation: to such airport, heliport, airstrip, civil
enclave or acronditical coiimiiinication station or any other agency or depart-
ment thereof and the Authority.shall continue to exercise and perform sock
50 powers and functions in accordance With the provisions of this Act.

Power of
the
Central
Gevern-
ment to
tempo.
rapily
divest
the
Autho-
vity of
the
manage-
meant of
any
airport.



Power ot
the

Centra)
Gaver
ment

fo super
sede the
Anithorily.

16

(6) On the cesser of operation of any order made under sub-section 09
jn xelation to amy airport, heliport, airstrip, civil enclave or aeronautical com-
srunication station, Or any other ageacy of department thereat the authorised
person shall hand ovér to the Authority any property Gacluding amy sum of
money of other asset) remaining with him in connection with the inanage-
ment of such airport, heliport, airstrip, civil enclave. or aeronautical communi-
cation station. Z

“(7) Anything done. or any action taken | é
in किम ed airport, neliport, airstrip, civil enclave 0 aeronautical com-
munication station of any other agency of department theceot decing the
period of operation of an order made under sub-sectios (1) shalt be drome:
to have been done oF taken by the ‘Authority and shal be binding an the:

Authority.
39, (1) If, at any time, the Central

wt

awiuily by the authorised. persoa.

Government is ‘of opinion——

ency, the Authority is unable 15.

on account of a grave enrerg
ene है कि y OF ander the

to discharge the functions and duties imposed on it b
provisions of this Act; ता

ib) that the Authority has persistently made default a eon
with any direction, issued by the Central Government onde का Ae det ;
im the discharge of the functions and duties nee ae i iH "al
the provisions of this Act and a8 @ yesult of which defaw to ic ee
position. of the Authority or the administration of any काएण है काका
airstrip, civil enclave or aeronautical communication ऑफ BS

detoriorated, or

(6) that circwnstances exist which render it necessary in: the public 25

interest so to do,
1 Gazette, supersede

r ification in the Officta
the Central Government may, by soliftah व मा जटिल

the Authority for such period, nat exceeding six moutlts,
jn the notification:
Provided that before issuing 8 ‘notification
reasons mentioned in clause @), the Cen ne
॥6 opportuni OW
ried and al wo eter ve exptanations and objections, if any, of
Authority.
52) Upon the publication
ing the Authority,—
(व) all the members shalJ, as from the
their offices as such;

verament shall give 3 TeascH”
why it should not be supet-
the

of a notification under sub-section (I

date of supersession, yacate

(by jong 3M i nich may, by of under ihe
{by all the powers. functions and duties wi हि
provisions of this ‘Act, be exercised oF discharged by of छा behalf of the 49:

H til sty jg ve-conatituted under gub-section (3).
Authority, shall unt the Authority is eat

bo. exercised and discharged. by guch person av persons 3
Government may direct: coe हि
" ye Authority «shall, vat
all property owned a contralied by the ; 4
the सम वकील ig te-constituted under sub-section (3). vest in the Central 45

Government,

(3) On the expiration. of, the period of stiparsession specified in the noti-
fication issued: under sub-section (1), the Centrak Government piay—

under’ this: sub-section for the 30:

) supersed- 35.75

10

13

20

25

nie

AS

Wy

we extend the pexiod of supersession for such further term, not ex-
ceeding six months, as it may consider necessary; or

(2) reconstitute the Authority by fresh appointment and in such case
tie members who vacated their offices under clatse (व) of sub-section (2)
shall not be deemed disqualified for appointracnt:

Provided that the Centrat Government may, at any time before the ox

piration of the period of supersession, whether as originally ‘specified under

sub-section (1) or as extended under this sub-section, take, action under clause
{b) of this sub-section,

(4) The Cental Government shall cause a. notification issued under .sub-
section ((1) and # full report of any action taken under this section and the
circumstances leading to such action to be laid before both Houses of Parlia-
ment at the earliest opportunity.

40, (0) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the
Authority shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act.
be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central” Govern-
ment may give in writing to it irom time to time:

है Provided that the Authority shall, as far.as practicable, be given oppar-
tunity to express its views before any ditection is given under this sub-section.

(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one
of policy or not shall be final. ४

(3) The Central Government may, from time to time, issue directions to
the Authority regarding the discharge of any functions to it under clause (e)
of sub-section (3) of section 12 and the Authority sha be bound to comply
with such directions,

41, (1) The. Central Government may, by notification in the Oficial
Gazette, make rules for carryime out the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular and without prejudice 10 the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide far—

(4) the period of notice us may be given by the Central Govern-
ment to terminate the appointment of any part-time member of the Au-
thority under claus: (b) oi proviso to sub-section (1) of section 5;

(b) the conditions of service of the members of the Authority under
sub-section (2) of section 5; .

(८) the period of notice as may be given by any member to resign
his office under sub-section (3) of section 5,

(d) the provisions subject to which officers and other employees
imay “be appointed by the Authority and the category of officers to be
appointed after approval of the Central Government ander the proviso to
sub-section (1) section 10; ’

(2) the provisions subject to which the Authority may manage the
airports, civil enclaves and aeronautical communication’ stations. under
sub-section (2)-of section 12; _

(fH the thanner ia whith the Authority may invest its fuads under
clause (9) of sub-section (जि) of section 24; .

(g) the form-in which the annwal--statement of, accounts shalt be
prepared by the Authority under sub-section (2) of. section 28:

Power of
the
Central
Govern.
mada’ to
isstie.
direc-
tions,

Power to
कान्र&ल
rules.



Power to
make
regula+
tions,

18

(A) the form in which a report giving an account of ifs activitics
shall be prepared and submitted by the Authority to the Central
Government under sub-section (1) of section 29; and

(i) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.

42, (1) The Authority may make regulations not inconsistent with this 5 5.
‘Act and the rules made thereunder: to provide for all matters for which pro-.
vision is necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the pro~.
visions of this Act.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, suck :
gegulations may provide for— 10

(a) the time and places of the meetings of the, Authority and

the procedure to be followed for the transaction of business including the.

guorum at such meetings under sub-section (1) of section 8;

(b) the conditions of service and the renmmeration of officers and
other employees to be appointed by the Authority under sub-section (2)7 5°
of section 10:

(2) the construction of residential accommodation for the officers
and cther employees appointed by the Authority under clause (8) of
sub-section @) of section 12; :

(d) the storage or processing df goods im-any warehouse establish. 20.
ed by the Authority under clause (g). of sub-section (7) of section 12
and the charging of fees for such storage or processing;

(e) the contracts or class of contracts which .are to be sealed with
the common seal of the Authority and the form and manner in which

_ a contract may be made by the Authority under sub-section (1) of 25

section 21; .

(f) the custody and restoration of Jost ‘property and the terms
and conditions under which lost property may be restored to the
persons entitled thereto under section 34;

(g) the dispesal of any lost property in cases where such pro- 39
perty is not restored;

(h) securing the safety of aircraft, vehicles and persons using
the airport or civil enclave and preventing danger to the public arising

from the use and operation of aircraft in. the airport or civil enclave;

G) preventing obstruction within the airport or civil enclave 35

. for its normal functioning;

(i) prohibiting the parking or waiting of any vehicle of carriage
within the airport or civil enclave except at places specified by the
Authority; on

(k) prohibiting or festricting access to any + part of the airport 49.
or. civil enclave;

(PD preserving otder within: the airport or civil. enclaves and

preventing damage to property therein;

(Gn) regulating or restricting advertising within the airport or

civil enclave; - 45

ig

(ny requiring any person, if so directed by an officer appointed
by the Authority in this behalf, to leave the airport or civil enclave
or any particular part of the airport or civil enclave; and

(०) generally for the efficient and proper management of the
5 airport or civil eaclave.

(3) Any regulation made under any of the clauses (8) to (०) (both in-
elusive) of sub-section (2) may provide that a contravention thereof shall
be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. and in
the case of 2 coutinuing contravention with an additional fine which may

10 extéud to twenty rupees for every day during which such contravention
continues after conviction for the first such contsavention. :

(4) No regulation made by the Authority under this section shall
have effect until it has been approved by the Central Government: and
published in the Official Gazette. है

15 (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the first regu~
lations under this Act shall made by the Central Government and shail
have effect on being published in the Official Gazette. ,

(6) The first regulations framed under sub-section (5) shall remain in
force until such time the Authority has made regulations and they are published
in the Official Gazette.

20

43. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid,
as soon asi may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while
jt is in session, for a itotal period of thirty days which may be comprised in
fone session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or re-
gulation, as the case may be, or both Houses agree’ that the role or regula-
tion, ag the case may be, should not be made, the rule or regulation shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be’ of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule
or regulation.

44, (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this
Act, the Central Government may, by general or special order published
in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the pro-
visions of this Act as appear fo it 10 be necessary’ or expedient for the
removal of the difficulty:

Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of one
year from the commencement of this Act.
नर

(2) Every order made under डफिष्ट्लांगा, (1) shall be laid, as soon

40 ag may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is
in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
cone session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before: the expiry

‘of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the order or
both Houses agree thiat the order should not be made, the order shall there-
after have’ effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that aay such modification or annulment shall be
syithout prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order.

Rules
and
regula-
tions to
be laid
before
Parlia.
ment.

Power to
remove
difficul-
ties.



Amenzl-
ment of
Act

ae ol 1934

Repeal,
aud
Saving

20
45. Iq section 5 of the Aireralis Act, 1934, in sub-section (2),—

(a) in clause (8), for the words-and figures “the international Ae
ports Authority Act, 1971 or the National Airports Authority हक
1985”, the words and figures “the Airports Authority of India Act, 1993

shall be substituted;
(8) proviso to clause (9) shall be omitted,
46. (1) On and from the appoint dated, —

(i) The International Airports Authority Act, 1974 and the National
Airports Ajuthority Act, 1985 shail stand repealed;

i i tional Airports
Gi) the International Airports Authority and the National Airp 0

Authority constituted under the aforesaid Acts shall cease to exist.

i y acti ken ot

(2) Notwithstanding such repeal. anything done of an setion ‘ake ne

purported to have been done or taken under ihe aforesaid acts rea ee se
i iti it i i istent: with the provisions of this .

shall, in so ifar as it is not inconsisien t ip i

deemed to have been done or taken uader the corresponding provisions of thi

Act

15

ay
छः

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Until 13971, the Director General of Civil Aviation was sntrusted with
the responsibility not only of regulatory functions relating to civil aviation
but also of construction and management of airports, air traffic control
and air space management in the country,

2, Considering the need for heavy investments and operational Hexibi-
lity required for construction and management of large airports, the [nter-
national Airports Authority of India (IAAT) was constituted as an au
fonomous body under the International Airports Authority Act, 1971.
Four international airports, namely, Dethi, Bombay, Madras and Caleutta
were transferred to TAAI with effect from 1.4.1972; later, Trivandrum
airport was also transferred to TAAT. In 1985, it was felt that a similar
treaunent wes required for domestic airports and air mafic control and
related services. Consequently, National Airports Authority (NAA) was
constituted under the National Airports Authority Act, 1985.

3. International airports are put to more intensive use and generate
substantial revenues which acerue to TAAT, Revenues of NAA are much
less buoyant because a number of its airports do not have any commercial
adr service whatsoever while many others have only infrequent operations.
NAA has, therefore, not been able to generate adequate resources to meet
the requirements of development and modernisation. To overcome this
handicep and provide for closer integration in the management of airports
and air traffic contract services in the country, it has been found necessary
19 merge the [AAI and the NAA, which the Bill seeks to achieve.

4 The salient features of the Bil] are:—

fa) Constitution of a single unified Airports Authority’ of India
io control and manage both the national and international airports in
the country and transfer and vesting of the undertakings of the Inter-
national Airports Authority of India and National Airports. Authority
to the said Airports Authority of India.

{b)Repeal of the International Airports Authority of India Act.
1971 and the National Airports Authority Aet, 1985.

(c} AU licences, permits, quotas and exemptions granted to the
International Airports Authority of India or the National Airports
Authomity be deemed to have been granted ta the Airports Authority
of India.

(d) Guarantees given for ot in favour of the Internations] Air.
ports Authority of India or the National Airports ‘Authority fo continue
to be operetive in relation to the Airports Authority of India.

21



22
(९) Every officer or other employee of the International Airports
Authority of India and the National Airports Authority, serving in
ly before the appointed day, to become an

its employment immediatel
officer or other employee, as the case may pe, of the Airports

Authority of India, with option to resign.
(f), Power of the Central Government to give directions to the
Airports Authority of India.

+
5. ‘Whe Bili seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.

New. Detur; GHULAM NABI AZAD,

The 27th July, 1993. ..

PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES’ 117 AND 274
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

LCopy of letter Ne. 2. 24015 /01/92-VE{1548, dated the 3rd August,
1998 from Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad, Minister of Civil Aviation and "Tourism.

to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]

The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the
proposed Bill to provide for the constitution of a statutory authority for
management of international and domestic airports and air traffic ser-
vices and matters connected therewith, recommends the introduction of
the Bill under article’ 117(1) read with clause (1) of article 274 and its
consideration under clause (3) of ariicle ‘T17 of the constitution in- Lok

Sabha.

». qualifications mentioned in clause 4.

Notes on clauses

हु Clause 1—sub-clause (3) specifies the airports, civil enclaves aeronau-
tipal communication stations training stations and establishments to’ which
this Bill applies. : :

mee 2 deals with the definitions of certain éxpressions used in the
Bill, है

Clause 3 provides for the constitiition and incerporation रण the: Air-

ports Authority of India. Under this clause the Authority will be a body
corporate and will consist of a whole time Chairperson; the Director
General of Civil Aviation, ex officio member and not less than 8 and not
more than 14 members to be appointed by the Central Government.

Clause 4 deals with the disqualifications for being appointed’ as a
member of the Authority. ‘ |

Clause 5 provides for the term of office of members, resignation by
them and the cirmumstances in which their appointments’ may be
terminated.

Clause 6 deals with the removal of members on the ground of dis-

है i

Clause 7 deals with the eligibility of members for reappointment.

Clouse 8 provides.for the meetings of the Authority, for transacting
and the quorum at such meetings. It. also provides that in
the absence of the chairperson, another member could preside over such
meetings. Matters coming before the Authority shall be decided by the
majority of votes of the members present and voting.

business

Clause 9 lays down the circumstances which will not invalidate the

proceedings. '

Clause 10 deals with the appointment of officers and other employees
of the Authority. Te

Clause 11 provides that the Authority shall act on business princtples.
tions of the Authority. The Autho-
shall have various functions inter Glia to manage the airports,
‘ports, airtrips, civil enclaves and air transport services to which the
applies or is made applicable. An, obligation thas been cast on the
‘Autliority to provide at the airports, heliports, airtrips and such other
locations as may be considered necessary, navigational aids, communi-
cation equipment and ground aids for safe and efficient operation of air
‘transport services. Sub-clause (3) of this clause enumerates in detail the
various functions performed by the Authority.
for the transfer of the undertakings of the Inter-
and the National Airport Authority to vest
this clatise in a chain enumerates
ete, which will vest in

Clause 12 provides for the fune!

Clause 13 provides
national Airports Authority
an the Authority. Sub-clatise (2) of
the assets, rights, powers, privileges, property,
the Authority. दि

~ 23



24

Clause 14 provides the general effect of vesting of the undertakings

of the International Airport ‘Authority and the
in the Authority. 1 i

Clause 15 provides that all

appointed day to the Authority.

Clause 16 provides that tax exemptions of

able to the International Airports Authority or aaa Airpors
Auth 196 al ati
Authori the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43: of 1 shail co
Aaa ae in Te Authority. Sub-clause (०)
provides that deductions to lax under the Tncome-tax Act, 1961 and

fo have effect in relation to the

‘exemptions from the tax available to the in

rity or the National Airports. Authority wi continue to pe available

0 the Authority.

Clause 17 lays down that any guarentse give? in favour of the ne
national Airports Authority of the ‘National Airports Authority wl

to any loan or lease shall continus

to the Authority. i

Chaise 18 lays down provisions in. respect

of officers and other employees of the Inte

and the National Airports Authority who
Authority.

Clause 19 provides that any +

‘Authority under the provisions of the Land

he i We 4 i ing in foree:
1894). or of any other correspording las for the time being in :

Clause 20 empowers the Authority to enter-into and perform, any .con-

tract necessary for the discharge of its func

Clause 21 provides for the modes of executing contracts on: behalf of

the Authority. Ir has also been provided in

for ‘acquisition or sale of immovable property of Tease ef any a oe
perty for a term of thirty years and no other contrac excet mee oe
value or amount as the Central Government may, Srom time to ne,
‘py order, fix in this behalf shall be made wnless it has been previously

approvedsby. the Central. Government.

”* Hause 22° empowers the Authority to

ap proval of the Central Government, fees or vents for the
Hous i ivi ther

fousing or making of aictrafts or for any ०:16 c yo
offe wet in connection with the’ aircraft. operations at any airport oF

ieliport; for providing air traffic services,

५ हि 1000७ : ti
communication and navigational aids at any airport and the amenities

given to the passenge?s, ete.

Clause 23 empowers the Central Gover!
capital to the Authority required by the

of iis functions on such. terms and conditions .as the Centeal Goyern-
ment may determine and also to pay-to the Authority by. way of Joans oF
grants such sums of money as the Central Government. may consider

necessary for the efficient discharge of its
under this Bil. !

jeences, permits, quotas and exemptions
granted to the International Airports Authority or the National Aixpos!®
Authority shall be deemed to have been granted with effect from

ad acquired by the Authority for
discharging its functions under the legislation shall be deemed to pe
needed for a public purpose and the same may be acquired for the

National Airport Authority

\
tyenefits extended or avail.

further

ternational Airports Autho-

to be operative in relation

of the terms and conditions
rnational Airport Authority
will be transferred to the

Acouisition Act, 1894 (1 of

ons under this झा

this clause that. any contract

charge... with the provious
lending,
services or facility

safety services, aeronautic

nment to provide” additional
‘Anthority, for the discharge

functions by the. Authority:
\

25

Clause 24 provides that the Authority shall Rave its own fund, and alt
its ‘receipts should be credited thereto and all dhe payments should be made
therefrom. The clause also provides that all moneys standing at the oredit
of the Authority which cannot immediately be applied shall be deposited in
the State Bank of India or any such scheduled bank or banks as may bé
specified by the Central Government,

Clause 25 provides for th lishment of reserve fund or funds for
purposes of expanding existing facilities or air transport services or creating:
new facilities or services at amy airport or for the purpose of providing
against any temporary decrease of revenue or increase of expenditure from
transient causes or for purposes of replacement or for meeting expenditure -
arising from loss or damage from fire, cyclone, air-crash or other accident
ox for meeting any liability arisiug out of any act or omission in discharge
‘of ifs functions of the Authority under ¢

3 jogislation.

_ Clause 26 imposes obligation on the Anthorlty to prepare, before the
coffimencement of each financial year, a staicment of the programmes of its
activities during the forthcoming financial year as well as financial. estimatés
in respect thereof net less than three months from the commencement’ of ‘the!
financial year and submit those for approval of the Central Government,

Clause 27 empowers the Authority to borrow with the consent of, the
Central Government, raoney from any source by the issue of bonds or ‘del
tures or such other ingtruimenis as it may deem fit for discharging all or. any
of its functions under this Bill, The clause lays down also that the “‘Joans
borrowed by the Authority may be guaranteed by the Central Government
for the repayment of principal and paymext of interest thereon.

Clause 28 provides for the audit of the accounts! of the Authority’
annually by the Comptroiler and Auditor-General of India, पु

Clause 29 imposes an obligation on the Authority to preparc and
submit to the Central Government after the end of each financial year,
a report giving an account of its activities during that financial year
the activities which are likely to he undertaken by the Authority during
the next financial year. The report 80 submitted by the Authority ta’ the
Central Government shall. be laid before the Houses of Parliament-

Clause 30 empowers the Authority to delegats to the Chairperson of
any other member or to any officer of the ‘Authority such of its powers
and functions under this Bill (except the rule making power) as it may
deem: necessary.

Clause 31 provides for authentication of the orders and other instdlu-
ments of the Authority, 4

Clause 32 provides that the officers and employees of the Authority
while acting or purporting to act in pursuance of the provisions of this
legistation or of any rule and regulation made thereunder, shall be deenied 0
be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Pénal’ Code
(45 of 1860). conned

Clause’ 33 provides that no suit, prosecution or other Jegal proceédings
shall. jie against the Authority or any member ‘or any officer or other शान
ployees of the Authority for anything done in good faith or intended to be
done if pursuance’ of this Bill.



26

ation Clause 34 imposes an obligation’ on the Autharity to. provide by regu
fation for securing the safe: custody and restoration of any property which,

while not in proper custody; is found on any premises belonging to the Autho-
rity or under its overall control oc in any aircraft or any such permises.

Clause 35° lays down’ that for the purposes of the Income-tax Act, 1964
(43 of 1961) the income, profits or gains of Authority shall be liable to tax
under the Income-tax Act, 1961 as if it were a company.

Clasue’'36 empowers the Authority to carry out om behalf of any péersom
any works or-serviees or any class of works or services on suck terms and
{ronditions as may bé agreed to between the Authority and the person.
concerned. 1

+ Clause, 37 empowers the Authority or any officer specially authorised
by it in this ‘behalf to issue directions consistent with the: provisions mention-
ed in certain sections of the Aircraft Act, 1934 (22 of 1934) and provides
for imposition of the penalty for contravention of the said directions

Clause 38 empoyers the Central Government to temporarily divest the.
Authority, ini the. public: interest, of the management of any airport, civil en-
clave aeronautical communication station, any other agency ण department of
airport etc. Tn cases where: the Central Government is ‘of the opinion that
jt is necessary OF expedient so to do and entrust the fonctions of the Au
thority ‘to any person. However, such an order will be passed after giving &
zeasonable opportunity of being heard. ‘The said order will remain in force
for.a period of six months initially, which can bo further extended for a fur-
ther period. or periods not exceeding eighteen months.

Clause 39 Jays down the circumstances in which the Authority may be
superseded. The clause ‘further empowers the Centrat Government to ex
tend. the period of suipersession for such further term not exceeding six
months as it may consider necessary of constitute the Authority during of
‘on the expiry of the period di supersession- :

Clause 40 empowers the Centrat Government to jssue directions to the
‘Auittiority on questions of policy and the Authority shall be pound by the
directions issued jn this behalf. ‘

Clause 41 empowers the Central Government to taake rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The matters in respect of which ules may'-
be made by the Central Government are enumerated in detait in sub-clause
(2): है भू

Clause 42 confers on the Authority the power [0 make regulations not
inconsistent with, ‘his. Bill and the rules. made thereunder to provide for alt
matters for giving, effect to the provisions of this Bill. The particular matters
with ‘to which regulations may be made are enumerated it detail गीत
gub-clause: (2). ‘ ॥ ही 5

Clayise 43 provides that every rule and regulation. made under this Bill
shall be laid before each House of Parliament. 0 hawt Y

a7

Glause 44 empowers Cc प make
the Central Go 2 4
ate a vernment to
neces for removal of any difficulty whieh may ne a le icing
effec the provisions of this Bill within one year डा
a this Bi year of the commencement
_ aA

Clause 46 seeks to amend clausa (b) of sub-section (2) of section
(b) 2 (3) a

Clause 46 provides for r t
epeal of the International
(er ot 1505) of 1971) and the National Airports Auda per
). The clause further saves anything done or any लक taken

by the two Authorities estab ished under th
५ ii
h है the aforesaid Acts, before the



MORANDUM

ti provides for the Constitution of the: Airports
nistrative and cohesive management
al communication statio

}YNANCIAL ME

Clause 3 902) of the Bill | 5
Authority of India for the vital adminis
of हि civil enclaves and. aeronautic

हक Glause 23 of the Bill provides fi
Joans and grants to the Authority by
additional capital, 10808 and grants [0 |
future requirements of the Authority in i
plans. {he expenditure that may have to ve aie un
Government from the Consolidatee Fund eee
be estimated at present. However, 0D ne - nt
the Eighth Five Years Plan, an expent it . * a ec 1
likely to be jneurred during the said period on 1९

executed by the Authority.

1. 01 additional. capital

‘or the payment
the Central Government. Paymen

to the Authority will depend..ot
the context of its developme!
incurred by the Central:
1 this account cannot
oposals made in
1566.41 crores. is
be

ides for the guarantees py the Central,
¢ the principal and the payment of

on the repayment © : ent
t af tans porrowed by ihe Authority under sub “ -
om & out of such guarantees cannot

pility arisin

Clause 27 (2) of; the Bill prov

Government
interest, in resp
(1). ‘The ultimate lial
estimated at this stage.
prought into operation, will not involve. oy

iI if enacted and
1 ning « rring expenditure.

other recurring of non-recu!
e

28

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 41 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules
for carrymg out the provisions of the proposed legislation, ‘The matters with
respect to which rules may be made, have been detailed in. sub-clause (2) and
relate mainly to the conditions of services of the Chair person and other mem-
bers of the Authority, including the salaries payable to the members required
to render part-tithe services; the period of notice required to terminate the
appointment of any member who is required to render parttime service and
who js not a servant of the Government and the period of notice that may
be given to the Central Government by a member before he resigns his
office; the conditions and limitations subject to which the Authority may ap- ड़
point officers and other employces: the manner subject. to which to manage
the airports, civil enclaves and geronautical communication stations; the manner
in which tha Authority may invest its funds and the form in which the Au-
thority shall prepare the annual statement of accounts including the profit and

Joss accotnt and the balance-sheet. These are all matters of detail and it is
difficult to provide for alf these matters in the: Bill itself. .

Clause 42 of the Bill bestow powers on the Authority to make regula-
tiong not inconsistent with the proposed legislation and the sules made there-
vider! to provide for such matters for which provision is necessary ot ex-
pédient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the Logislation, The
* matters in respect, of which the Authority mav make regulations have, .been:
Gétailed’ in particutar in sub-clause (2) of the clause. The matters, inter, alia,
‘telate to the time and places of meetings of the Authority and the procedure:
tobe: followed for the transaction of business at such meetings: the conditions
Of service and the remuneration of officers and other employees. appointed
by the Aluthority; the contracts or class of contracts which are 10 be sealed
with the common: seal, of the Authority: the storage or processing of goods
in warehouses established by the Authority, the  cnstody or testoration of

lost property: securing the safety of aircrafts in airports; prevention of obstruc-
tion within the airports for its normal functionieg: orohibiting or restricting
excess to any part of the airoort regulating and testrictiny advertising within
‘the airport or civil enclave. These ave afl matters of detail and it is difficult

to provide for the same in the Bil itself,

Under sub-clause (4) of Clause 42, no reonlation made bv the Authority
under this legislation, shall have effect until it has been approved by the
Central Government and published in the Official Gazette.

Jt has been provided in. clause 43 that every mile. and regulation - made
“undér this Bill shall be laid hefore each House of Parliament while it is in
session for a total period af thirty davs, which mav be cotaprised in one
session or in two suocessive sessions for their scrutiny.

As the matters with resvect tr which rules and resulntions under the
aforesaid provisions are soucht ts he made are maiters of peoceditre or
of which jt is net nracticahle to mark. express

detail or matters im respect ¢
provisions in the Jeislation itself, the delegation, of legislative power is of

a normal character:
29



Se LOK SABHA

BILL e oe
to provide for the constitution of the Ainports Authority of. India and
the transfer and vesting of the undertakings. of: the Internati
Airports Authority of India and the National Airports Author!
and in the Airports Authority of India so constituted: for: the bet
_ administration’ and . cohesive management of“ airports and.
enclaves whereat air transport servides are operated ‘or. are. int
to be® operated: and of all aeronautical communication stations:
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto, :

(Shri Gulam Nabi Azad, Minister of Civil Aviation) 5.

|
|
|
|