As INTRODUCED IN toE SABIiA 
Bill No. 8z of 1"1 
THE DELHI SECONDARY EDUCATION BILL, 1964 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSIS 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
3. Recognition of schools. 
4. Annual list of recognized schools. 
5. Scheme of management. 
6. Managers of schools. 
7. Closure of schools prohibited. 
8. Punishment far maintenance of false accounts, etc. 
9. Aid to recognized schools. 
10. School property. 
11. Tenure of office of teachers. 
12. Salaries of teachers and other employees of aided schools. 
13. Affiliation. 
14. Fees. 
15. Admission of persons. 
16. School Fund. 
17. Inspection. 
18. Taking over of aided schools. 
19. Exemption of immovable property. 
20. Advisory Committee. 
21. Power to give directions. 
22. D~legation. 
23. Exemption. 
24. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
25. Bar of jurisdiction. 
26. Power to make rules. 
27. Removal of difficulties. I 

mK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE DELHI SECONDARY EDUCATION BILL, 1964 
(To be/As introduced in 10k Sabha) 
1. In the Arrangement of cl'ausee, again.st clause 11,-
for '!Tenure of office of teachers" read 
"Terme ,::md conditione of service of teachers 
and othe"!:" employe e6 • " 
2. Page 13, line 11,-
after "may bell insert II; It 
,. Docket page, ~ "or" ~ "of" 
4. Correct line number on page 4. 
NEW DELHI, 
igoember 8. 1964 
rahayana 17, 1886 'Sakal 

S 
10 
BiD No. 82 of 1"1 
THE DELHI SECONDARY EDUCATION BILL, 1964 
A 
BILL 
to provide for better organization and development of .ec0nd4'11 
education, in the Un.ion territcwy of Delhii. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: - . I • 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Delhi Secondary Education Act, Short title, 
1964. ment .. d 
COIIl" 
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Delhi. menee-ment. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the CeBtral Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and differ-
ent dates may be appointed for different provisions at this Act. ,. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Deftn1-
(a) "Administrator" means the Administrator af Delhi 
appointed under article 239 of the Constitution; 
(b) "aid" means any aid granted to a recognized school by 
the Central Government or a local authority; 
(c) "aided school" means any school receiving aid out of the 
tiona. 
IS funds of the Central Government or a local authority; 
(d) "Board" means the. Central Board Qt Secondary 
Education; 
(e) "Delhi" mea~ tll~ YIR.~~ tmitory of Delhil 

2 
(f) "Director" means the Director of Education, Delhi, and 
includes any other officer authorized by the Administrator to 
perform all or any of the functions of the Director under this 
Act; 
(g) Uexisting employee" means an employee of an existing , 
school whose appointment as such has been a.pproved by the 
Director; 
(h) "existing school" means a school which is in existence 
at the commencement of this Act and which, having been recog-
nized 1w an appropriate authority, continues to be so recognized 10 
fimnedhltely before such commencement; 
(i) "liead'of SehooI!"means the principal academle·oftleerj by 
whatever name called, of a recognized school; 
(;) uinspeclexr" means an Inspector of Schools or the Assis-
tant Director of Education for Women and includes any other I, 
o8lcer authorized by the Administrator to perform all or any 
of the functions of an inspector.; , 
(k) "manager" means a person appointed, or deemed to have 
!been appointed, to. be the manager under sub ilectMn (1) of 
section 6 and approved by the Director; 20 
(1). "Managing Committee" means the committee of 
management constituted .under the scheme of managemeXlt 
referred to in section 5 and includes any other body charged 
wtfh ttie' !Jl8ftagement of the- affairs of a sehool; 
(m), ·~eeeribed". means prescribed by rules made under 2, 
thIa Act; 
flo. ('It) "pubUe exaJhlnaUon" means an ez:amlnation- eMldUeted 
by any authority rec:ognJud by the Director for such. purpose; 
(0) urecognized schQOl" means a school recognized, or deem-
ed to have been recognized, under section 3;'" 30 
(1') "school" means an institution for providing secondary 
edueaUOIl aDd includes-
(i) a composite school for providing primary, middle 
and secoDdary. eciucation; 
(") any schoolin which provision exUtsfor clus IX And 3~ 
JXroPOS81s are pending for the opening of classes X and XI; 
(q) "school property" includes land, buildings, playgrounds, 
hostels and movable properties such as furniture, appar"tllSt 
equipment: ~ .. maps and utesistla; 

3 
(r) "secondary education" means full time general, voca-
tional, technical, special or any other type of education which 
leads to the secondary, higher secondary or equivalent public 
examination; 
5 (8) "teacher" includes the head of a school. 
. 3; (I) The Director or any other authority specified in this behalf l!-ecogni. 
by the Central Government may, on application made to it in the tl~ o~ 
prescribed form and in the prescribed manner, recognize any school: sc 00 • 
Pr.oY.1ded that no school shall be recognized if-
10 (a) it does not have adequate funds to ensure ftnRncial 
stability; or 
(b)' it d~s not have a duly approved scheme of manft~ement 
as required by seetion 5; or 
(c) it does not have suitable accommodation with adequate 
IS sanitary and seating arrangements; or 
(d) i. premises or any patt thereof is used as a snop, An 
I')fftee or a residence unconneeted with the activities of the 
school; or 
(e) it does not have the prescribed facilities for physical 
20 education, library service, laboratory work, workshop practice or 
eo-curricular actiYitfes; or 
(f) it is naMed after a seet or caste. 
(!l Where recognition to a school is refused on the ground of its 
being named af. a sed or caste, the management of !tUch 8Chool 
2S may appeal against the order in the prescribed manner to such 
authority as may be prescribed in this behalf by the Cpntral C...ov-
ernmpnt whose decision thereon shall be final. 
(3) Where the management of a school obtains ~ltion for 
the school by fraud, misrepresentation or suppression of material 
30 particulars or where, after obtaining recognition, the school f!!lils to 
continue to comply with any of the conditions specified in the provfso 
to sub-section (1), the authority granting the recognition may, after 
gtving the management of the school an opportunity of showing 
cause, withdraw the recognition granted to such school under sub-
3S section (1). 
(4) '!be reoGg!1ition granted under sub-aeotian (1) shaU not by 
~tself ~tine allY school to receive aid. 

Annual 
list of 
recogniz-
ed schools. 
Scheme of 
manage-
menl 
4 
(5) Every existing school shall be deemed to have been recogniz-
ed under this section: 
Provided that where any such school does not satisfy any of the 
conditions specified in the proviso to sub-section (1), the prescribed 
authority may require the school.to satisfy such condition within a' 
specified period and if any such condition is not so satisfied, recogni-
tion may be withdrawn from such school. 
(6) Every schaal whose recognition is withdrawn under sub-
section (3) or sub-section (5) may appeal to the prescrflbed autho-
rity who shall dispose of the appeal in such manner as may be 10 
prescrilbed. 
4. The Central Government shall publish on or before the first 
day of May of every year, in the Official Gazette, and in such other 
mann("r as may be prescribed, a list of all recognized schools. 
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything in any law for the time being in IS 
force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law, 
there shall be a scheme of management for every recognized scnool. 
(2) The Administrator shall formulate a model scheme of 
management and the same shall be published in the Ofticial Gazette. 
(3) The Managing Committee of every existing school shall, 20 
within fifteen days from the publication of the scheme of manage-
ment under sub-section (2), prepare and submit to the Administrntor 
a scheme of management for such school which shall, so far as is 
practicable, be in conformity with the model scheme aforesaid. 
(4) The Administrator may, after considering the scheme of 25 
management submitted to him under sub-section (3), approve 
such scheme with or Without modifications. 
(5) The scheme of-management shall, among other things, provide 
for the constitution of a Managing Committee, by whatever name 
called. vested with authority to manage and conduct the Rffairs of 30 
the school. 
(6) Subject to any rules made in this behalf and the requirements 
of section 6, the scheme of management of every recognized school 
-sliall specify the respective powers, duties and functions of the head 
of tbe ,choo} and of the Managing Committee of the school: 35 

Provided that in respect of a Government school the compositiofi; 
powers, functions and the manner of working of the Managing Com· 
mittee shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(7) The head of the school and two other teachers thereof chosen 
5 according to seniority by rotation in the prescribed manner shall be 
ex utJicio members of the Managing Committee. 
(8) No member of any Managing Committee shall be entitled to 
vote or otherwise participate in any meeting of the committee when-
ever a charge concerning his personal conduct is under discussion. 
JO (9) Where any person maintains more than one recognized school, 
there shall be a separate Managing Committee for each such school. 
(10) Every recognized school shall be managed in accordance with 
. the scheme of management approved under this section. 
6. (1) The Managing Committee constituted under section 5 of a Manage-ps 
15 recognized schOol other than a Government school may, subject to of schools. 
the approval of the Director, appoint any person to be the manageI 
of the school: . 
Provided that any person functioning as a manager in respect of 
a recognized school having a Managing Committee and who has 
20 already been approved by the Director shall be deemed to have been 
appointed under this sub-section but only for 80 long as the scheme 
of management of the school is not approved under sub-section (4) 
Of section 5. 
(2) AIly manager of a recognized school may resign his office by 
2S giving notice in writing of his intention so to do to the authority 
appointing him. 
30 
3S 
(3) A copy of such notice shall be Simultaneously sent by him to 
the Director. ., 
(4) It shall be the duty of the manager to-
(a) maintain in proper and good condition the school 
property placed under his control by the Managing Committee; 
(b) ma4J,tain such records and accounts and furnish such 
statements and returns as may be prescribed; 
(e) afford all assistance and facilities as may reasonably be 
necessary for the inspection of the school and its records and 
accounts by the inspector or any Guthority specified in this beha.l£ 
by the Director; and 

Closure of 
schools 
prohibit-
ed. 
Punish-
mentfor 
mainten-
anceof 
false 
accounts, 
etc. 
~\ -- . 
(d) generally, conduct the school in accordaDee with ·.the 
provisions of this Aet and the rules made thereunder. 
7. (1) No school or class in a school shall be closed by the manager 
without notice in writing to that effect to the Director: 
Provided that no school or class in a school shall be SO dosed S 
before the expiry of six months from the date of the receipt by the 
Dilrector of the notice or the expiry of the academic year in which 
the notice is given, whichever is later: 
Provided further that no such notice shall be withdrawn withou· 
the consent of the Administrator. 10 
(2) Ii at any time after notice has been given under sub-section 
(1), the manager of the school informs the Director that· he is unable 
or unwilling to carry on the management of the school or elass till 
the expiry of the period specified in the proviso to sub-section (1) I 
the Director may arrange to manage the school or class during the IS 
whole or any part of ihe unexpired portion of such period: 
Provided that no additional liability shall fallon the Govern-
ment in respect of the school or class during the period in which the 
Director so arranges to manage the school or class. 
(3) In the event ·of the school being discontinued ,or down-graded. 20 
or taken over..or its racognitionbeing withdrawn, the manager shaU 
make ov~ to the Di~ector or any authority autOOriaed: by him in thi& 
behalf all the records and accounts of the school maintaiBeci .UDder 
sub-section (4) of section 6 . 
.a. Any manager who fails to comply with the provisions bt~.s 
clause (b) or clau~ (c) of sub-section (4) of sectioR 6 {)r wrlU.ully 
maintains a false statement of accounts, shall, without prejudice to 
any oth~r action that may be taken against him, be Hable to be 
removed from managership: 
Provided that before an ~der for removal of the ·manager from 30 
managership is passed, he shall be given an opportunity to show 
eause against suc!t removal. 
Aid to •. (1) The Central Government may, after due appropriation 
recris made "" Parliament by·1Mv ... tIUs heba1f, and· sHfect .. to sueh 
ec1 00. conditions as may be ltftIIeri~ pay to .. y ~ sehoel by 3S 
way of aid such sums of money as the Central GOV.,rDUleat may 
consider neee5sary: 
Provided that no existing school receiving aid shall .be eligible 
Dr the continuance of the aid unless iIt complies with the prescribed 
~'Onditions within such period as may be specified in this behalf. 40 

~ 
1 
", .. 
<I> The authority competent to Fant the aid may stop or suspend 
the aid for violation of any of the conditions pre&eribed by the rules 
made in thi. behalf or for any other good and suftlcient cause. 
(3) The aid may cover either the full expenditure or such part of 
S the expenditure of the school as may be prescribed under the rules. 
(4) The salaries and allowances of teachers and other employees 
of the IChool for the period for which aid is given shall be the first 
charge on such aid and no payment out of the aid shall be made or 
committed to be made before maldng payment to the teachers and 
10 othar employees of their salaries and allowances for the period 
aforesaid. 
(5) If the manager or the Managing Committee fails to comply 
with, or in any other manner contravenes, the provtaions . of sub-
section (4), the manager or, as the case may be, the Managing Com-
ISmittee ab.all be deemed to have neglected his or its dutic!! within 
the m8fUling of sub-aection (1) of 8ection 18. 
(6) No aid shall be paid to a school which has been taken over 
under section 18. 
10. (1) By the 30th day of April each year, the manager of cv~ry School 
20 aided school shall furnish to the Director a statement containing '. property. 
Uat of the school property together with such particulars as may be 
prescribed. 
(2) Notwithstandina anything to the contrary contained ill any 
other law for the time being in force, no transfer or lease of any 
as immovable property of an aided school shall be made except with 
the previous permiSSion in writing of the Administrator. 
(3) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Administrator under 
sub-section (2) may, in such manner and within such time as may lbe 
prescribed, appeal to the Central Government whose decision thereon 
30 shall be firial 
(4) Any transaction made in contravention of the order of the 
A.dminiatrator or, a8 the eue may be, the decision of the Central 
Government shall be void. 
11. (1) The terms and conditions of service (including conditions Terms and 
35 regulating recruitment) of teachers and other employees of an eooditioM 
wded school shall be such as may be preecribed. of IeI'Viee 
. rul that b d' this b h If of teachers (2) SubJect to any e may e rna e In e a , no and other 
teacher of an aided school shall be dismissed, removed, reduced in employee!!; 
rank or suspended, nor shall his services be otherwise tenninated 
40 without the .previous sanction in writing of the Director. 

Salaries ot 
teachers 
and other 
employees 
of aided 
schools. 
Affiliation. 
Fee •. 
Admis&lon 
of persona. 
8 
(3) Any teacher of an aided. school aggrieved Iby any order 
under 8ub-section (2) may appeal to the prescribed authority who 
shall dispose of the appeal in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(4) No person shall be disqualified for being appointed as, or 
for being, a teacher or any other employee of an aided school by 5 
reason only of his religious opinion or of his attendance or non-
attendance at any religious worship or religious instruction. 
12. (1) The salaries of teachers and other employees of an aided 
school shall be disbursed every month by the manager or by' the 
prescribed authority within the prescribed time and in the prescribed 10 
manner, failing which it shall be competent for the Director to dis-
burse or arrange to disburse t.he full approved salary of any teacher 
or other employee. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), it shall be lawful for. the 
Director either to withdraw the aid or, as the case may be, draw on 15 
the reserve and other funds of the school. 
(3) Where there is any dispute regarding the salary or other 
dues .to a teacher or other employee, the teacher or t,he other em-
ployee may make an application to the prescribed authority regard-
ing the dispute and thereupon the prescribed authority shall, after 20 
giving an opportunity to the teacher or the other employee and the 
management to present their case, decide the matter which decision 
shall be binding on. the teacher or the other employee and the 
management: 
Provided that pending a decision on such application, the teaclier 25 
or the other employee concerned shall continue to accept the amount 
offered or being offered to him by the manager or the Director. 
13. For the purpose of conducting public examination, all Govem~ 
ment and aided schools shall be affiliated to the Board and shall 
fulfil the conditions prescribed by the Board in this behalf. 30 
14. No aided school shall levy any fee or any other charge at a 
rate exceeding the prescribed rate and such fees and other charges 
may be collected and accounted for in the prescribed manner. 
15. (1) (a) No person who has not attained the age of ftve years 
shall be adInitted to class I or equivalent class in a Government ttr 35 
recognized schoo1. 
(b) No person studying in any such school shall, without the 
permission in writing of the Director, be retained in the school after 
such person has attained the age of twenty years. 

(2) Admission of persons into aided schools shall be made in the 
prescribed manner. 
18. (1) In every aided school tliere shall be a fund to be called School 
the School Fund and there shall be credited thereto- Fund. 
5 (a) any monetary aid granted by the Central Government, 
(b) income accruing to the school by way of fees, and 
(c) any other contributions, endowments and the like. 
(2) The School Fund and all other funds, including the Pupils' 
Fund, established with the approval of the Administrator shall be 
10 accounted for and operated upon ift accordance with the rules made 
under this Act. • 
17. (1) Every recognized school shall be inspected at least once in Inspec-
each financial year in accordance with the prescribed rules. tlon. 
(2) The Director may also arrange special inspection of any 
IS school on such aspects of its working as may, from time to time, be 
considered necessary by him. 
'"'I. 
(3) The Director may give directions to the manager requfrin!! 
the m!lnager to rectify any defect or deficiency found at the time of 
inspection or otherwise in the working of the school. 
20 (4) If the manager fails to comply with any direction given unrlf'r 
sub-section (3), the Director may, after considering the explanation 
or report, if any, given or made by the manager, take such action pc; 
he may think fit, including-
(a) stoppage of aid, 
25 (b) withdrawal of recognition, and 
(e) taking over of the school under section 18. 
t: .~~:.:.~: 
18. (I) Whenever it appears to the Administrator that the Taking 
manager or Managing Committee of any aided school has neglected over of 
to perform any of the duties imposeo by or under this Act, and thRt a~ed 18 
30 in the public interest it is expedient to take over the management of S 00 . 
the school, he may, after giving the manager reasonable opportunity 
of showing cause 'against the proposed action, take over the msnage-
I'nent of that school for Ii ,period not exceeding five yel!rs. 
(2) After taking over the management of any school under this 
,S5 A ~t, the Administrator may arrange to manage the school through 
, the Director or any other person as may 'be considered expedient 
trom time to time. ' 

BuIIaIt· 
tion of 
immov-
able pro-
pert7. 
Advilory 
Commit. 
tee. 
10 
(3) Where the management of any aided school baa been taken 
over under sub-section (1), the manager of the school may, within. 
three months of the date Qf the tWdng over, represent to the Central 
Government for the restoration of the management of the school; 
and on considering the representation, the Central Government may , 
order the restoration of the same. 
(4) Where the management of any aided school has been taken 
over under this Act, the Administrator aball pay such rent for the 
!;luUding of the school, if any, to the person entitled to receive It u 
was being paid by the management before the taking OYer. 10 
(5) During such period as any aided sehool remains UDder the 
management of the Administrator under this Act-
(i) the approved conditions of service of the existing em-
ployees of the school shall not ordinarily be adversely affected; 
(ii) all educational facilities which the school had. been afford- I, 
ing immediately before such taking over, shall ordinarily continue 
to be afforded; and 
(iii) the School Fund Miall continue to be available to the 
Administrator for betng spent on the schoo1. 
(6) The Central Government may, if it deems it expedient, of its 10 
own motion or on the application of the previous management, dis-
continue a school taken over under this Act, and on such discontinu-
ance the liability of the Central Government to run the Sehool shaI1 
cease. I 
(7) Any order made ·or direction given under this section shall.! 
have effect mtwithstand!ng anything inconsistent therewith con-
tained in any otbe.r enactment or instrument relating to the manage-
ment of the school. I 
19. The Central Government shall, while taking over the manage-
ment of any school, exempt any immovable property from bemg .0 30 
taken over if such property is bemg uw for any religiou8 purpose, 
or if the Central Government· is saUrfted that 8ueh property on ac-
count of its proxtmtty to any bufldtnp of worship shoUld be exempted. 
20. There shall be an Advisory Committee on Educntfon which 
shall aSsist the Director in formulating major polieies about education 35 
and may be eonsulted by the Director on such matters as he thinks 
'.~ fit, l 

I I 
11. It ebal1 be lawful lor the Cefttral Government to live any Power 
direetion not incoDJistent with the provistona of th.ia Act to the mana- to glve 
gel' or the Managing Committee of a school in respect of any of the direction&. 
following matters, namely:-
" (i) syllabus, 
(ii) text-books and other reading material, 
(iii) eondiUons of service 01 teachers, 
(tv) sanitary facilities, and 
(v) any other matter that may be preaeribed. 
10 22. The CeIlu.l Government may delegate all or any of its powers, Dele;a-
duties or functions under this Act to the Administrator or any other lion. 
officer subordinate to him.' I 
23. If the Central Governmem is of opinion that it would' not be Exemp-
expedient to make the provisions of taia Act applicable to any school tlon. 
IS having rega:rd to its financial resources, character,location or other 
relevant considerations, it may, by _tifleation in the Oftlcial Gazette. 
exempt such school, either generally or subject to such eonditions, if 
any, or for any period to be- apecl1\ed in the notd&ation, from all or 
any of the provisions of this Act. ' 'I .. 
~o 14. No suit, prosecution or other lepl proceeding shall Ue against PrOtectioD 
the Central Government « any authority flr' any officer' appointed of action 
under this Aet for anything whi~h is in good faith done or inte~ded t~n in 
to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule made thereunder. ~aith. 
25. Save as otherwise expressly provided In this Act. no civil court, Bar of 
~S shall have jurisdiction to et1tertaili any suit or proeeeding in respect jurisdic-
of any matter which the Central Government or any ofBcer or autho- tion. 
rlty aopoflitea tit speCtfted under th!ti Act te eDSf)O\\'eNd by' or under 
this Act to dtterfnine, and JlO injUDCtion shall be '~ted by' any 
court Qr other authority in respect of any action· taken-or to be'1;tJIken 
30 in pursuance of any power confen'ed 1Iy or ,under th1s ,Act, ' 
M. (1) The Centl'al GO¥emment may, by notiftC!ltion in the om- Power to 
eta! Gazette, cd subject &0 the'eonc:UtiGn of ]reVf.ous publfeation, make 
make rules fur earrying out the purpotes of thil Act. ," rules. 
(2) In part1eular, and without pre:fudice to the generaUtv of the 
3S foretf;oing power, such rules may provide fOl' all or any of the following 
matten, namely! - ' 
(0).. the form 'and manner (If making an appliC!ation fbr re-
cognitioa 01. a achool; 
(b) the faeWties 10r physical edueattOft, library' service, 
laboratory work, workshop-practice or CfWUr.rfeular activities to 
be,provided in a l'ec:osn~ed school: 

J2 
(e) the authority to which and the manner tn· wruch an 
appeal may be preferred under sub-section (2) of section 3; 
(d) the authority to which an appeal shall lie under sub-
section (6) of section 3 and the manner of disposal of such 
appeal; S 
(e) the manner of publication of the annual list of all re-
cognized schools under section 4; 
(I) the composition, powers, functions and the manner of 
working of the Managing Committee and the manner of choos-
ing the ex officio members thereof under sub-section (7) of 10 
section 5; 
(g) the records and accounts to be maintained and the 
statements and returns to be furnished under clause (b) of 
sub-section (4) of section 6; 
(h) the conditions for the grant of aid to recognized schools J S 
under section 9 and matters connected therewith; 
(i) the particulars to be contained in the statement to be 
furnished to the Director under sulHJection (1) of section 10 
regarding the school property; 
(j) the manner in which and. the time within which an 20 
appeal shall lie to the Central Government under sub-section 
(3) of section 10; 
(k) the autharity to which an a·ppeal shall lie under sub-
section (3) of section, 11. and the manner of disposal of such 
appeal;. 2S 
(I) the terms and eonditions of sei'vice (including condI-
tions regulating recruitment) I of teachers and other employees 
of aided schools; 
(m) the authority Who shall disburse the salaries of tea-
chers and other employees of an aided school under sub-section 30 
(1) of section 12, the time within which and the manner in 
whi~h the same shall be diSbursed and the authority to which 
an application may be made under sub-section (3) of that section; 
(n.) the rate exceeding which no fee or other eharges 8hall 
be levied by an aided school and the manner of' collection and 3S 
accounting of the fees and other charges; 
(0) the admission of persons into· aided schools; 
(p) the manner of accounting and operation of the Scnool 
Fund and all other funds under sub-section (2) of section 16; 
(q) the manner of inspection of recognized schoois; and 40 

.... ~ 
(rJ any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribeCI 
under this Act. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is 
5 in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately follow-
ing, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall there-
10 after have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be so however that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule.' I 
27. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Removal 
IS Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official of~­
Gazette, meke such provisions not inconsistent with the purposes of cultles. 
this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for remov-
ing the difficulty. I 

In recent years the UJ;I.S8tisfactory working and management of a 
number of private secondary schools in the Union territory of Delhi 
l}ave been subjected to a areat deal of adverse c:ri.ticlsm. These have 
been mainly in respect of (1) violations of executive inatructioDS re-
garding timely payment of iUlaries to teachers, (ii) failure to create 
a Reserve Fund, (iii) recruitment of teachers with lower than the 
prescribed qualificatioll$, (iv) unauthorised borrowing of money from 
the Pupils' Fund by the managements of schools. and (v) collecting 
compulsory donations to meet the managements' ahare of the main-
tenance expenditUre of the schools. 
2. At present the Delhi Administration have no legal power to 
compel the managements of private schools to abide by the rules and 
regulations governing the terms and conditions of service of teachers, 
the payment of salaries of the employees regularly, the maintenance 
of the quality of education in the institutions or to ensure their fin-
ancial stability. Although there are several private schools running 
smoothly and efficiently, occasions do arise when drastic action is 
called for. The Administration can, of course, stop or suspend the 
payment of grant to the school in question; but recourse to such 
measures adversely affects the interests of the teachers and also of 
the pupils. It has, therefore, become necessary for the Government 
to have the necessary statutory authOrity to require the school 
managements to run the schools in conformity with the prescribed 
conditions for ensuring improved quality of instruction· and the 
present Bill is designed to achieve this purpose. 
3. The main features of the Bill are:-
(a) proviSion for grant of recognition to a school on fulfil-
ment of the conditions laid down in this behalf; 
(b) provision for the framing of a scheme of management for 
every recognized school and the constitution of Managing Com-
mittee thereunder; 
(c) provision for payment, stoppage or suspension of grant 
to a school and for making the salaries and allowances of teachers 
and other employees of a school the first charge on such grant; 
(d) provision regarding the conditiolll of serVice of teachers 
of aided schools and for the dtabursement of their salaries; 

IS 
(e) provision regarding taking over of managements of aided 
schools for a period not exceeding five years if it is deemed to be 
expedient in public interest to do so and in that event making 
the School Fund available to the Administrator for being spent 
on the .school; 
(f) provision regarding the setting up of an Advisory Com-
mittee to assist the Director of Education; 
(g) provision for exemption of certain schools from the pur-
view of this Act on certain grounds such as, character, location, 
financial resources, etc., of the schools concerned. 
N.w DE.BI; 
The 25th November, 1984. M. C. CHAGLA. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F. 26-1/64-SE2, dated the 3rd December, 1964 
from. Skri M. C. Chagla, Min4lter of Education to th:e Secret4'r1/, 
Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter oj the 
proposed Delhi Secondary Education BID, 1964. recommends to the 
HoUle under article 117 (3) of the Constitution of India the consi-
deration of the Bill . 

nNANC~MEMORANDUM 
Clause 9 of the Bill provides for the payment to recognized schools 
of grants subject to prescribed conditions. 'nle grant may be of re-
curring or non-recurring character. 'nle aided schools are given grants 
on recurring basis in respect of salaries and allowances of employees, 
including the employers' contribution towards the Contributory Pro-
vident Fund, contingent expenditure on account of stationery, repairs 
and renewal of fUrniture, telephones, etc., rent for the 'buildings hired 
for the schools and depreciation of the school and hostel buildings 
owned by the institutions. The schools are also paid non-recurring 
grant towards expenditure on the purchase or construction of buUd-
ings for schools and for purchase of appr@ved items of equipment, 
furniture, science material, library books, etc. For both the recur-
ring and non-recurring grants, a percentage of ceiling is prescribed. 
These grants will continue to be paid according to these rates, subject 
of course to such revisions as may be decided upon from time to time. 
The quantum of the grant depends on factors like the number of 
schools, students, and employees, and is likely to vary from year to 
year. The provision made for this purpose during the current year's 
budget is Rs. 136'87 lakhs recurring and Rs. 4 lakhs non-recurring. 
The expenditure will be met from the Consolidated Fund of India 
after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf. 
2. Clause 17 requires that every recognized school shall be inspect-
ed at least once in each financial year. At present the inspection of 
aided schools is carried out by the inspection staff of the Directorate 
of Education, Delhi and no separate inspection staff has been employ-
ed exclusively for the non-Government schools. After the passage 
of this Bill, the Director will have to ensure that the provisions of 
the Act are complied with and if for that purpose he finds it neces-
sary to employ more staff, he will take necessary action with the 
approval of the Central Government. At this stage, it is diftlcult 
to determine the complement of additional staff that may be required 
or the exact amount of additional expenditure likely to be involved. 
16 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 26 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government 
to make rules in relation to certain matters. The matters in respect 
of which the Central Government may make rules relate, i.nter 
alia to: 
(i) the conditions pertaining to the grant of recognition 
to schools; 
(i;') the conditions goverrung the payment of grant to 
schools, admission of persons and collection of fees; 
(iii) the terms and conditions of service (including condi-
tions regulating recruitment) of teachers and other employees 
of aided schools; . 
(iv) inspection and supervision of schools. 
2. These matters pertain to procedure, form or detail and as such 
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
17 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for better organization and development or secondary 
education in the Union territory of Delhi. 
(Shri M. C. CM,la, 
Minister of Education.) 