Bill No. 82 of 1959 
THE DELHI LAND HOLDINGS 
(CEILING) BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 25m NOVEMBER, 1959) 

THE DELHI LAND HOLDINGS (CEILING) BILL, 1959 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1 Short title, extent and commencement. 
2 Defini tions. 
CHAPTER II 
CEILING ON HOLDINGS AND VESTING AND ALLOTMENT OF EXCESS LAND 
3 Ceiling on holdings. 
4 Submission of returns. 
5 Collection of information through other agency. 
6 Procedure for determination of excess land. 
7 Selection of excess land in cases of certain transfers. 
8 Distribution of excess land. 
9 Publication of the final list and consequences thereof. 
10 Compensation. 
11 Manner of payment of compensation. 
12 Limit of future acquisition of land. 
13 Excess land not to be surrendered in certain cases. 
14 Power of Deputy Commissioner to take possession of excess 
land. 
15 Reservation of land for certain purposes. 
16 Allotment of excess land. 
CHAPTER III 
MISCELLANEOUS 
17 Act to over-ride contract and other laws. 
18 Mode of recovery of any amount due under the Act. 
19 Appeal. 
20 Revision. 

(li) 
CLAUSES 
21 Power of officers while holding inquiries, etc., under the Act. 
22 Entry upon land for purposes of survey, etc. 
23 Offences and penalties. 
24 Finality of orders and bar of jurisdiction. 
25 Protection of action taken under the Act. 
26 Power to exempt, etc. 
27 Power to make rules. 
28 Amendment of the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954. 

Punjab AI:t 
3 of 1911. 
:z of 1924. 
Bill No. 82 of 1959 
THE DELHI LAND HOLDINGS (CEILING) BILL, 1959· 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the imposition of a ceiling on land holdings in the 
Union territory of Delhi and for matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic of 
India as follow»:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
S 1. (1) This Act may be called the Delhi Land Holdings (Ceiling) Short title, 
extent and Act, 1959. CQnunence-
10 
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Delhi, but 
shall not apply to-
(a) the areas which, immediately before the 1st day of 
November, 1956, were included in a municipality or in a notified 
area under the provisions of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911, or 
in a cantonment under the provisions of the Cantonments Act, 
1924; 
(b) the areas owned by the Central Government or any 
IS local authority; and 
(c) the areas held and occupied for a public purpose or for 
a work of public utility and declared as such by the Chief Com-
missioner or the areas acquired under any enactment relating to 
the acquisition of land for a public purpose. 
Mento 

Definition •• 
Ceilfog Oil 
bcolding •• 
2 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Chief Commis-
sioner may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "ceiling limit", in relation to land, means the limit fixed 
under section 3; 5 
(b) "Chief Commissioner" means the Chief Commissioner of 
Delhi; 
(c) "competent authority" means any person or authority 
authorised by the Chief Commissioner by notification in the 
Official Gazette to perform the functions of the competent autho- 10 
rity under this Act for such area as may be specified in the 
notification; 
(d) "family", in relation to e person, means the person, the 
wife or husband., as the case may be, and the dependerit children 
and grand children, of such person; 15 
(e) "minor" means a person who is deemed not to have 
attained majority under the Indian Majority Act, 1875; 9 of 1875 
<f) "person under disability" means-
(i) a widow; 
(ii) a minor; 20 
(iii) a woman unmarried or, if married, divorced. or judi-
cially separated from her husband or whose husband is a 
person falling under sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v); 
(iv) a member of the Armed Forces of the Union; 
(v) a person inoopable of cultivating land by reason of 25 
some physical or mental disability; 
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under 
this Act; 
(h) the words and expressions "Asami", "Bhumidhar", 
"Deputy Commissioner", "Gnon Panchayat", "improvement", 0 
"land", "standard acre" and "village" shall have the meanings 3 
respectively assigned to them in the Delhi Land Reforms Act, Delhi ~t 8 
1954. of 19.54· 
CHAPTER II 
CEILING ON HOLDINGS AND VESTING AND ALLOTMENT OF EXCESS LAND 35 
3. No person either by himself or, if he has a family, together with 
any other member of his family (hereiilafter referred to as the person 

representing the family) shall, whether as a Bhumidhar or an Asami 
or partly in one capacity and partly in another, hold land in excess 
of thirty standard acres in the aggregate: 
Provided that where the number of members of the family of 
S such person exceeds five, he rooy hold five additional standard acres 
for each member in excess of five, so however, as not to exceed sixty 
standard acres in the aggregate. 
Explanation.-In the case of a company, an association or any 
other body of individuals, the ceiling limit shall be thirty standard 
10 acres. 
4. Every person representing a family who at the commencement Submlslion 
of this Act holds, or has at any time during the period between the of return •. 
10th day of February, 1959, and such commencement held, land in 
excess of the ceiling limit shall submit to the competent authority, 
IS in such form and within such time as may be prescribed, iii return 
giving the particulars of all land held by him and indicating therein 
the parcels of land, not exceeding the ceiling limit, which he desires 
to retain: 
Provided that in the case of a joint holding, all co-sharers rooy 
20 submit the return jointly indicating the parcels of land, not exceed-
ing the aggregate of their individual ceiling limits, which they desire 
to retain. 
Explanation.-In the case of a person unde!' disability, the return 
shall be furnished by his guardian or authorised agent, as the case 
2S may be. 
5. If any person, who under section 4 is required to submit a Collection of 
return, fails to do so in accordance with the provisions of that sec- infonnation 
tion, the competent authority may collect the necessary information ~~~~~gh 
through such agency as may be prescribed. agency. 
30 6. (1) On receipt of any return under section 4 or information Procedure 
under section 5 or otherwise, the competent authority shl9.l1 after fo~ ~eter-f 
• • .' I1lInIl tlon 0 gxvmg the persons affected an opportumty of being heard, hold an excels land. 
inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed, and having regard to 
the provisions of section 7 and section 8 or of any rules that may be 
35 made in this behalf, it shall determine-
(a) the total area of land held by each person representing 
the family; 
(b) the specific parcels of land which he may retain; 
(c) the land in excess of the ceiling limit held by him; 

4 
(d) whether such excess land is held by him as a Bhumi-
dhar or as an Asami; 
(e) the excess land in respect of which Bhumidhari rights 
may be acquired by an Asami; 
and 
(f) the excess land which may be restored to a Bhumidhar; 5 
(g) the excess land which shall vest in the Government; 
(h) such other matters as may be prescribed. 
(2) For the purpose of determining the excess land under this 
section, any land transferred at any time during the period between 10 
the 10th day of February, 1959, and the commencement of this Act 
shall, notwithstanding such transfer, be deemed to be held by the 
transferor. 
(3) The competent authority shall prepare a list in the pres-
cribed form containing the particulars determined by him under sub- IS 
section (1) and shall cause every such list to be published in the 
Officiel Gazette and also in such other manner as may be prescribed. 
Selection of 7. (1) Where any person holding land in excess of the ceiling 
~xce8s land limit at any time during the period between the 10th day of Febru-
~r~es of ary, 1959, and the 25th day of November, 1959, has transferred ~o 
transfers. during such period any part ot his land to any other person under a 
registered deed for valuable consideration, the excess land to be 
determined under section 6 shall, to the extent possible, be selected 
out of the land held at the commencement of this Act by the trans-
feror in excess of eight standard acres and no land shall be selected 2S 
out of the land transferred. 
(2) Where any person holding land in excess of the ceiling limit 
at any time-- ~I 
(a) during the period between 10th day of February, 1959, 
and the 25th day of November, 1959, has transferred dur- 30 
ing such period any part of his land to any other person in any 
manner other toon under a registered deed for valuable consi-
deration; or 
(b) during the period between the 25th day of November, 
1959, and the commencement of this Act has transferred during 35 
such period any part of his land to any other person in any man-
ner whatsoever, 
the excess land to be determined under section 6 shall be select-
ed out of the lands held at the commencement of this Act by the 

transferor and the transferee in the same proportion as the land held 
by the transferor bears to the land transferred and where no land is 
held by the transferor, out of the land transferred. 
(3) Where excess land is to be selected out of the lands of more 
5 than one transferee, such land shall be selected out of the lands held 
by each of the transferees in the same proportion as the land trans-
ferred to him bears to the total area of the lands transferred to all 
the transferees. 
(4) Where any excess land is selected out of the land transferred, 
10 the transfer of such land shall be void. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, the excess 
land to be selected shall in no case include the homestead land of a 
person. 
ExpZanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, "homestead 
IS land" means the land on which the homestead (whether used by the 
owner or let out on rent) stands together with any courtyard, com-
pound and attached garden, not exceeding one acre in the aggregate. 
8. (1) Where any excess land of a Bhumidhar is in his actual Distributicm 
h G of excess possession, the excess land shall vest in t e overnment. land. 
20 (2) Where any excess land of a Bhumidhar is in the possession 
of a person holding the same as an Asami and the excess land to-
gether with any other land held by such person exceeds his ceiling 
limit, the land in excess of the ceiling limit shall vest in the Govern-
ment. 
25 (3) Where any excess land of a Bhumidhar is in the possession 
of a person holding the same as an Asami and such person is allow-
ed to retain the excess land or a part thereof as being within his 
ceiling limit, that person shall acquire Bhumidhari rights in respect 
of such excess land or part thereof on payment of compensation as 
30 hereinafter provided, but if that person refuses to pay such compen-
sation, the excess land or part thereof shall vest in the Government. 
(4) Where there is any excess land of an Asami, the excess land 
shall vest in the Government: 
Provided that in any case where the excess land or any part 
35 thereof held by a Bhumidhar together with any other land held by 
such person does not exceed the ceiling limit, the excess land or such 
part thereof as does not exceed the ceiling limit shall be restored to 
the Bhumidhar on an application made by him in this behalf to the 
competent authority within such time. as may be prescribed. 

6 
Publication 9. (1) Any person aggrieved by an entry in the list published 
li~t ~~ ~ under sub-section (3) of section 6 may, within thirty days from the 
sequences date of publication thereof in the Official Gazette, file objections 
thereof. thereto before the Deputy Commissioner. 
Compensa-
tloo· 
(2) The Deputy Commissioner or any other Officer authorised in 5 
this behalf by the Chief Commissioner may, after considering the 
objections and after giving the objector or his representatives an 
opportunity of being heard in the matter, approve or modify the list. 
(3) The list as approved or modified under sub-section (2) shall 
then be published in the Official Gazette and also in such other man- 10 
ner as may be prescribed and, subject to the provisions of this Act, 
the list shall be final. 
(4) With effect from the date of the publication of the list in the 
Official Gazette under sub-section (8), the excess land shall stand 
transferred to, and vest in, the Government free of all encumbr- IS 
ances or, as the case may be, the excess land shall stand restored to 
the Bhumidhar or the Bhumidhari rights in respect of the excess 
land shall stand transferred to the Asami free of all encumbrances. 
10. (1) Where any excess land of a Bhumidbar ·vests in the 'Gov-
ernment, there shall be paid by the Government to the Bhumidbal" 20 
compensation the amount of which shall be equal to-
(a) forty times the land revenue in respect of the first 
twenty-five acres of excess land: 
(b) thirty-five times the land revenue in resped of the next 
tweftty-five acres of excess land; 2.5 
(c) thirty times the land revenue in respect of the next 
twenty-five acres of excess land: 
(d) twenty-five times the land revenue in respect of the 
next fifty acres of excess land; and 
(e) twenty times the land revenue in respect of the remain- 30 
ing part of the excess land: 
Provided that where such excess land or any part thereof is in 
the possession of an Asami, the compensation in respect of the land 
shall be apportioned between the Bhumidhar and the Asami in such 
proportion as may be determined by the competent authority in .the 35 
prescribed manner, having re,ard to their respective shares in the 
net income from such land. 
(2) In addition to the compensation payable in respect of any 
excess land under sub-section (1), there shall also be paid compen-
sation in respect of any structure or building, including wells, tube- 40 
wells and emb1mkments constructed on such excess land and any 

7 
tree. ,Planted thereoa and lIuch compemation shaN be .deten:a,i,ned b, 
the eompetent authority having regard to the market value of suck 
structure or building or the value of such trees and shall be paW to 
the person who has constructed the structure or building or planted 
5 the trees. 
(3) Where any excess land in respect of which compensation is 
payable is subject to any mortgage or other encumbrance, the 
amount due under the mortgage or other encumbrance in respect of 
such excess land, or where a transfer in respect of excess land is 
10 void by virtue of sub-section (4) of section 7, the consideration money 
paid by the transferee in respect of such excess land, shall be a 
charge on the compensation payable in respect of the excess land 
to the person who has created the mortgage or encumbrance or, as 
the case may bE', to the transferor. 
IS (4) Where an Asami acquires Bhumidhari rights in respect of 
any excess land, the compensation payable by him in respect of tthat 
land shall be equal to the amount which the Bhumidhar woul~ have 
been paid as compensation under the proviso to sUb-section (1) ,01' 
sub-section (2), if the land had vested in the Government; and the 
20 amount shall, in the first instance, be paid to the Bhumidhar by 
the Government and shall be recovered from the Asami in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(5) Where any excess land of a religious or charitable institution 
vests intbe Government, suob institution shaU, ·in lieu of CIOIIIJH!!D-
3, sation payable under sub-section (1 )or sub-section (2), be paid all 
annuity equal to the net annual income of the extlMS land and such 
net llDIlual income shall be determined by the competent .uthori~ 
.in the prescribed manner. 
(6) The competent authority shall, after holding an inquiry in 
30 the prescribed manner, make an order determining the amount of 
compensation payable to any person under this section and in deter-
mining the amount payable under sub-section (1), the competent 
authority may, after giving that person an opportunity of making 
any representation, make selection of excess lands for the purposes 
~ of each of the clauses of that sub-section in accordance with such 
3 rules as may be made in this behalf. 
40 
11. (1) The compensation payable under section 10 shall be due MaDner .f 
on the date of the publication of the list in the Official Gazette =~e:.- of 
under sub-section (3) of section 9 and may be paid in cash, in a tion. 
lump sum or in instalments, or in bonds. 
(2) Where the compensation is payable in bonds, the bonds may 
be made not transferable or transferable by endaraement .or in .any 

Limit of 
future 
ICquiaition 
of land. 
I 
other manner but all such bonds shall be redeemed within such 
period, not exceeding ten years from the date of issue, as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) Where there is any delay in the payment of compeIUlation or 
where the compensation is paid either in instalments or in bonds, it s 
shall carry interest at the rate of two and a half per cent. per annum 
from the date on which it falls due. 
12. No person representing a family shall acquire in any manner 
whatsoever whether by transfer, exchange, lease, agreement or 
succession any land where such acquisition has the effect of making 10 
the total area of the land held by him exceed the ceiling limit; and 
any such land in excess of the ceiling limit shall, subject to the pro- Delhi Act • 
visions of the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954, be treated as excess of 19' •• 
land of the transferee and the provisions of sections 6 to 11 shall, as 
far as may be, apply to such excess land. IS 
~xce .. land 13. Where a person representing a family holds at any time land 
~~ which does not exceed the ceiling limit, he shall not be deemed to hold 
in certain any excess land under this Act where such excess is due to any im-
-.el. provements effected in the land by the efforts of the family or to a 
decrease in the number of members of the family. 20 
Power of U After the publication of the list of excess land under sub-
g:r •• i- section (3) of section 9, and after demarcation in the prescribed 
oner to. take manner of such land where necessary, the Deputy Commissioner 
=:8~d. Of may take possession of any excess land and may use or cause to be 
used such force as may be necessary for the purpose. 25 
Reservation 15. The Chief Commissioner may reserve any excess land vesting 
of Il!Dd for in the Government under the provisions of this Act for the benefit of 
~ pur- the village community or for any work of public utility or for such 
other purposes as may be prescribed: 
Provided that where such land is not being used for the afore- leD 
said purposes, it may be used by te Gaon P&nchayat for lUeh 
purposes as the Chief Commissioner may direct. 
Allotment of 16. Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the 
hCelllmd. Chief Commissioner or any officer authorised by him may settle any 
excess land vesting in the Government (other than land reserved 3S 
under section 15) with such person~ and on such terms and condi-
tions as h. think. fit. 

• CHAPTER III 
MISCELLANEOUS 
17. Save as otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this AI:t to ovei-
Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary con- rde othCl' 
stained in any other law, custom or usage or agreement or decree or aWl. 
order of a court. 
18. Any sum payable to the Government under the provisions Mode of re-
fthi At b ed · h coveryof o s c may e recover In t e same manner as an arrear of any amount 
land revenue. due UDder 
the ~t. 
10 19. Any person aggrieved by an order made by the competent Appeal. 
authority under section 10, may, within a period of thirty days from 
the date of the order, prefer an appeal to the Deputy Commissioner: 
Provided that the Deputy Commissioner may entertain the 
appeal after the expiry of the said period, if he is satisfied that the 
IS appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the 
appeal in time. 
20. (1) The Chief Commissioner may, on an application for revi- Ilevieion. 
sion made to him or otherwise, call for the record of any proceeding 
pending before, or disposed of by, the competent authority or the 
20 Deputy Commissioner. 
(2) No order varying the decision of the competent authority 
or the Deputy Commissioner or revising the list published under 
section 9 which prejudiCially affects any person shall be made with-
out giving him an opportunity of being heard. 
25 21. Any officer or authority while holding an inquiry or hear- Po~er of. 
ing an appeal or exercising powers of revision under this Act h~d:, i~~e 
shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the quiriee, etc., 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, when trying a suit, in respect of the A::~.er the 
following matters, namely:-
30 (a) enforcing the attendance of any person and examinine 
3S 
him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents 
and material objects; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit; and 
(d) such other matters as may be prescribed. 
%2. Subject to any conditions and restrictions that may be pres- Entry upon 
cribed, any officer entrusted with the performance of any duty land for 
under this Act may, in the discharge of such duty, enter upon and ~:C.Of 

Otrenc:es ad 
penaltiea. 
10 
survey and take measurement of any land and do all other acts 
necessary for carrying out his duties under this Act. 
23. (1) Whoever being bound to submit a return under section 
4 fails without reasonable cause, to do so, within the prescribed 
time, or submits a return which he knows or has reason to believe , 
to be false, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to Oftt! 
thousand rupees. 
(2) Whoever contravenes any lawful order made under this Act 
or otherwise obstructs any person from lawfully taking possession of 
any land shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one 10 
thousand rupees. 
!~n:~t~:f %4. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every order made 
bar of juril- under this Act shall be final. 
diction. 
(2) No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit 
or proceeding in so far as it relates to any matter which the compe- 15 
tent authority or the Deputy Commissioner is empowered by or 
under this Act to deci~. 
P1o>tCCtion 25. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Govem-
~:dcr ment or any authority or officer in respect of anything which is in 
the Act. good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or 20 
any rules or orders made thereunder. 
Power to 26. (1) The Chief Commissioner may, on an application made to 
exempt, elx:. him in this behalf within three months from the commencement of 
this Act, exempt from the operation of section 3,-
(a) any person who holds a compact block of land exceedinf 25 
the ceiling limit which-
(i) is being used as an orchard from before the 10th day 
of February, 1959; or 
(ii) is being used as a farm in which heavy investment 
or permanent structural improvements have been made and 30 
which, in the opinion of the Chief Commissioner, is being 
so efficienUy managed that its break up is likely to result in 
a fall in production; 
Provided that, where such person holds the compact block 35 
of land toeether with any other land, he shall be permitted to 

Delhi Act 
8 of 19'4. 
11 
elect to retain either the compact block of land, notwithstalldmg 
that it exceeds the ceiling limit or the other land, not exceeding 
the ceiling limit; ... 
(b) any specialised farm which is being used for cattle 
5 breeding, dairy or wool raising; 
10 
(c) any land which is being held by a eowoperative society. 
provided that where a member of any such society helds a 
share in such land, his share shall be tala!n into account in 
determining his ceiling limit; 
(d) any land held by a body notified by the Chief Commis-
sioner under section 33 of the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954, as 
in force before sum commencement: 
Provided that the Chief Commissioner may entertain the appli-
cation after the expiry of the said period of three months, if he i~ 
I, satisfied that the appiieant was prevented by su1ftcient eaase from 
makmg the- application in time. 
(2) Where any land in respect of which exemption has been 
granted to a person under clause (a..) of sub-section (1) is trans-
ferred to another person, the Chief Commissioner may, on an 
~ application made to htm within three months from the date of the 
tran.r, exempt the trarmferee from the operation of section 3 and 
section 12 and the proviSions of the said clause shall, as far as may 
be, apply to the grant of such c~an. 
(3) Where the Chief Commissioner is of opinion that the use of 
25 land for any specified purpose is expedient or necessary in the public 
interest, he may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make a 
declaration to that effect and on the issue of such notification, any 
person may, notwithstanding anything contained in section 12, 
aequire land in excess of the ceiling limit for being used for such 
30 specified purpose and such person shall, within one month from the 
date of such acquisition, send intimation thereof to the competent 
authority. 
(4) Where any land in respect of which exempticm has been 
gran'ted under sub~ection (l) or sub-section (2) or sub-section 
35 (3) ceases to be used, or is not within the prescribed time used, for 
the purpose for which exemption had been granted, the Chief 
COnunissioner may, after giving the persons affected an. opportunity 
of being heard, withdraw such exemption. 
27. (1) The Chief Commissioner may, by notification in the Power to 
Oftlcial Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposea elf this make Mel. 
Aet. 

12 
(.2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generaiity of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
(a) the form in which and the period within which a 
return under section 4 may be submitted; 
(b) the agency through which information under section 5 
may be collected; 
(c) the manner of holding inquiries under this Act; 
5 
(d) the matters which may be determined by the competent 
authority under sub-section (1) of section 6 and the manner of 10 
determination of excess land under the Act; 
(e) the form in which a list under sub-section (3) of section 
6 or sub-section (3) of section 9 may be prepared and the 
manner of publication of such list; 
(/) the period within which an application for restoration 15 
of excess land of an Asami may be made by the Bhumidhar; 
(g) the manner of apportionment of compensation bet-
ween the Bhumidhar and the Asami in respect of any excess 
land in the possession of the Asami; 
(h) the manner of determination of the net annual income 20 
of any excess land for the purposes of payment of compensa-
tion; 
(i) the manner of assessment of market value of structures 
and buildings and the value of trees for the purpose of payment 
of compensation; 25 
(j) the manner of selection of excess lands for the pur-
poses of clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section (1) of section 10; 
(k) the number of instalments in which compensation under 
this Act may be paid or recovered; and the period within which 
bonds may be redeemed; 30 
(1) the manner of demarcation of excess land; 
(m) the purposes for which land may be reserved under 
section 15; , 
(11.) the categories of persons with whom excess land may 
be settled anc;l the terms and conditions on which such settle- 35 
ment may b,e Jll8.<;le~ 
(0) the powers of a civil court which may be velted in 
any officer or authority holding an inquiry; 
(p) the conditions and restrictions subject to which an 
officer may enter upon any land for the purpose of survey and 40 
tamr measurement; 

ed. 
13 
(q) the levy of fees in respect of any matter under this Act; 
(r) any other matter which has to be, or may be prescrib-
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as 
oS may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it 
is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be com-
prised in one session or in two successive sessioris, and if, before the 
expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session imme-
diately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in 
10 the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be, so' however that any such modifica-
tion or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule. 
Delhi Act 8 IS 28. In the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954, for section 33, the fol- :r::dment 
of 1954· lowing section shall be substituted, namely:- Delhi Land 
Reform. 
Act, 1954. 
20 
25 
"33. (1) No Bhumidhar shall have the right to transfer by Rettrictiontfi OD trlDl en 
sale or gift or otherwise any land to any person, where as a ra- ~ a Bhumi-
sult of the transfer, the transferor shall be left with less tpan sr. 
eight standard acres in the Union territory of Delhi: 
Provided that the Chief Commissioner may exempt from the' 
operation of this section, the transfer of any land made before 
the 1st day of December, 1958, if the land covered by such 
transfer does not exceed one acre in area and is used or intend-
ed to be used for purposes other than those mentioned in clause 
(13) of section 3.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954, fixed .a limit .Glf 3Q staadarj 
acres on future acquisitiolUl, but .did not provide for .ally ceiling 011 
existing land holdings in Delhi. An announcement was made in the 
Lok Sabha by the Home Minister on the 10th February, 1959, that a 
Bill to impose ceilings Dn land holdings would be intr.oduced. The 
present BnI seeks to fix a ceiling of 30 standard acres <in respect.of a 
family consisting of five members. The Bill further seeks tG .provide 
that where there are more than five members in a family, it would be 
permissible for that family to hold an additional five standard acres 
for each member provided that the total area held by that family 
does not exceed sixty standard acres. 
Lands in excess of the ceiling limit are to vest in the 
Government. 
The provisions of the Bill are explained in the notes on clauses, 
wherever necessary. 
G. B. PANT. 
NEW DJUII; 
'Ihe 10th November, 1951. 

Notes on dauses 
Clause a.-This clause provides that in respect of a family 
consisting of five members, the ceiling limit shall be 30 standard 
acres, provided that if there are more than five members in a family, 
It would be permissible to hold five additional standard acres for 
each member in excess of five, so however, as not to exceed 60 
standard acres in the aggregate. 
Under clause 2 (d), 'family', in relation to a person, means the 
person, the wife or husbandi, as the case may be, and the dependent 
children and grand-children, of such person. 
Clauses 4 and 5.-These clauses provide for the submission of 
returns by persons who held land in excess of the ceiling limit at 
any time during the period between the 10th day of February, 1959, 
and the date of the commencement of the Act and for the collection 
of information through any other agency in default of the submis-
sion of the returns under clause 4. 
Clauses 6, 7 and a.-These clauses prescribe the procedure for 
the determination of excess land, selection of excess land in cases 
of certain transfers and distribution of excess land. 
Clause 9.-This clause provides for the disposal of the objections 
that may be filed against the list of excess lands published by the 
competent authority under sub-clause (3) of clause 6, the publica-
tion of the final list of excess lands and the consequences thereof. 
Clauses 10 and H.-These clauses specify the principles of 
assessment of compensation and the manner of payment of the 
same. 
Clause 12.-This clause seeks to limit the future acquisitions of 
land. 
Clause 13.-By this clause provlSlon is made that excess lands 
need not be surrendered where such excess is due to any improve-
ments effected in the land by the efforts of the family or to a 
decrease in the number of members of the family. 
Clame a.-By this clause, the Deputy CommissJOner is 
empowered to take possession of excess land. 

16 
Clau.se lS.-By this clause power is sought to be given to the 
Chief Commissioner to reserve excess land vesting in the Govern-
ment for the benefit of the village community or for any work of 
public utility or for such other purposes as may be prescribed. 
Clause l6.-This clause seeks to empower the Chief Commis-
sioner or any other officer authorised by him in this behalf to allot 
any excess land vesting in the Government to such persons and 
on such conditions as he thinks fit. 
Clau.ses 19, 20 and 21.-These clauses provide for appeals and 
revision against orders passed under the proposed legislation and 
the extent to which officers exercising powers thereunder are to 
have the powers of a civil court. 
Clame 22.-By this clause, provision is made to empower officers 
entrusted with the performance of duties under the Bill to enter 
upon and survey and take measurement of any land. 
Clause 23.-This clause provides for penalties for non-submission 
of returns to be submitted under clause 4 or for submission of false 
returns. 
Clau.se 26.-This clause seeks to empower the Chief Commissioner 
to exempt any land specified therein from the operation of clause 3. 
Clause 28.-This clause makes a consequential amendment in sec-
tion 33 of the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 10 of the Bill envisages payment of compensation in res-
pect of excess lands that would vest in the Government. The princi-
ples on which the compensation is to be determined have been speci-
fied in that clause and it is estimated that the compensation so 
payable may be about Rs. 1,10,000/-. It is permissible to pay the 
compensation in instalments in which case interest is required to be 
paid at the rate of 21% per annum on the unpaid amount. 
The Bill also contemplates the llppOintment of certain officers as 
competent authority for exercising the powers and performing the 
functions specified by and under this Act. The services of officers 
already available would be mostly utilised for this purpose and it is 
not likely that any expenditure on this account would be required 
to be incurred. 
11 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 27 of the Bill specifies the matters in respect of which the 
Chief Commissioner is empowered to make rules and these relate to 
matters of procedure and of detail such as form of returns, manner 
of holding inquiries, manner of determination of the net annual In-
come of excess lands, manner of demarcation of such land, etc., which 
it is not practicable to provide for in the Bill itself, and have neces-
sarily to be left to be provided for in the rules, taking into considera-
tion the needs of day-to-day administration and local conditions. 
The proposed delegation of legislative power is of a normal charac-
ter. 
fl 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE DELHI LAND REFORMS ACT, 1954 
No. VIII OF 1954 
• • • '" '" 
Reatrktiotls 33. No Bhumidhar shall have the right to transfer by sale or gift 
bn tr~;fcr. or otherwise any land to any person, other than an institution estal>-
di:a~. wm- lished for a charitable purpose or a body notified by the Chief Com-
missioner, where as a result of the transfer-
(a) such person shall become entitled to land which t9-
goether with land, if any, held- by him personally or together with 
the JIl8IIlbers of his family will, in the aggregate, exceed thirty 
standard acres, or 
(b) the transferor shall be left with an uneconomic holding 
of less than eight standard acres in the Union territory of Delhi: 
Provided that the Chief Commissioner may exempt from the 
operation of clause (b) the transfer of any land made before the 1st 
day of December, 1958, if the land covered by such transfer does not 
exceed one acre in area and is used or intended to be used for pur-
poses other than those mentioned in clause (13) of section 3. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section a person's family 
shall, if the members are living jointly, consist of the person him-
self, his minor children, his wife or her husband, as the case may 
be, and if the person himself is a minor, his father and mother." 
• '" 
, 
I. 
'" '" '" 
19 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the imposition of a ceiling on land holdings in 
the Union territory of Delhi and for matters connected 
therewith. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the 
consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Govind Ballabh Pant, 
Minister of Home A//airs) 