25 of 1"1. 
As INmODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
Bill No. 82 of 1976 
r~IW"_ t"HtM "1' 
THE ADVOCATES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1976 
.. 
BILL 
further to amend the Advocata Act, 1961. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty~eventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Advocates (Amendment) Act, 1976. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall come into force on 
5 such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Offi-
cial Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different 
provisions of this Act. 
Short 
title and 
com-
menC'e-
menl 
2. In section 2 of the Advocates Act, 1961 
as the principal Act), in sub-sectiqn (1) ,-
(~nafter referred to Amend-
mentol 
aect1on2. 
10 (i) clause (c) shall be omitted; 
(ii) in clause (i), for the words ce, vakil or attorney", the words 
"or vakil" shall be substituted. 
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the follow-
ing sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:-
I' "(3) There shall be a Cha.irmaD of each State Bar Council as 
fqUows:-
(a) in the case of the State Bar Council of Delhi, such ad-
vocate as may be nominated by the Cmtral Government shall 
be the Chairman for a period of two years; 
Amend-
mentot 
aectlon S. 

Amend-
mentr4 
section"-
Amend-
ment of 
aeclioo 
ID. 
Amend-
ment of 
aection 
2'. 
(1)) in the case of the State Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, 
Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura, the Advocate-General of each 
of the States of Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland and Tri-
pura, ex-fficio shall, by rotation in that order, be the Chairman 
for a i>&iod of two years; S .. 
(c) in the case of the State Bar Council Qf Punjab and Har-
yana, the Advocate-General of each of the &tates of Punjab and 
Haryana, ex-officio shall, by rotation in that order, be the Chair-
man for a period of two years; and 
(d) in the case of any Qther State Bar Council, the Advocate- 10 
General of the State, ex-offi<'io, shall be the Chairman. 
(3A) There shall be a Vice-Chairman of each State Bar Council 
who shall be the seniormost advocate amongst the members of that 
Council.". 
'" In section 4 of the principal Act,- I, 
(i) in sub-section (1), after clause (b), the following clause shall 
be ~ed. namely:-
II (bb) a person appointed by virtue of oftlce (whether or not 
under Government) by the Central Government;"; 
(oii) for sub-section (2), thW following sub--sections shall be sub- 20 
stituted,namely: -
II (2) The Attorney-General of India ex-officio and the Solici-
tor-General of India ex-otJicio shall be the Chairman and Vice-
Chairman respectively of the Bar Council of India. 
(2A) The term of office of the member of the Bar Council of 25 
India appointed under clause (bb) of sub-section (1) shall be 
two years from the date of his appointment or till he ceases to 
hold the office by virtuQ of which he was appointed, whichever 
is earlier.". 
5. In sub-section (2) of section 15 of the principal Act,-
(i) clause (c) shall be omitted; 
(ii) in clause (d), the wQl'ds "or to the office of the Chairman or 
Vice-Chairman" shall be omitted. 
6. In section 24 of the principal A.ct,-
(i) in clause (c) of sub-section (1), after the words, figures and 35 
letters "the 31st day of December, 1976;", the following shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"or has pa~ the articled clerk's examination or any other 
examination specified by the High Court at Bombay or Calcutta 
for enrolment as an attorney of that High Court;"; 40 
(£i) sub-section (4) shall be omitted . 
. 1 

~ 
1. Section 31 of the principal Act shall be omitted With deet·frOm the 
ist day of January. 1977., 
8; in Section 34 of the principal Act, sub-sections (2) and (3) shall be 
binitted With effect from the 1st day af January, 1977. 
Omlnlori 
of section 
31. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
section 
34. 
$ 9. For section 46 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Substitu-
10 
substituted, namely:- tlonof 
"46. Every State Bar Council shall, for each financial year com-
mencing on or after the 1st day af April, 1976,pay tqthe Bar Coun-
cil of India a sum equivalent to twenty per cent .. of the ~tal of the 
enrolment fees realised by it under this Act during that year before 
the thirtieth day of April of the succeeding financial year.". 
10. In section 55 of the principal Act, clause (b) lhall be omitted 
with effect from the 1st day of January, 1977. 
11. Every person hoJding office as--
(i) Chairman or Vice-Chairman of the Bar Council of India; or 
(<ii) Chairman or Vice-Chairman of any State Bar Council, 
immediately before the coming into force of section 4. Of, as the case 
may be, section 3 of this Act shall cease to hold such office on such 
commencement. 
newUc-
tion for 
section 
46. 
Payment 
of 
part of 
enrol-
ment 
fees 
to the 
Bar 
Council 
of 
India. 
Amend-
mentof 
eection 
55. 
Transi-
tional 
provi-
sions. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Experience gained in the practical working of the Advocates Act, 1961 
has necessitated the following amendments:-
(i) Abolition of the Dual System 
The Indian High Courts Act, 1861 (commonly known as the Charter 
Act) passed by the British Parliament enabled the Crown to erect and 
establish High Courts in India by Letters Patent and these Letters Patent 
authorised and empowered the High Courts to make rules for' enrolment 
of advocates and attorneys (commonly known as Solicitors). Under these 
rules, a suitor on the original side of the High Courts at Bombay and Cal-
cutta has to approach an advocate only through the conduit of a solici-
tor. Though the rules of the High Courts have minimised this compul-
sion recently, complaints have been voiced against the system mainly on 
the ground that it imposes a double burden on a poor litigant who is re-
quired to pay fees to two sets of professionals and it has been suggested 
that the two, classes of professionals, namely, advocates and solicitors that 
stand between the law and the lay should be amalgamated into a single 
class of advocates. It is proposed to give effect to the suggestion by aboli-
shing the dual system with a view to simplifying and streamlining court 
procedure, avoiding stratification of the profession and reducing the costa 
of litigatioIll keeping the needs of the consumer of the legal process as a 
matter of paramount importance. 
(ii) RedUCing the share of the Bar Council of India in the enrolment fee. 
Presently out of Rs. 250 paid by an applicant for enrolment as advo-
cate, the share of the apex body, namely, the Bar Council of India is 41) 
per cent. and the remainder is retained by the State Bar Council where 
he is enrolled. The State Bar Councils have complained that they are 
hampered for want of funds in implementing welfare schemes like 
insurance and provident fund for advocates and legal aid to the poor. 
It ls, therefore, proposed that the share of the Bar Council Of India in 
the enrolment fees should be reduced to 20 per cent. from the existing 
40 per cent. 
(iii) Making the Law O~ers of the Centre and the State ex-ofRcid 
Ch4irman of the Bar Council of India and State Bar Councils 
respectively 
Under the present scheme of the Advocates Act, 1961, the posts of 
Chairmen and Vice-Chairmen of the Bar Council of India as well as the 
State Bar Councils are elective ones. The Attorney-General of India as 
well as the Advocates-General of States are indubitably leaders in their 
own rights in the profession as being well-known for their erudition, ad-
vocacy, integrity and legal acumen. It is proposed to make these Law 
Officers ex-officio Chairman of the Bar Council of India and the State Bar 
Councils respectively; Solicitor-General of India, the ex-ofJicio Vice-Chair-
man of the Bar Council of India and the seniormost Advocate from 
amongst the elected members of a State Bar Council to be the Vice-
Chairman of that Council. Representation is sought to be given to the 
Central Government on the Bar Council of India and a rotational pattern 
for Chairmanship amongst the Advocates-General is being introduced as 
respects Bar Councils constituted for territories comprising of more than 
~e State. 
Hence the Bill. 
NEW l>ELHI; H. R. GOKHALE. 
The 12th August, 1976. 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS mOM THE ADVOCATES ACT, 1961 
III III III 
• • 
Z. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires.-
III III III III 
• 
(c) "attorney" includes a solicitor; 
III 
'" '" '" ... 
(i) "legal practitioner" means an advocate, vakil or attorney 
of any High Court, a pleader, mukhtar or revenue agent; 
• 
3. (1) • • 
• 
CHAPTER II 
BAR COUNCILS 
• 
• • 
... ., 
j' ;.i ., .~ 
• • 
(3) There shall be a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman of each State Bar 
Council elected by the Council in such manner as may be prescribed. 
III III 
'" 
III 
'" 
4. (1) • • • • • 
(2) There shall be a Chairman and a Vice-Chainnan of the Bar Council 
of India elected by the Council in such manner as may be prescribed. 
15. (1) • • • • • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for---: 
... ... '" 
III 
• 
(c) the manner of election of the Chairman and the Vice-
Chairman of the Bar Council; 
(d) the nuumer in which and the authority by which doubts and 
disputes as to the validity of! an election to the Bar Council or to the 
office of the Ch~an or Vice-Chairman shall be finally decided; 
III III 
'" 
III 
'" 
Z4.. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and the rules made there-
under, a person shall be qualified to be admitted as an advocate on a State 
roll, if he fulfils the following conditions, namely:-
'" • • • 
(c) he has obtained a degree in law-
(i) before the 12th day of. March, 1967, from any University 
in the territory of India; or 
. . . .... 
r~t· ...... 
,'. \ -. 
Deflnl. 
tions. 
State Bar 
Councu... 
Bar 
Council 
of IncUa. 
Power to 
make \ 
rule .. 
Persons 
who may 
be admit-
ted as 
advocates 
ona state 
roll. 

~f pro- - .-
viaion for 
• Home,... 
Power 
olHi,h 
C0urt8 
to make 
rul~. 
r - olio !III ....... ' . ~; 
6 i.. ••• 
(ii) before the 15th day of August, 1947, from any University 
in any area which was comprised before that date within India 88 
defined by the Government of India Act, 1935; or 
(iii) after the 12th day of March, 1967, save as provided in 
8ub-clause (iiia), after undergoing a three-year course 01. study in 
law from any University in India which is recognised for the pur-
poses of this Act by the Bar Council 'Of India; or 
(iiia) after undergoing a course of study in law, the duration 
of which is not less than two, academic years commencing from 
the academic year 1967-68 or any earlier academJ.c year from any 
UIliiversity in India which is recognised for the purposes of this 
Act by the Bar Council of India; or 
(iv) in any other case, from any University outside the terri-
tory of Iftdia, if the degree is reco.gnised for the purposes of this 
Act by the Bar Council of India; or 
he is a barrister and is called to the Bar on or before the 31st day 
Of December, 1976; or has obtained such other foreign qualification 
in law as is recognised by the Bar Council of India for the purpose 
of admission as an advocate under this Act; 
* * * * * 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a person 
who has been an attorney of any High Court may be admitted as an ad-
vocate on a State roll if he makes an application for such enrolment in ac-
cordance with the provisions of this Act and fulfils the conditions specified 
in clauses (a), (b), (e) and (f) of sub-section (1), but the right of such 
• penon to plead orto act onjthe wiginal side of the High Court at Cal-
cutta or the High Court at Bombay shall 'be subject to any rules that may 
be made in that behalf by that High Court. 
* * * * * 
31. Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 29 and '30, the High 
-Court 1I.t Calcutta. or the High Court at Bo,mbay may provide for the 
admdssion of proper persons to be attorneys and shall have power to 
remove or to suspend from practice on reaso,nable cause, any such attorney . 
*. * * * * 
.. ~1) • • • • • 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), 
the High Court at Calcutta and the High Court at Bombay may make 
rules- ,. 
&.. -
'(i) providing for the qualificati~ and admission of proper persons 
to be attorneys; 
(ii) declaring what shall be deemed to be the functions, powers and 
duties of such attorneys and the procedure to be followed in remov-
. ing etr suspending any such atto,mey from practice; 
(iii) determining the persons who shall be entitl~ respectively to 
plead and to act in the High Court in the exercise of its original juriJro 
cUction. 

l8 of 1879. 
7 
(8) Until rules are made under this section, any rules made by a High 
Court under its Letters Patent or any other laiw relating to any of the 
matters specified in this secti~ which were in force immediately before 
the appointed day, shall continue in force so far as consistent with this 
Act, and shall be deemed to be rules made under this section . 
• • • • • 
46. Every State Bar Council shall, before the thirtieth day of April in 
each financial year, pay to the Bar Council of India a sum equivalent to 
forty per cent. of the ~tal of the enrolment fees realised by it under this 
Act during the financial year immediately preceding that year. 
• • • • • 
55. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,-
• '" '" '" • 
(b) every attorney practising as such immediately before the said 
date by virtue of the provisions of the Legal Practitioners Act, 187~, or 
any other law who does not elect to be, or is not qualified to be, 
enrolled as an advocate under this Act; 
'" • • • • 
Payment 
ot part of 
enrolment 
fees to 
the Bar 
Councll 
of India. 
Rights of 
certain 
exiatin, 
legal 
practi-
tioners 
notaftect-
eeL 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
!further to amend the Advocates Act, 1961. 
(Shri H. R. GokhGle, 
MinisteT 01 Lew. Junice 
OM Compcmr Afqir.) , 