AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

~3 06 2004

Bill No. 82 ० 2004

THE FOREST (CONSERVATION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2004

By
Suri C.K. CHANDRAPPAN, M.P.

A
BILL
further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Forest (Conservation) Amendment Act, 2004.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

11980 5 2. After section 2 of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:—

“2, Notwithstanding anything contained in section 2 when a forestiland or
any part thereof is required for any work relating to building new houses for tribal
families in and around the existing tribal settlements, construction of anganwadies,

10 primary health centres, laying of pipelines for drinking water or erection of electric
poles for transmission and distribution of electricity for exclusive benefit of the tribal
settlements, no approval of the Central Government shall be required for deforestation.”.

Short title
and

commences
ment,

Insertion of
new section
2A.

Provision for
construction
of new
houses,
anganwadies,
public health
centres and
for other
development
work in tribal
areas.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Tribal people living in the forest areas are facing innumerable hardships due to an
existing statue namely ‘The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980’ which restricts the use of
reserved forest or any portion thereof for non-forest purpose. Due to this restriction, tribal
people feel helpless in construction of their new houses, anganwadies, public health centres,
etc. in the vicinity of their existing settlements.

‘These tribal people have not seen any developmental work in their area as the
Act provides for a cumbersome procedure to be followed for clearance of any project for
development of basic amenities in the area. It is necessary to serve the interests of the tribal
people by amending the existing Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 with a view to facilitate
tribal people for carrying out necessary construction and other related works to meet the
demands of their growing population for housing, health centres etc. in the vicinity of their
existing settlements. This step will go a long way to mitigate their problems to some extent.

Hence this Bill.

‘New DeLut; C.K, CHANDRAPPAN
June 10,2004.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.

* * * * . * *

“3A, Whoever contravenes or abets the contravention of any of the provisions of Penalty for
section 2, shall be punishable with simple imprisonment for a period which may extend to wae

of the
fifteen days. Provisions of
the Act,
3B. (1) Where any offence under this Act has been committed— Offences by
tT
(a) by any department of Government, the head of the department; or aa

i वि P Government
(8) by any authority, every person who, at the time the offence ‘was committed, departments.

was directly in charge of, and was responsible to, the authority for the conduct of the

business of the authority as well as the authority;

shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly:

Provided that noting contained in this sub-section shall render the head of the
department or any person referred to in clause (b), liable to any punishment if he proves that
the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to
prevent the commission of such offence.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence
punishable under the Act has been committed by a department of Government or any
authority referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) and it is proved that the offence has
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the
part of, any officer, other than the head of the department, or in the case of an authority, any
person other than the persons referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1), such officer or
persons shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.”

. . . * . * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.

(Shri C.K. Chandrappan, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—2477LS—15.10.2004.