1
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI SUSHIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Code of  Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 82 of  2017
5

2
2. In section 451 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,—
(i) for the words "the Court may", the words "the Court shall, within sixty days
from the date such property is produced before it,’’ shall be substituted; and
(ii) after the words "disposed of", the words "in such manner, as may be
prescribed by notification by the Central Government in consultation with the State
Governments" shall be inserted.
Amendment of
section 451.
5
2 of 1974.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
Criminal litigation in India is a long drawn out process. Under the relevant criminal
laws, any property related to the trial has to be confiscated or be kept in the custody of the
police station for being recorded as evidence. Though the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
provides for disposal of property pending trial, the absence of any time limit to adjudicate the
disposal of property often leads to destruction of the said property as it is confiscated for a
long time. The non-disposal of property such as vehicles, cement packets, foodgrains and
other items leads to their decay and, subsequently, they become obsolete and non-usable. It
is, therefore, recommended that a time-bound disposal of application for disposal of property
which has been confiscated during the pendency of trial is essential. Such a time-bound
decision will ensure that the property is not wasted and it doesn't become a burden for the
police or the Court to continuously monitor the upkeep of such property. The State
Government is also required to prescribe the rules and procedure for dealing with such
property and ensuring that existing registration of movable property such as car is cancelled
and the products are freshly auctioned in order to avoid any further hardship to the buyer or
acquirer of the property.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUSHIL KUMAR SINGH
March 11,  2017.
3

4
MEMORANDUM   REGARDING   DELEGATED   LEGISLATION
Clause 2 of the Bill empowers the State Government to make rules for disposal of
property subject to speedy and natural decay within sixty days of producing of such property
before any criminal Court. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
(NO. 2 OF 1974)
* * * * *
451. When any property is produced before any Criminal Court during an inquiry or
trial, the court may make such order as it thinks fit for the proper custody of such property
pending the conclusion of the inquiry or trial, and, if the property is subject to speedy and
natural decay, or if it is otherwise expedient so to do, the court may, after recording such
evidence as it thinks necessary, order it to be sold or otherwise disposed of.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, ‘‘property’’ includes—
(a) Property of any kind or document which is produced before the court or
which is in its custody.
(b) Any property regarding which an offence appears to have been committed or
which appears to have been used for the commission of any offence.
* * * * *
Order for
custody and
disposal of
property
pending trial
in certain
cases.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of  Criminal Procedure, 1973.
————
(Shri Sushil Kumar Singh, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—5705LS(S3)—16-06-2017.