As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

ft &%
<4 ae Me :

Bill No. 82 of 2005

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
By
SHR! SURESH Kurup, M.P. |
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2005 Short title.
2. For article 130 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted, namely:— Substitution: of
| new article for
article 130.
"130. The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi and shall have permanent Bench at Seat of
Bangalore ——
ourt.

Provided that the Supreme Court may also sit in such other .ace or
places as the Chief Justice of India may, with the approval of the President
from time to time, appoint."


कक STATEMENT OF OBJECT rs AND REASONS

Delhi is the permanent seat of the Supreme Court of India. But in view of the vastness
of the country and its population exceeding hundred crore, majority of the people living in
_ States far away from Delhi particularly those from Southern States, are either deprived of _
their right to seek justice from the highest court of the land or made to incur very heavy —
expenses in connection with their cases. Besides, mounting arrears of cases in the Courtalso —
cause great hardship to the litigants coming from far away regions like Kerala. This situation

has given rise to persistent demand from Southern States for a permanent Bench of the

Supreme Court at Bangalore. The Bill seeks to meet this long standing demand of the people — ;
of the Southern region of the country a

New DELHI; — 7 | a ’ SURESH KURUP
April 15,2005. | |



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for establishment of a permanent Bench of the
Supreme Court at Bangalore. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India in respect of construction of new building,
appointment of staff and other establishment expenditure, etc. It is estimated that a

recurring expenditure of about rupees three crore is likely to be involved per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore is also likely to be involved.


eS ee

ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.
$ ‘
x * * हु * :

मै 1 . * :
130. The Supreme Co
Justice of India may, with

a e

urt shall sit in Delhi or in such other place or places, asthe Chief Se
the approval of the President, from time to time, appoint.

कप * ok * | ot



LOK SABHA

A
| BILL
- further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Suresh Kurup, M.P)

MGIPMRND—1276LS(S-1 )—28.06.2005.