1
THE  TIMELY  COMMENCEMENT  OF  LAWS  BILL,  2016
By
SHRI BAIJAY ANT PANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
to require the Central Government to issue notification of coming into force of laws
passed by Parliament in a timely manner.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Timely Commencement of Laws Act, 2016.
Bill No. 82 of  2016
Short title.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires "notification section" in reference
to an Act passed by the Houses of the Parliament means that section which empowers the
Central Government to bring into force that Act from such date as it may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint and includes those provisions in the notification section or
elsewhere in that Act which empowers the Central Government to appoint, by notification,
different dates for coming into force of different provisions of that Act or different dates for
coming into force of all or any provision in different parts of India or a State.
3. Notwithstanding anything in the notification section of any Act, an Act after having
received the assent of the President of India, shall be deemed to have come into force after
the expiry of a period of ninety days from the date it is finally passed by the Houses of
Parliament, unless it has, by notification, come into force earlier than the said period of ninety
days:
Provided that in case of an Act, which does not receive the assent of the President of
India within a period of ninety days from the date it is finally passed by the Houses of
Parliament, the Act shall be deemed to have come into force on the date it receives the assent
of the President of India.
4. If an Act is deemed to have come into force by operation of section 3, the Central
Government shall at the earliest possible instance publish information conveying that fact in
the Official Gazette.
5. Notwithstanding anything in section 3, if each House of Parliament, before the
expiry of period of ninety days referred to in section 3, by resolutions, approves the coming
into force of an Act beyond the said period of ninety days, the Act shall then be deemed to
have come into force after the expiry of six month from the date it is finally passed by the
Houses of Parliament, unless it has, by notification, come into force earlier than the said
period of six months:
Provided that if the resolutions cannot be moved in either or both the Houses of
Parliament, owing to being not in session or in the House of the People owing to its dissolution,
the Central Government may, by notification in Official Gazette, declare its intention of moving
such resolutions in the immediately following session or in the session to be held after
general election, as the case may be, and, upon the publication of such notification, the
provisions of section 3 shall not apply till the expiry of seven days from the commencement
of immediately following session or the session to be held after general election, as the case
may be.
Definitions.
Commencement
of an Act
within a
period of
ninety days.
Extension of
time for
commencement
of the
Act with
approval of
the Houses.
Central
Government
to publish Act
in the Official
Gazette.
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is beyond doubt that there can be cases where it is desirable to confer upon the
Central Government a limited amount of discretion in deciding and notifying the appointed
date on which an Act, that has been passed by Parliament, comes into effect. This discretion
allows the Central Government some amount of time to make adequate arrangements for
implementing a new Act.
However, the system as it exists right now offer much scope for misuse. With no
compulsion to notify the commencement of the Act by any definite date, the Central Government
has an effective veto over laws that have been passed by the Parliament. This possibility, if
not rectified, would be an affront to the basic tenets of separation of powers that we cherish.
Thus, there is a need to cap the amount of time that can be given to the Central
Government to notify the coming into force of a law after it has been passed by Parliament.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BAIJAYANT PANDA
February 25, 2016.

GMGIPMRND—37LS(S3)—16.04.2016.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to require the Central Government to issue notification of coming into force of laws
passed by Parliament in a timely manner.
————
(Shri Baijayant Panda, M.P .)