Bill No. 82 of 2009
THE ERADICATION OF UNEMPLOYMENT BILL, 2009
By
SHRI J.P. AGARWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide a scheme for eradication of unemployment from the country.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Eradication of Unemployment Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India
2. In this Act,—
(a) “Government” means the Central Government; and
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Definitions.
Short  title
and extent.
5
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. The Government shall endeavour to provide every citizen, who has attained the age
of eighteen years and who is registered with Employment Exchange, with employment
suitable to his age, qualification, skill and potential.
4. Till such time as employment is provided to a citizen under section 3, he shall be
entitled to unemployment allowance at such rate commensurate with his qualifications
and skills, as may be prescribed.
5. An Unemployment Insurance Scheme, with such features, as may be prescribed,
shall be framed by the Government so as to provide for a special fund for the grant of
unemployment allowance under this Act.
6. A citizen who has registered himself with the Employment Exchange shall be eligible
to receive benefit of unemployment allowance under this Act subject to his furnishing an
agreement to contribute to the Unemployment Insurance Scheme for a prescribed period
immediately after securing employment at such rate, as may be prescribed.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in Official Gazzette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall by laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Employment
to citizens.
Grant of
unemployment
allowance.
Unemployment
Insurance
Scheme.
Contribution to
Unemployment
Insurance
Scheme.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The problem of unemployment has assumed menacing proportions in our country.
Even the educated citizens are living in indigent state. Their energy is not being utilized for
nation building. Due to desperation and abject poverty, they are choosing the path of
violence and crime. Lack of employment opportunities in the country is also leading to brain-
drain and exodus of a large number of skilled and unskilled persons abroad. It is time that
concerted efforts are made by the Government to assure employment to the citizens of the
country and to provide unemployment allowance to those who have not been able to
secure employment. It is also necessary to start an Unemployment Insurance Scheme for
the purpose, so that the scheme may serve to finance the funds to provide relief to
unemployed people.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; J.P. AGARWAL
July 20, 2009.
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Government shall endeavour to provide
employment to all eligible citizens who have attained the age of eighteen years or above.
Clause 4 provides for unemployment allowance to all such unemployed citizens. Clause 5
provides for Unemployment Insurance Scheme to be started by the Central Government.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred fifty crore
per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Government to make rules for carrying out the
provisions of the Bill. The matters in respect of which such rules may be made would relate
to matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for
them in the Bill itself.
The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide a scheme for eradication of unemployment from the country.
————
(Shri J.P . Agarwal, M.P .)
GMMGIPMRND—3941LS—05.1 1.2009