1
Bill No.  82  of  2018
THE PRIV ATE SCHOOLS (REGULATION OF FEE) BILL, 2018
By
DR. BOORA NARSAIAH GOUD, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of fee in private schools with a view to make education
accessible to all and for matters connected therewith.or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Private Schools (Regulation of Fee) Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short
title,extent
and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “academic year” means the year specified by the appropriate Government
or, as the case may be, any Board or Council to which respective school  is affiliated;
(b) “aided school” means a school receiving any kind of recurring grant or
assistance in monetary or non-monetary form, from the appropriate Government or
the concerned authority for defraying its expenditure;
(c) “appropriate Government” means, in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(d) “child” means a child who has not completed the age of fourteen years;
(e) “fee” means the amount fixed as fee including tuition fee, library fee, gymkhana
fee, examination fee, development fee or amount payable for any curricular or
co-curricular activities, laboratory fee, information brochure fee and any other amount
collected from the students, by whatsoever name called, and accepted in whichever
manner, that is made payable to a private school;
(f) “management” means the managing committee or the governing body, by
whatever name called, of the private school to which the affairs of such schools are
entrusted and where such affairs are entrusted to any person,  by whatever name or
designation called;
(g) “National Authority” means the National Authority for the Regulation of
Fee in Private Schools constituted under section 4;
(h) “parent” means biological or adoptive mother or father of a child;
(i) “pre-primary school” means a nursery, junior kindergarten, senior kindergarten
level or any school imparting education for children between the age of three to six
years, by whatever name called and of any medium attached in the prescribed manner
to the school, but does not include a creche;
(j) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(k) “private school” means an unaided school, whether recognized or not,
which is not run by the appropriate Government, or its local authority or any other
authority designated or sponsored by appropriate Government and includes a pre-
primary, primary, middle, higher secondary and senior secondary school and also
other institutions which impart education or training below the degree level but does
not include an institute which imparts technical education;
(l) “profiteering” means any amount accepted in cash or kind, directly or
indirectly which is in excess of the fee approved as per the provisions of this Act;
(m) “regulations” means the regulations framed by the Authority;
(n) “school” means a pre-primary school, primary school, school imparting
elementary education, secondary school, higher secondary school or junior college
recognized by the Government and managed by any management and affiliated to
any Indian or foreign board, whether aided, partially aided or un-aided;
(o) “stake-holders” means the management, the students studying in the
respective institution and their parents; and
(p) “State Authority” means the State Authority for Regulation of Fee in Private
Schools constituted under section 6.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in, no
private school shall charge any additional fee in any form for admission in such school.
Definitions.
Prohibition
on charging
additional
fee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a National Authority to be known as the National Authority for Regulation of Fee in Private
Schools for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The National Authority shall consist of—
(a)  a Chairperson and six other members having atleast twenty-five years of
experience in the field of school education, public affairs or administration of
educational matters;
(b) following ex-officio members—
(i) the Chairperson, Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE);
(ii) the Commissioner, Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan (KVS);
(iii) the Director, National Council of Educational Research & Training
(NCERT);
(iv) the Chairperson, National Council for Teacher Education (NCTE);
(v) the Chairperson, National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS);
(vi) the Commissioner, Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti (NVS);
(vii) the Chairperson, National Bal Bhavan; and
(c) an eminent economist and a statistician.
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The term of office of the members of the National Authority shall be five years and
they shall not be eligible for re-appointment.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson, other members, eminent economist and statistician shall be such as may be
prescribed.
5. The National authority shall,—
(a) prescribe the fee to be charged by a private school;
(b) define the principle of ‘reasonable surplus’ and ‘non-profiteering’ on the
basis of cost-fee analysis by private schools; and
(c) undertake such other function as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government, from time to time.
6. (1) Every State Government shall, within three months from the date of coming
into force of this Act and in consultation with the respective State School Education Boards,
by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a State Authority to be known as the State
Authority for Regulation of Fee in Private Schools.
(2) The State Authority shall consist of such number of members representing the
State School Education Boards, teachers, parents and students to be appointed by the
State Government concerned in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. The State Authority shall,—
(a) ensure that the fee structure submitted by the private schools within the
State conforms to the principles of ‘reasonable suplus’ and ‘non-profiteering’ defined
by the National Authority under section 5; and
(b) undertake such other function as may be assigned to it by the State
Government, from time to time.
Constitution
of the
National
Authority for
Regulation of
Fee in Private
Schools.
Functions of
the National
Authority.
Constitution
of the State
Authority for
Regulation of
Fee in Private
Schools.
Functions of
the State
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
8. The Central Governemnt shall, on the recommendations of the National Authority,
determine the maximum amount of fee that can be charged by a private school.
9. Every private school shall, subject to the maximum amount of fee determined by the
National Authority under section, formulate its fee structure in consonance with the principles
of ‘reasonable surplus’ and ‘non-profiteering’ as defined by the National Authority under
section 5.
10. Any private school, which demands or accepts any fee or donation, in any manner
whatsoever, in violation of the provisions of section 9 shall, without prejudice to proceedings
for prosecution under the provisions of this Act or any other law for the time being in force,
be subject to following penalties:—
(i) the recognition of such private school shall be withdrawn; and
(ii) such private school shall be liable to a penalty which may extend upon
twenty lakh rupees;
Provided that a school shall be given reasonable opportunity of being heard before
any decision on its derecognition is taken.
11. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State Governments for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
12. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the provisions of this Act, shall
apply to minority institutions only if the management of such institutions convey to the
appropriate Government their willingness for regulation of fee in such institutions.
13.  The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
14. The provisions of this Act shall  be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.
15. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to prescribe
the maximum
amount of
fee.
Private
School to
formulate the
fee structure.
Penalty.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Application
of Act on
minority
educational
institutions in
certain
situation.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

5
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Education is listed as a subject in the Concurrent List of the Constitution of India,
meaning that schools, including private schools, are governed by both Central and State
laws. The last decade has witnessed growth in both the number of private schools in India
and the proportion of children enrolled in them. The proportion of private schools rose from
19.49 per cent in 2007-08 to 22.74 per cent in 2014-15. Around the same period, the share of
enrolment of children between the ages of six to fourteen years in private schools rose from
19.3 per cent to 30.8 per cent.
Parents spend a significant portion of their income to educate their children, a burden
that is often greatest for the poorest families. There is ample evidence that these costs are
a barrier that prevents some parents from enrolling or keeping their children in school. For
some families, the desire to send their children to school results in parents making sacrifices
in other areas of their lives.
The Supreme Court as well as the High Courts of various Indian States have censured
‘commercialisation of education’ and banned the charging of capitation fee. In TMA Pai
Foundation vs State of Karnataka (2002), the Supreme Court ruled that the fee chared by
private unaided institutions can be limited by the State to prevent profiteering, while allowing
for ‘reasonable surplus’. In 2003 in Islamic Academy of Education vs State of Karnataka
(2003), the Supreme Court observed that the Educational Institutions can form their own fee
structures, and the funds must be used to provide facilities to students and to further the
growth of the educational institutions. In line with the Supreme Court’s judgement, some
States did set up Committees to monitor the fee structure of Educational Institutions. But,
there is no framework at the national level prescribing the criteria for limits on fee and the
definition of terms ‘reasonable surplus’ and ‘profiteering’.
In the words of Babasaheb Ambedkar, education authorities cannot be treated on the
basis of quid pro quo; rather it is something “ought to be cheapened in all possible ways to
the greatest possible extent”.  Therefore, Government should stop the commercialisation of
education and regulate with a uniform fee structure across private schools in India. Such a
regulatory mechanism will reduce rampant exploitation of the public and help improve
educational quality.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BOORA NARSAIAH GOUD
February 9, 2018.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for constitution of National Authority for Regulation of
Fee in Private Schools. It also provides for appointment of a Chairperson, an economist and
statistician to the National Authority. Clause 6 provides for constitution of State Authority
by the State Government concerned. Clause 11 provides that the Central Government shall
provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees twenty-five crore would be involved as recurring
expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.

7
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

MGIPMRND—4198LS(S3)—05-03-2018.
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of fee in private schools with a view to make education
accessible to all and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud, M.P.)