THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
BY
SHRI MOHAN SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2007.
2.  After article 24 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:–
"24A. Every citizen shall have the right to corruption-free service in all offices
and bodies under the State.".
Short title
Insertion of
new article
24A.
Right to
corruption
free service.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  82 of 2007
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The fundamental rights enshrined in the Constitution represent two important facts.
The first is that they are an explicit and significant articulation of the basic rights that every
citizen in the country must enjoy in order to ensure that we have a meaningful democracy
and the ideals articulated in the Preamble of the Constitution are realised in practice. The
second important fact is that they represent the rights which a citizen must enjoy if we want
to have good governance by removing social evils like untouchability. These rights have
evolved over generations. They represent the lessons the society has learnt from the past
experience when these rights were not available to the citizens and consequently there was
suffering and misgovernance. For example, the protection from double jeopardy must have
arisen because there was a time when a person could be punished again and again for the
same offence.
Sixty years of our existence as independent nation and fifty-seven years of working of
the Constitution has resulted in one common experience of all Indian citizens. They cannot
go to any public organisation or office today and get the service which they are supposed to
get without either paying bribe or bringing influence by way of recommendations or
references from VIPs. Today, the situation is so bad that even a simple work can be got done
only after paying necessary bribe or bringing influence. It is a shameful thing that our
country has been rated as one of the most corrupt countries in the world. Corruption cannot
go unchecked. It will kill initiative, industriousness and skill. It will rather develop
irresponsibility and a lack of sensibility. Today, corruption is not only in Government
departments but is prevalent everywhere.
When we are talking about transparency in administration, freedom of information,
etc. it would be appropriate to talk about prevention of corruption which all go together.
Today, we are attracting maximum foreign investment. Our computer engineers are making us
proud by their achievements. But one single factor, corruption, has downgraded our image
to such an extent that all our efforts have been nullified. Certain steps like–
(i) computerisation of all records;
(ii) immediate action in case of corruption;
(iii) complete transparency in administration; and
(iv) severe punishment to the guilty
can be initiated immediately to tackle this menace.
With this in view, it is proposed to amend the Constitution to make corruption free
service as a fundamental right.
N
EW DELHI; MOHAN SINGH
November 8, 2007.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Mohan Singh, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4462LS(S5)—14-11-2007.