AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Bill No. 82 of  2025 
THE PATERNITY AND PARENTAL BENEFIT BILL, 2025 
BY 
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P. 
____________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
____________ 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Application of Act.
3. Definitions.
4. Right to payment of paternity benefit.
5. Notice of claim for paternity benefit and payment thereof.
6. Payment of paternity benefit in case of death of a man.
7. Crèche Facility.
8. Leave for miscarriage.
9. Dismissal during absence.
10. Right to Payment of Parental Benefits.
11. Notice of claim for parental benefit and payment thereof.
12. Payment of parental benefits in case of death of a person.
13. No deduction of wages in certain cases.
14. Appointment of Inspectors.
15. Powers and duties of Inspectors.
16. Inspectors to be public servants.
17. Power of Inspectors to direct payments to be made.

 
-2- 
 
18. Forfeiture of paternity benefit. 
19. Abstract of Act and rules thereunder to be exhibited. 
20. Registers, etc. 
21. Penalty for contravention of Act by employer or local authority.  
22. Penalty for obstructing Inspector. 
23. Cognizance of offences 
24. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
25. Power of Central Government to give directions. 
26.  Power to exempt establishments. 
27. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Act. 
28. Power to make rules. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 82  of  2025 
 
 
 
THE PATERNITY AND PARENTAL BENEFITS BILL, 2025 
 
BY 
 
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE 
 
A 
 
 
BILL 
 
 
to regulate the employment of persons in certain establishments for certain 
periods before and after becoming a parent and to provide for paternity 
and parental benefit and certain other benefits. 
 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: - 
 
 
 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Paternity and Parental Benefits Act, 
2025. 
 (2) It shall come into force such date, as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint. 
 
 
 
Short title and 
commencement. 
 

 
-2- 
2. (1) It applies, in the first instance,— 
(a) to every establishment being a factory, mine or plantation 
including any such establishment belonging to Government and to 
every establishment wherein persons are employed for the exhibition 
of equestrian, acrobatic and other performances; 
(b) to every shop or establishment within the meaning of any 
law for the time being in force in relation to shops and establishments 
in a State, in which ten or more persons are employed, or were 
employed, on any day of the preceding twelve months: 
Provided that the State Government may, with the approval of 
the Central Government, after giving not less than two months’ 
notice of its intention of so doing, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare that all or any of the provisions of this Act shall 
apply also to any other establishment or class of establishments, 
industrial, commercial, agricultural or otherwise. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sections 5A and 5B, nothing 
contained in this Act shall apply to any factory or other establishment 
to which the provisions of the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 
(34 of 1948), apply for the time being. 
 
Application of Act. 
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “appropriate Government” means, in relation to an 
establishment being a mine, 7[or an establishment wherein persons 
are employed for the exhibition of equestrian, acrobatic and other 
performances,] the Central Government and in relation to any other 
establishment, the State Government; 
(b) “child” includes a still-born child; 
(c) “commissioning mother” means a biological mother who 
uses her egg to create an embryo implanted in any other woman or a 
woman married to a commissioning father; 
(d) “commissioning father” means a biological father who uses 
his sperm to create an embryo implanted in the surrogate mother or a 
man married to a commissioning mother; 
Definitions. 
 

-3- 
(e) “delivery” means the birth of a child; 
(f) “employer” means— 
(i) in relation to an establishment which is under the 
control of the Government, a person or authority appointed by 
the Government for the supervision and control of employees 
or where no person or authority is so appointed, the head of the 
department; 
(ii) in relation to an establishment under any local 
authority, the person appointed by such authority for the 
supervision and control of employees or where no person is so 
appointed, the chief executive officer of the local authority; 
(iii) in any other case, the person who, or the authority 
which, has the ultimate control over the affairs of the 
establishment and where the said affairs are entrusted to any 
other person whether called a manager, managing director, 
managing agent, or by any other name, such person; 
(g) “establishment” means— 
(i) a factory; 
(ii) a mine; 
(iii) a plantation; 
(iv) an establishment wherein persons are employed for 
the exhibition of equestrian, acrobatic and other performances;  
(iva) a shop or establishment; or 
(v) an establishment to which the provisions of this Act 
have been declared under sub-section (1) of section 2 to be 
applicable; 
(h) “factory” means a factory as defined in clause(m) of   
section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948); 
(i) “Inspector” means an Inspector appointed under section 14; 
(j) “maternity benefit” means the payment referred to in sub-
section (1) of section 5; 
(k) “medical termination of pregnancy” means the termination 
of pregnancy permissible under the provisions of Medical 
Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 (34 of 1971); 
 

-4- 
 
(l) “man”  means a person employed, whether directly or 
through any agency, for wages in any establishment 
(m) “mine” means a mine as defined in clause (j) of section 2 of 
the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952); 
(n) “miscarriage” means expulsion of the contents of a pregnant 
uterus at any period prior to or during the twenty-sixth week of 
pregnancy but does not include any miscarriage, the causing of which 
is punishable under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860); 
(o) “plantation” means a plantation as defined in clause (f) of 
section 2 of the Plantations Labour Act, 1951 (69 of 1951); 
(p) “person”  means a person employed, whether directly or 
through any agency, for wages in any establishment 
(q) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(r) “State Government”, in relation to a Union territory, means 
the Administrator thereof; 
(s) “wages” means all remuneration paid or payable in cash to a 
woman, if the terms of the contract of employment, express or 
implied, were fulfilled and includes such cash allowances (including 
dearness allowance and house rent allowance) as a person is for the 
time being entitled to incentive bonus; and the money value of the 
concessional supply of food grains and other articles, but does not 
include— 
(i) any bonus other than incentive bonus; 
(ii) over-time earnings and any deduction or payment 
made on account of fines; 
(iii) any contribution paid or payable by the employer to 
any pension fund or provident fund or for the benefit of the 
person under any law for the time being in force; and 
(iv) any gratuity payable on the termination of service; 
(t) “woman” means a woman employed, whether directly or 
through any agency, for wages in any establishment. 
 
 

-5- 
 
4. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every man shall be 
entitled to, and his employer shall be liable for, the payment of paternity 
benefit at the rate of the average daily wage for the period of his actual 
absence, that is to say, the period immediately preceding the day of 
delivery of a child of his legally wedded wife, the actual day of the 
delivery and any period immediately following that day. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section, the average daily 
wage means the average of the man’s wages payable to him for the days on 
which he has worked during the period of three calendar months 
immediately preceding the date from which he absents himself on account 
of paternity or the minimum rate of wage fixed or revised under the 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (11 of 1948), whichever is the highest. 
(2) No man shall be entitled to paternity benefit unless he has 
actually worked in an establishment of the employer from whom he claims 
paternity benefit, for a period of not less than eighty days in the twelve 
months immediately preceding the expected date of delivery of a child to 
his legally wedded wife. 
(3) The maximum period for which any man shall be entitled to 
paternity benefit shall be eight weeks of which not more than one week 
shall precede the date of his legally wedded wife’s expected delivery: 
Provided that the maximum period entitled to paternity benefit by a 
man having two or more than two surviving children shall be five weeks of 
which not more than one week shall precede the date of his legally wedded 
wife’s expected delivery: 
Provided further that where a man dies during this period, the 
paternity benefit shall be payable only for the days up to and including the 
day of his death: 
Provided also that where a man dies during the period for which he is 
entitled for the paternity benefit, leaving behind the child, the employer 
shall be liable for the paternity benefit for that entire period but if the child 
also dies during the said period, then, for the days up to and including the 
date of the death of the child. 
 
 
Right to payment of 
paternity benefit. 

 
-6- 
 
Provided also that where a man who legally adopts a child below the 
age of three months or a commissioning father shall be entitled to paternity 
benefit for a period of eight weeks from the date the child is handed over to 
the adopting father or the commissioning father, as the case may be. 
(4). In case where the nature of work assigned to a man is of such 
nature that he may work from home, the employer may allow him to do so 
after availing of the paternity benefit for such period and on such 
conditions as the employer and the man may mutually agree. 
 
5. (1) Any man employed in an establishment and entitled to 
paternity benefit under the provisions of this Act may give notice in 
writing in such form as may be prescribed, to his employer, stating that his 
paternity benefit and any other amount to which he may be entitled under 
this Act may be paid to him or to such person as he may nominate in the 
notice and that he will not work in any establishment during the period for 
which he receives paternity benefit. 
(2) In the case of a man whose legally wedded wife is pregnant, such 
notice shall state the date from which he may be absent from work, not 
being a date earlier than one week from the date of her expected delivery. 
(3) Any man who has not given the notice when his legally wedded 
wife was pregnant may give such notice as soon as possible after the 
delivery. 
(4) On receipt of the notice, the employer shall permit such man to 
absent himself from the establishment during the period for which he 
receives the paternity benefit. 
(5) The amount of paternity benefit for the period preceding the date 
of his legally wedded wife’s expected delivery shall be paid in advance by 
the employer to the man on production of such proof as may be prescribed 
that his wife is pregnant, and the amount due for the subsequent period 
shall be paid by the employer to the man within forty-eight hours of 
production of such proof as may be prescribed that his wife delivered a 
child. 
 
Notice of claim for 
paternity benefit and 
payment thereof. 

 
 
-7- 
 
(6) The failure to give notice under this section shall not disentitle a 
man to paternity benefit or any other amount under this Act if he is 
otherwise entitled to such benefit or amount and in any such case an 
Inspector may either of his own motion or on an application made to him 
by the man, order the payment of such benefit or amount within such 
period as may be specified in the order. 
 
6. If a man entitled to paternity benefit or any other amount under 
this Act, dies before receiving such paternity benefit or amount, or where 
the employee is liable for payment of paternity benefit under the second 
proviso to sub-section (3) of section 5, the employer shall pay such benefit 
or amount to the person nominated by the man in the notice given under 
section 6 and in case there is no such nominee, to his legal representative. 
 
Payment of paternity 
benefit in case of 
death of a man. 
7. (1) Every establishment having fifty or more employees shall have 
the facility of créche within such distance as may be prescribed, either 
separately or along with common facilities: 
 
Provided that the employer shall allow four visits a day to the creche 
by the man, which shall also include the interval for rest allowed to him. 
 
 (2) Every establishment shall intimate in writing and electronically 
to every man at the time of his initial appointment regarding every benefit 
available under the Act. 
 
Creche facility. 
8. In case of miscarriage or medical termination of the pregnancy of 
his legally wedded wife, a man shall, on production of such proof as may 
be prescribed, be entitled to leave with wages at the rate of paternity 
benefit, for a period of five days immediately following the day of the 
miscarriage or medical termination.  
 
 
Leave for 
miscarriage. 

 
-8- 
 
9. (1) When a man absents himself from work in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act, it shall be unlawful for his employer to discharge or 
dismiss him during or on account of such absence or to give notice of 
discharge or dismissal on such a day that the notice will expire during such 
absence, or to vary to his disadvantage any of the conditions of his service. 
(2) (a) The discharge or dismissal of a man at any time during the 
pregnancy of his legally wedded wife, if the man but for such discharge or 
dismissal would have been entitled to paternity benefit, shall not have the 
effect of depriving him of the paternity benefit: 
Provided that where the dismissal is for any prescribed gross 
misconduct, the employer may, by order in writing communicated to the 
deprive him of the paternity benefit. 
(b) Any man deprived of paternity benefit or discharged or dismissed 
during or on account of his absence from work in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act, may, within sixty days from the date on which order 
of such deprivation or discharge or dismissal is communicated to him, 
appeal to such authority as may be prescribed, and the decision of that 
authority on such appeal, whether the man should or should not be 
deprived of maternity benefit or discharged or dismissed shall be final. 
(c) Nothing contained in this sub-section shall affect the provisions 
contained in sub-section (1). 
Dismissal during 
absence. 
 
           10. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every legally married 
couple shall be entitled to, and his or her employer shall be liable for, the 
payment of parental benefit at the rate of the average daily wage for the 
period of his or her actual absence, that is to say, within a period of 
eighteen months of the delivery of a woman’s child or the delivery of the 
child of a man’s legally wedded wife, as the case may be. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to payment of 
parental benefit. 

 
-9- 
 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section, the average daily 
wage means the average of the person’s wages payable to him or her for 
the days on which he has worked during the period of three calendar 
months immediately preceding the date from which he absents himself on 
account of paternity or maternity, the minimum rate of wage fixed or 
revised under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (11 of 1948), whichever is 
the highest. 
(2) No person shall be entitled to parental benefit unless he or she has 
actually worked in an establishment of the employer from whom he or she 
claims parental benefit, for a period of not less than eighty days in the 
twelve months immediately preceding the expected date of [delivery] or 
[birth] of the child. 
(3) The maximum period for which any legally married couple shall 
be entitled to parental benefit shall be a combined period of eight weeks, 
divided as they may mutually decide: 
Provided that the parental benefit may be availed, either in a single 
continuous period of eight weeks or in two installments, each of not less 
than one week: 
Provided further that the maximum period entitled to parental benefit 
by a married couple having two or more than two surviving children shall 
be a combined period of four weeks, divided as they may mutually decide: 
Provided also that the parental benefit may be availed by a married 
couple having two o more than two surviving children either for a single 
continuous period of four weeks or in two installments, each of not less 
than one week: 
Provided also that where a person dies during period of leave for 
parental benefit, the parental benefit shall be payable only for the days up 
to and including the day of his or her death: 
Provided also that where a person dies during the period for which he 
is entitled for the parental benefit, leaving behind the child, the employer 
shall be liable for the parental benefit for that entire period but if the child 
also dies during the said period, then, for the days up to and including the 
date of the death of the child. 

 
-10- 
Provided also that where a married couple who legally adopts a child 
below the age of three months or a commissioning couple shall be entitled 
to parental benefit for a period of eight weeks within eighteen months of 
the date the child is handed over to the adopting couple or commissioning 
couple, as the case may be. 
 
11. (1) Any person employed in an establishment and entitled to 
parental benefit under the provisions of this Act may give notice in writing 
in such form as may be prescribed, to his or her employer, stating that his 
or her parental benefit and any other amount to which he may be entitled 
under this Act may be paid to him or her or to such person as he or she 
may nominate in the notice and that he or she will not work in any 
establishment during the period for which he or she receives parental 
benefit. 
(2) The notice under-section (1) shall be given not less than one 
month from the date from which he or shall be absent and contain the 
information specified in sub-section (3) and is accompanied by the 
declarations specified in sub-section (4):  
(3) The specified information required for notice under sub-section 
(1) shall include,- 
(a) the name of the person; 
(b) the name of the person’s legally wedded spouse; 
(c) the start and end dates of the period for which the person 
has received maternity or paternity benefit;  
(d) the start and end dates of the period for which the person 
shall be absent from work and receive parental benefit; 
(e) the duration for which the person’s legally wedded spouse 
intends to absent themselves from work and receive parental benefit. 
(4) The specified declarations for notice under sub-section (1), shall 
include,- 
(a) a declaration signed by the person that the information 
given by them in the notice is accurate. 
(b) a declaration signed by the person’s legally wedded 
spouse— 
Notice of claim for 
parental benefit and 
payment thereof. 

-11- 
 
(i) specifying name, address, and Permanent Account 
Number (PAN) of the person; 
(ii) that the person is the legally wedded spouse of the 
employee giving the notice; 
(iii) that the person consents to the duration and dates of 
leave which the employee intends to take as set out in the 
notice; 
(iv) that the person consents to their spouse’s employer 
processing the information in their declaration.  
(5) On receipt of the notice, the employer shall permit such person to 
absent himself or herself from the establishment during the period for 
which he or she receives the parental benefit. 
(6) The employer may request, within fourteen days beginning with 
the date on which that notice was given, the name and address of the 
employer of the person’s legally wedded spouse.  
(7) Where an employer makes a request under subsection (6), the 
person must, within 14 days beginning on the date on which that request 
was made, send the employer—  
(a) the name and address requested, or 
(b) a declaration that the person’s legally wedded spouse has no 
employer.  
(8) The amount of parental benefit for the period preceding the date 
of his legally wedded wife’s expected delivery shall be paid by the 
employer to the person not less than two weeks before the date from which 
he or she shall receive the parental benefit on production of such proof as 
may be prescribed that she has delivered a child or his legally wedded wife 
has delivered a child. 
 
12. If a person entitled to parental benefit or any other amount under 
this Act, dies before receiving such parental benefit or amount, or where 
the employer is liable for parental benefit under the second proviso to sub-
section (3) of section 5, the employer shall pay such benefit or amount to 
the person nominated by the employee in the notice given under section 6 
and in case there is no such nominee, to his or her legal representative. 
Payment of parental 
benefit in case of 
death of a  person. 

 
-12- 
 
13. No deduction from the normal and usual daily wages of a person 
entitled to paternity or parental benefit under the provisions of this Act 
shall be made by reason only of the nature of work assigned to him or her 
by virtue of the provisions contained in sub-section (3) of section 4. 
 
No deduction of 
wages in certain 
cases. 
14. The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint such officers as it thinks fit to be Inspectors for the 
purposes of this Act and may define the local limits of the jurisdiction 
within which they shall exercise their functions under this Act. 
 
Appointment of 
Inspectors. 
 
15. An Inspector may, subject to such restrictions or conditions as 
may be prescribed, exercise all or any of the following powers, namely:— 
 
 (a) enter at all reasonable times with such assistants, if any, 
being persons in the service of the Government or any local or other 
public authority, as he thinks fit, any place of work or establishment, 
for the purposes of examining any registers, records and notices 
required to be kept or exhibited by or under this Act and required 
their production for inspection; 
(b) examine any person whom he finds in any premises or place 
and who, he has reasonable cause to believe, is employed in the 
establishment: 
Provided that no person shall be compelled under this section to 
answer any question or give any evidence tending to incriminate 
himself; 
(c) require the employer to give information regarding the 
names and addresses of persons employed, payments made to them, 
and applications or notices received from them under this Act; and 
(d) take copies of any register and records or notices or any 
portions thereof. 
 
 
 
Powers and duties of 
Inspectors. 

-13- 
 
16. Every Inspector appointed under this Act shall be deemed to be a 
public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860). 
 
Inspectors to be 
public servants. 
 
17. (1) Any person claiming that— 
(a) paternity benefit or parental benefit to which he or she is 
entitled under this Act and any person claiming that payment due 
under section 7 has been improperly withheld; 
(b) his or her employer has discharged or dismissed him or her 
during or on account of his or her absence from work in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act, may make a complaint to the 
Inspector. 
(2) The Inspector may, of his own motion or on receipt of a 
complaint referred to in sub-section (1), make an inquiry or cause an 
inquiry to be made and if satisfied that— 
(a) payment has been wrongfully withheld, may direct the 
payment to be made in accordance with his orders; 
(b) he or she has been discharged or dismissed during or on 
account of his or her absence from work in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act, may pass such orders as are just and proper 
according to the circumstances of the case. 
(3) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Inspector under sub-
section (2) may, within thirty days from the date on which such decision is 
communicated to such persons, appeal to the prescribed authority. 
(4) The decision of the prescribed authority where an appeal has been 
preferred to it under sub-section (3) or of the Inspector where no such 
appeal has been preferred, shall be final. 
(5) Any amount payable under this section shall be recoverable by 
the Collector on a certificate issued for that amount by the Inspector as an 
arrear of land revenue. 
Power of Inspector 
to direct payments to 
be made. 
18. If a person works in any establishment after she has been 
permitted by his or her employer to absent herself under the provisions of 
section 6 for any period during such authorised absence, he or she shall 
forfeit her claim to the paternity or parental benefit for such period. 
Forfeiture of 
paternity or parental 
benefit. 

-14- 
19. An abstract of the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder in the language or languages of the locality shall be exhibited in 
a conspicuous place by the employer in every part of the establishment. 
Abstract of Act and 
rules thereunder to 
be exhibited. 
 
20. Every employer shall prepare and maintain such registers, records 
and muster-rolls and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
 
Registers, etc. 
 
21. (1) If any employer fails to pay any amount of paternity or 
parental benefit to a person entitled under this Act or discharges or 
dismisses such person during or on account of his or her absence from 
work in accordance with the provisions of this Act, he shall be punishable 
with imprisonment which shall not be less than three months but which 
may extend to one year and with fine which shall not be less than two 
thousand rupees but which may extend to five thousand rupees: 
Provided that the court may, for sufficient reasons to be recorded in 
writing, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a lesser term or fine only in 
lieu of imprisonment. 
(2) If any employer contravenes the provisions of this Act or the rules 
made thereunder, he shall, if no other penalty is elsewhere provided by or 
under this Act for such contravention, be punishable with imprisonment 
which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees, or with both: 
Provided that where the contravention is of any provision regarding 
paternity or parental benefit and such paternity or parental benefit or 
amount has not already been recovered, the court shall, in addition, recover 
such paternity or parental benefit or amount as if it were a fine and pay the 
same to the person entitled thereto. 
 
Penalty for 
contravention of Act 
by employer. 
22. Whoever fails to produce on demand by the Inspector any register 
or document in his custody kept in pursuance of this Act or the rules made 
thereunder or conceals or prevents any person from appearing before or 
being examined by an Inspector shall be punishable with imprisonment 
which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees, or with both. 
Penalty for 
obstructing 
Inspector. 

-15- 
23. (1) Any aggrieved person, an office-bearer of a trade union 
registered under the Trade Unions Act, 1926 (16 of 1926) of which such 
person is a member or a voluntary organisation registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) or an Inspector, may file a 
complaint regarding the commission of an offence under this Act in any 
court of competent jurisdiction and no such complaint shall be filed after 
the expiry of one year from the date on which the offence is alleged to 
have been committed. 
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a 
Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence under this Act. 
 
Cognizance of 
offences. 
24. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
in pursuance of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder. 
 
 
Protection of action 
taken in good faith. 
25. The Central Government may give such directions as it may 
deem necessary to a State Government regarding the carrying into 
execution of the provisions of this Act and the State Government shall 
comply with such directions. 
 
Power of Central 
Government to give 
directions. 
 
26. If the appropriate Government is satisfied that having regard to an 
establishment or a class of establishments providing for the grant of 
benefits which are not less favourable than those provided in this Act, it is 
necessary so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt, 
subject to such conditions and restrictions, if any, as may be specified in 
the notification, the establishment or class of establishments from the 
operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule made 
thereunder. 
 
Power to exempt 
establishments. 
 
27. (1) The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or in the terms 
of any award, agreement or contract of service, whether made before or 
after the coming into force of this Act: 
 
Effect of laws and 
agreements 
inconsistent with 
this Act. 

-16- 
Provided that where under any such award, agreement, contract of 
service or otherwise, a person is entitled to benefits in respect of any matter 
which are more favourable to him or her than those to which she would be 
entitled under this Act, the person shall continue to be entitled to the more 
favourable benefits in respect of that matter, notwithstanding that he or she 
is entitled to receive benefits in respect of other matters under this Act. 
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to preclude a 
person from entering into an agreement with his or her employer for 
granting him or her rights or privileges in respect of any matter which are 
more favourable to her than those to which he or she would be entitled 
under this Act. 
 
28. (1) The appropriate Government may, subject to the condition of 
previous publication and by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for— 
(a) the preparation and maintenance of registers, records and 
muster-rolls; 
(b) the exercise of powers including the inspection of 
establishments and the performance of duties by Inspectors for the 
purposes of this Act; 
(c) the method of payment of maternity benefit and other 
benefits under this Act in so far as provision has not been made 
therefor in this Act; 
(d) the form of notices under section 6; 
(e) the nature of proof required under the provisions of this Act; 
(f) acts which may constitute gross misconduct for purposes of 
section 12; 
(g) the authority to which an appeal under clause (b) of sub-
section (2) of section 12 shall lie; the form and manner in which such 
appeal may be made and the procedure to be followed in disposal 
thereof; 
 
 
Power to make rules. 

-17- 
 
(h) the authority to which an appeal shall lie against the 
decision of the Inspector under section 17; the form and manner in 
which such appeal may be made and the procedure to be followed in 
disposal thereof; 
(i) the form and manner in which complaints may be made to 
Inspectors under sub-section (1) of section 17 and the procedure to be 
followed by them when making inquiries or causing inquiries to be 
made under sub-section (2) of that section; 
(j) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section 
shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session 1[or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid,] both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 
 
 
 
  

 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
The evolving nature of work and family structures necessitates legal reforms that 
support equitable care giving responsibilities. Despite growing recognition of the importance 
of shared parenting, India’s labor laws remain outdated, offering minimal provisions for 
paternity and parental benefits. While the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 provides leave and 
protections for women, there is no corresponding legal framework for fathers, leading to an 
unequal burden of childcare on women and limiting fathers' ability to participate in early 
child-rearing. India, with its growing workforce and shifting social dynamics, must address 
this policy gap to ensure that both parents have the necessary support to balance work and 
family responsibilities. 
 
Research has found that fathers who take parental leave are more actively engaged in 
child-rearing, both during and long after the period of the leave ends, resulting in improved 
emotional and cognitive development and overall well-being in their children. Allowing 
fathers to take parental leave also has a profound impact on the well-being of mothers—a 
2019 study by the World Bank found that paternity leave reduces postpartum depression in 
mothers by improving the division of household responsibilities and providing emotional 
support. Countries with robust paternity leave policies have seen higher female labour force 
participation rates, as mothers return to work earlier and are more likely to remain employed 
long-term, as well as improved career progression for women and a more equitable 
distribution of unpaid domestic labour.  
 
This Bill introduces paid paternity leave, ensuring that fathers have the legal right to 
take time off from work to care for their newborn or newly adopted child. By enshrining this 
right in law, the Bill ensures that no father is forced to choose between financial stability and 
their child’s early development. 
 
In addition to paternity leave, the Bill introduces shared parental leave, allowing 
parents to divide caregiving responsibilities more flexibly within 18 months of childbirth or 
adoption rather than being restricted to the immediate postpartum period. The traditional 
model of parental leave, which only accounts for the immediate weeks following childbirth, 
does not reflect the long-term and evolving needs of a child. Research has shown that flexible 
shared parental leave allows parents to stagger their time off, ensuring continuous parental 
presence in the early developmental years, which has been linked to better emotional and 
behavioural outcomes in children, alongside reducing financial strain and workplace 
disruptions. 
 
By enabling parents to take leave at any time during the first 18 months, the Bill 
allows families to structure their caregiving in a way that best supports child development, 
maternal workforce participation, and work-life balance. This approach is particularly critical 
for ensuring continuity of care, supporting single-parent and dual-career households, and 
accommodating changing family dynamics. 
   
            NEW DELHI;                                     SUPRIYA SULE 
 
    January 21, 2025. 

 
 
 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 
This Bill involves expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India on account as it 
involves the payment of paternity and/or parental benefits to employees of the Central 
government. However, it is not possible to give an estimate of the additional expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of Indie, as this would require the collection of a large volume of 
statistics and the expenditure will also have to be calculated on the basis of certain 
assumptions. 
  

          
            MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 
Clause 26 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make 
necessary rules, by notification in the official gazette, for carrying out the purposes of 
the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. 
 
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character. 

 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
------------  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
 
 
BILL 
 
 
to regulate the employment of persons in certain establishments for certain periods before and 
after becoming a parent and to provide for paternity and parental benefit and certain other 
benefits. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
------------  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P.) 
 