As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 82 of 2024
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR ANCIENT 
MONUMENTS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND 
REMAINS IN THE STATE OF TAMIL NADU BILL, 2024
By
Shri D.M. Kathir Anand, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu to meet the costs 
of repairs, renovations and preservation of ancient and historical monuments and 
archaeological sites and remains including excavation of new archaeological sites  
and remains situated in the State of Tamil Nadu. 
 B e it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of India as  
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance for Ancient Monuments 
and Archaeological Sites and Remains in the State of Tamil Nadu Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement.
5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires “ancient monument” means any 
structure, erection or monument, or any tumulus or place of interment, or any cave, rock-
sculpture, inscription or monolith which is of historical, archaeological or artistic interest 
and which has been in existence for not less than one hundred years and includes:—
(i) remains of an ancient monument;
(ii) site of an ancient monument;
(iii) such portion of land adjoining the site of an ancient monument as may be 
required for fencing or covering in or otherwise preserving such monument; and
(iv) the means of access to, and convenient inspection of, an ancient monument. 
3. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India, 
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial 
assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu to meet the costs of repairs, renovations and 
preservation of ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites and remains 
including excavation of new archaeological sites and remains situated in the State 
of Tamil Nadu, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Central 
Government.
4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force.
2
Definitions.
5
10
15
Special Financial 
Assistance to  
the State of 
Tamil Nadu.
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law.

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The State of Tamil Nadu is one of the most favourite destinations of tourists, both 
domestic and foreign, famous for its rich ancient architecture, art, culture and tradition, fairs 
and festivals worldwide. The different tourist destinations attract the tourists because of 
various reasons including its ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites and 
remains.
 At present, the Archaeological Survey of India is looking after the maintenance and 
conservation of 242 centrally protected monuments/sites in the State of Tamil Nadu. Besides 
more than 500 monuments and buildings have been notified as  protected monuments in the 
State of Tamil Nadu. These monuments and archaeological remains of diverse nature are 
located in the region since prehistoric times and are scattered from the Palaeolithic site at 
Gudiyam in Tiruvallur District to the Microlithic or Mesolithic sites in Teri Sand in Southern 
districts of Tirunelveli and Thuthukudi. There are splendid array of Megalithic monuments, 
pre-historic and historic monuments, the exquisite stone architecture of the Pallavas, Cholas, 
Pandiyas and the Nayaks. There are hundreds of archaic buildings constructed during the rule 
of Nawabs of Arcot and the British. The great repertoire of ancient monuments and plethora 
of ancient temples makes Tamil Nadu the greatest treasure of ancient world. The grand 
Vellore Fort and the Jalakandeswarar temple complex situated in my Vellore Parliamentary 
constituency is world renowned and attracts great attention.
 Taking care of the monuments is an important duty that devolves on the respective State 
Government as well as the Central Government. It needs adequate funds to engage people 
who can look after monuments, ensure that the miscreants do not harm them, as also to get 
the damaged portion repaired from expert designers and engineers. The Central Government 
must provide adequate funds for each monument.
 The proper upkeep and maintenance of ancient and historical monuments and 
archaeological sites and remains in the State of Tamil Nadu shall boost heritage tourism 
which will in turn increase employment, revenue generation and local business in  
Tamil Nadu.
 It is, therefore, necessary that the Central Government should provide special 
financial assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu to meet the costs of repairs, renovations 
and preservation of ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites and remains 
including excavation of new archaeological sites and remains situated in the State of  
Tamil Nadu.
 Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                   D.M. KATHIR ANAND  
July 9, 2024.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of money out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, 
as special financial assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu to meet the costs of repairs, 
renovations and preservation of ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites 
and remains including excavation of new archaeological sites and remain situated in the 
State of Tamil Nadu, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government 
of India.
 The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund 
of India. As the sums of moneys which will be given to the State of Tamil Nadu as special 
financial assistance by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after 
the plans to be implemented by the State Government with the approval of Government of 
India are identified, it is not possible at present to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, 
which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
 No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund  
of India.
4

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu to meet the costs 
of repairs, renovations and preservation of ancient and historical monuments and 
archaeological sites and remains including excavation of new archaeological sites  
and remains situated in the State of Tamil Nadu. 
(Shri D.M. Kathir Anand, M.P .) 