As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

8 DEC 2006

Bill No. 82 of 2006
——

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
. By
Suri L. Rasacopat, M.P.
A
BILL
Surther to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, (7) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2006. Short title and
‘commencement.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In article 312 of the Constitution:-— Amendment of
article 312.

(a) in clause (7) for the words, "common to the Union and the States,” the
words, "for the Union," shall be substituted.

(6) clause (2) shall be omitted.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The present structure of bureaucracy at the Union and State level is a legacy of ihe ©
colonial era. At that time the administration was highly centralised and the officers appointed
by the Central Government were given top jobs in the States with a view to maximize revenue
collection and keep a tab on the happenings within the provinces. We chose to continue with
this system even after independence, principally because continuity in administration was
considered to be necessary for a country which had just emerged from long years of foreign
tule. It was also felt that retaining such services would help preserve unity and integrity of
the country. But now, the nature of administration has changed from revenue collection to
welfare of the citizens. When we are moving towards decentralized Government rather than
centralized Government, particularly after the seventy-third and seventy-fourth amendment
of the Constitution taking democracy to the grass root level and when federalism is the order
of the day, we need to review the necessity of having All India Services, in particular, the
Indian Administrative Service and the Indian Police Service. In fact the very idea of officers
appointed by the Union Government taking senior positions in States runs contrary to the
federal structure of our nation.

The State Governments should have the power to appoint and regulate the conditions
of service of all officers serving under them. It will not only allow appointment of such
officers who are better conversant with the ground realities existing in a State and so, ina
better position to formulate and implement development strategies, but the officers can also
be better groomed to the needs of the State. All over world, the focus is now shifting towards
specialist administrators, i.e, administrators who are specialists in their respective area of
operation, as a means to ensure faster pace of development. This purpose would also be
served if the States are given greater autonomy in the appointment of their officers.

Therefore, an amendment is proposed in the Constitution to ensure that
State Governments are able to appoint officers at all levels within the State.

New DELHI; L. RAJAGOPAL
July 28, 2006.



ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.

* * x * * * *

312 (/) Notwithstanding anything in Chapter VI of Part VI or Part XI, ifthe Council All-India
of States has declared by resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of the members Services.
present and voting that it is necessary or expedient in the national interest so to do, Parliament
may by law provide for the creation of one or more all-India services (including an all-India
judicial service) common to the Union and the States, and, subject to the other provisions of
this Chapter, regulate the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to
any such service.

(2) The services known at the commencement of this Constitution as the
Indian Administrative Service and the Indian Police Service shall be deemed to be services
created by Parliament under this article.

* * * * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri L. Rajagopal, MP)

MGIPMRND—2852LS(S-3)—23.10.2006.