1
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HORTICULTURE
DEVELOPMENT BILL, 2011
By
SHRI JAGDAMBIKA PAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a National Commission for Horticulture Development
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.   (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Horticulture Development
Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "Commission" means the National Commission for Horticulture Development
set up under section 3;
(ii) "horticulture" includes vegetables, fruits and flowers and their products;
and
(iii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No.  82 of 2011
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK  SABHA
Definitions.
5
10

2
3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Commission to be known as the National
Commission for Horticulture Development.
(2) The Commission shall consist of:—
(i) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government;
(ii) three members to be appointed by the Central Government; and
(iii) one representative of the growers of horticulture.
(3) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service payable to the
Chairperson and other members of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Central Government shall make available necessary officers and staff including
technical experts to the Commission for efficient functioning of the Commission.
5. Every State Government shall send detailed information to the Commission
regarding:—
(i) the total area under horticulture cultivation;
(ii) the product-wise output in horticulture sector;
(iii) the estimated annual demand for horticultural products;
(iv) the potential of growth of horticultural products;
(v) the export potential of horticultural products; and
(vi) the potential for setting up of industries based on horticultural products.
6. (1) The National Commission shall, on receipt of information from a State Government,
depute a team of experts to the State to study the situation of horticulture in the State.
(2) The team of experts shall submit a report to the National Commission at the earliest
but not later than three months from the date of study tour conducted in that State.
(3) The Commission shall, on the basis of the report submitted by the team of experts,
release funds to a State for the development of horticulture including for setting up of
industries based on horticultural products.
7. The Central Government shall set up a fund to be known as the Horticulture
Development Fund to implement the provisions of this Act.
8. (1) The  Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
officers and
staff for
efficient
functioning of
the
Commission.
State
Government
to send
detailed
information
to
Commission.
Functions of
the
Commission.
Horticulture
Development
Fund.
Power to
make rules.
National
Commission
for
Horticulture
Development.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The importance of horticulture in improving the productivity of the land, generating
employment, improving economic conditions of the farmers and entrepreneurs, enhancing
exports and most importantly, providing nutritional security to the people is well known.
Though India ranks first in the world in the production of vegetables and second in the
production of fruits, the situation of industries based on the processing of horticultural
products is not encouraging. There is a great potential for growth of horticulture and industries
based on processing of horticulture products including their export. But this important
sector has not been properly harnessed so far.
It is, therefore, proposed to set up a National Commission for Horticulture for the
promotion of cultivation/production of horticultural products and industries based on
processing of horticultural products.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
JAGDAMBIKA PAL
N
EW DELHI;
September 5, 2011.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a National Commission for Horticulture
Development. Clause 4 provides that the Central Government shall make available necessary
officers and staff for the efficient functioning of the Commission. Clause 6 provides that the
Commission shall release funds to States for the development of horticulture. Clause 7
provides for creation of a Horticulture Development Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is
likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an
annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill expowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a National Commission for Horticulture Development and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Jagdambika Pal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2288LS(S3)—14-11-2011.