1 • 
2. 
3. 
)..j,. , . 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE LABOUR PROVIDENT FUND LAWS (AMENDl1ENT) BILL, 1976 
(To be/As in t ro due ed in Lok Sablla) 
Page 11, , line 18,-
after "ratio"insert rlof" 
Page 16, line 19\-
fQJ: "~oJillbCL'" ~ "number" 
P"'-be 1{-
'~ , 1ine 22,-
for "37,000" ~ "37,800" 
Page 16, line 26,-
after "ratio" in sert "of" 
5. Page 1 9 , lin e 11,-
fer "f<...lling" ~ "following" 
6. Page 20, line 1,-
read "In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires' 
* * * * * * • 
7. Page 21, line 34,-
(I fo r "11" read -11 (1 )" 
8. Page 21 ,I in the Marginal heading to ',11 sec.11-
Pofter "contributions over" insert "other" 
Bhadra 2, 189 ( Saka) 

A1J INTRODUCED IN LoE SAIHA OR' 
BilJ No. 83 of, t87. 
THE LABOUR PROVIDENT FUND LAWS (AMENDMENT) 
BlLL,1976 
It. 
SILL 
further to amend the Coal Mines Provident Fund, Family Pension and 
Bonus Schemes Act, 1948, the Employees' Provident Funds and 
Family Pension Fund Act, 1952, the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 and the 
Income-taX Act, 1961. . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-seventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
S ..&. (1) This A« maybe called the Labour Provident , Fund Laws 
10 
(AllMndlllent.) Act, 1976. .. 
• ! ; 
~). 1he, .pr~v~siOl1s of secijans 30 a.ru:l 31 sh8!U come in,to ~,¥ce at one, 
and the remaining provisions of. this Act ~ be dee,me4 to have come 
into force on the 1st day of August, 1976 . 
• ;1 
Cl;lAPTER II 
AMENnMENT 0)0' THF. COAL MtNE~ PRoVTD!NT FuND. FAMILY ~JON 
i '. -AND Bo\u!1i SCH!MES ACT, 1948 
2. l~ ~f .l()J)j, title tQ the Coal Mines Providept Fund, Family ?~­
ai~n f4~d l;3011~s 5f;;~~ Act, 1%1;1, (~erein~fter -x:~err¢ to ~ the C~ 
46 of 11148. 15 MIn'll; ~,ro"ident~dAct). after the words ".Family ~~~ ~~'~, 
the words ",a Deposit-linked Insurance Scheme" shall be inserted., __ . 
Short title 
and coat. 
meDee • 
men'. 
Amend· 
mento! 
10D, 
tttle. 

" 
Amend- 3. i'Ol'-s\ll>-section (1) of section 1 of the Coal Mines Provident Fund· 
ment of Act, the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
aection 1 
Amend-
mentof 
section 2. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
lA, 
Amend_ 
ment of 
section 
3C. 
Insertion 
of new 
aection 
aG. 
Coal 
Mine. De-
posit-
linked 
Insurance 
Scheme. 
"(1) This Act may be called .the Coal Mines Provident Fund and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1948 .... 
4. In section 2 of the Coal Mines Provident Fund Act,-
(i) in clause (c), the words "or the contribution payable in 
respect of an employee to whom the Insurance Scheme applies" shall 
be inserted at the end: 
(ii) after clause (f), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(fa) "Insurance Fund" means the Deposit-linked Insurance 
Fund established under sub-section (2) of section 3G; 
(fb) "Insurance Scheme" means the Coal Mines DepoBit-
linked Insurance Scheme framed under sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 3G;'; 
(iii) clause (ff.) shall be re·lettered as clause (fc). 
i. In section 3A of the Coal Mines Provident Fund Act,-
(a) in ,sub-section (3), after the word, figure and letter "section 
3E", the words, figure and letter "and section 3G" shall be insel·ted; 
S 
10 
IS 
(b) in sub-section (4), for the words "and the Coal Mines Family 
Pension Scheme", the words ", the Coal Mines Family Pension 20 
Scheme and the Insurance Scheme" shall be substituted. 
6. In SUb-section (3) of section 3C of the Coal Mines Provident Fund 
Act, for the words "and the Coal Mines Family PeIllSion Scheme", the 
words ", the Coal Mines Family Pension Scheme and the Insurance 2, 
Scheme" shall be substituted. 
1. After section 3F of the Coal Mines Provident Fund Act, the fol-
lowing section shall be inserted, namely:-
'3G. (1) The Ceatrall Governme~ may, by lIGItiAeatiOil in the 
Oftlcial' Gazette, frame a scheme to be called the n.t Mm.. 30 
Deposit-linked Insurance Scheme for the P1ll'pOle of provi.uu. life 
insurllllce benefits to such eDJ.PtIoyees as are covered by the Coal . 
Mines ProvideDt Fund Scheme. 
(2) There shall be established, as IGon as may be after the 
framing of the Insurance Scheme, a Deposit-linked laurence I'uDd 3' 
into which shall be paid by the employer from time to tim. ill 1'88-
peet of every such employee, in relation to whom he is the employer, 
such amount, not beine more than one per cent. of the aell'eeate of 
the basic waen, dearness allowance and retaADine allowance (if aDY) 
for the time being payable in relation to such employee, as the 40 
Central Government may, by notification in tbe 0ftle1a1 Gazetfle, 
'pecify: 

19 of 1912. 
10 
30 
35 
3 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section,-
(a) the expression "basic wagee" bas the meaning assiped 
to it in the Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous 
ProvisiOll8 Act, 195!; 
(b) r'dearnels allowance" means all cash payments, by 
whatever name called, paid to an employee on account of a rise 
in the cost of living and shan be deemed to include also tbe cash 
value of any food concession allowed to tbe employee; 
(e) "retaining allowance" means an allowance payable for 
the time being to aa employee of any coal mine during any 
period in' which the coal mine is not working, for retaining 
his services. 
(3) The Cen1ral Government shall, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law, contribute to the Insurance Fund in relation 
to each employee covered by the Coal Mines Provident Fund 
Scheme, an amount representing one-half of the contribution which 
an employer is required, by sub-sedion (2), to make. 
(4) (a) The employer shall pay into the Insurance Fund sucb 
further sums of money, not exceeding one-fourth of the contribution 
which he is requiTed to make under sub-section (2), as the Centl'a1 
Government may, from time 10 time, determine, to meet aU the 
expenses in connection with the administration of the Insurance, 
Scheme other than the expenses towards the cost of any benefits 
provided by or under that scheme. 
(b) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law, pay into the Insurance Fund such further 
sums of money representing one-half of the sums payable by the 
employer under clause (a), to meet all the expenses in connection 
with the administration of the Insurance Scheme Other than the 
expenses towards the cost of any benefits provided by or undel' that 
scheme. 
(5) The Insurance Fund shall vest in the Board and shall be 
administered by the Board in such manner as may be specified in 
the Insurance Scheme. 'i 
(6) Any scheme framed under the provisions of su~section (1) 
may provide for all or any of .the matters specified in the Third 
Schedule.'. 
8. In su~ection (2) of section 5 of the Coal Mines Provident Fund 
Act, for the words "Third Schedule". the words "Fourth Schedule" 
40 shall be substituted. 
9. In section 7 of the Coal Mines Provident Fund Act. after the words 
"amend or vary", the words "either prospectively or retrospPCtively" 
shall be inserted. 
10. In section 7 A of the Coal Mines Provident Fund Act, for the 
45 words "two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the se~sion 
in which it is so laid or the sess-ion immediately following", the words 
"tW9 or Jl1or~ s~cces~iv, s~sions. and if, before th~ expi? of t~e session 
Amend_ 
mentol 
lection 5. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
section 7, 
Amend-
mental 
section 
7A. 

Amend-
mentof 
section 8, 
Amend-
ment of 
.ection 
10. 
Amend-
ment of 
.ection 
lOB. 
WriOD 
of Dew 
.ectiODI 
~C and 
11D. 
Power 
to 
toQrnpt, 
.,~ . ' , 
4 •• 
immediately fonoWtngthe' ses!liO'n or the successive sesSions aforesaid" 
, shall besubsmtut.ed, 
11. In sub-section (3) of section 8 of the' Coal Min4!!tl PfC!Vident Fund 
Act, after the words "Coal Mines Family Pensio~ Scheme", the words 
''&it" hlsoin relation to any amount payableurl8ei' 'the 'Insurance Schenie" 5 
sha~l be inserted. 
12. ;1n sul).:section (1) of seCtion ] 0 of 'the Coal Mili~s Ptdvident Fund 
Act, ,aftert.he wvrds "Coal Mines Provident ,Fund Scheme", the words 
'!or the Insurance Scheme" shall be inserted. 
13, In sub-section (1) of section tOE of the Coal Nfin'es Providellt Fund 10 
·Act, for the words and brackets "The amowlt of ~trlbution (that is to 
Ny the emplo,er's contribution as well as the employee's (:OIltribution)", 
thewor6s ·and brackets "The amoWlt of CQntribution, (that is to say the 
employer's 'contribution a! well as the employee'scontribuUoa in pursu-
ance of the Coal Mines Provident Fund Scheme and, the employer's IS 
contribution in pursuance of the Insurance Scheme)" shall be substituted. 
14. After section llB of the Coal MinE!+S 'ProVident FUrid ' Act, the 
following sections shall be inserted, namely:-
'ltC. (1) The Central Govemmentmay, if requeste<iso to do 
by the employer, by notification in the Official Gazette, and subject 20 
to such conditions as may be specified in the notification, exempt 
any coal mine from the operation of all or any of the provisions of 
the Insurance Scheme, if it is satisfied that the employees of such 
coal mine are, without making any separate contribution or pay-
ment of premium, in enjoyment of benefits in I the n~ture of life 25 
insurance, whether linked to their deposits ·in provident flmd or not, 
and such benefits are more favourable to such employ~ . than the 
benefits admissible under the Insurance SoJaeme. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the 
Insurance Scheme may provide for the exemption of any person or 30 
class of persons employed in any coal mine and covered by that 
scheme 'from the operation of all or any of the provisions thereof, if 
the benefits in the nature of life insurance admissible to such person 
or, class of persons are more favourable than the benefits provided 
under the Insurance Scheme. 35 
(3) Where, in respect of any person or class Cd persons emplO1ed 
in any coal mine, an exemption'is granted under this section from the 
operation of all or any of the provisions of the Insurance Scheme 
(whether such exemption is granted to the coal mine wherein such 
person or class of persons is employed or to the person ~elass of 40 -
'persons as such), the employer in relation to such coal mine-
(a) shall, in relation to the benefits tn'the natureo! "life 
assurance, to which any such person or class of persons is en-
titled, or any insuran~e fwicl, riiain'tatn S'U~h aeeounts, submit 

r 5 
SUch returns, make such investment, pl'O'ridefor .ueh facilitiel 
for inspection and pay such inspection charges, 8& the Central 
Government may direct; 
(b) shall not, at any time after the exemption, without 
the leave of the Central Government, reduce the total quantum 
ofbeneftts in the nature of life insuranee to wbkth . any such 
person or classaf persons was entitled immediately before the 
date of the exemption: and 
(c) shall, where any such person leaves his employment 
'10 and obtains re-employment in any other coal 'mine, transfer 
within such time as may be specified in fbis behalf by the 
Central Government, the amount of accumulations to the credit 
of that person in the insurance fund ot 'the coal tttfne left by 
him to the credit of that person's account in the insurance fund 
IS of the coal mine in which he is re-employed or. as the case 
may be, in the Deposit-linked Insurance Fund. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section "insurance 
fund" means any fund established by an employer under ahy scheme 
for providing benefits in the nature of life insurande to employees, 
whether linked to their deposits in provident fund or not, without 
payment by the employees of any separate contribution of premium 
in that behalf. 
(4) Any exemption granted under this section.may be cancelled 
by the authority which granted it, by order in writing, if.8I1 employer 
25 fails to comply-
35 
(a) in the case of an exemption granted tmder sub-section 
(1), with any of the conditions imposed under that sub-section 
or with any of the provisions of sub-section (3); 
(b) in the case of an exemption granted under sub-section 
(2), with any of the provisions of sub-section (3). 
(5) Where any exemption granted under sub-section (1) or sub-
.section (2) is cancelled, the amount of accumulations to the credit 
of every employee to whom such exemption applied. ill ,the insurance 
fund of the coal mine in which he is employed shall be transferred 
within such time and in such manner as may be specified in the 
Insurance Scheme to the credit of his account in the Insurance Fund. 
llD. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstand-
'fng anything inconsistent therewith contained in the "LIfe Insurance 
Corporation Act, 1956.'. 
Act to 
have 
effect 
notwith_ 
Nnding 
at'lythin, 
centained 
in Act 
31 ot 195'. 

Insertion 
of new 
Third 
Schedule. 
Amend-
mentof 
10n. 
title. 
6 
15. The Third. Schedule to the Coal Mines Provident Fund Act shall 
be renumbered as the Fourth Schedule and before the Fourth Schedule 
·as so renumbered, the following Schedule shall be inserted, namely:-
"THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See 8ection 3G) 
MA'l"l'IlRS TO BE PROVIDED !'OR IN THJ: COAL MINI'S DEPoStT-LIND:D 
INSURANCE ScHEME 
1. The employees or 'Class of employees who shall be covered by 
the Insurance Scheme. 
S 
2. The manner in which the accounts of the Insurance Fund 10 
shaH be kept and the inyestment of moneys belonging to the Insur-
ance Fund, subject to such pattern of investment as may be deter-
mined, by order, by the Central Government. 
3. The form in which an employee shall furnish particulars 
about himself and the members of his family whenever reqUired. IS 
4. The nomination of a person to receive the insurance amount 
due to the employee after his death and the cancellation or variation 
of such nomination. 
5. The registers and records to be maintained in respect of 
employees; the form or design of any identity card, token or disc 20 
for the purpose of identifying any employee or his nominee or 
member of his family entitled to receive the insurance amount. 
6. The scales of insurance amount which shall not be less than 
the average balance in the account of the employee concerned in the 
Fund during a period of three years immediately preceding hil 25 
death or more than rupees ten thousand. 
7. The minimum average balance to be maintained by an em-
ployee in the Fund to make him eligible for the benefits under the 
scheme. 
8. The manner in which the amount due to the nominee or the 30 
member of the family of the employee under the scheme is to be 
paid including a provision that the amount shall not be paid other-
wise than in the form of a deposit in a savings hank account, in the 
name of such nominee or member ot family. in any corresponding 
new bank specified in the First Schedule to the Banking Companies 35 
,(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970. 
9. Any other matter which is to be provided for in the Insurance 
Scheme or which may be necessary or proper for the purpose of 
implementing that scheme.". 
CHAPTER III 
.AMENDMENT OF THE EMPLOYEES' PROVIDENT FUNOS AND FAMILY 
PENSION FUND ACT, 1952 
40 
18. In the long title to the Employees' Provident Funds and Family 
Pension Fund Act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as the Employees' Pro-
vident Funds Act), for the words "and family pension fund", the words 45 
",family pension fund and deposit·linked insurance fund" shall be sub .. 
stituted. 
5 of 19'70. 
1901 19112. 

S 
.... • 7 
1'1. For 8ub-aection (1) of section 1 of the Employees' Provident FUDda 
Act, the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely':-
.. (1) This Act may be called the Employees' Provident Funds 
and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952.". 
18. In section 2 of the Employees' Provident Funds Act,-
(a) in clause (c), the words "or the contribution payable in 
respect of an employee to whom the Insurance Scheme applies" shall 
be inserted at the end; 
(b) in clause (if), after the words "a Scheme", the words "or 
10 the Insurance Scheme, as the case may be," shall be inserted; 
(c) in clause <fff), after the words "any Scheme", the words 
"or the Insurance Scheme, as the case may be" shall be inserted; 
(d) clause (ia) shall be re-Iettered as clause (ie) and before 
clause (ic) as so re-Iettered, the following clauses shall be inserted, 
IS namely:-
'(14) "Insurance Fund" means the Deposit-linked Insurance 
Fund established under sub-section (2) of section 6C; 
(ib) "Insurance Scheme" means the Employees' Deposit-
linked. Insurance Scheme framed under sub-section (1) of IeC-
:ao tion 6C;'. 
19. In section 5A of the Employees' Provident Funds Act,-
(a) in sub-section (3), after the word, figure and letter "section 
6A", the words, figure and letter "and section 6e" shall be inserted; 
(b) in sub-section (4), for the words "and the Family Pension 
Scheme", the words '" the Family Pension Scheme and the Insur-
ance Scheme" shall be substituted. 
20. In sub-section (3) of section 5D, and section 5E, of the Employees' 
Provident Funds Act, for the words "and the Family Pension 
Scheme", the words ", the Family Pension Scheme and the Insurance 
30 Scheme" shalf be substituted. . 
3' 
D. After section 6B of the Employees' Provident Funds Act, the 
following section shall be inserted, namely:-
'&C. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Oftlcial Gazette, frame a scheme to be called the Employees' Deposit-
linked 100U1'ance Scheme for the purpose of providiDe life insurance 
beneBt. to the employees of any establishment or class of establish-
ments to which this Act applies. 
(2) There shall be established, as soon as may be after the 
framinl of the Insurance Scheme, a Deposit.linked Insurance Fund 
into which shall be paid by the employer from tim. to time in res-
pect of every such employee in relation to whom he is the em-
ployer, such amount, not being more than one per cent. of the aille-
pte of the b.sic wages, dearness allowance ... d retaiDin, allowance 
(If any) for the time being payable in relation to sQch employee as 
Amend.-
ment of 
lection'1 . 
Amend-
ment of 
lection 2. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
SA. 
Amend-
mentof 
aections 
5D and 
5E. 
Insertion 
otnew 
section 
6C. 
Employ_ 
ees' De-
posit-
linked 
Insurance 
Scheme. 

Amend-
ment (Iff 
section 'I. 
Amend-
ment of 
secti()n 
7A. . 
Amend-
mentol 
. section 8. 
.- --6 .. 
-... , ~.tnl Gcaver~t DlaYJ bB lloWlc ...... ita theOlltlal,G.,t-. 
Ipecify. 
Exp14nation.-For the pUrposes of this sub-section, the expres. 
lioDS "deamess allowaDce" aDd "ret~in~ all~w8Dce" have ~ s&O:'e 
JDeBDiDp as ill seetioD 6. S 
(3) The CeIltral Go""' .... t.shall. after due app~P«iatioa .aW 
by ParliameDt by law, contribute to the Insurance Fund in relation 
to ea::!l employee, of any establishment or class of establishments to 
witich this Act applies, an amount representing 'one-half of the 
contribution which an employer is required, by sub-section (2), to 10 
QlIke. 
(4) (c) The employer shall pay i114e the I_urance Fun. sut!h 
fur.ther sums of mODey, not exceediag one-fourth of the contri~ution 
whi~ he is required to make Under sub-section (2), as tbe' Central 
Government may, from time to time, determine to meet ail the 'ex- 15 
peaNs ia connection with the admiRistration IJf tile Innrant'e 
Sebeme other than the expenses towards <the COlit of any beneftts 
provided by or under that scheme. 
(b) The Central Government shaD, after due appropn.tion made 
by Parli .. ent by law, pay into the Ins~e Fund such futher 20 
s~ of money represeuti~ one-half of the sums payable by the 
e .. ploy,r undu clause (a) to meet aU the expenses in . connection 
with the administration of the Insurance Scheme other th~n the 
expenses towards the cost of any benefits provided by or under that 
ficheme. 2S 
(5) ftel_urlUlCe FUDdshaB vest in the Central Qoard Alpd be 
Mnai-idel'ed .... it in such lIUUlDer as may be specifie.t in ~ 
Insurance Scheme. 
(6) The Insurance Scheme may provide for all or any ot ijlIe 
matters specified in Schedule IV. 30 
(7) The Insurance Scheme may provide that any of its provi-
sions shall take effect either prospectively or retrospectively on such 
date as may be specified in this behalf in that Scheme.'. 
22. In sub-section (1) of section 7 of the Employees' Provident Funds 
Act. . for 1he words "amend or vary the Scheme or t4e ~amil,y PeDSlqs 35 
Scheme, as the case may be", the words "amend or vary, eitberpro-
spectively or retrospectively, the Scheme, the Family Pension Scheme or 
the Insurance Scheme, as the case may be" shall be substituted. 
zs. 1119Ub-section(1) of section 7A of the Employees' Provident 
Funds Act, after.the ·words "Family Pension Scheme", the words "or tile 40 
Insurance Scheme" €halt he ineerted. 
at. In clause (til) of section 8 of the Employees' Provident Funds 
Act;-
(a) for the word "Scheme", wherever it occurs, the words 
"Scheme or the Insurance Scheme" shall be substituted; 4S 
(b) for the words "the Fund", the words "'the Fund or, as .tile 
case may be, the {·nsUTance Fund"shall be subatituted. 

( 
, 
, 
15. in section SA of the Employees' Provident Funds ACt,-
(a.) in sub-section (1), for the words and brackets "The amount 
of contribution (that is to say the employer's contribution as well 
as the employee's contribution)", ~he words and brackets "The 
limount of contribution (that is to say the empioyer's Contribution 
as well as the employee's contribution in pursuance of any': Scheme 
ind the emplo),er's contribution in pursuance of the insurance 
Scheme)" shim be subStituted; 
1'1... (b) in sub-section (2}1, after the words "employee's coiitribuiion';, 
u the words "under any Scheme" shah he inserted. 
!i. In sub-seCtion (3) of section 10 of tile Employees; Provident 
Funds Act, after the words "Family Pension Scheme", the words "and 
also ih i'elation to any amount payable under the Insurance Scheme" 
shaIi be ihsetteci. ' .• 
ts 21. In sub·section (1) of section 11 of the Employees' Provident Funds 
Act,~ 
20 
35 
(a) in clause (a),-
(i) for the word "Scheme.", in both the places where it 
occurs, the words "Scheme or the Insurance Scheme" shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) after the words "the Fund", the words "or, as the case 
may be, the Insurance Fund" shall be inserted; 
(b) in clause (b), for the words "the provident ~und", in both 
the places where they occur, the words "the provident fund or any 
insurance fund" shall be substituted; 
(c) the following Explanation shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:-
'Explanation.-In this sub-section and in section 17, "insurance 
fund" means any fund est&blf$hcd by an employer under any 
scheme for providing benefits in the nature of life insurance to 
employees, whether linkeCil to their deposits in provident fund or 
not, without payment by the employees of any separate contri-
bution or premium in that behalf.'. 
21. In section 12 of the Employees' Provident Funds Aqt,-
(a) for the word "Scheme", wherever it occurs, thlel wO!l'ds 
"Scheme or the Insurance Scheme" shall be subsmtuted; 
(hi) for the words "the Fund", the words "the Fund or the In-
surance Fund" shall be substituted; 
(c) for the words "or provident fund", the words ", provident 
40 fund or life insurance" shall be substituted, 
45 
29. In section 13 of the Employees' Provident Funds Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "or the Family Pension 
Scheme", the words ", the Family Pension Scheme or the Insurance 
Scheme" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the word "Scheme", wherever it 
occurs, the words "Scheme or the Insurance Scheme" shall be sub-
stituted. 
ADiend.;. 
mento! 
section 
SA. 
Mnerid .. 
mentof 
section 
10. 
Amend-
mentol 
section 
11. 
Amend_. 
mentol 
IeCtion 
12. 
Amend-
mentol 
section 
13. 

, 
Amend-
mento! 
sectiOJi 
14, 
.Amend. 
mental 
.ectlona 
14A. 
14M, 
14AC 
aDd 
17B, 
Amend.. 
mentol 
section 
14B, 
Amend-
mentol 
section 
14C. 
Amend-
mentol 
section 
17, 
.. 
',' 
10 
30. In s~ctioh 14 of ,the Employees' Provident Funds Act,-
(a) for the words "or the Family Pension Scheme", wherever 
they OCCUr, the words ". the Family Pension Scheme Or the Insurance 
Scheme" shall be snbstituted; 
(b) after sub-section (lA), the following sub-section shall be S 
inserted, namely:-
"(1S) An employer who contravenes, or makes default in 
eomplying with, the provisions of section SC, or clause (a.) of 
sub-section (3A) of section 17 in so far as ~t relates to the pay. 
ment of inspection charges, shall be punishable with imprison- .10 
ment for a term which may extend to six months but which shall 
not be less than one month and shall also be liable to fine which 
may extend to two thousand rupau: 
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special 
reasons to be recorded in the judgment. impose 4, sentence of im- IS 
prisonrnent for a lesser term or of fine only in lieu of imprison-
ment.fI . 
3l. In section 14A, section 14M, section HAC and section 17B of the 
Employees' Provit1ent Funds Act, for the words "the Family Pension 
Scheme", Wherever they occur the words "the Family Pension Scheme or 20 
the Insurance Scheme" shall be· substituted, 
32. In section 14B of the Employees' Provident Funds Act,-
(a.) for the words "or the Family Pension Fund", the words 
", the Family Pension Fund or the Insurance Fund" shall be substi-
tuted; 25 
(b) for the words "any Scheme", the words "any Scheme or 
Insurance Scheme" shall be substituted. 
33, In ~ub-section (1) qf section 14C of the Employees' ProVident 
Funds Act, for the words "or the Family Pension Fund", the words ", 
the, Family Pension Fund or the Insurance Fund" shall be substituted. 30 
3ft. In section 17 of the Employees' ProVident Funds Act,-
(a) after sul>section (2). th~ following sub-sections shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(2A) The Central Governmen.t may, if requested so to do 
by the employer, by notification in the Official Gazette, and sub- 3S 
ject to sucb conditions as may be specified in the notification, 
exempt any establishment from the operation of allor, any of 
the provisions of the Insurance S('heme, if ~t is satisfied that the 
employees of such establishment are, without making any sep-
arate contribution or payment of premium, in enjoyment of 40 
benefits in the nature of life insurance, whether linked to· their 
de~ts in provident fund or not, and such benefits are more 
favourable to such employees than the benefits admissible under 
the Insurance Scheme, 
(2B) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2A), 4S 
the . Insurance Scheme may provide for the exemption of any 
person or class of persons employed in any establishment and 

10 
IS 
20 
3S 
40 
"'" 11 
covered by that scheme from the operation of all or any of the 
provisions thereof, if the benefits in the nature of life insurance 
admissible to such person or class of persons are more favour-
able than the benefits provided under the Insurance Scheme."; 
(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be in· 
serted, namely:-
U(3A) Where, in respect of any person or class of persons 
employed in any establishment, an exemption is granted under 
sub-section (2A) or sub-section (2B) from the operation of all 
or any of the provisions of the Insurance Scheme (whether such 
exemption is granted to the establishment wherein such person 
or class of persons is employed or to the person or class of per-
sons as such), the employer in relation to such establishment-
(a) shall, in relation to the benefits in the nature of life 
insurance. to which any such person or class of pen:ons is 
entitled, or any insurance fund, maintain: such accounts, 
submit such returns, make such investments, provide for 
such facilities for inspection and pay such inspection charg-
es, as the Central Government may direct; 
(b) shall not, at any time after the exemption without 
the leave of the Central Government, reduce the total quan-
tum of benefits in the nature of life insurance to which any 
such person or class of persons was entitled immediately 
before the date of the exemption; and 
(c) shall, where any such person leaves his employ-
ment and obtains re-employment in any other estahlishment 
to which this Act applies, transfer within such time as may 
be specified in this behalf by the Central Government. the 
amount of accumulations to the credit of that person in the 
insurance fund of the establishment left by him to the 
credit of that person's account in the insurance !fund of the 
establishment in which he is re-employed or, 86 the case 
may be, in the Deposit-linked Insurance Fund."; 
(c) in sub-section (4), after clause (b), the following clauses 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"(c) in the case of an exemption granted under sub-section 
(2A), with any of the conditions imposed under that sub-section 
or with any of the provisions of sub-section (3A); 
(d) in the case of an exemption granted under suMection 
(2B) , with any of the provisions Of sub-section (3A) ."; . 
(d) in sub-section (5) ,-
(i) for the words. brackets and figure "or sub-section (2) ", 
the words, brackets, figures and letters ", sub-section (2), sub-
section (2A) or sub-section (2B) I, shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "or the family pension fund", the . words 
", the family pension fund or the insuranCe fund" shall be sub-
stituted; 
(iii) after the wcr.c1s "Family Pension Scheme", the words 
"or the Insurance Scheme" shall be inserted; 

Insertion 
of new 
section 
17AA. 
Act to 
have 
effect 
notwith_ 
standing 
anything 
contained 
in Act 
31 of 1956. 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 
18. 
Amend. 
mentol 
section 
19. 
Insertion 
of new 
Schedule 
IV, 
12 
(iv) after the words "Family Pension Fund", the words "or 
the Insurance Fund" shall be inserted. 
36. After section 17A of the Employees' Provident Funds Act, the 
!following section shall be inserted, namely:-
"17AA The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstand- S 
ing anything inconsistent therewith contained in the Life Insurance 
Corporation Act, 1956.", 
38. In section 18 of the Employees' Provident Funds Act, the words 
"or the Insurance Scheme" shall be inserted at the end. 
37. In section 19 of the Employees' Provident Funds Act, in the open- 10 
ing paragraph, for the words "or the Family Pension Scheme", the words 
", the Family Pension Scheme or the Insurance Scheme" shall be sub-
stituted. 
38. After Schedule III to the Employees' Provident Funds Act, the 
following Schedule shall be inserted, namely: - IS 
"SCHEDULE IV 
(See section 6C) 
MATTERS TO BE PROVIDED FOR IN THE EMPLOYEES' DEPOSIT-LINKED 
INSURANCE ScHEME 
1. The employees or class of employees who shall be covered by the 20 
Insurance Scheme. 
2. The manner in which the aceounts of the' Insurance Fund shall be 
kept and the investment of moneys belonging to the Insurance Fund 
subject to such pattern of investment as may be determined, by order, 
by the Central Government. 2S 
3. The !form in which an employee shall furnish particulars about 
himself and the members of his family whenever required. 
4. The nomination of a pers:>n to receive the insurance amount due 
to the employee after his death and the cancellation or variation of such 
nomination. 30 
5. The registers and records to be maintained in respect of employees; 
the form or design of any identity card, token or disc for the purpose 
of identifying any employee or his nominee or member of his family 
entitled to receive the insurance amount. 
6. The scales of insurance amount which shall not be less than the 35 
average balance in the account of the employee concerned. in the Fund 
or any other provident fund during a period of three years immediately 
preceding his death or more than rupees ten thousand. 
7. The minimum average balance to be maintained -by an employee 
in the Fund or any other provident fund to make him eligible for the 40 
'benefits under the scheme. 

13 ,{ 
8. The manner in which the amount due to the nominee or the 
member of the family of the employee under the scheme is to be paid 
including a provision that the amount shall not be padd otherwise than 
in the form of a deposit in a savings bank account, in the name of such 
5 nominee or member of family, in any corresponding new bank specified 
in the First Schedule to the Banking Companies (AcqUisition and 
5 ot 1970. Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970. 
9. Any other matter which is to be provided for in the Employees' 
Deposit-linked Insurance Scheme or which may be necessary or proper 
10 for the purpose of implementing that Scheme.". 
CHAPTER IV 
AMENDMENT OF THE WEALTH-TAX ACT, 1957 AND THE INCOME-TAX ACT, 
1961 
39. In the Wealth-tax Act, 1957, in sub-section (1) of section 5, after Amend-
IS clause (xviib), the following clause shall be inserted; namely:- ~;t of 
co (xviiba) any property held- 27 of 1957. 
46 of 1948. 
19 of 1952. 
20 
25 
(a) by the Board of Trustees constituted under the Coal 
Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1948, 
on behalf of the Deposit-linked Insurance Fund established 
under section 3G of that Act; or 
(b) by the Board of Trustees constituted under the Em-
ployees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 
1952, on behalf of the Deposit-linked Insurance Fund ,established 
under section 6C of that Act;". 
40. In the Income-tax Act, 1961,-
(a) in section 10, in clause (25), after sub-clause (iv), the fol-
lowing sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:-
co (v) any income received-
(a) by the Board of Trustees constituted under the Coal 
30 Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 
46 of 1948. 1948, on behalf of the Deposit-linked Insurance Fund estab-
lished under section 3G of that Act; or 
(b) by the Board of Trustees constituted under the Em-
ployees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 
19 of 1952. 35 1952, on behalf of thp Deposit-linked Insurance Fund estab-
lished under section 6C of that Act;"; 
(b) in section 17, in clause (2), in sub-clause (v), after the words 
"superannuation fund", the words, figures and letters "or a Deposit-
Hnked Insurance Fund establish en. under section 3G of the Coal Mines 
46 of1948. 40 Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1948, or, as the 
case may be, section 6C of the Employees' Provident Funds and 
19 of 1952. Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952" shall be inserted. 
41. (1) The Labour Provident Fund Laws (Amendment) Ordinance, 
9 of 1976. 1976, is hereby repealed. 
4S (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done Or any action taken 
under the Coal Mines Provident Fund Act, the Employees' Provident 
Funds Act, the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 and the Income-tax Act, 1961, as 
amended by the Ordinance so repealed (including any Scheme framed 
or notification issued), shall be deemed to have been done or taken 
So under the corresponding provisions of the respective Act aforesaid as 
amended by this Act. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
Act 
43 of 1961. 
Repeal 
and 
saving, 

i 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Labour Provident Fund Laws (Amendment) Ordinance, 1976, 
was promulgated by the President to introduce a new social security 
scheme known as the Deposit-linked Insurance Scheme to provide in-
surance cover to the members of the Coal Mines Provident Fund and the 
Employees' Provident Fund, without payment of any premiwn by such 
members. 
2. The insurance cover provided by the scheme is linked to the amount 
lying in deposit in the provident fund to the credit of the employee con-
cerned. The salient feature of the Deposit-linked Insurance Scheme is 
that in the event of the death of an employee, his dependants would be 
entitled to receive an additional payment equivalent to three years' 
avera:ge balance at the credit of the deceased employee in the 
provident fund account (provided that such balance is not less than 
one thousand rupees), subject to a maximum of rupees ten thousand. 
For getting this facility, the employee will not be required to make any 
contribution to the Insurance Fund. Contribution to that Fund will be 
made by the employers and the Central Government in the ratio 2: 1. 
A similar scheme is already in operation in respect o! Centrol Govern-
ment employees trom the 8th January, 1975. 
3. The Coal Mines Deposit-linked Insurance Scheme will be adminis-
tered by the Board of Trustees constituted under the Coal Mines Provi-
dent Fund, Family Pension and Bonus Schemes Mt, 1948 and the Em-
ployees' Deposit-linked Insurance Scheme will be administered by the-
Central Board of Trustees constituted under the Employees' Provident 
Funds and Family Pension Fund Act, 1952. The cost of administration 
of the Deposit-linked Insurance Scheme in both the cases will be borne 
by the employers and the Central Government in the ratio of 2 : 1. 
4. Provision has also been lThlde for granting exemption from the 
provisions of the two Deposit-linked Insurance Schemes in the case of 
such of the employees of the coal mine or, as the case may be, the estab.-
lishment as are in enjoyment of more favourable benefits in the nature 
of life insurance. 
5. Consequential amendments are also proposed to be made in the 
Wealth~tax Act, 1957, and the Income-tax Act, 1961, so that the Board of 
Trustees are not assessed to tax in respect of any property held, or in-
come received, on behalf of the Deposit-linked Insurance Fund, and to 
prevent employees being assessed under the Income-tax Act, 1961, in 
respect of the contributions made into the. Deposit-linked Insurance Fund 
in relation to such employees. 
6. The Bill 'Seeks to replace the Ordinance with the modification that 
the Deposit-linked. Insurance Scheme would also apply to the employees 
of establishments which were exempted from the operation of the Em-
ployees' Provident Funds Scheme. 
NEW DELHI; K. V. RAGHUNATHA REDDY. 
The 13th August, 1976. 
14 

...... ..~ , 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 274 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. S. 35012(2) /76-PF. II, dated the 17th August, 19'16 
from Shni K. V. Raghunatha Reddy, Minister of Labou~ to the Secretary-
General, Lok Sabha_] (' 
The President of India having been informed of the subject matter of 
the above mentioned Bill has, in pursuance of clause (1) of article 117 
read with clause (1) of article 274 and also clause (3) of article 117 of 
the Constitution recommended the introduction and consideration of the 
said Bill by Lok Sabha. 
15 

• .. t 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
~ •• :,11 • 
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to insert section 3G in the Coal Mines Pro': 
vident Fund, Family Pension and Bonus Schemes Act, 1948 and clause 
21 seeks to insert section 6C in the Employees' Provident Funds and 
Family Pension Fund Act, 1952. The new section 3G envisages the fram-
ing of the Coal Mines Deposit-linked Insurance Scheme for employees 
covered by the Coal Mines Provident Fund Scheme and the new section 
6C envisages the framing of the Employees' Deposit-linked Insurance 
Scheme for employees of establishments to which the Employees' Pro-
vident Funds and Family Pension Fund Act, 1952, applies. The contti~ 
butions to both these Deposit-linked Insurance Funds are to be made by 
the employers and the Central Government in the ratio of 2: 1, The cost df 
administration of the two Deposit-linked Insurance Schemes will also be 
paid by the employers and the Central Government in the same ratio I 
2. The Coal Mines Provident Fund, Family Pension and Bonus 
Schemes Act, 1948, is applicable to about 6 lakhs of employees in Coal 
Mines. The Employees' Provident Funds and Family Pension Fund Act, 
1952, is at present applicable to about 78 lakhs employees. Thus, the 
total member of employees, entitled to Deposit-linked Insuraq,ce benefits, 
would be about 84 lakhs. It is estimated that the mortality would occur 
at the rate of 4.5 per thousand of the population and as such the mortality 
figure would be, approximately, 37,000. If the average balance of contri-
bution of a worker is taken to be Rs. 5,000/-, the total expenditure which 
is likely to be involved under the two Schemes would be of the order of 
Rs. 18.90 crores per annum which would be shared by the employers and 
the Central Government in the ratio 2:1 as under:-
(1) Employers' contribution out of the proposed 
payment of Rs. 18.90 crores 18.90Xf=Rs. 12.60 crores. 
(2) Central Government's contributionl8.90X l=Rs. 6.30 crores. 
3. The cost Off administration of the ~o Deposit-linked Insurance 
Funds which is estimated to be about Rs. 15 lakhs, which is also to be 
shared by the employers and the Central Government in the ratio of 2:1. 
The Central Government would thus be required to incur an expenditure 
of the order of Rs. 5 lakhs per annum. 
4. No other recurring or non-recurring expenditure would be involv-
ed from the Consolidated Fund of India if the Bill is enacted and brought 
into operation. 
16 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to insert section 3G in the Coal Mines Pro-
vident Fund, Family Pension and Bonus Schemes Act, 1948 to empower 
the Central Government to frame the Coal Mines Deposit··linked Insu-
rance Scheme for the purpose of providing life insurance benefits to the 
employees covered by the Coal Mines Provident }4~und Scheme. The 
various matters which are to be provided in the Coal Mines Deposit-
linked Insurance Scheme are enumerated in the 'rhird Schedule pro-
posed to be inserted in the Act by clause 15 of the Bill. 
2. Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to insert section HC in the Act afore-
said to empower the Central Government to exempt any coal mine from 
all or any of the provisions of the Coal Mines Deposit-linked Insurance 
Scheme in the .circumstances specified in that section. It also seeks to 
provide that the Coal Mines Deposit-'linked InsuTance Scheme may make 
provision for exemption of any person or class of persons employed in 
any coal mine to which that scheme applies from the operation of all or 
any of the provisions thereof on similar grounds. 
3. Clauses 21, 34 and 38 of the Bill seek to make similar provisions in 
the Employees' Provident fund'S and Family Pension Fund Act, 1952. 
4. The delegation of legislative powers by the prOVisions of the Bill 
relates to matters of detail and it is hardly practicable to provide for 
them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, 
. of a normal character. 
11 .' 

Silort 
title and 
extent. 
In~erpre­
tation. 
Constitu-
tion of 
Board of 
Trustees. 
Appoint-
ment of 
ofBcen. 
A~NEXUR~ 
EXTRACTS FROM THE COAL MINES PROVIDENT FUND, FAMILY PUSIOX 
AND BoNUS ScHEMES AcT, 1948 
(46 OF 1948) 
An Act to make provision for the framing of a Provident Fund Scheme, 
a Fa.mily Pension Scheme and a Bonus Scheme for persons employe. 
in coal mines. 
1. 0) This Act may be called the Coal Mines Provident Fund, Fami-
ly Pension and Bonus Schemes Act, 1948. 
• • '" • '" • 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context,-
'" '" '" '" '" • 
(c) "Contribution" means the contribution payable in respect of 
a member qnder the Coal Mines Provident Fund Scheme framed 
under this Act; 
'" '" '" • • • 
(ff) "managing agent" has the meaning assigned to it in. th4t . 
Companies Act, 1956; and , of , •. 
'" '" '" '" '" • 
3A. (1) '" • • ... • '" 
(3) The Board shall, subject to the provisions of sectiqn 3E, adminis-
ter the Fund vested in it in such manner as may be specified in the Sche-
me aforesaid.. 
(4) The Board shall perform such other functions as it may be re-
quired to perform by or under any provisions of the Coal Mines Pro-
vident Fund Scheme and the Coal Mines Family Pension Scheme. 
'" '" '" '" '" • 
3C. (1) ... ... '" • '" '" 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (1) ana (2), the Board 
may appoint such other officers and employees as it may consider neces-
sary for the efficient administration of the Coal Mines Provident Fund' 
Scheme and the Coal Mines Family Pension Scheme . 
... • ... '" • '" '" '" 
18 

; ,'" 19 
I. (1) • • • • • • • 
(2) A scheme framed under the provisions of sub-section (1) may 
provide for all or any of the matters specified in the Th'rd Schedule. 
• • • • • • 
7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, add to, amend or vary a scheme framed under this Act. 
'lA. Every scheme made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is session 
tor a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or 
in two successive sessions, and if. before the expiry of the session in 
which it is so laid or the session immediately falling, both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the scheme or both Houses agree that the 
scheme should not be made, the scheme shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect. as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudi'!e to 
the val:dity of anything previously done under that scheme. 
• • • • • • 
8. (1) • • • • • 
(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) shall, so 
far as may be, apply in relation to the family pension or any other 
amount payable under the Coal Mines Family l;'ension Scheme as they 
apply in relation to any amount payable out of the Fund, 
• • • • • • 
Coal 
Mine •. ". 
Bonu. 
Scheme . 
Modifica-
tion I()f a 
Scheme. 
Schemes 
to be laid 
before 
Parlia-
ment. 
Protec-
tion 
against 
aUach-
ment. 
10. (1) The Central Government may. by notification in the Official Inspectorl. 
Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be Inspectors {':>r the 
purposes of the Coal Mines Provident Fund Sche~e or the COal Mines 
Bonus Scheme and may define their jurisdiction. 
• • • • • • 
10E. (1) The amount of contribution (thnt is to say the employer's 
oontribution as well as the employee's contribution) alld any cha::ges 
referred to in section lOA paid or payable by an employer in respect of 
an employee employed by or through a contractor and any bonus paid 
or payable under any Coal Mines Bonus Scheme in respect of any such 
employee may be recovered by such empk>yer from the contractor either 
by deduction from any amount payable to the contractor under any con-
tract or as a debt payable by the contractor. 
• • ... • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE EMPLOYEES',PaoVIDI!NT FUNDS AND FAMILY PENSION 
FUND ACT, 1952 
(19 OF 1952) 
A n Act to provide fo'r tM institution of provident funds and family pension 
fund for employees in factories and other establishments. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Employees' Provident Funds and 
Family Pension Fund Act, 1952. 
• • • • • 
Recovery 
ofmoni. 
by em-
ployer. 
and con-
tractora. 
Short 
title, ex-
tent and 
appllea. 
tion. 

DefiDi.-
tina. 
Central 
Board 
Appoint-
ment of 
officers. 
Delega-
tion. 
Modifica-
tion of 
5dleme. 
.. ' 
20 
2. • • • • • 
(c) "contribution" means a contribution payable .\n respect, of a 
member under a Scheme; 
• • • • • • 
(ff) "exempted employee" means an employee to whom a Scheme 
would, but for the exemption granted under section 17, have applied; 
(fff) "exempted establishment" means an establishment in 
respect of which an exemption has been granted under section 17 
from the operation of all or any of the provisions of any scheme, 
whether such exemption has been granted to the establishment as such 
or to any person or class of persons employed therein; 
• • • • • .. 
(ia) "manufacture" or "manufacturing process" means any 
process for making, altering, repairing, ornamenting, finishing, 
packing, oiling, washing, cleaning, breaking up, demolishing or other-
wise treating or adapting any article or substance with a view to its 
use, sale, transport, delivery or disposal; 
• • • • • • 
SA. (1) • • • • • 
(3) The Central Board shall, subject to the provisions of seetion &A, 
administer the Fund vested in it in such manner as nlay be specified in the 
Scheme. 
(4) The Central Board shall perform such other functions as it may 
be requiren to perform by or under any provisions of the Scheme and 
the Family Pension Scheme. 
• • • • • • 
SD. (1) • • • • • 
(3) The Central Board may appoint such other officers and employees 
as it may consider necessary for the efflcient administration of tl\e 
Scheme and the Family Pension Scheme. 
• • • • • • 
SE. The Central Board may, with the prior approval of the Central 
Government and a State Board may, with the prior approval of the State 
Government concerned, ci.elegate to its chairman or to any of its officers, 
subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as it may specify, such 
of its powers and functions under this Act as it may deem necessary for 
the efflcient administration of the Scheme and the Family Pension 
Scheme. 
• • • • • • 
"I. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Omeial 
Gazette, add to, amend or vary the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme, 
as the case may be. . 
• • • • 
• 

,21 
'lA.. (1) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner, any Deputy Pro-
vident Fund Commissioner or any Regional Provident Fund Commis-
sioner may, by order, determine the amount due from any employer un-
der any provision of this Act, the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme, 
as the case may be, and for this purpose may conduct such inquiry as 
he may deem necessary. 
* • • • • • 
&; Any· amount due--
(a) from the employer in relation to an establishment to which 
any Scheme applies in respect of any contribution payable to the 
Fund, damages recoverable under section 14B, accumulations requirE!(\ 
to be transferred under sub-section (2) of section 15 or unc\er sub-
section (5) of section 17 or any charges payable by him under any 
other proviSion of this Act or of any provision of the Scheme; or 
• * • • * • 
SA. (1) The amount of contribution (that is to say the employer's 
contribution as well as the employee's contribution), and any charges 
OIl the bais of such contribution for meeting the cost of administering 
·the FUDd paid or payable by an employer in respect of an employee em-
ployed by or through a contractor mlly be recovered by such employer 
from the oontractor, either by deduction from any amount payable to the 
-contrtICt&.r unltef any contract or as a debt payable by the contractor. 
(2) A contractor from whom the amounts mentioned in sub-section 
(1) may be recovered in respect of any employee employed by or thro-
ugh him, may recover from such employee the employee's contribution 
by deduction from the basic wages, dearness allowance and retaining 
allowance (if any) payable to such employee. 
* * • * • * 
10. (1) * • * * • • 
(.1) The provisions of sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) shall, so 
:far .. may be, apply in relation to the famlly pension or any other amount 
pa)'l&ble under the Family Pension Scheme as they apply in !'elation to 
,any amount payable out of the Fund. 
1'1. Where any employer is adjuC\icated i~solvent or, being a com-
pany, an order for winding up is made, the amount due-
(G) from the employer in relation to an establishment to whieh 
any Scheme applies in respect of any cOIltrfbtition payable ~ the 
Fund, damages recoverable under section 14B, accumulations re-
quired to be transferred under sub-section (2) of section 15 or any 
eharges payable by him under any other provisron of this Ad or of 
any provision of the Scheme, or 
(b) from the employer in relation to an exempted establishment 
in reapect of any contribution to· the provident fUlld (in so far as it 
relates to exempted employees), under the rules of the provident fund, 
allY contribution payable by him towareis the Family Pension Fund 
umler 8ubo-eection (6) of section 17, damagea recoverable under section 
14B or any charges payable by him to the appl'opria~ GeYernmeat 
Determin-
ation of 
moneys 
due from 
employers. 
Mode of' 
reco-
very of 
moneys 
due from 
employ-
ers. 
Recovery 
01 money. 
byem-
ployer. 
and con-
tractors. 
Protee-
tion 
against 
atta'cll-
ment. 
Priority 
of pay-
ment of 
contribu-
tions 
over de-
bts. 

Ilmployer 
DOt to 
reduce 
VI ..... 
ft. 
1118pec-
tora. 
under any provision of this Act or under any of the conditions specifted 
under section 17. 
• • • • • • 
12. No employer in relation to an establishment to which any Scheme 
applies shall, by reason only of his liability for the payment of any COIl-
tribution to the Fund or any charges under this Act or the Scheme, re-
duce, whether cUrectly or indirectly, the wages of any employee to wbom 
the Scheme applies or the total quantum of benefits in the nature of old 
age pension, gratuity or provident fund to which the employee is entitled 
under the terms of his employment, express or implied. 
13. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be Inspectors for the 
purposes of this Act, the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme, and may 
define their jurisdiction. 
(2) Any qnspector appointed under sub-section (1) may, for the pur-
pose of inquiring into the correctnes<; of any information furnished in con-
nection with this Act or with any Scheme or for the purpose of ascer-
taining whether any of the provisions of this Act or of any Scheme have 
been complied with in respect of an establishment to which any Scheme 
applies or for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of this 
Ad or any Scheme are applicable to any establishment to which the 
Scheme has not been applied or for the purpose of determining whether 
the conditions subject to which exemption was granted under section 
17 are being complied with by the employer in relation to an exempted 
establishment-
• • • • • 
Penaltl.. 14. (1) Whoever, for the purpose of avoiding any payment to be made 
by himself under this Act, the Scheme or the Family Pen~ion Scheme or 
of enabling any other person to avoid such payment, knowingly makes or 
causes to be made any false statement or false representation shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months 
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
(1A) An employer who contravenes, or makes default in complying 
with, the provisions of section 6 or clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 
17 in so far as it relates to the payment of inspection charges, or para-
graph 38 of the Scheme in so far as it relates to the payment of adminis-
trative charges, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to six months, but-
(a) which shall not be less than three months in case of default 
in payment of the employees' contribution which has been deducted 
by the employer from the employees' wages; 
(b) which shall not be less than one month, in any other case; 
and shall also be liable to fine which mar extend to two thousand rupees: 
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to 
be recorded in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a 
lell8er term or of ftne i'n lieu of imprisonment. 

.," 
t2) Subject to the provisions of this Act the Scheme or th~ ~ami1y 
Pension Scheme may provicle that any person who contravenes, or makes 
default in complying with, any of the provisions thereof shall be punish-
able with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
(2A) Whoever contravenes or makes default in complying with any 
provision of this Act or of any condition subject to which exemption was 
granted uncler section 17 shall, if no other penalty is elsewhere provided by 
or under this Act for such contravention or non-compliance, be J?unishable 
with imprisonment which may extend to three months, or with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
(3) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act, the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme except on a report in 
writing of the facts constituting such offence made with the previous sanc-
tion of such authority as may be specified in this behalf by the appropriate 
Government by an Inspector appointed under section 13 . 
• • • • .' 
14AA. Whoever, having been convicted by a court of an offence punish-
able under this Act, the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme, commits 
the same offence shall be subject for every such subsequent offence to 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year but which shall 
not be less than three months and shall also be liable to fine which may 
extend to four thousand rupees. 
• • • • • 
14AC. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable 
under thiS Act, the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme except on a 
report in writing of the facts constituting such offence macle with the 
previous sanction of the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or such 
other officer as may be authorised by the Central Government, by noti-
fication in the Official Gazette, in this behalf, by an Inspector appointed 
under section 13. 
(2) No court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magis-
.trate of the first class shall try any offence under this Act or the Scheme 
or the Family Pension Scheme. 
1m. Where an employer makes default in the payment of any contri-
bution to the Fund or the Family Pension Fund or in the trlUlSfer of 
accumulations required to be transferred by him under sub-section (2) of 
section 15 or sub-section (5) of section 17 or in the payment of any charges 
payable under any other provision of this Act or of any Scheme or under 
any of the conclitions specified under section 17, the Central ProvicIent 
Fund Commissioner or such other officer as may be authorise(} oy the 
Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, in this behalf 
may recover from the employer such damages, not exceeding the amount 
of arrears, as it may think fit to impose. 
UC. (1) Where an employer is convicted of an offence of making 
default in the payment of any contribution to the Fund or the Family 
Pension Fund or in the transfer of accumulations required to be trans-
ferred by him under sub-section (2) of section 15 or SUb-section (5) of 
aection 17, the court may, in addition to awarding any punishment, br 
Enhanced 
punish-
ment in 
certain 
caaee 
after 
previoUi 
convic-
tion. 
Cogni-
zance 
and trial 
ot 
oi!encel. 
Power to 
recover 
dam.,eI. 
Power of. 
court to 
make 
order •. 
.'-... . 

I 
ordCll' in writing require him within a period specified in the order (wbicli 
the court may, if it thinks fit and on application in that behalf, from time' 
to time, extend), to pay the amount of contribution or tra!lSfer the accu-
mulations, as the case may be, in respect of which the offenee was com-
mitted. 
• • • • • 
11. (1). ~ • • • 
(5) Where any exemption granted under sub-section (1), sub-
section (lA) or sub-section (2) is cancelled, the amount of accumulations 
to the credit of every employee to whom such exemption applied, in the 
provident fund or the family pension fund of the establishment in which 
he is employed shall be transferred within such time and in such manner 
as may be specified in the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme to the 
credit of his account in the Funn or the Family Pension Fund, as the case 
may be. 
• • • • • 
17B. Where an employer, relation to an establishment, transfers 
that establishment in whole or in part, by sale, gift, lease or licence 01' in 
any other manner whatsoever, the employer and the person to whom the 
establishment is so transferred shall jointly and severally be liable to 
pay the contribution and other sums due from the employer under any 
provision of this Act or the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme, .. 
the case may be, in respect of the perion up to the date of sueh traaafer: 
Provided that the liability of the transferee shall be limited to the 
value of the assets obtained by him by such transfer. 
18. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie agatlUlt an Inspector or 
any other person in respect of anything which is in goon faith done ortn-
~nded to be done under this Act, the Scheme or thi! Family PenaIaa 
Scheme. 
19. The appropriate Govermnent may dirElct that any pow« .. ..attJo. 
rity or jurisdiction exercisable by it under this Act, the Scheme or the 
Family Pension Scfteme shall, in relation to such matters and subject to 
such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the direction, be exercisabl. 
also-
17. 
• • • • 
EXTRACT FROM. Tim INCOMB-TAX ACT, 1961 
(43 or 1961) 
• • • • • 
• • • • • • • 
(2) "perquisite" includes-
• * • • • 
(v) any sum payable by the employer, whether directly or 
through a fund, other than a recognised provident fund or an 
approved superannuation fund, to effect an assurance on the life 
of the assessee or to effect a contract for an annuity; 
• • • • • • 
I\)wer to 
exempt. 
Liability 
in catJe 
of tran8-
ter ot 
(·stablish-
ment. 
ProtectiOD 
for actl 
done iB 
load faith. 
Dele,a-
tion of 
pow .... 
"Salary" 
''Perqui-
site" aD. 
"proftt. in 
lieu of 
salary" 
defined. 

Memorandum e~taining the modificatiotl.$ contained in the Bill to replace 
the Labour Provident Fund Laws (Amendment) Ordin~nce, 1976 
Besides drafting and consequential amendments, the following modi-
fications have been made in the Bill, namely:-
(0 In the new section 6e sought to be inserted itt the Employees' 
Provident Funds and Family Pension Fund Act, 1952, by clause 21 of 
the Bill,--
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "bene8.ts to such em-
ployees as are covered by any Scheme", the words "benefits to 
the employees of any establishment or class of establishments to 
which this Act applies" have been substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words "employee covered by 
the Scheme", the words "employee, of any establishment or class 
of establishments to which this Act applies," have been substi-
tuted. 
(ii) Clause 31 has been inserted to make sections 14AA, 14AC and 
17B also applicable to the Insurance Scheme. 
(iii) A new clause 30 has been inserted to amend section 14 of the 
Employees' Provident Funds and Family Pension Fund Act, 1952, to 
provide for a minimum sentence of imprisonment to employers who 
contravene the provisions of section 6C or the provisions of clause 
(a) of sub-section (3A) of section 17 in so far as it relates :to inspec-
tion charges. 
(iv) New clauses 32 and 33 in the Bill seek to amend sections HB 
and 14C(1) of the Employees' Provident Funds and Family Pension 
Fund Act, 1952 to make them applicable to Insurance Fund and 
Insurance Scheme also. 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
furPler to amend the Coal Mines ProVident Fund, Family Pension and 
. BOnus SChemes Act, 1948, the' Employees' Provident Funds and FamUy 
Pension Fund Act, 1952, the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 and the Income-tax 
'Act, 1961. 
(Shri K, V. Raghunatha Reddy, 
MiWister of Labour.) 