BID No. '3 of I'~ 
THE SEA CUSTOMS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCBD IN LOlt SABHA) 

aiD No. 83 of 19" 
TIlE SEA CUSTOMS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
B~ 
further to amend the Sea CtI.8toms Act, 1878. 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called -the Sea Customs (Amendment) Act, Shon tide. 
1956. 
S 2. In section 3 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 (hereinafter referred ~ 
to as the principal Act), after clause (g), the following clause shall n 3. 
be inserted, namely:-
"(gg) 'Indian customs waters' means the waters extending 
into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles measured 
10 from the appropriate base line on the coast of India;". 
IS 
3. After section 52 of the principal Act, the following section shalllnaertion of 
be inserted, namely:- viA. Chapter 
"CHAPTER VIA 
PROHIBITION OF ENTRY OF VESSELS CONSTRUCTED, ETC., FOR 
CONCEALING GOODS 
52A. No vessel constructed, adapted, altered or fitted for the Prohibition 
purpose of concealing goods shall enter, or be within, the limits ~!~~:n-
of any port in India, or the Indian customs waters. Itructed, etc., for ~ncea1-
iD.goods. 

2 
" In the Schedule to Section 167 of the principal Aet,-
(4) after item 3, the following item aha1l be inserted 
~ly:-
"]A. If aDY part of the carro of I Yellel Geael'll 
il throwD over board Or i. ltaved or 
destroyed 10 II to prevent ita examinl-
tion or llwful seizure by illY officer 
of CUltoma or other perlon dulY emp-
loyed for the prevention of WIlII-
liDl- . 
ea) while the vellel il within the 
IndilJl CUltoma waterI, or 
(6) where the veuel hiving been 
properly lummoned while within 
IUch waten, to brin, to by 
Iny lhip in the terTice of the 
Central GoYerDtnent, faiIa to 
do 10 IJId chile ilgiven, It aDy 
time durin, the chile. 
Such.eaael IhIll be 
liable to coDfllcatioa , 
IlId the DIIIter of web 
vellel IhIlI be liable to 
I penal" not exc:cedinl 
Qne thoullnd rupee.."; 
10 
IS 
(b) for item 4, the following item Iha1l be aut.tituted, ~ 
JWnely:-
"4. If Iny vellel which h'II been within II Ind 
the limitl olany port in India or within General. 
the Indiln cultoma waten, with cargo 
on boezd, be Ifterwardl found elte- . 
where in lueb Wlten or in Iny port, 
bay, river, creek or Irm of the lei in 
India, 
(i) u,ht or In baDlit. or 
Ci,') with Iny part of lueh carao mil-
ling, 
IJId the mllter of the ve.lel is unable 
to live due IICCOU1Jt of how the 
veuel came to be light or in bal-
_. or or the millin, cargo. 
Such vel.el lhall be 
liable to confiacltion 
Ind the malter of weh 
venel IhlU be Ulble ... 
to I penllty not ex-'" 
ceeding ono thou-
lind rupee.". 
30 
35 
(c) after item 12, the following item .hall be inserted, 
lWDe1y:-
"I2.A If I vealel constructed. .dapted, al- ,2.\. 
tered or fitted for the purpose of COD-
ceaHn' goods, enters or i. wtthin the 
Uraftl of In)' port in Inciil, or within 
the InctJan CUItODll waterl. 
Such vettel IblU be liable 
to confiacation and 
tbe mllter of sucb 
vet'lel lhall be liable to 40 
• penalty not exceeding . 
one tbOUInd rupee I" ; 

3 
(d) after item 7813, the following item shall be fDIerte4, 
namely:-
"76C. If, uve for good and lumcient au Ie, 171 Such vellel Ihan be 
It any velael having been properly lum-
.;1 moned to brin, to, in the manner 
provided in 'ection 171, fail' ,0 to 
do. 
liable to confilCltj.,n 
and the malter or IUdI 
velsel Ihan be Hable 
to a penalty Q~ 
nceedfn, one thou-
aand rupeea". 
5. In section 169 and in sub-section (1) of section 170A of the AmendDMat 
principal Act, after the words "any port in India", the words "or:~ se:l.l' 
10 within the Indian Customs waters" shall be inserted. 170 A. 
S. For section 171 of the principal Act, the following leetion aball ofSubltitDtien new sec-be substituted, namely:- tion for 1eC-
tion 171. 
"171. (1) Any duly empowered officer of customs or other Poweraof 
IS 
person duly employed for the prevention of smuggling may, ~~ 
for the purpose of ascertaining whether any breach of this Act ~n~nd 
or any other law relating to customs has been. is being or is ::b!:.r.. 
likely to be, committed,- • 
(a) stop and board any velsel in India or within the 
Indian customs waters and examine and search such veue! 
and every part thereof and every trunk, package or cargo 
on board and may inspect and examine the manifest and 
other documents and papers; 
(b) stop and search any cart or other means of convey-
ance at any place in India. 
25 (2) Where in exercise of the powers conferred by clause 
(a) of sub-section (1), it becomes necessary to stop an,-
vessel, it shall be lawful for any ship in the service of the • Central Government while flying her proper ensign, to summon 
such vessel, under the direction of any such officer or person as 
30 is referred to in that sub-section, by means of an international 
signal code or other recognised means, and thereupon such 
vessel shall forthwith bring to, and if it fails to do so, chase may 
. be given to the vessel by any such ship as aforesaid, and if 
after a gun is fired, the vessel still fails to bring to, the vessel 
35 may be fired upon by such ship.". 
7. In section 173 and in section 176 of the principal Act, for the :r=n~t 
words "either upon land or water", the words "in India either upon 173sc:!t°~ 
land or water, or within the Indian customs waters" shall be substi-
tuted. 

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
International law and practice recognize the right of a maritime 
State to exercise, on the high seas adjacent to its territorial waters, 
and within twelve miles from its coast, the control necessary to pre-
vent and punish the infringement of its Customs regulations. The 
existing Customs laws of India do not provide for any such control. 
The Bill seeks to remedy this defect, and to confer upon the 
Customs authorities certain powers necessary to exercise this control 
over vessels within a distance of twelve miles from the Indian coast 
line. 
NEW DELHI, 
The 30th Not)ember, 1956. , 
.. .. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 

, 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE SEA CUSTOMS ACT, 1878 (8 OF 1878) • 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER XVI 
OFFENCES, AND PENALTIES 
167. The offences mentioned in the first col~ of ~e following r::r=~ 
schedule shall be punishable to the extent mentloned m the third 
column of the same with reference to such offences l'espectively:-
Offencet 
• .. 
Section of 
tbis Act 
to which 
oftences 
has 
reference. 
• 
II 4-If any veasel which bas been within the 
limits of any port in India with cargo 
on board, be afterwards found in any 
port, bay, river, creek or arm of the 
aea in India, light OIl' in baUalt, and 
if the malter be unable to give a due 
account of the customs-port where 
such vellel lawfully discharged her 
cargo. 
• • • 
. CHAPTER XVII 
Penaltiea 
• • 
Such velie! 'han be 
liable to. conti.cation. 
• • 
PROCEDURE RELATING TO OFFENCES, ,ApPEALS, ETC. 
II.. Any officer of Customs duly employed in the prevention of Power to 
smuggling may search any person on board of any vessel in any port ~:ble 
in India or any person who has landed from any vessel: .uapiclon. 
Provided that such officer has reason to believe that such 
person has dutiable or prohibited goods secreted about his 
person .. 
• • • • • • 
170A. (1) Where any officer of Customs duly employed in the Power to 
prevention of smuggling "has reason to believe that any person on ;reen b!cu 
board of any vessel in any port in India or any person who has oi~ ea 
landed from any vessel has any dutiable, or prohibited goods secreted for d~inl 
inside his body, such officer of Customs may detain such person and ~:d.. 
produce him without unnecessary delay before the nearest Magis-
trate. 
• • • • • • 

Power to 
Itop vessel., 
carts, etc., 
and learch 
(or goods on 
reasonable 
supicion. 
Penons 
realonabl,. 
'suspected 
may be 
arrelted. 
Seizure o( 
thinp liable 
to confisca-
tion. 
6 
171. Any duly empowered officer of Cunoms or other person 
duly em.ployed for the prevention of smuggling, may stop and 
search for smuggled goods any vessel, cart or other means of con-
veyance; pro~ded that he has reason to believe that smuggled 
goods are contained therein . 
• • • • • 
173. Any person against whom a reaSonable suspicion exists that 
he has been guilty of an offence under this Act may be arrested in 
a11y place, either upon land or water, by any officer of Customs or 
other person duly employed for the prevention of smuggling . 
• • • • • 
178. Any thing liable to confiscation under this Act may be 
seized in any place, either upon land or water, by any officer of 
Customs or other person duly employed for the prevention of 
smuggling. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
funher to amend the Sea Customs Act, 1878. 
(Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, 
Minister of Finance. 