As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA * |

' etme

Bill No. 83 of 1999,

OF HUMAN RIGHTS (AMENDMENT) BILL,
1999

By
Suri Ramesh CHENNITHALA, MP.
5
BILL
to amend the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993.
Brit enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1, (7) This Act may be called the protection of Human Rights (Amendment) Act,

(2) It shall come into force at once.

2. In section 2 of the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993 (hereinafter referred to
the principal Act), in sub-section (1), clause (a) shall be omitted.

3. Section 19 of the principal Act shall be omitted.

4. For section 30 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
ly:— है

“30, For the purpose of providing speedy trial of offences arising out of
violation of human rights, the State Government shall, with the concurrence of
the Chief Justice of the High Court, by notification, set up for each district a
special court to be a Human Rights Court to try the said offences,”.

kK

Short title and
commence-
ment,

Amendment of
section 2.

Omission of
section 19.
Substitution of
new section for
section 30,
Human Rights
Courts.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Bae tion of Human Rights Act, 1993, is a landmark legislation in | field of
fhuman rights. The Act, no doubt, meets the demand of the present times and takes care of
all kinds of violations of human rights. However, there are (wo serious shortcomings in
this Act which may render it less effective than what it was intended to be. The first
shortcoming is the special procedure to be followed by the Commission in dealing with
complaints of human rights violations by members of the armed forces under section 19
of the Act. The Commission, as such, has no authority to investigate or try the offences —
committed by the members of the armed forces. Since the members of the armed forces _

are likely to become target of malicious attack by vested interests and since the special
procedure prescribed for members of armed forces is, in essence, against the spirit of this
legislation. It would be proper that armed forces are also brought under the jurisdiction of |
the Commission and the special procedure with respect to armed forces be dispensed |

with.
॥ the discretionary provision of setting up of

‘The second shortcoming is that of
cial courts for trying the offences under this law. Since these offences are being treated

a special footing, the instrumentality of ordinary courts will be ineffective and time-con-
suming and hence would defeat the object of the law. Therefore, it has been proposed that
it should be made obligatory on the part of the State Governments to set up special court

for each district for speedy trial of offences arising out of violations of human rights. 1

‘The Bill seeks to achieve these objects.

New DELHG RAMESH CHE!
November 1, 1999


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

se 4 of the Bill provides that every State Government shall, with the concur-
‘the Chief Justice of the High Court, by notification, set up special courts in each
speedy trial of offences arising out of violation of human rights. The setting up
Courts in Union territories will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated
As far as States are concerned, the expenditure involved for setting up of
ourts shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the respective States.
¢ Central Government may have to assist the State Governments in setting up

ial Courts.

Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure owt of the Consolidated
Tndia, It is likely to inyolve a recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty five
annum. पे

is also likely to involve a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten lakh
‘Consolidated Fund of India.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
40 amend the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993.

(Shri Ramesh Chennithala, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1718LS—18.17.1999.