THE SUGARCANE CONTROL 
(ADDITIONAL POWERS) 
BILL, I96~ 
(As INftODUCBD IN Lox SABBA 
OM 27111 AUGUST, 1962) 
• 
,... AritJAMENl L.llSftAft 1 
_ ••• -. .......... 110 .............. ... 
O"t.e •••• ;: 1. J LJ.2-. 

10 of 1955. 
8U1 No. 83 of 1962. 
THE SUGARCANE CONTROL (ADDITIONAL POWERS) 
BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoIC SABBA) 
A 
BILL 
to empower the Central Government to amend the Sugarcane (COft.t. 
rol) Order, 1955 with "retrospective effect in respect of certain 
matter.. " 
BE itenacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. Thia Act may be called the Sugarcane Control (Additional Short title. 
Powers) Act, 1962. 
S I. Notwithstanding that no provision has been made in section 3 pow~: 
of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, for making an order under s~:'rcan: 
!hat ~ection with retrospective effect, t?e Central Governmen~ may, ~~~lth 
if satisfied that public interest so reqwres, by order notified m the retrospective 
Oftlcial Gazette, amend either prospectively or retrospectively the ~!~Dof 
10 Sugarcane (Control) Order in respect of any matter for which provi- certain 
sion has been made in clause 3A and the Schedule of that Order, and matten. 
any such amendment may contain such supplemental, incidental and 
consequential provisions as the Central Government may deem neces-
sary: 
IS Provided that no such order shall be made so as to have retros-
pective effect from a date earlier than the 1st day of November, 
1958. 
Explanation.-In this section 'Sugarcane (Control) Order' means 
the Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1955 made under section 3 of the 
10 of 1955. 20 Essential Commodities Act, 1955 by notification of the Government 
of Indila in the Ministry of Food and Agriculture, S.R.O. No. 1863 
dated the 27th August, 1955 and as amended from time to time. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under clause 3A of the Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1955 made 
l.Ulder the Essential. Commodities Act, 1955, producers of sugar are 
required to pay to growers of sugarcane a price in addition to the 
minimam price of sugarcane fixed under that Order. This additional 
payment has to be made in accordance with the formula set out in 
the Schedule to ,the Order. Neither the manufacturers of sugar nor 
the sugarcane growers were satisfied with the formula and repre-
sentations were received for a re-examination of that formula. The 
Government accordingly referred the matter to the Tariff Commission 
and requested them to examine the formula in all its aspects. In 
its Report submitted to the Government, the Commission suggested 
a new formula for detennining the additional price. This new 
formula has been examined and it is considered that it would be 
more appropriate to apply the existing formula after making suitable 
amendments thereto which are necessitated as a result of the accept-
ance by the Government of the suggestions of the Commission for 
inclusion of allowances for rehabilitation and export losses, for 
adjustment of costs and for sharing of incentives given for increasing 
the production of sugar. It is intended to make this revised formula 
effective from the 1st November, 1958 and for this purpose to suitably 
amend clause 3A and the Schedule of the Sugarcane (Control) Order 
with retrospective effect. Section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act 
l.Ulder which the said Order was made does not enable the Govern-
ment to make such orders with retrospective effect. 
2. In order to achieve this object, it is proposed in the Bill to 
empower the Central Govermnent to amend the Sugarcane (Control) 
Order in certain respects with retrospective effect. 
NEW DELHI; S. K. PATn.. 
The 21st August, 1962. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Under section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, the Central 
Government can issue orders in respect of matters specified in that 
section. That section, however, does not enable the Central Govern-
ment to make orders with retrospective effect. The Bill proposes to 
confer power on the Central Government to amend the Sugarcane 
(Control) Order with retros~ve effect in respect of certain matters. 
The matters in respect of which this power will be exercised are 
matters of detail. Every order made under the proposed enactment 
shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament. 
The delegation is, therefore, of a normal character. 
3 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to empower the Central Government to amend the Sugarcane 
(Control) Order, 1955 with retrospective effect in respect of 
certain matters. 
(Shri S. K. Patil, Minister of Food and Agriculture.) 