THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABH.\) 

Bitt No. 83 of 1958 
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
furth~T to t!m~nd the Code of Criminal ProceduTe, 1898. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure Short title. 
(Amendment) Act, 1958. 
5 .2. Sectioo 93A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 Omis.~ion of 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), shall be omitted. Scction 93 A• 
3. In Part III of the principal Act, after Chapter VII, the follow- Inscrtion of 
ing Chapter shall be inserted, namely: - viiA~hap~er 
"CHAPTER VIlA 
10 UP.lClAL RUJoES REGARDING PROCESSES IN CERTAIN CASES 
1OSA. (1) Where a court in the territories to which this Special rulca 
Code extends (hereinafter in this section referred to as the rcgarding 
PI'QCC8lCI In 
said territories) desires that- ccrtain Cit: •. 
(a) a summons to an accused person, or 
15 (b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person, or 
(c) a iummons to any person requiring him to attend 
and produce a document or other thing, or to produce it, or 
(d) a search warrant, 
issued by it shall be served or executed at any place within the 
20 local limits of the jurisdiction of a court in the State of Jammu 

2 
and Kashmir or a court established or continued by the autho-
rity of the Central Government in any area outside the said 
territories, it may send such summons or warrant in duplicate 
by post or otherwise, to the presiding officer of that court to be 
served or executed; and where any summons referred to in 5 
clause (a) or clause (c) has been so served, the provisions of 
section 74 shall apply in relation to such summons as if the 
presiding officer of the court to whom it is sent were a magis-
trate in the said territories . 
. . (2) Where a court in the said territories has received for ·10 
service or execution-
(a) a summons to an accused person, or 
(b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person, or 
(c) a summons to any person requiring him to attend 
and produce a document or other thing, or to produce it, or IS 
(d) a search warrant, 
issued by a court in the State of Jammu and Kashmir or a court 
established or continued by the authority of the Central Gov-
ernment in any area outside the said territories, it shall cause 
the same to be served or executed as if it were a summons or 20 
warrant received by it from another court in the said territorie3 
for service or execution within the local limits of its jurisdic-
." tion; .and where-
(i) a warrant of arrest has been executed, the person 
arrested shall, so far as possible, be dealt with in accordance 25 
with the procedure prescribed by sections 85 and 86; 
(ii) a search warrant has been executed, the things 
found in the search shall, so far as possible, be dealt with 
. in accordance with the procedure prescribed by section 99.". 
~·.epeal and 4. (1) The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 30 
51Vlna· ] 958. is hereby r~peuled. ~ of 19SP • 
.. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
~aken under the s!lid Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done 
or taken under this Act, as if thjs Act had commenced on the 5th 
dRY of June, 1958· . 35 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Section 93A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, provides 
for summonses to, and warrants for the arrest of, accused· persons 
issued by courts in Jammu and Kashmir being served or executed 
by courts in the rest of India. As there was no similar provision in 
regard to the execution or service in the rest of India of search 
warrants, or summonses to produce a document or thing, issued by 
courts in Jammu and Kashmir, an Ordinance was promulgated on 
the 5th of June, 1958, to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure to 
provide for the execution or service of such warrants and 
summonses. The present Bill seeks to replace the Ordinance, and 
opportunity is taken to combine the provisions of section 93A and the 
provisions contained in the Ordinance and insert them as a new 
Chapter in the Code. 
G. B. PANT. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 8th August, 1958. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRA.CTS nOM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1898 
, (ACT 5 OF 1898) 
• • • 
E.~l rules Tega,.di~ P70CUHS in ceTtGin casu 
Spechl. rules B3A. (1) In this section, the expression "internal Court" means 
~~~~:~~in auy Court in the territories to which this Code extends, and the ex-
cartain CJICS. pression '~extemal Court" means any Court established or continued 
by the. authority of the Central Government in exercise of its foreign 
jurisdiction or any Court in the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
(2) Where an interool Court desires that a summons to, or a 
Wftrrant for the arrest ~f, an accused person issued ·by it shall be 
eaLleCUted at _y plaee within the Jeoal limits of the jurisdiction of 
tm . exbernal Court, it may send &tACh summons or warrant, in dupli-
cate, by post or otherwise, to the presiding officer of to.1t Court to 
be served or executed; and where any such summons has been so 
served, the provisions of section 74 shall apply in relation to such 
summons as if the presiding officer of the external Court to whom 
it is sent were a magistrate in the territories to which this Code ex-
tends. 
(3) Where an internal Court has received for service or execution 
a summons to, or a wurrant for the arrest of, an accused person 
issued by an external Court, it shall cause the same to be served or 
executed as if it were a summons or warrant received by it from 
another internal Court for service or execution within the local 
limits of its jurisdiction; and where any such warront of arrest has 
been so executed, the person arrested shall, so far as possible, be 
dealt with in accordance with the procedure prescri~d by sections 
&5 and 86. 
• • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedur.!, 1898, 
(Shri Gwind Ballabh Pant, 
Mim'ster of Home Affairs,) 