LJL SABRA 
COR:~I GENDA 
to 
THE UNION TERRI1DRIES (1.1E OF HI~ln AND OTHER 
LANGUAGES) BILL, 1978 
L-To betas introduced in Ink Sabha 7 
1. Page 1, line 16,-
t:Q.!: "De VTlag ar i " read "De val1agari" 
2. Page 2, line 2,-
for nOrdinance" read "Ordinances" 
3. Page 2, in the marginal heading to clause 4,-
for "judgements II ~ "judgments" 
NEW DELHI, 
MaY 8. 01978 
Vai sakha. 18 ;1900-----rsak a) 

As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
Bill No. 83 of 19'18 
THE UNION TERRITORIES (USE OF HINDI AND OTHER 
LANGUAGES) BILL, 1978 
A 
BILL 
to proVlide fOT the authorised Hindi translation of Acts passed by the 
Legislative Assemblie, of Union territories and of Ordin:ances pro-
mulgateci b1J the Administrator. of Union territories and for the 
optional useCYj Hindi or t~ offiCial languages at Union territories 
for certain purpose. in the High COUTU having their principa.l seats 
in the Union territories. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in tne Twenty-ninth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Union Territories (Use of Hindi 
and Other Languages) Act, 1978. 
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
10 
IS 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates 
may be appointed for different Union territories and for different provi-
sions of this Act. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Administratoor" means the Administrator of a Union terri-
tory appointed by the President under article 239 of the Constitu-
tion; 
(b) "appointed day", in relation to a Union territory and any 
provision of this Act, means the day on which that provision comes 
into force in that Union territory; 
(c) "Hindi" means Hindi in Devnagari script; 
(d) "Union territory" means a Union territory having a Legis-
lative Assembly and includes the Union territory of Delhi. 
Short title 
and 
com-
mence-
ment. 
Defini-
tions. 

Autho:ised 
Hindi 
translation 
of Acts 
passed by 
the Legis-
lative As-
semblies 
of Union 
territories 
and Ordi-
nances 
prom 11:2a-
ted by the 
Adminis-
trators in 
certain 
cases. 
Optional 
use of 
Hindi or 
other 
official 
language 
in judge-
ments. etc. 
8 
3. Where the Acts passed by the Legislative Assembly of a Union 
territory or the Ordinance promulgated by the Administrator of a Union 
territory are in a language other than Hindi, a translation of the same 
in Hindi may be published on or after the appointed day under the autho-
rity of the Administrator of the Union territory in the Ofllclal Gazette of S 
that Union territory and in such a case, the translation in Hindi of any 
such Act or Ordinance shall be deemed to be the authoritative text 
thereof in the Hindi language. 
4. (1) As from the appointed day or any day thereafter, the President 
may authorise the use of Hindi or the official language of the Union 10 
territory in proceedings in the Rieh Court for that Union territory and 
having its principal seat in that Union territory. 
(2) As from the appointed day or any day thereafter, the President 
may authorise the use of Hindi or the official language of the Union terri-
tory. in addition to the English language, for the purposes of any judg- 15 
ment, decree or order pas.C!ed or made by the High Court for that Union 
territory and having its prin-cipal seat in that Union territory and where 
any judgment, decree or order is passed or made iD any such language 
(other than the Engli!lh 'anguage), it shall be aceompanled by a transla-
tion of the same in the English language issued under the authority of 20 
the High Court. 
Explanation.-In this section, the expression "Hleh Court" Includes 
the Court of the Judicial Commissioner for the Union territory of Goa, 
Daman and Diu. 

STATEMENT OF OBJli:CTS AND REASONS 
Under article 348 (2) of the Constitution, read with section 7 of the 
Official Languages Act, 1963, the Governor of a State may, with the pre-
vious consent of the President, authorise the USe of Hindi or the cfftcial 
language of the State, in addition to the English language, for the pur-
pose of any proceedings, judgments, etc., of the High Court of that State. 
Similarly, section 6 of the Official Languages Act, 1963 provides that 
where the Legislature of a State has prescribed any language, other than 
Hindi, for use in Acts passed by the Legislature of the State 0:-' in Ordi-
nances promulgated by the Governor of the State, a translation of the 
same in Hindi, in addition to a translation thereof in the English language, 
as required by clause (3) of article 348 of the Constitution, may be pubUsh-
ed under the authority of the Governor of the State in the Official Gazette 
of that State and in such a case, the translation in Hindi of any such Act 
or Ordinance shall be deemed to be the authoritative text thereof in the 
Hindi language. These provisions are inapplicable to the Union terri-
tories as reference to the Governor in these provisions will not include 
the Administrator of a Union territory. It IS, therefore, proposed to enact 
separate legislation, on the lines of sections 6 and 7 of the Official Lan-
guages Act, 1963, to provide for the authorised Hindi translation of Acts 
passed by the Legislative Assemblies of Union territories and Ordinances 
promUlgated by the Administrators of Union territories and for the 
optional use of Hindi or the official language of a Union territory for cer-
tain purposes in the High Court having its principal seat in the Union 
territory. 
The Bill seeks to give effect to the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; DHANIK LAL MANDAL. 
The 24th Apn1. 1978. 
3 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for publication in the Official 
Gazette of a translation in Hindi of the Acts passed by the Legislative 
Assembly Of a Union territory or the Ordinances promulgated by the 
Administrator of a Union territory, in a language other than Hindi. 
Similarly clause 4 of the Bill provides for the use of Hindi or the Oftlcial 
Language of the Union territary in proceedings and for purposes of any 
judgment, decree or order passed or made by the High Court of a Union 
territory. This is likely to involve some recurrini expenditure but it is 
not possible at present to indicate the amount of such expenditure. 
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved. 

I , • ~ ...... • 'T"- .. 
LOK SABHA 
• r 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the authorised Hindi translation of Acts passed by the 
Legislative Assemblies of Union territories and of Ordinances pro-
mulgated by the Administrators of Union territories and fOIl" the 
option~ll use of Hindi. or the official languages of Union territories 
for cenain purposes in the High Courts baving their principal seats 
in the Union territories. 
(Shri Dhanik LaI Maftd4I, 
Minister of State in the 
;Vinis~ of Home Affclir,.) 
J 