1
THE BACKWARD AREAS DEVELOPMENT BOARD BILL, 2011
By
SHRI JAGDAMBIKA PAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an autonomous Board for the overall development of
economically backward areas of the country.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Backward Areas Development Board  Act, 2011.
2. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare the
areas of the country which in the opinion of the Central Government are economically
backward.
(2) Till such time the Central Government by notification declares, the following areas
shall be treated as backward areas:—
(i) Vidarbha region of the State of Maharashtra;
(ii) Telangana region of the State of Andhra Pradesh;
(iii) Southern districts of the State of Tamil Nadu;
(iv) Northern areas of the State of Bihar;
Short title.
Bill No. 83 of  2011
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Identification
of Backward
areas.
5
10

2
(v) Tribal areas of the States of Orissa, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh;
(vi) Hilly regions of the State of Uttar Pradesh;
(vii) State of Himachal Pradesh;
(viii) Hilly areas of the State of Uttarakhand;
(ix) North-eastern States; and
(x) Eastern part of the State of Uttar Pradesh.
3. (1) There shall be established by the Central Government, by notification in the
Official Gazette, a Board to be called the Backward Areas Development Board.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The head office of the Board shall be at New Delhi and Board may, with the
previous approval of the Central Government, establish offices at other places in the country.
4. The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) a Chairman, who shall be the Vice-Chairman of the Planning Commission,
ex-officio;
(b) a Vice-Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government;
(c) six Members of Parliament of whom four shall be from Lok Sabha and two
from Rajya Sabha to be elected by the Members of the respective Houses, who belong
to the backward areas, from amongst themselves;
(d) nine members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent
respectively:—
(i) the Planning Commission (other than the Chairman of the Board);
(ii) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Agriculture;
(iii) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Industrial
Development;
(iv) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Finance;
(v) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Railways;
(vi) the Ministry of Central Government dealing with Communications and
Information Technology;
(vii) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Education;
(viii) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Health and
Family Welfare; and
(ix) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Irrigation.
(e) not more than five members to be appointed by the Central Government, by
rotation in alphabetical order, to represent the Government of the States having the
backward areas; and
( f ) four members to be appointed by the Central Government, who, in the
opinion of that Government, are experts in various fields of economic development.
5. (1) It shall be the duty of the Board to promote, by such measures as it thinks fit, the
all-round development, under the control of the Central Government, of the backward areas
of the country.
Backward
Areas
Development
Board.
Composition
of Board.
Development
of Backward
Areas.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the Board
shall take measures for the development, particularly, of railways, roads, posts and telegraphs
and other means of communications, agriculture and irrigation, industries, banking, drinking
water and water power, forests, live-stock, health and family welfare, education, vocational
training and tourism in the backward areas of the country.
(3) The Central Government shall set up such industries in the backward areas as it
may determine.
6. The Central Government shall provide from time to time, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law, adequate funds for—
(a) development works undertaken by the Board; and
(b) administrative expenses of the Board.
7. The Board shall have a fund to be called the Development Fund to which shall be
credited all receipts from the Central Government for the purposes of development of the
backward areas and all payments by the Board towards development expenditure shall be
made therefrom.
8. The Board shall also have a fund to be called the Administration Fund to which shall
be credited all receipts from the Central Government for the purposes of administration of the
Board and all administrative expenses shall be met therefrom.
9. The Vice-Chairman of the Board shall be entitled to such salary and allowances as
may be prescribed by the Central Government.
10. The Central Government shall appoint a Secretary to the Board to exercise such
powers and perform such duties as may be delegated to him by the Chairman and the
Vice-Chairman.
11. The Board may appoint such officers and employees as may be necessary for the
efficient performance of its functions.
12. (1) The Board shall submit every year a report, in such form as may be prescribed,
of its development activities in the backward areas to the Prime Minister.
(2) The Prime Minister shall cause the report to be laid before each House of Parliament
as soon as may be after receipt of the report.
13. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of thirty days as aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule
or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be made without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under the rule.
Appropriation
of fund.
Development
fund.
Administration
fund.
Salary of
Vice-
Chairman.
Secretary to
the Board.
Appointment
of officers
and staff.
Annual
Report.
5
10
15
20
Powers to
make rules.
25
30
35

4
SERVER-3\F\BILL2011\LS\2363LS
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The need for reducing and removing economic disparties between different regions of
the country was recognised as soon as the nation launched the programme of planned
economic development. Accelerated development of backward areas, with a view to reducing
regional disparities, was one of the important national objectives. But, even after sixty-four
years of independence, the economic disparities among regions have not only persisted but
have also increased. Required attention has not been paid to develop the backward areas.
For the development of the backward areas of the country and to bring them up in a
short time to the level of the rest of the country, the strategy should be to evolve a fully
integrated development programme for identified backward areas to ensure their all round
progress. For drought-prone areas which have a predominance of small and marginal farmers,
area based programmes which envisage a flow of the necessary inputs in the form of a
package to enable accelerated economic development should be implemented. In addition, a
programme of giving incentives to enable accelerated industrialization of identified backward
areas should be implemented. It should be ensured that infrastructural facilities like power,
water supply and transport are steadily developed and made available to areas which are at
present lagging behind industrially or where there is a greater need for providing opportunities
for employment. In order to achieve these objectives, an autonomous body, though under
the overall control of the Central Government, should be established which would be
responsible for planning and implementation of area based package programmes in
coordination with the Planning Commission and the State Governments.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; JAGDAMBIKA PAL
September 5, 2011.
————
PRESIDENT’S  RECOMMENDATION  UNDER  ARTICLE  117(3)  OF
THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  INDIA
[Copy of D.O. No. H-11016/25/2011-MLP dated 20 October, 2011 from Dr. Ashwani
Kumar, Minister of State in the Ministry of Planning and Minister of State in the Ministry of
Science and Technology and Minister of State in the Ministry of Earth Sciences to the
Secretary-General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Backward Areas
Development Board Bill, 2011 by Shri Jagdambika Pal, Member of Parliament, has recommended
the consideration of the Bill by Lok Sabha under article 117(3) of the Constitution.

5
SERVER-3\F\BILL2011\LS\2363LS
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Backward Areas Development
Board. Clause 4 provides for appointment of Vice-Chairman and four members who are
experts in various fields of economic development, among others. Clause 9 provides for
payment of salary to Vice-Chairman. Clauses 10 and 11 provides for appointment of a Secretary
to the Board and other necessary staff for performance of the functions of the Board. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifteen
lakh from the Consolidated Fund of India on account of administrative expenses. So far as
the development expenditure (Clause 6) is concerned, that will form part of the annual
expenditure on development plans of the country as a whole, and the development funds
shall be made available to the Board after due appropriation by Parliament. An estimate of
such expenditure is not possible at this stage. However, a recurring expenditure of about
rupees ten thousand crore is likely to be incurred.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be incurred.

6
SERVER-3\F\BILL2011\LS\2363LS
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will provide for matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an autonomous Board for the overall development of
economically backward areas of the country.
————
(Shri Jagdambika Pal, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2363LS(S3)—14-11-2011.