Short title.
THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDER
(AMENDMENT)  BILL, 2007
By
DR. R. SENTHIL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Amendment)
Act, 2007.
2.   In  the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, in Part XIV,—
Tamil Nadu, for entry 18 , the following entry shall be substituted, namely :—
"18. Kuruman, Kurumbas, Kurumans, Kurumba, Kuruba and Kurumba
Gounder.".
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 83 of  2007
Amendment
of the
Schedule.
C.O. 22
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Kuruman, Kurumbas, Kurumans, Kurumba, Kuruba and Kurumba Gounder are all
synonyms of one tribe. The people belonging to these tribes are living  in various parts of
the State of  Tamil Nadu.  They have same culture. But the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes)
Order, 1950 has mentioned only Kurumans in the list of  Scheduled Tribes. The other names
are not mentioned in the Constitution  (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950. Due to difference of
one or two letters in the names of Kuruman, Kurumbas, Kurumba, Kuruba and Kurumba
Gounder tribes, the people of this tribe are not considered as Scheduled Tribes. Hence the
people belonging to these communities are not getting the  benefits available to the Scheduled
Tribes.
The State Government of Tamil Nadu has recognised the demand of persons belonging
to these tribes and forwarded their requests to the Union Government for necessary action
urgently.
However, there has been undue delay in including the names of these tribes in the list
of Scheduled Tribes, which has caused lots of hardship to them. A large number of youth
belonging to these communities are not able to get benefits of reservation in the matters of
admission in professional colleges and jobs under the State as the names of aforesaid  tribes
are not mentioned in the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950. This position has to be
rectified.
The present Bill seeks to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 in
order to include all the synonyms of Kurumans tribe in the list of Scheduled Tribes of the
State of  Tamil Nadu.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; R. SENTHIL
November 8, 2007.
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill seeks to include Kuruman, Kurumbas, Kurumba, Kuruba and Kurumba Gounder
community in the list of Scheduled Tribes in respect of the State of Tamil Nadu by way of
amending the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950. The Bill, if enacted, would
involve recurring and non-recurring expenditure on account of the benefits to be given
under the schemes and programmes  of the Government meant for social, educational and
economic development of the scheduled tribes. At this stage, it is not possible to mention
the exact amount which may be incurred on this account. However, it is estimated that a sum
of approximately rupees twenty-five crore is likely to be involved  as a recurring expenditure
per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDER, 1950
C.O. 22
********
(PART III—Rules and Orders under the Constitution)
********
PART XIV .—Tamil Nadu
********
18. Kurumans
********
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950.
————
(Dr. R. Senthil, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4483LS(S5)—16-11-2007.