1
THE THALASSEMIA PREVENTION BILL, 2018
By
DR. DHARAMVIRA GANDHI, M.P.
A
BILL
to promote awareness and prevent the incidence of thalassemia in newborn children
with a view to avoid lifelong suffering and hardship and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Thalassemia Prevention Act,  2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 83 of  2018
Short title,
extent, and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means,—
(i) in relation to the Central Government or any establishment wholly or
substantially financed by that Government or a Cantonment Board constituted
under the Cantonments Act, 2006, the Central Government;
(ii) in relation to a State Government or any establishment, wholly or
substantially financed by that Government or any local authority other than a
Cantonment Board, the State Government; and
(iii) in relation to a Union territory with Legislature, means the Administrator
of the Union territory appointed by the President under article 239 of the
Constitution;
(b) "couple" means the legally married Indian man and woman including marriages
solemnized under all personal laws;
(c) "establishment" includes a Government establishment and private
establishment;
(d) "foetus" means a human organism during the period of its development,
beginning on the fifty-seventh day following fertilisation or creation (excluding any
time during which its development has been suspended) and ending at birth;
(e) "Government establishment" means a corporation established by or under a
Central Act or State Act or an authority or a body owned or controlled or aided by the
Government or a local authority or a Government company as defined in section 2 of
the Companies Act, 2013 and includes a Department of the Government;
(f) "gynaecologist" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Pre-
conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection)
Act, 1994;
(g) "medical institution" means any maternity nursing home or hospital offering
maternity treatment and care;
(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(i) "thalassemia" means a disease in which a child or an adult becomes anaemic
because of genetic defect of haemoglobin.
3. It shall be the responsibility  of the appropriate Government to ensure implementation
of the provisions of this Act.
4. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, formulate a
national policy for the prevention of thalassemia in the country.
5. The gynaecologist or the head of the medical institution, who is consulted or
approached by a pregnant woman for maternity treatment and care shall be responsible for
prevention of birth of a child afflicted with thalassemia major.
41 of 2006.
18 of 2013.
57 of 1994.
Appropriate
Government
to implement
the provisions
of this Act.
Formulation
of a national
policy for
prevention of
thalassemia.
Responsibility
of the
gynaecologist
or head of the
medical
institution for
prevention of
birth of child
affected with
thalassemia.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
Issuance of
Ante-natal
Health Cards.
6. The gynaecologist or the head of the medical institution who is consulted or
approached by a pregnant woman for maternity treatment and care, shall ensure that—
(a) every woman who becomes pregnant for the first time shall, as soon as her
pregnancy is confirmed, be tested for thalassemia carrier or trait;
(b) where the pregnant woman is tested positive for thalassemia carrier or
trait, her husband be advised to undergo a similar test, as soon as may be;
(c) where the husband is tested positive for thalassemia carrier or trait, the
couple stands a risk of carrying a thalassemia major foetus be counselled about
thalassemia major and its lifelong implications for the unborn child and be referred
to a Genetics Specialist for a further gene mapping study called Family Gene Study
(FGS), as part of the pre-natal diagnosis;
(d) wherein the foetus is found to be afflicted with thalassemia major in the pre-natal
diagnosis,  the option of medical termination of pregnancy, according to the provisions of
Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 shall be offered to the pregnant woman.
7.  (1) The appropriate Government shall ensure that the gynaecologist or the head of
the medical institution issue to each individual in the couple, an Ante-natal Health Card
wherein the thalassemia carrier or trait information, along with cautionary notes for
guidance in the case of future pregnancies  are clearly stated.
(2) In addition to the issuing of Ante-natal Health Card under sub-section (1), the
gynaecologist or the head of the medical institution shall ensure that where the pregnant
woman has already undergone a test for thalassemia carrier or trait during her earlier
pregnancy and her husband has also been tested positive for thalassemia carrier or trait,
the couple shall be counselled about the risk involved in the foetus likely to be thalassemia
major whether the couple have an Ante-natal Health Card or not:
Provided that in case when no information is available about the couple's carrier or trait
status, they shall be subjected to the procedure described under section 6 (as in the case of
a first pregnancy).
8. The appropriate Government shall initiate, design and set up a strong and effective
system for Genetic Counselling and diagnostic centres across the country and shall take
measures to educate the public, especially women, about thalassemia major and its
implications for the life of the newborn, in order to facilitate informed making and to
encourage thalassemia carrier or trait test at the first pregnancy.
9. The appropriate Government shall be responsible for making available the requisite
pathological facilities in all medical institutions to carry out thalassemia carrier or trait
test, family gene studies, pre-natal diagnosis and medical termination of pregnancy where
sufficient evidence is provided to the effect that the foetus is afflicted with thalassemia
major.
10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by the Parliament by
law on this subject, provide adequate funds to such State Governments which offers to
implement similar schemes in their respective States.
11. (1) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any rules made
thereunder, for which no penalty has been elsewhere provided in this Act, shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto three years or with fine which may
extend upto ten thousand rupees or with both.
(2) An offence punishable under this Act shall be bailable.
(3) Where a gynaecologist or the head of the medical institution contravenes any of
the provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder, he shall be punishable with imprisonment
Accountability
of medical
institutions
and
gynaecologist.
34 of 1971.
Appropriate
Government
to set up
Genetic
Counselling
and diagnostic
centres for
thalassemia.
Appropriate
Government
to make
available
requisite
pathological
facilities.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Offences and
penalties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
Offences by
companies.
Cognizance of
offences.
Miscellaneous.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
for a term which may extend upto three years or with fine which may extend upto fifty
thousand rupees or with both.
(4) In case it is established that a child afflicted with thalassemia major is born as a
result of contravention of provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder, the Court trying
the offence may award a compensatory payment which may extend upto twenty lakh rupees
in favour of the mother of that child to assist in the lifelong treatment of that child, including
a bone marrow transplantation to be made by the person convicted of having contravened
the provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder, or by the appropriate Government as
may be decided and awarded by the Court.
12. Where any offence punishable under this Act or rules made thereunder have been
committed by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed was in
charge of and was responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed guilty of the offence and shall be liable to
be prosecuted against and punished accordingly.
13. ( 1) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence under this Act except on a
complaint made by —
(a) the appropriate Government concerned or any officer authorised on this
matter by the appropriate Government.
(b) a person who is directly or indirectly affected by the offence.
Explanation .—For the purpose of this clause "person" includes a social
organisation.
(2) No Court other than that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of
the First Class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
(3) When a complaint has been made under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 14,
the Court may, on demand by such person, direct the appropriate Government to make
available copies of relevant records in its possession to such person.
14. (1) The gynaecologist or the medical institution who is consulted or approached
by a pregnant woman under this Act shall maintain all records, charts, forms, reports,
consent letters and all other documents required to be maintained under this Act.
(2) Every record maintained under sub-section (1) shall be preserved for a period of
five years or for such period in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Every record maintained under sub-section (1) shall, at all reasonable times, be
made available to the appropriate Government or to any other person authorised by the
appropriate Government in this behalf in such manner as may be prescribed.
15. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central or State
Government or any other officer authorised by the Central or State Government for anything
which is in good faith, done or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act.
16. (1) In such a case where any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of
this Act, the Central Government may by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act, as appear to it to be necessary or
expedient for removing the difficulty.
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after expiry of a period of three
years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament and be ratified.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
17. (1)The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modifications in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rules should not be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under the rule.
(3) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for:
(a) the manner in which the gynaecologist or head of the medical institution
shall keep records of the screening test and other procedures required under the
provisions of section 8;
(b) the form in which consent of the pregnant woman has to be obtained under
section 8;
(c) the facilities to be provided, equipments and other standards to be maintained
by the Central and State Governments for facilitating screening, family gene study,
pre-natal diagnosis and medical termination of pregnancy;
(d) the form in which Ante-natal Health Card showing the thalassemia carrier or
trait status of the women is to be issued under section 7; and
(e) any other matters that may be required to be prescribed.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Thalassemia is one of the commonest inherited genetic disorders in our country. One
in every six hundred and twenty-five pregnancies ends in the birth of a thalassemia major
child. It is a cruel disease and the children afflicted by it have to undergo painful blood tests
and blood transfusions every two or three weeks for the rest of their lives, starting six
months of age. The parents of these children also suffer psychological trauma from watching
their child undergo repeated needle insertions. Furthermore, the disease entails a grave
financial implication for the parents, as blood transfusion, filters and other devices, iron
chelation medicines, etc. which are needed, are very expensive.
Thalassemia is a disorder of the haemoglobin molecule. Beta thalassemia (the
commonest of the haemoglobin disorders that are seen in our country) is caused by a
mutation in the haemoglobin gene of the parents. In our country, four per cent. of the
population carries this mutation and such individuals are called thalassemia trait or carriers
or thalassemia minors. They are asymptomatic and lead normal lives. It is not possible to
identify who is a carrier without a blood test.
When two individuals who are both asymptomatic carriers marry and have a pregnancy
there is a twenty-five per cent. chance that the foetus inherits the mutated thalassemia gene
from both the parents and thus develops thalassemia major soon after birth. The foetus
could however inherit one or both normal genes from the parents and be a carrier or absolutely
normal. The chance of this is seventy-five per cent.
Since four per cent. of the general population are thalassemia carriers, one in every
twenty-five per cent. individuals could be a carrier. In some communities like Sindhis, Punjabis,
Gujaratis, Marwaris, etc. the incidence is even higher. Consanguineous marriages within
their own communities add to the risk. It is reported that about ten to twelve thousand
children with thalassemia major, are born in our country every year.
Thalassemia major is preventable and medical science has the answers, but ignorance
and social taboos have come in the way of effectively preventing the birth of such children.
Therefore, there is a need to bring in statutory regulations to put in place an effective
prevention program.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DHARAM VIRA GANDHI
November  30, 2017.
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for formulation of a national policy for prevention of
thalassemia. Clause 6 provides for accountability of gynaecologist or the head of the medical
institution for testing thalassemia carrier or trait to a pregnant woman. Clause 7 provides for
issuance of Ante-natal Health Cards containing information regarding thalassemia carrier or
trait to a pregnant woman or the couple. Clause 8 provides for setting up of genetic counselling
and diagnostic centres for thalassemia by the appropriate Government. Clause 9 provides for
making available requisite pathological facilities in all medical institutions to carry out
thalassemia carrier or trait test by the appropriate Government. Clause 10 provides that the
Central Government shall provide adequate funds for State Government for implementing
similar schemes in their respective States. Clause 14 provides for maintenance of all records,
charts, forms, reports, consent letters and all other documents of a pregnant woman by the
gynaecologist or the medical institution. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees fifty crore  would be
involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees  ten crore is also likely to be involved.
7

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
8

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to promote awareness and to prevent the incidence of thalassemia in newborn children,
with a view to avoid lifelong suffering and hardship, and  matters connected
or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Dharam Vira Gandhi, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3653LS(S3)—07.03.2018.