 
Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 83 of 2024
THE ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES   
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
By
Sඁඋං V .K. Sඋൾൾ඄ൺඇൽൺඇ, M.P.
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the All India Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 1956.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the All India Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 3 of the All India Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 1956, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:—
“3A. (1) There shall be established an All India Institute of Medical Sciences at 
Palakkad in the State of Kerala which shall be a body corporate, to be known as the 
All India Institute of Medical Science Palakkad.
(2) The provision of this Act shall apply mutatis mutandis to the All India Institute 
of Medical Sciences, Palakkad established under sub-section (1).”.
Short title and 
commencement.
5 Insertion of new 
section 3A.
10
25 of 1956.
Establishment of 
All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences at 
Palakkad  in the State 
of Kerala.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It has been a long pending of the people of Kerala to establish an All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences in Kerala.
The Union Government has so far sanctioned 22 All India Institutes of Medical Sciences 
(AIIMS) under Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY) across the country, but 
sorry to note that not a single such institution has been sanctioned for the State of Kerala and 
it is an injustice or discrimination towards the people of Kerala and against the spirit of our 
Constitution which provides equality to all.
Generally, the people of Kerala are very health conscious, but not now, from time 
immemorial. However, the new diseases one after the other, further accelerated their 
consciousness on health, and therefore, there is always a huge rush in all government-run 
hospitals which are the only source for the poor people.
The two deadly viruses were first detected in the State of Kerala i.e. Nipah outbreak 
in the year 2018 and the Covid-19 in the year 2020 and on both the occasions the 
Union Government had to depute a central team to take control of the situation, and therefore, 
such an institution like AIIMS is a must in the State of Kerala, to tackle such a situation, if 
arises in the future, in addition to providing world-class treatment. Recently cases of Nipah 
and Zika viruses were reported in Kerala.
While I demand to set up an AIIMS in the State of Kerala, I recommend a place for the 
same, which is Palakkad. Palakkad would be an ideal place as such an institution at Palakkad 
will fill the gaps in tertiary healthcare infrastructure in this part of Kerala, since Palakkad 
lacks healthcare infrastructure is not matching with the other places, the people of Palakkad 
district now have to undertake a journey ranging from 60 kms. to 120 kms. to get treatment 
from specialty hospitals located at either Thrissur, Malappuram, Kozhikode or Coimbatore.
Therefore, looking into the gaps in tertiary healthcare infrastructure in the district of 
Palakkad, I urge upon the government to establish an AIIMS at Palakkad in Kerala.
Hence this Bill.
      Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                                                    V . K. SREEKANDAN
 9, 2024.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for establishment of an All India Institute of Medical  
Sciences at Palakakd in the State of Kerala. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve  
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an expenditure of  
about rupees 50 crore would be incurred per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is likely to be involved. 

ANNEXURE
[Eඑඍඋൺർඍඌ Fඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Aඅඅ Iඇൽංൺ Iඇඌඍංඍඎඍൾඌ ඈൿ Mൾൽංർൺඅ Sർංൾඇർൾඌ Aർඍ, 1956]
(25 ඈൿ 1956)
*                                *                                   *                                 *                              *
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established for the purposes of this Act 
an institution to be called the All India Institute of Medical Sciences:
Provided that the Central Government may, on and after the commencement of the All 
India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012, establish by notification in the 
Official Gazette, such other All India Institutes of Medical Sciences at such places as it may 
specify in the said notification in addition to the existing Institute and the corresponding 
Institutes.
(2) Every Institute shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual 
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
*                                *                                   *                                 *                              *
Establishment and 
incorporation of the 
Institute.

LOK SABHA
_______
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the All India Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 1956.
_______
(Shri V .K. Sreekandan, M.P .)