-3 DEC 2004
4 AS INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA
Bill No. 83 of 2004

THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORY OF
LAKSHADWEEP BILL, 2004

By
Suri Basupes Acuaria, M.P.
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
PARTI

PRELIMINARY

Causes
1, Short title and Commencement.
2. Definitions.

PART II
LeGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
. Legislative Assembly and its composition.
|. Qualifications for membership of Legislative Assembly.
. Duration of Legislative Assembly.
. Session of Legislative Assembly, prorogation and dissolution.
7. Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Legislative Assembly.

8. Speaker or Deputy Speaker not to preside while a resolution for his removal from office
is under consideration.

9. Right of Lieutenant Governor to address and send message to Legislative Assembly.
10. Special address by the Lieutenant Governor.
11. Rights of Ministers as respects Legislative Assembly.
12. Oath or affirmation by Members.

13. Voting in Legislative Assembly, Power of Assembly to act notwithstanding vacancies
and quorum,

14, Vacation of seats.
15. Disqualifications for membership.
16. Disqualification on ground of defection,

17. Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation or when not qualified
or when disqualified,

18. Powers, privileges, etc. of members.

19. Salaries and allowances of members.

20. Exemption of property of the Union from taxation,

21. Restrictions on laws passed by Legislative Assembly with respect to certain matters,
2. Special provisions as to Financial Bills.
2B.
24.
25,
26.

aAuaw

. Procedure as to lapsing of Bills.

. Assent to Bills.

. Bills reserved for consideration.

. Requirements as to sanction, etc.


Causes
. Annual financial statement.
. Procedure in Legislative Assembly with respect to estimates,

27.
28.
29.
30.
31,

32,

33,
34.

35,
36.
37.

&S8

41.
42,
43.

45.

46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
rit
52,
53.
54.
55.
56.

. Supplementary, additional or excess grants.
. Votes on accounts.

@

Appropriation Bills,

Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by Legislative Assembly,
Rules of procedure.

Official language or languages of the Union Territory and language or languages to |
used in Legislative Assembly.

Language to be used for Bills, Act, etc.
Restriction on discussion in the Legislative Assembly.
Courts not to inquire into Proceedings of Legislative Assembly.
PART III
DeLimitation oF ConsTITUENCIES

}. Election Commission to delimit constituencies.
. Power of Election Commission to maintain delimitation orders upto date,
. Elections to the Legislative Assembly.

PARTIV
CERTAIN PRovisions RELATING To LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR AND Ministers
Matters in which Lieutenant Governor to act in his discretion.
Advice by Ministers,
Other provisions as to Ministers,

}. Conduct of business.

Duties of Chief Minister as respects the furnishing of information, etc. to the
Lieutenant Governor.

PARTV

MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory.
Contingency Fund of the Union territory,
Audit reports,
Relation of Lieutenant Governor and his Ministers to President,
Period of order made under article and approval thereof by Parliament.
Authorisation of expenditure by President.
Contract and suits.
Power of President to remove difficulties.
Laying of Rules before Legislative Assembly.
Amendments to the Constitution.
Amendment of section 27A of Act 43 of 1950.

THE SCHEDULE


5

Bill No. 83 of 2004

THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORY OF LAKSHADWEEP
BILL, 2004
By
‘Suri BasupeB ACHARIA, M.P.

A
BILL

to provide for the creation of a Legislative Assembly for the Union Territory of
Lakshadweep and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
PART I
PRELIMINARY

1. (7) This Act may be called the Government of Union Territory of Lakshadweep
Act, 2004.

Short title
and
Commence-
ment


Definitions.

Legislative
‘Assembly and
its

composition.

Qualifications
for
membership
of Legislative
Assembly.

Duration of
Legislative
Assembly.

2:
(2) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:

Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of the Act and
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as
a reference to the coming into force of that provision,

2. In thi

Act, unless the context otherwise requir

(a) “article” means an article of the Constitution;

(8) “assembly constituency” means a constituency provided under this Act for
the purpose of election to the Legislative Assembly;

(c) “Election Commission” means the Election Commission referred to in article
324;

(०) “Legislative Assembly” means the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory
of Lakshadweep;

(€) “Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes” in relation to the Union territory means
such castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within such castes, races or tribes as
are deemed under articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution to be Scheduled Caste or
Scheduled Tribe in relation to that Union territory; and

(/) “Union territory” means the Union territory of Lakshadweep.
PARTI
LeoisLaTivE ASSEMBLY

3. (1) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly to be filled by persons
chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies shall be forty.

(2) For the purposes of election to the Legislative Assembly, the Union territory shall
be divided into single-member assembly constituencies in accordance with the provisions
of Part वा in such manner that the population of each of the constituencies shall, so far as
practicable, be the same throughout the Union territory.

(3) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the
Legislative Assembly, and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be,
the same proportion to the total number of seats in the Assembly as the population of the
Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes in the Union territory bears to the total population of
the Union territory.

4, A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the Legislative Assembly
unless he—

(a) is acitizen of India and makes and subscribes before some person authorised
in that behalf by the Election Commission an oath or affirmation according to the form
set out for the purpose in the Schedule;

(8) is not less than twenty-five years of age; and

(cS possess such other qualifications as may be prescribed in that behalf by or
under any law made by Parliament.
5. The Legislative Assembly unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for five years
from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer and the expiration of the said
period of five years shall operate as a dissolution of the Assembly:

Provided that the said period may be extended as while a proclamation of emergency
issued under clause (1) of article 352 is in operation, by the President by order for a period not
exceeding one year at a time and not extending it in any case beyond a period of six months
after the proclamation has ceased to operate.

25.

30

35

40

4!



20

25

35

40

45

3

6. (1) The Lieutenant Governor shall, from time to time, summon the Legislative
Assembly to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene
between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next
session.

(2) The Lieutenant Governor may, from time to time,—
(a) prorogue the Assembly; and
(0) dissolve the Assembly.

7. (1) The Legislative Assembly shall, as soon as may be, choose two members of the
Assembly to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof and, so often as the office
of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes vacant, the Assembly shall choose another member
to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.

(2) Amember holding office as Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly —
(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Assembly;

(b) may, at any time by writing under his hand addressed, if such member is the
Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker, and if such member is the Deputy Speaker, to the
Speaker resign his office; and

(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Assembly passed by 8
majority of all the then members of the Assembly:
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (०) shall be moved untess at least
fourteen days’ notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution:
Provided further that whenever the Assembly is dissolved, the Speaker shall not

yacate his office until immediately before the first meeting of the Assembly after the
dissolution.

(3) While the office of Speaker is vacant, the duties of the office shall be performed by
the Deputy Speaker, if the office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such member of the
Assembly as may be determined by the rules of procedure of the Assembly.

(4) During the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the Assembly, the Deputy
Speaker, or if he is also absent, such person as may be determined by the rules of procedure
of the Assembly, or if no such person is present, such other person as may be determined by
the Assembly, shall act as Speaker.

(5) There shall be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly such salaries and allowances as may be respectively fixed by the Legislative
‘Assembly by law and until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries and allowances
as the Lieutenant Governor may, with the approval of the President, by order determine.

8. (7) Atany sitting of the Legislative Assembly while any resolution for the removal
of the Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Speaker, or while any resolution for
the removal of the Deputy Speaker from his office is under: consideration, the Deputy Speaker,
shall not, though he is present, preside and the provisions of sub-section (4) of section 7
shall apply in relation to every such sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from which
the Speaker or, as the case may be, the Deputy Speaker is absent.

(2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak in and otherwise to take part in the
proceedings of the Legislative Assembly while any resolution for his removal from office is
under consideration in the Assembly and shall, notwithstanding anything in section 13, be
entitled to vote only in the first instance on such resolution or on any other matter during,
such proceedings but not in the case of an equality of votes.

Session of
Legislative
Assembly,
prorogation
and
dissolution.

Speaker and
Deputy
Speaker of
Legislative
Assembly.

Speaker or
Deputy
‘Speaker not
to preside
while a
resolution for
his removal
from office is
under
consideration


Right of
Lieutenant
Governor to
address and
send message
to Legislative
Assembly.

Special
address by the
Lieutenant
Governor.

Rights of
Ministers as
respects
Legislative
Assembly.

Oath oF
affirmation
by member.

Voting in
Legislative
Assembly,
Power of
Assembly to
act
notwithstanding
vacancies and
quorum,

Vacation of
seats.

4

9. (1) The Lieutenant Governor may address the Legislative Assembly and for that
purpose require the attendance of members,

(2) The Lieutenant Governor may send message to the Legislative Assembly whether
with respect to a Bill then pending in the Assembly or otherwise and when a message is so
sent, the Assembly shall with all convenient despatch consider any matter required by the
message to be taken into consideration.

10. (1) At the commencement of the first session after cach general election to the
Legislative Asembly at the commencement of the first session of each year, the Lieutenant
Governor shall address the Legislative Assembly and inform it of the causes of its summons.

(2) Provision shall be made by rules to be made by the Assembly regulating its
procedure for the allotment of time for discussion of the matters referred to in such address,

वा, Every Minister who is not a member of the Legislative Assembly shall have the
right to speak in and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of the Legislative Assembly
and to speak in and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of any committee of the
Legislative Assembly which he may be named a member, but shall not by virtue of this
section be entitled to vote.

12, Every member of the Legislative Assembly shall, before taking his seat, make and
subscribe before the Lieutenant Governor or some person appointed in that behalf’ by him,
an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Schedule,

13. (1) Save as otherwise provided in the Act, question at any sitting of the Legislative
Assembly shall be determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting
other than the Speaker or person acting as such.

(2) The Speaker or person acting as such shall not vote in the first instance, but shall
have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes.

(3) The Legislative Assembly shall have power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in
the membership thereof, and any proceedings in the Legislative Assembly shall be valid
notwithstanding that it is discovered subsequently that some person who was not entitled
80 to do, sat or, voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings.

(4) The quorum to constitute a meeting of the Assembly shall be one-third of the total
number of members of the Assembly.

(5) If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly there is no quorum, it
shall be the duty of the Speaker, or person acting as such either to adjourn the Assembly or
to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.

14. (1) No person ‘shall be a member both of Parliament and of the Legislative Assembly
and if'a person is chosen a member both of Parliament and of such Assembly, then at the
expiration of such period as is specified in or under the Representation of the People Act,
1951, and the rules made by the President under clause (2) of article 190, that person’s seat
in Parliament shall become vacant, unless he had previously resigned his seat in the Legislative
Assembly.

(2) Ifa member of the Legislative Assembly —

(a) Becomes subject 16 any disqualification mentioned in section 15 or section 16 for
membership of the Assembly; or

() resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the Speaker and his
resignation is accepted by the Speaker,
his seat shall thereupon become vacant:

Provided that in the case of any resignation referred to in clause (b), if from the
information received or otherwise and after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, the Speaker
i that such resignation is not voluntary or genuine he shall not accept such

resignation.

20

25

30

43

40

4s


20

2

3

3:

41

4:

5

5

0

5

(3) If for a period of sixty days a member of the Legislative Assembly is without
permission of the Assembly absent from all meetings thereof, the Assembly may declare his
‘seat vacant:

Provided that in computing the said period of sixty days no account shall be taken of
any period during which the Assembly is prorogued or is adjourned for more than four
consecutive days.

15. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of
the Legislative Assembly—

(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the
Government of any State or the Government of any Union territory other than an office
declared by law made by Parliament or by the Legislature of any State or by the
Legislative Assembly of any other Union territory not to disqualify its holder; or

(b) if he is for the time being chosen as, and for being, a member of either House
of Parliament under the provisions of sub-clause (b) or sub-clause (०) of sub clause (1)
of article 102 or of any law made in pursuance of that article.

(2) For the purpose of the section, a person shall not be deemed to hold an office of
profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State or the Government of
any Union territory by reason only that he is a Minister either for the Union or for such State
or Union territory.

(3) If any question arises as to whether a member of the Legislative Assembly has
become disqualified for being such a member under the provisions of sub-section (1), the
question shall be referred for the decision of the President and his decision shall be final.

(4) Before giving any decision on any such question; the President shall obtain the
opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion.

16. The provisions of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution shall, subject to the
necessary modification (including modifications for construing references therein to the
Legislative Assembly of a State, article 188, article 194 and article 212 as references,
respectively, to the Legislative Assembly, section 12, section 18 and section 37 of this Act),
apply to and in relation to the members of the Legislative Assembly of a State and
accordingly:

(a) the said Tenth Schedule as so modified shall be deemed to form part of this Act;
and

(b) aperson shall be disqualified for being a member of the Legislative Assembly if he
is so disqualified under the said Tenth Schedule as so modified.

17. Ifa person sits or votes as a member of the Legislative Assembly before he has
complied with requirements of section 12 or when he knows that he is not qualified or that he
is disqualified for membership thereof, he shall be liable in respect of each day on which he
0 sits oF votes to a penalty of five hundred rupees to be recovered as a debt due to the
Union,

18. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules and standing orders
regulating the procedure of the Legislative Assembly, there shall be freedom of speech in the
Legislative Assembly.

(2) No member of the Legislative Assembly shall be liable to any proceedings in any
court in respect of anything said or any vote given by him in the Legislative Assembly or any
committee thereof and no person shall be so liable in respect of the publication by or under
the authority of such Assembly of any report, paper, votes or proceedings.

(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of the Legislative Assembly
and of the members and the commitiees thereof shall be such as are for the time being
enjoyed by the House of the People and its members and committees.

Disqualification
for
membership.

Disqualification
on ground of
defection

Penalty for
sitting and
voting before
making oath
or affirmation
or when not
qualified or
when
disqualified

Powers,
Privileges,
etc, of
members


Salaries and
allowances of
members,

Exemption
of property
of the Union
from
taxation

Restrictions
on laws
passed by
Legislative
Assembly
with respect
to certain
matters.

Special
provisions as
to Financial
Bills

Procedure as
(o lapsing of
Bills

6

(4) The provisions of sub-section (1), (2) and (3) shall apply in relation to persons who
by virtue of this Act have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings,
of the Legislative Assembly or any committee thereof as they apply, in relation to members |
that Assembly.

19. Members of the Legislative Assembly shall be entitled to receive such salaries
and allowances as may from time to time determine by the Legislative Assembly by law and
until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries and allowances as the Lieutenant
Governor may, with the approval of the President, by order determine.

20. The property of the Union shall, save in so far as Parliament may by law otherwise
provide, be exempted from all taxes imposed by or under any law made by the Legislative
Assembly or by under any other law in force in the Union territory:

Provided that nothing in this section shall, until Parliament by law otherwise provides,
prevent any authority within the Union territory from levying any tax on any property of the
Union to which such property was immediately before the commencement of the Constitution
liable or treated as liable, so long as the tax continues to be levied in the Union territory.

21. (1) The provisions of articles 286, 287 and 288 shall apply in relation to any law
passed by the Legislative Assembly with respect to any of the matters referred to in those
articles as they apply in relation to any law passed by the Legislature of a State with respect
to those matters.

(2) The provisions of article 304 shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in
relation to any law passed by the Legislative Assembly with respect to any of the matters
referred to in that article as they apply in relation to any law passed by the Legislature of a
State with respect to those matters,

22. (1) A Bill or amendment shall not be introduced into, or moved in, the Legislative
Assembly except on the recommendation of the Lieutenant Governor if such bill or amendment
makes provision for any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax;

(6) the amendment of the law with respect to any financial obligations undertaken
or to be undertaken by the Government of the Union territory;

(० the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union
territory;

(d) the declaring of any expenditure to the expenditure charged on the
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory or the increasing of the amount of any such
expenditure; and

(e) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of the Union
territory or the custody of such money:
Provided that no recommendation shall be required, under this sub-section for the
moving of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.

(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the matters
aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary
penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for license or fees for services rendered, or by
reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any
tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.

(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory shall not be passed by the Legislative Assembly
unless the Lieutenant Governor has recommended to that. Assembly the consideration of the
Bill,

23. (/) A Bill pending in the Legislative Assembly shall not lapse by reason of the
prorogation of the Assembly.



20

25

30

4

$

4

50

7

(2)8 छा which is pending in the Legislative Assembly shall lapse on a dissolution of
the Assembly.

24. When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly it shall be presented to
the Lieutenant Governor and he shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he
withholds assent therefrom or that he reserves the Bill for the consideration of the President:

Provided that the Lieutenant Governor may, as soon as possible after the presentation
of the Bill for his assent, return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill together with a message
requesting that the Assembly will reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions thereof,
and, in particular, will consider the desirability of introducing any such amendments as he
may recommend in his message and, when a Bill is so returned, the Assembly will reconsider
the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again with or without amendment and presented
to the Lieutenant Governor for assent, he shall declare either that he assents, to the Bill or
that he reserves the Bill for the consideration of the President:

Provided further that the Lieutenant Governor shall not assent to, but shall reserve for
the consideration of the President, any Bill which,—

(a) in the opinion of the Lieutenant Governor would, if it became law, so derogate
from the powers of the High Court as to endanger the position which that Court is, by
the Constitution, designed to fill; or

(6) the President may, by order, direct to be reserved for his consideration; or

(c) relates to a matter referred to in sub-section (5) of section 7 or section 19 or
section 34 or sub-section (3) of section 43.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 25, a Bill shall be deemed
to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the matters
specified in sub-section (1) of section 22 or any matter incidental to any of those matters
and, in either case, there is endorsed thereon the certificate of the Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly signed by him that it is a Money Bill.

25. When a Bill is reserved by the Lieutenant Governor for the consideration of the
President, the President shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds
assent thereftom:

Provided that where the Bill is not a money Bill, the President may direct the Lieutenant
Governor to return the Bill to the Legislative Assembly together with such a message as is
mentioned in the first proviso to section 24 and, when a Bill is so returned, the Assembly
shall reconsider it accordingly within a period of six months from the date of receipt of such
message and, if it is again passed by the Assembly with or without amendment it shall be
presented again to the President for his consideration.

26. No Act of the Legislative Assembly, and no provision in any such Act, shall be
invalid by reason only that some previous sanction or recommendation required by this Act
‘was not given, if assent to that Act was given by the Lieutenant Governor or, one being
reserved by the Lieutenant Governor for the consideration of the President, by the President.

27. (1) The Lieutenant Governor shall in respect of every financial year cause to be laid
before the Legislative Assembly, with the previous sanction of the President, a statement of
the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Union territory for the year, in this part referred
to as the “annual financial statement”.

(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall
show separately—

(a) the sums-required to meet expenditure described by this Act as expenditure
charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory; and

(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue
account from other expenditure,

Assent to
Bills,

Bills reserved
for
consideration,

Requirements
as to
sanction, etc.

Annual
financial
statement.


Procedure in
Legisiative
Assembly
with respect
to estimates,

Appropriation
Bills.

Supplementary,
additional or
excess grants,

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the
following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the Union
territory:—

(a) the emoluments and allowances of the Lieutenant Governor and other
expenditure relating to his office as determined by the President by general or special
order;

(6) the charges payable in respect of loans advanced to the Union territory from
the Consolidated Fund of India including interest, sinking fund charges and redemption
charges and other expenditure connected therewith;

(c) the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly;

(वी any sums required to satisfy any judgement, decree or award of any court or
arbitrator or tribunal; and

(e) any other expenditure declared by the Constitution or by law made by

Parliament or by the Legislative Assembly to be so charged.

28. (/) So much of the estimates as relates to expenditure charged upon the
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory shall not be submitted to the vote of the Legislative
Assembly but nothing in this sub-section shall be construed as preventing the discussion in
the Legislative Assembly of any of those estimates.

(2) So much of the said estimates as relates to other expenditure shall be submitted in
the form of demands for grants to the Legislative Assembly, and the Legislative Assembly
shall have the power to assent or to refuse to assent, to any demand, or to assent to any
demargd subject to a reduction of the amount specified therein.

(3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on the recommendation of the Lieutenant
Governor.

29. (1) As soon as may be after the grants under section 28 have been made by the
Legislative Assembly, there shall be introduced a Bill to provide for the appropriation out of
the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory of all moneys required to meet—

(a) the grants so made by the Assembly; and

(8) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory but
not exceeding in any case the amount shown in the statement previously laid before
the Assembly.

(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in the Legislative Assembly
which will have the effect of varying the amount or altering the destination of any grant made
or of varying the amount of any expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the Union
territory and the decision of the person presiding as to whether an amendment is inadmissible
under this sub-section shall be final.

(3) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, no money shall be withdrawn from the
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory except under appropriation made by law passed in
accordance with provisions of this section.

30. (/) The Lieutenant Governor shall,—

(a) if the amount authorised by any law made in accordance with provisions of
section 29 to be expended for a particular service for the current financial year is found
to be insufficient for the purposes of that year or when a need has arisen during the
current financial year for supplementary or additional expenditure upon some new
service not contemplated in the annual financial statement for that year, or

(0) if any money has been spent on any service during a financial year in excess
of the amount granted for that service and for that year, cause to be laid before the
Legislative Assembly, with the previous sanction of the President, another Statement

25

35

40

45



20

25

30

35

40

4

50

9

showing the estimated amount of that expenditure or cause to be presented to the
Legislative Assembly with such previous sanction a demand for such excess, as the
case may be.

(2) The provisions of sections 27, 28 and 29 shall have effect in relation to any such
statement and expenditure or demand and also to any law to be made authorising the
appropriation of money out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory to meet such
expenditure or the grant in respect of such demand as they have effect in relation to the
annual financial statement and the expenditure menti
‘and the law to be made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated
Fund of the Union territory to meet such expenditure or grant.

31. (/) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, the Legislative
‘Assembly shall have power to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated
expenditure for a part of any financial year pending the completion of the procedure prescribed
in section 28 for the voting of such grant and passing of the 189 in accordance with the
provisions of section 29 in relation to that expenditure and the Legislative Assembly shall
have power to authorise by law the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of the
Union territory for the purposes for which the said grant is made.

(2) The provisions of sections 28 and 29 shall have effect in relation to the making of
any grant under sub-section (1) or to any law to be made under that sub-section as they
have effect in relation to the making of a grant with regard to any expenditure mentioned in
the annual financial statement and the law to be made for the authorisation of appropriation
of moneys, out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory to meet such expenditure.

32, Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, the Lieutenant
Governor may authorise such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory
as he deems necessary for a period of not more than six months beginning from the date of
the constitution of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory, pending the sanction of
such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly,

33. (7) The Legislative Assembly may make rules regulating, subject to the provisions
of this Act, its procedure and the conduct of its business:

Provided that the Lieutenant Governor shall, after consultation with the Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly and with the approval of the President, make rules—

(a) for securing the timely completion of financial business;

(6) for regulating the procedure of, and the conduct of business in, the Legislative
‘Assembly in relation to any financial matter or to any Bill for the appropriation of
moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory;

(c) for prohibiting the discussion of, or the asking of questions on, any matters
which affects the discharge of the functions of the Lieutenant Governor in so far as he
is required by or under this Act or any law to act in his discretion.

(2) Until rules are made under sub-section (1), the rules of procedure and standing
orders with respect of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Uttar Pradesh in force
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall have effect in relation to the Legislative
‘Assembly subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the
Lieutenant Governor.

34, (7) The Legislative Assembly may be law adopt any one or more of the languages
in use in the Union territory or Hindi as the official language or languages to be used for all
or any of the official purposes of the Union territory:

Provided that the President may by order direct—
( that the official language of the Union shall be adopted for such of the official
purposes of the Union territory as may be specified in the order; and

(ii) that any other language shall also be adopted throughout the Union territory or
such part thereof for such of the official purposes of the Union territory as may be specified

ed therein or to ademand fora grant

Votes on
account

expenditure
pending its

Rules of
Procedure.

Official
language or
languages of
the Union
territory and
language or
languages to
be used in
Legislative
Assembly,


Languages to
be used for
Bills, Acts,
etc.

Restrictions
‘on discussion
in the
legislative
Assembly.

Courts not to
inguire into
proceedings
of Legislative
Assembly,

Election
Commission
to delimit
‘constituencies.

10

in the order, if the President is satisfied that a substantial proportion of the population of the
Union territory desires the use of that other language for all or any of such purposes.

(2) The business in the Legislative Assembly shall be transacted in the official language
or languages of the Union territory or in Hindi or in English:

‘Provided that the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly or the person acting as such, as
the case may be, permit any member who cannot adequately express himself in any of the
languages aforesaid, to address the Assembly in his mother-tongue.

35, Notwithstanding anything contained in section 34 until Parliament by law otherwise
provides, the authoritative texts—

(a) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in the
Legislative Assembly;

(0) of all Acts passed by the Legislative Assembly; and

(०) of all orders, rules regulations and bye-laws issued under any law made by
the Legislative Assembly shall be in English language:

Provided that where the Legislative Assembly has prescribed any language other than
the English language for use in Bills introduced in, or Acts passed by the Legislative Assembly
or in any order, rule regulation or bye-law issued under any law made by the Legislative
Assembly, a translation of the same in the English language published under the authority of
the Lieutenant Governor in the official Gazette shall be deemed to be the authoritative text
thereof in the English language.

36, No discussion shall take place in the Legislative Assembly with respect to the
conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties.

37. (1) The validity of any proceedings in the Legislative Assembly shall not be called
in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.

(2) No officer or member of the Legislative Assembly in whom powers are vested by or
under this Act for regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for maintaining order
in the Legislative Assembly shall be subject to the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the
exercise by him of those powers.

PART III
‘DELimiTaTion OF CONSTITUENCIES

38. (7) The Election Commission shall, in the manner herein provided, distribute the
seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly under section 3 to single-member territorial
constituencies and delimit them having regard to the following provisions, namely:—

(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be delimited in such manner
that the ratio between the population of each of such constituencies and the total
population of the Union territory is the same; and

(8) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes or
Scheduled Tribes shall, as far as possible, be located in areas where the proportion of
the population to the total population is comparatively large.

(2) The Election Commission shall—

(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies in the official
Gazette and also in such other manner as the Commission may consider fit together
with a notice inviting objections and suggestions in relation to the proposals and
specifying a date on or after which their proposals will be further considered by it;

(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it
before the date so specified; and



1951
20

1951

25

30

35

40

45

वा

(©) after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been
received by it before the date so specified, finalise delimitation of constituencies and
‘cause such order or orders to be published in the official Gazette; and upon such
publication, the order or orders shall have the full force of law and shall not be called
in question in any court,

39. The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notification in the official
Gazette,—

(a) correct any printing mistakes in any order made under section 38 or any error
arising therein from inadvertent slip or omission; and

(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned in any
such order are or is altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be necessary or
expedient for bringing such order up to date.

40, (1) For the purpose of constituting the Legislative Assembly, a general election will
be held as soon as may be after the delimitation of all the assembly constituencies under
section 38.

(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Lieutenant Governor shall, by one or more
notifications published in the official Gazette, call upon all the said assembly constituencies
to elect members in accordance with the provisions of the Representation of the People
Act, 1951 and of the rules and orders made or issued thereunder as applicable under
sub-section (3).

(3) The Representation of People Act, 1950, the Representation of the People Act, 1951
the rules and orders made or issued under the said Acts and all other laws for the time being
in force relating to the elections shall apply with necessary modifications (including
modifications for construing references therein to a State, State Government and Governor
as including references to the Union territory, Government of the Union territory and
Lieutenant Governor, respectively) to, and in relation to, the general election referred to in
sub-section (1).
PARTIV
Certain PRovistons RELATING TO LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR AND MINISTERS
41. (7) The Lieutenant Governor shall act in his discretion in a matter—

(0) which falls outside the purview of the powers conferred on the Legislative
‘Assembly but in respect of which powers or functions are entrusted or delegated to
him by the President, or

(ii) in which he is required by or under any law to act in his discretion or to
exercise any judicial or quasi-judicial functions.

(2) If any question arises as to whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects
which the Lieutenant Governor is by or under any law required to act in his discretion, the
decision of the Lieutenant Governor thereon shall be final.

(3) If any question arises as to whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects
which the Lieutenant Governor is required by any law to exercise any judicial or quasi-
judicial functions, the decision of the Lieutenant Governor thereon shall be final.

42. The question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered by Ministers to the
Lieutenant Governor shall not be inquired into in any court.

43. (1) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the Lieutenant’ Governor shall administer
to him the oaths of office and of secrecy according to the forms set out for the purpose in the
Schedule.

(2) A Minister who, for any period of six months, is not 8 member of the Legislative
Assembly, at the expiration of that period, shall cease to be a Minister.

Power of
Election
Commission

Matters in
which
Lieutenant
Governor to
act in his
discretion.

Advice by
Ministers.

Other
provisions as
to Ministers.


Conduct of
business,

Duties of
Chief
Minister as
respects the
furnishing of
information,
etc. to the
Lieutenant
Governor.

Consolidated
Fund of the
Union
territory.

Contingency
Fund of the
Union
territory.

12

(3) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as the Legislative Assem|
may from time to time by law determine and until the Legislative Assembly so determines,
shall be determined by the Lieutenant Governor with the approval of the President.

44, (1) The President shall make rules—
(a) for the allocation of business to the Ministers in so far as it is |

respect to which the Lieutenant Governor is required to act on the aid and advice of his
Council of Ministers; and

(b) for the more convenient transaction of business with the Ministers, including,
the procedure to be adopted in the case of a difference of opinion between the Lieutenant
Governor and the Council of Ministers or a Minister. P

(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all executive actions of the Lieutenant
Governor whether taken on the advice of his Ministers or otherwise shall be expressed to be
taken in the name of the Lieutenant Governor.

(3) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the Lieutenant
Governor shall be authenticated in such manner as may be specified in rules to be made by
the Lieutenant Governor and the validity of an order or instrument which is so authenticated
shall not be called in question on the ground that it is not an order or instrument made or
executed by the Lieutenant Governor.

45. It shall be the duty of the Chief Minister—

(०) to communicate to the Lieutenant Governor all decisions of Council of
Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union territory and proposals
for legislation;

(6) to furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of the
Union territory and proposals for legislation as Lieutenant Governor may call for; and

(c) if the Lieutenant Governor so requires, to submit for the consideration of the
Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a Minister but
which has not been considered by the Council.

PARTV
MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.

46, (1) As from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the official
Gazette, appoint in this behalf, all revenues received in the Union territory by the Government
of India or the Lieutenant Governor in relation to any matter with respect to which the
Legislative Assembly has power to make laws, and all grants made and all loans advanced to
the Union territory from the Consolidated Fund of India and all moneys received by the
Union territory in repayment of loans shall form one Consolidated Fund to be entitled “the
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory of Lakshadweep” (referred to in this Act as the
Consoldiated Fund of the Union territory).

(2) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory shall be appropriated
except in accordance with and for the purposes and in the manner provided in the Act.

(3) The cystody of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory, the payment of
moneys into such fund, the withdrawal of moneys therefrom and all other matters connected
with or ancillary to those matters shall be regulated by rules made by the Lieutenant Governor
with the approval of the President. के

47. (1) There shall be established a Contingency Fund in the nature of an imprest to be
entitled “the Contingency Fund of the Union territory of Lakshadweep” into which shall be
paid from and out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory such sums as may, from
time to time be determined by law made by the Legislative Assembly; and the said Fund shall
be held by the Lieutenant Governor to enable advances to be made by him out of such Fund,

(2) No advances shall be made out of the Contingency Fund referred to in syb-
section (1) except for the purposes of meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation
of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly under appropriation made by law.


20

25

30

35

40

45

13

(3) The Lieutenant Governor may make rules regulating all matters connected with or
ancillary to the custody of, the payment of moneys in to, and the withdrwal of moneys from
the aforesaid Contigency Fund.

48. The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India relating to the accounts
of the Union territory for any period subsequent to the date referred to in sub-section (1) of
section 46 shall be submitted to the Lieutenant Governor who shall cause them to be laid
before the Legislative Assembly.

49, Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Lieutenant Governor and his Council of
Ministers shall be under the general control of, and comply with such particular directions,
if any, as may from time to time be given, by the President.

50. (1) Every order made by the President under article 239AB shall expire at the end
of one year from the date of issue of the order and the provisions of clauses (2) and (3) of
article 356 shall, so far may be, apply to such order as they apply to a proclamation issued
under clause (1) of article 356,

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the President may extend
the duration of the aforesaid order for a further period not exceeding two years from the date
of expiry of the order under sub-section (1) subject to the condition that every extension of
the said order for any period beyond the expiration of one year shall be approved by
resolutions of both Houses of Parliament.

51. Where the Legislative Assembly is dissolved or its functioning as such Assembly
remains suspended on account of an order made by the President under article 239AB, it
shall be competent for the President to authorise when the House of the People is not in
session expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory pending the sanction
of such expenditure by Parliament.

52. For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that—

(a) all contracts in connection with the administration of the Union territory are
contracts made in the exercise of the executive power of the Union; and

(b) all suits and proceedings in connection with the administration of the Union
territory shall be instituted by or against the Government of India.

53. (1) If any difficulty arises in relation to the transaction from the provisions of any
law repealed by the Act or in giving effect to the provisions of this Act and in particular in
relation to the constitution of the Legislative Assembly, the President may by order to
anything not inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution or of this Act which
appear to him to be necessary or expendient for the purpose of removing the difficulty.

Provided that no order under the sub-section shall be made after the expiry of three
years from the date of constitution of the first Legislative Assembly.

(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.

54, Every rule made by the Lieutenant Governor under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
it is made, before the Legislative Assembly.

55. On and from the appointed day—
(a) After article 239AA, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“239AAA (1) As from the date of commencement of the Government of
Union territory of Lakshadweep Act, 2004 the administrator of the Union territory

of Lakshadweep appointed under article 239 shail be designated as the Lieutenant
Governor.

Audit
Reports.

Relation of
Lieutenant
Governor and
his Ministers
to President.

Period of
order made
under article
239AB and
approval
thereof by
Parliament

Authorisation
of
expenditure
by President

Contracts and
Suits,

Power of
President to
remove
difficulties.

Laying of
rules before
Legislative
Assembly.

Amendments:
to the
Constitution.
Special
provision
with respect
to
Lakshadweep.


Amendment
of section
2A of Act 43
of 1950.

14

(2) The provisions of article 239AA and 23988 shall, so far as may be,
apply mutatis mutandis in relation to the Union territory of Lakshadweep,
Lieutenant Governor and the Legislative Assembly, as they apply in relation'to
the National Capital Territory of Delhi and its Legislature, respectively.”;

(8) in article 240, in clause (1), for the existing proviso, the following
provisos shall be substituted namely:;—

“Provided that when any body is created under article 239A or 239AAA to
function as a Legislature for the Union territory of Pondicherry or Union territory
of Lakshadweep, as the case may be, the President shall not make any regulation
for the peace, progress and good government of that Union territory with effect
from the date appointed for the first meeting of the Legislature.

Provided further that whenever the body functioning as a Legislature for
the Union territory of Pondicherry or Lakshadweep, as the case may be, is
dissolved, or the functioning of that body as such legislature remains suspended
on account of any action taken under any such law as is referred to in clause (1)
of article 239 A or 239AB, as the case may be, the President may, during the
period of such dissolution or suspension, make regulations for the peace progress
and good government of that Union territory.”

(c) In the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, in the Table,

(a) entry 30 shall be re-numbered as entry 31 and before entry 31 as 80
re-numbered, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
130, Lakshadweep wren 15
(b) for the figures “233”, the figures “234” shall be substituted.
56. In section 27A of the Representation of People Act, 1950, after sub-section (4), the
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—

“(5) The electoral college for the Union territory of Lakshadweep shall consist of the
elected members of the Legislative Assembly constituted for that territory under the
Government of Union territory of Lakshadweep Act, 2004.

THE SCHEDULE
(See sections 4, 12, and 43)
FORMS OF OATH ORAFFIRMATIONS
I

Form of oath or affirmation to made by a candidate for election to the Legislative
Assembly:—

“I, AB, having been nominated as a candidate to fill a seat in the Legislative Assembly,
do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I bear true faith and Allegiance to the
Constitution of India as by law established and that I will uphold the sovereignty and
integrity of India.”

0

Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of the Legislative Aseembly:—

“I, AB, having been elected a member of the Legislative Assembly, do swear in the
name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of
India as by law established, and that 1 will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am
about to enter”.

Form of oath of office of a member of the Council of Ministers:—

“1, AB, do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and
allegiance to the Constitution of India as by established, that I will uphold the sovereignty



15

and integrity of India, that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as a
Minister, and that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution
and the law without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.”

Vv
Form of oath of Secrecy for a member of Council of Ministers:—

“I, AB, do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will not directly or indirectly
communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be brought under my
consideration or shall become known to me as a Minister except as may be required for the
due discharge of any duties as such Minister.”


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Even after 57 years of Independence, the Union territory of Lakshadweep has not been
provided with a democratic set-up with a Legislative Assembly for the governance of the
affairs of the Union territory Administration. All powers are vested in the Lieutenant Governor
and the bureaucracy continues to reign supreme. In the absence of Legislative Assembly
with devolution of powers, the people of the islands are not enabled to have a sense of
belonging and involvement in the development activities of the islands and do not have a
say in the utilisation of the funds provided by the Central Government in proper perspective.

The type of administration provided to the Union territory is not at all befitting to a
democratic set-up and devolution of powers. The population of the Union territory has
crossed four lakhs mark and the literacy percentage is well over the national average and is
steadily heading towards achieving cent percent literacy as per norms prescribed by the
Government of India.

However, despite all these favourable points the people of the Union territory did not
get administrative set-up of their own choice mainly due to unforesighted views of the
Central Government. They deserve a political set-up in the same line as Delhi, Pondicherry
and the like are having.

‘There have been series of demands from the people of the Union territory for providing
व Legislative Assembly on the line of the set-up in Delhi and Pondicherry. The people of the
island territory are unanimous in this regard. Now, since a three-tier Panchayti Raj system is
also in offing in pursuance with the Constitution (Seventy-thitd Amendment) Act, with the
idea of devolution of powers at Panchayat, block and district levels, it is high time that a
Legislative Assembly was provided to set the tone and direction for the governance of the
Union territory Administration on democratic norms.

The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives,

New Det; BASUDEB ACHARIA.
July 5,2004.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM,

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a Legislative Assembly for the Union
territory of Lakshadweep. Clauses 7(5), 19 and 43(3) relate to payment of salaries and
allowances to the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker. Members of the Legislative Assembly and
the Ministers. The expenditure on such salaries and allowances and other expenditure of
incidental nature such as on the addtional staff in the Legislative Assembly and Council of
Ministers will be met from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory of Lakshadweep.

Clause 38 provides for the delimitation of thirty single member territorial constituencies
for the proposed Assem f the Union territory of Lakshadweep. Clause 55 provides that
Union territory of |. ikshudweep will be represented by one member in the Council of States,
For this purpose, a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifteen lakhs is likely to be
incurred. This expenditure will be met from the Consolidated Fund of India.

The Bill does not involve any other expenditure either of'a recurring or non-recurring
nature,



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 33 of the Bill empowers the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of
Lakshadweep to make rules, subject to the provisions of this Bill, for regulating its procedure
and conduct of its business. It also provides that the Lieutenant Governor shail, after
consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and with the approval of the
President make rules for securing the completion of the financial business, regulating the
procedure and conduct of business in the Legislative Assembly in relation to any financial
matter or to any Bill for appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union
territory of Lakshadweep and for prohibiting the discussion of or asking any question which
affect the discharge of the functions of the Lieutenant Governor in so far as he is required to
act in his discretion.

Clause 44 empowers the President to make rules regarding allocation of business to
Ministers and transactions of such business. It further empowers the Lieutenant Governor
to make rules providing the manner of authenticating the orders issued in his name.

Clause 46(3) and 47(3) provide that the Lieutenant Governor may make niles regarding
the custody etc. of the Consolidated Fund of the Union terriotry of Lakshadweep and the
Contingency Fund of the Union territory of Lakshadweep.

‘Clause 53 empowers the President to issue orders for removing any difficulty in giving
effect to the provisions of this Bill and in particular in relation to the constitution of the
Legislative Assembly.

The matters mentioned above are of a procedural nature and it is difficult to provide for
them in the Bill itself. The delegation of Legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.



ANNEXURE
ExtRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

. . . . *

240, (1) The President may make regulation for the peace, progress and good Government
of the Union Territory of —

(a) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands;

(b) Lakshadweep;

(c) Dadra and Nagar Haveli;

(0) Daman and

(c) Pondicherry;

Provided that when any body is created under article 239A to function as a Legislature
for the Union territory of Pondicherry the President shall not make any regulation for the
peace, progress and good Government of that Union territory with effect from the date
appointed for the first meeting of the Legislature:

Provided further that whenever the body functioning as a Legislature for the Union
territory of Pondicherry is dissolved, or the functioning of that body as such Legislature
remains suspended on account of any action taken under any such law as is referred to in
clause (1) of article 239A, the President may, during the period of such dissolution or
suspension, make regulations for the peace, progress and good Government of that Union
territory.

(2) Any regulation so made may repeal or amend any Act made by Parliament or any
other law, which is for the time being applicable to the Union territory and, when promulgated
by the President, shall have the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament which applies

to that territory.
* . . . .
FOURTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 4 (1) and 80 (2)]

Allocation of Seats in the Council of States

To each State of Union territory specified in the first column of the following table,
there shall be allotted the number of seats specified in the second column thereof. ‘opposite
to that State or that Union territory, as the case may be.

TABLE
. . . . .
28. Arunachal Pradesh 1
29. Delhi 3
30, Pondicherry 1

TOTAL 233
* . . . == .

EXTRACT FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PeorLe AcT, 1950
(43 of 1950)

ry . . . रु

271A. (1) For the purpose of filling any seat or seats in the Council of States allotted to
any Union territory in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution there shall be an electoral
college for each such territory.

’ . . . .

(4) The electoral college of the Union territory of Pondicherry shall consist of the
elected members of the Legislative Assembly constituted for that territory under the
Government of Union territories Act, 1963 (20 of 1963)

. . * . *

19

Power of
President to
make
regulations
for certain
Union
territories

Constitution
of electoral
colleges for
the filling of
seats in the
Council of
States allotted
to Union
territories.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the creation of the Legislative Assembly for the Union Territory of
Lakshadweep and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Basudeb Acharia, M.P)

MGIPMRNO—2584LS—19.11.2004,