Short title and
commencement.
   Bill No. 83 of  2020
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE RESERV ATION FOR THE OTHER BACKWARD CLASSES,
THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND THE SCHEDULED TRIBES IN
ADMISSION IN PRIV ATE EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2020
By
SHRI GANESH SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for reservation in favour of persons belonging to the Other Backward
Classes, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in admissions in
 private educational institutions and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Reservation for the Other Backward Classes,
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in Admission in Private Educational
Institutions Act, 2020.5

2
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) " prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act and
published in Gazette; and
(b) "private educational institution" means any school, college,
institutions or university imparting primary, elementary, secondary, higher
secondary or higher education including medical and technical education as
recognized by the appropriate Government, whether aided or unaided, whether
owned partly or wholly by a private person or trust or society, or any such
teaching institutions in which the Central Government or the State Government
has no financial interest but does not include a minority educational institution.
3. (1) The Central Government shall provide appropriate incentives to private
educational institutions for making provisions for reservation in favour of persons
belonging to the Other Backward Classes, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes in admission in such private educational institutions;
(2) The incentives as provided in sub-section ( 1) may include—
(i) special concessions under various existing Central schemes;
(ii) allotment of land on lease for educational institutions at lower prices;
and
(iii) loans from nationalized banks at reduced rate of interest.
4. The Central government shall cause to be laid an annual report before both
Houses of Parliament about the action taken under this Act.
5. The provision of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of any
provision of any other law for the time being in force.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Government to
give incentive
to Private
Sector to
provide
reservation.
Annual Report.
Savings.
Power to make
Rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
At present, except in the minority institutions, reservation has been given to
Other Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students in the
matter of admission in government owned educational institutions, but there is no
provision of reservation in favour  of Other Backward Classes, the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes students for admissions in private educational institutions.
By way of amendment in the Constitution (103rd Amendment), reservation of
maximum ten percent for the economically weaker sections has been allowed for
admission in government and private educational institutions (whether aided or
unaided) except minority educational institutions.
There are many schemes and special provisions for the welfare of the persons
belonging to the Other Backward Classes, the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes in the country. However, despite all these measures, no major changes have
been visible in their economic, educational and social status. In this situation, to
ensure their all around and overall development, reservation in admission to other
backward classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students in private
educational institutions of the country (whether aided or unaided) is of utmost
importance.
At present, there is no provision for reservation in admission of students in
favour of persons belonging to the Other Backward Classes, the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes in private educational institutions (whether aided or unaided)
in the country. However, the government  cannot pressurize the private educational
institutions to provide reservation to them. In such a sitution, by providing concessions
and special schemes to private educational institutions, these institutions can be
encouraged to provide reservation in admission to students from Other Backward
Classes, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled  Tribes.
Hence, this Bill
N
EW DELHI; GANESH  SINGH
February 17, 2020.

4
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for reservation in favour of persons belonging to the Other Backward
Classes, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in admissions in
 private educational institutions and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Ganesh Singh, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—5591LS(S3)—12.0 3.2020.