aap oes AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

99 Ju A

Bill No. 83 of 2005

1886 800 Me

322 2

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic. of India as
follows:— —

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2005. | Short title.

582 SAoS3

2. In article 371 of the Constitution, in clause (2), in sub-clause (a), after the word Amendment of
"Marathwada", the word, "Konkan" shall be inserted | a article 371


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Konkan region of Maharashtra State has remained under developed. No special atte
tion has been given to the region for its development. Therefore, it is proposed to amend he :
Constitution to provide for the speedier development of the Konkan region by establishing
a separate Development Board for the region in the State of Maharashtra

CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE |
| New DELHI;
May 13, 2005.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.
* * * * * 1 5 कु

3 371. (2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may by order
made with respect to the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat, provide for any special responsibility
of the Governor for:—

_ (a) the establishment of separate development boards for Vidarbha, Marathwada
a and the rest of Maharashtra or, as the case may be, Saurashtra, Kutch and the rest of
Gujarat with the provision that a report on the working of each of these boards will be
placed each year before the State Legislative Assembly

(b) the equitable allocation of funds for developmental expenditure over the

q said areas, subject to the requirements of the State as a whole; and

(c) an equitable arrangement providing adequate facilities for technical education
and vocational training, and adequate opportunities for employment in service under

4 : the control of the State Government, in respect of all the said areas, subject to the
: requirements of the State as a whole. ह ९६
x * * * * * *

Special

provision with = -

respect to the
States of
Maharashtra |
and Gujarat.


2

LOK SABHA

BILL

(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P)

MGIPMRND—1309LS—13.06.2005