THE ELECTRICITY (COMPULSORY SUPPLY TO KATRAS AND
DENSELY POPULATED AREAS) BILL, 2009
By
SHRI J.P . AGARW AL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory supply of electricity to katras and densely populated areas
located in the metropolitan and other major cities of the country and for matters
connected therewith.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Electricity (Compulsory Supply to Katras and Densely
Populated Areas) Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 83 of 2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5
10

2
Supply of
electricity to
katras and
densely
populated
areas.
(b) "Katras and densely populated areas" means such residential areas in the
metropolitan and other major cities as are so declared by the appropriate Government
for the purposes of this Act; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the appropriate Government shall ensure that ninety per cent. of the total electricity generated
under its territorial jurisdiction, including the electricity generated by foreign companies, be
earmarked for katras and densely populated areas located in the metropolitan and other
major cities.
(2) The quantum of electricity to be supplied to the metropolitan and other major cities
within the territorial jurisdiction of appropriate Government shall be determined in such
manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that in katras and densely populated areas, the supply of electricity to the
citizens living below poverty line shall be at half of the normal rate for not less than six
hours in a day.
4.  (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State legislature.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There is an acute shortage of electricity in katras and densely populated areas located
in the metropolitan and other major cities of the country. Katras are the residential areas
located in the old parts of the major cities. The citizens living in katras and densely populated
areas have to face a lot of difficulties due to shortage of electricity. During summer, the
situation becomes the worst. Due to non-availability of open spaces and parks near these
katras and densely populated areas, the citizens living there feel suffocated during failure of
power.
It is very well accepted that electricity is one of the basic needs of human beings.
Therefore, denying the people of their essential requirement of power cannot be justified on
any ground. Power outage for hours together, particularly during summer months, makes the
life of the people living in katras and other densely populated areas quite miserable.
It is, therefore, proposed to make the supply of electricity compulsory in the katras
and densely populated areas located in the metropolitan and other major cities of the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; J.P. AGARWAL
July 20, 2009.
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall supply electricity
to the citizens living below poverty line in the katras and densely populated areas for six
hours a day at half of the normal rate. The expenditure relating to States shall be borne out of
the Consolidated Funds of the respective States. However, the expenditure in respect of
Union territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees nine crore will be
involved.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
5

LOK   SALOK   SABHABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory supply of electricity to katras and densely populated
areas located in the metropolitan and other major cities of the country and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Shri J.P. Agarwal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3874LS(S-5)—05.11.2009.