1
THE  NAXAL AFFECTED STATES DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL
BILL, 2012
By
SHRI HANSRAJ GANGARAM AHIR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Council to be known as the Naxal Affected States
Development Council to formulate and monitor implementation of development
plans and schemes for balanced and all-round development of naxal affected States
and for matters connected therewith.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Naxal Affected States Development Council Act,
2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  83 of  2012
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Council” means the Naxal Affected States Development Council set up
under section 3;
(b) “naxal affected States” means the States of Bihar, West Bengal, Maharashtra,
Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh and Jharkhand; and
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Council to be known as the Naxal Affected States Development Council.
(2) The Council shall consist of—
(i) the Chief Minister of each of the naxal affected States:
Provided that if there is no Council of  Ministers in any naxal affected State, the
President may nominate one person to represent such State in the Council for a period
till the Council of Ministers is formed in that State;
(ii) Members representing the naxal affected States in the House of the People;
(iii) Leader of Opposition in the Legislative Assembly of each of the naxal
affected State;
(iv) three persons having experience of not less than fifteen years in the field
of social or economic planning to be nominated by the Central Government;
(v) two persons having not less than fifteen years of experience of handling
and managing internal security; and
(vi) the Secretary of the Department of Home Affairs of each of the naxal affected
State.
(3) The Chairperon of the Council shall be nominated by the President from amongst
the Chief Ministers of the naxal affected States in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(4) The term of office of the Chairperson of the Council shall be two years:
Provided that where a vacancy is caused in the office of the Chairperson before the
expiry of the period of two years due to issue of proclamation under article 356 of the
Constitution or otherwise, the President may nominate Chief Minister of any other naxal
affected State as Chairperson of the Council for the remaining period or for a period till the
new Chief Minister assumes office in that State, whichever is earlier.
4. (1) The head office of the Council shall be at Nagpur in the State of Maharashtra.
(2) The Council shall meet at least five times in a calendar year.
(3) The proceedings of every meeting of the Council shall be forwarded to the
Central Government and also to Government of each of the naxal affected States.
5. (1) The Council shall have a secretarial staff consisting of a secretary, a planning
advisor, a financial advisor, a security advisor and such other officers and employees as the
Central Government may, by order, determine.
(2) The secretarial staff of the Council shall function under the direction, supervision
and control of the Chairperson of the Council.
(3) The Central Government shall bear the administrative expenses of the Council
including the salaries and allowances payable to the secretarial staff of the Council.
6. (1) The Council shall function as a Planning body for balanced and all-round
development of naxal affected States.
Definitions.
Constitution
of the Naxal
Affected
States
Development
Council.
Headquarter
and meetings
of the
Council.
Officers and
staff of the
Council.
Functions of
the Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the Council to formulate plans and schemes for
ensuring peace and safety in the naxal affected States:
Provided that the Council may, if it considers necessary, formulate specific and time
bound projects and schemes for areas having high naxal activity and also review, from time
to time, the implementation of such projects and schemes.
(3) For securing the balanced development of the naxal affected States, the Council
shall forward the following proposals for consideration to the Central Government and the
Governments of naxal affected States:—
(i) augmenting security measures;
(ii) streamlining administration;
(iii) accelerating the industrial growth;
(iv) improving accessibility through railways or roads;
(v) providing communications and telecommunications facilities;
(vi) providing electricity, drinking water and housing in rural areas;
(vii) improving health services including multi speciality healthcare facilities;
(viii) providing educational facilities and gainful employment including
vocational education to people; and
(ix) compensation and financial assistance to the victims of or to the dependants
of persons killed or injured during naxalite or maoist violence and also providing
Government jobs to such persons for their rehabilitation.
(4) For the purpose of clause (iii) of sub-section (3), the Council may recommend to
the Central Government such concessions, including waiver of duty of excise, as it deems
necessary, for a specific period to the industrial units in naxal affected States.
7. It shall be the duty of the Central Government and the Government of each of the
naxal affected States to give due consideration to the proposals of the Council and apprise
the Council of its views and decisions on such proposals.
8. The Central Government shall, after  due appropriation made by Parliament by
law, from time to time, provide adequate funds to the Council for implementation of
development plans and schemes formulated by the Council.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central and
State
Governments
to give due
consideration
to the
proposals of
the Council.
Provision of
funds to the
Council.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The presence of naxals, maoists and anti-social elements  is constantly on the rise in
various parts of the country. In a number of States, there is complete disruption of
administrative work due to naxal activities, who are waging war by using arms and ammunitions
against the State. Almost all areas affected by naxal activity are covered with dense forests
and are located far away from the main areas. All such areas are backward and poor. There is
an urgent need to take effective steps to bring these socially, economically and educationally
backward areas into the mainstream by taking steps for their development.
It may not be correct to consider the naxalite problem as purely a problem caused by
social and economic backwardness. Naxalites are trying to impose their ideology on the
people by taking advantage of the backwardness and inaccessibility of the areas in which
they operate. Elected representatives of local bodies from the naxal affected areas are resigning
their offices due to increasing terror of the naxalites. This is endangering democratic set up
in these States. As per the reports, as many as 6687 violent incidents have occurred in the
country during the last four years resulting in death of 1856 civilians and of hundreds of
policemen and security personnel. Given the severity of the problem, there is an urgent need
for socio-economic development of the areas besides making the administration more effective.
The naxal affected States are rich not only in forests but also in precious minerals. Therefore,
formulation and implementation of schemes for development of infrastructure, industries,
education, health and supply of safe drinking water is the need of the hour.
The Bill proposes to set up a Naxal Affected States Development Council to focus on
all-round development of the naxal affected States. The setting up of such a council will go
a long way in ensuring development of naxal affected States and as a result, the people living
in naxal affected States will be free from fear and enjoy the fruits of social, economic and
educational development.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; HANSRAJ  GANGARAM AHIR
July 23, 2012.

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of the Naxal Affected States Development
Council. Clause 4 provides that the Council shall have its headquarter at Nagpur and meet
at least five times in a calendar year. Clause 5 provides that the Council shall have a  Secretariat.
It further provides that the Central Government shall bear the administrative expenditure
including salaries and allowances of Secretariat staff of the Council. Clause 8 provides that
the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the Council for implementing the
development plans and schemes after due appropriation made by Parliament by law. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a sum of rupees six hundred crore is likely to be involved as a recurring
expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees four hundred crore is also likely to be involved as non-recurring
expenditure.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules to be made relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Council to be known as the Naxal Affected States
Development Council to formulate and monitor implementation of development
plans and schemes for balanced and all-round development of naxal affected
States and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2238LS(S3)—21-08-2012.