1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 83 of  2016
Definitions.
THE  GEOTAG-ENABLED  MONITORING  OF  PUBLIC  WORKS  BILL,  2016
By
SHRI  BAIJAYANT  PANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for better accountability in public works undertaken by the Central
Government through regular publication of geotagged and time-and-date-stamped
photographs of the progress being achieved in such works.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Geotag-Enabled Monitoring of Public Works
Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by a notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Central Government body" means a Central Government body, organisation
or establishment, by whatever name called, that engages in relevant public works;
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
(b) "geotagging" means the process of adding geographical information, usually
in the form of latitude and longitude coordinates, to a photograph;
(c) "public work" include civil works and irrigation, navigation, embankment and
drainage works, whether undertaken for creation of new assets or for the improvement
or maintenance of the existing assets;
(d) "relevant public works" means public works having a budget of rupees ten
lakh or more undertaken by any Central Government body, either directly, that is to say,
when the work is carried out by the Central Government body, or indirectly, that is to
say, when arrangements are made where an entity carries out the works on behalf of
the Central Government body, like awarding a contract for public works to a private
entity; and
(e) "time-and-date-stamping" means the process of adding information about
when a photograph was taken on a photographic device, in the form of time and date,
to the photograph.
3. (1) Every Central Government body shall, by the seventh day of every month, or by
the next working day, if the seventh day is not a working day, procure geotagged and
time-and-date-stamped photographs of relevant public works and transmit such photographs
to the Union Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation.
(2) The photographs referred to in sub-section (1) shall—
(a) clearly communicate the progress or lack of progress made in the relevant
public work in the last month or lack of progress thereof, as the case may be; and
(b) cover all major components of the relevant public work.
(3) The photographs referred to in sub-section (1) need not be procured and transmitted
after the Central Government body certifies the completion of the relevant public work.
4. (1) Where releasing geotagged and time-and-date-stamped photographs of a public
work may have adverse implications on national security, such public work shall be so
certified by the Central Government.
(2) Nothing in this Act shall apply to public works certified by the Central Government
under sub-section (1).
5. (1) The Union Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation shall, by the
fifteenth day of every month, or by the next working day if the fifteenth day is not a working
day, upload the photographs transmitted under section 3 by Central Government bodies, on
an especially created website, which shall be freely accessible to the public.
(2) The Union Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation shall cause a
report on the implementation of the system of collecting and uploading the geotagged and
time-and-date-stamped photographs of relevant public works to be laid before each House
of Parliament once in every session.
6. The Union Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation shall—
(a) ensure that the especially created website referred to in section 5 is user
friendly and any person can, as far as possible, easily find out the geotagged and
time-and-date-stamped photographs of a specific public work;
(b) ensure that the photographs are presented in a manner that makes it easy for
a person to compare the monthly progress that may have been made for a specific
public work;
(c) lay down guidelines and standards to ensure that no attempt to transmit or
upload incorrect information regarding the geotag or time-and-date-stamped
information succeeds; and
Every Central
Government
body to
procure and
transmit
geotagged and
time-and-date-
stamped
photographs.
Act not to
apply on
projects
having a
bearing on
national
security.
Uploading
geotagged and
time-and-date-
stamped
photographs
by the
Ministry of
Statistics and
Programme
Implementation.
Duties of the
Ministry of
Statistics and
Programme
Implementation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(d) monitor technological developments to ensure that the most accurate way of
presenting the progress of public works through geotagged and time-and-date-stamped
photographs is implemented.
7. (1) Every Central Government body shall, within one month of the coming into force
of this Act, designate an official, not below the rank of Director or equivalent, who shall be
responsible for ensuring that the Central Government body processes and transmits
photographs as specified under section 3.
(2) Where the Central Government body fails to fulfil its obligations under section 3,
the official designated under sub-section (1) shall be liable to—
(a) pay a fine of rupees one thousand per day for delay, beyond the period
specified in section 3, in processing and transmitting the photographs; and
(b) such other disciplinary action as the Central Government may deem
appropriate:
Provided that no penalty shall be imposed if the official proves that the failure to
fulfil the obligations under section 3 was due to circumstances beyond his control.
8. (1) The Union Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation shall, within
one month of coming into force of this Act, designate an official not below the rank of Joint
Secretary to the Government of India, who shall be responsible for ensuring that the Union
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation uploads the photographs on an
especially created website as specified under section 5.
(2) Where the official designated under sub-section (1) fails to fulfil his obligations
under section 5, he shall be liable to—
(a) pay a fine of rupees one thousand for every extra day it takes to publish the
photographs, after the day by which the photographs were supposed to be published;
and
(b) such other disciplinary action as the Central Government may deem fit:
Provided that no penalty shall be imposed if the official proves that the failure to
fulfil the obligations was due to circumstances beyond his control.
9. (1) Where a Central Government body fails to transmit the photographs, as required
under section 3, to the Union Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, the
Ministry shall communicate the same to the Union Ministry of Finance.
(2) The Union Ministry of Finance shall ensure that no further funds are issued for the
concerned relevant public works until the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
certifies that it has received the delayed photographs and a report from the Central Government
body about the reasons for delay in transmitting the photographs.
10. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against any person in respect of anything
which is in good faith done, or intended to be done, under or in pursuance of the provisions
of this Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
Penalty for
failure to
perform duties
by designated
officials
responsible for
processing and
transmitting
the geotagged
and time-and-
date-stamped
photographs.
Penalties for
failure to
upload
geotagged and
time-and-date-
stamped
photographs
by designated
official of the
Ministry of
Statistics and
Programme
Implementation.
Communication
about failure
of
transmitting
geotagged and
time-and-date-
stamped
photographs
of projects by
Central
Government
body.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule. 5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Undertaking public works is a key function of the Central Government. The expenditure
of public money on such works demand that the highest standards of accountability be
attached to them. Unfortunately, there are numerous instances of public works languishing
in delays and deadlocks. In many cases, the entities responsible for timely completion of the
required public works present a wrong picture of the progress they are achieving. This can
mislead both the public and the authorities.
A significantly improved sense of accountability would arise if the above mentioned
entities are required to submit geotagged and time-and-date-stamped photographs of the
progress they are making with the public works on a monthly basis. Geotagging and time-
and-date-stamping are effective ways of not only ensuring that the photographs are of the
relevant public work, but also of enabling interested citizens to check and confirm the progress
for themselves. This will usher in a significantly more responsible utilisation of public money.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BAIJAYANT PANDA
February 25, 2016
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for procuring and transmitting of geotagged and time-
and-date-stamped photographs of public works to the Union Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation. Clause 5 provides for creation of website and uploading of time-
and-date-stamped photographs to give access to public about the progress of public works
undertaken by Central Government bodies. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore will be involved.
A Non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty crore is also likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for better accountability in public works undertaken by the Central
Government through regular publication of geotagged and time-and-date-stamped
photographs of the progress being achieved in such works.
————
(Shri Baijayant Panda, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—36L(S3)—16.04.2016.