Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 
5
                                                                                 As introduced in Lok Sabha 
Bill No. 83 of  2025
THE WOMEN WORKFORCE (SUPPORT AND 
WELFARE) BILL, 2025
By
Shrimati Smita Uday Wagh, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of working women against discrimination and to ensure 
that essential facilities such as crèche service, recreational amenities, maternity 
benefits, hostel and transport support are available to working women and  
also to mandate for welfare measures by the employers to improve the state  
for the women employees working in Government establishments; public  
sector undertaking including banks and ports, educational institutions  
including universities, colleges and schools; as well as in factories,  
mines, plantations, agricultural lands, orchards and other  
such work places; and for matters connected  
therewith and incidental thereto.
           Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Women Workforce (Support and Welfare) Act, 
2025. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.

5
10
15
20
25
2
30
Definitions.
35
40
 2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government 
of that State and in other cases, the Central Government; 
(b) “child” means a male or female of the age below eighteen years and 
includes a still born child; 
(c) “employer” means,— 
(i) in relation to an establishment which is under the control of 
an appropriate Government, the person or authority appointed by the 
appropriate government for the supervision and control of the employees or 
where no person or authority is so appointed, the head of the establishment.; 
(ii) in relation to an establishment under any local self-government or 
authority, the person appointed by such authority or local self-government 
for the supervision and control of the employees or where no person is so 
appointed, the Chief Executive Officer by whatever name called by the 
local self-government or the authority, as the case may be; 
(iii) in other cases, the person who or the authority which has the 
ultimate control over the affairs of the establishment; 
(d) “establishment” include an office of the appropriate Government, quasi 
government or department including telegraph office, post office, telephone 
exchange, a mine, a plantation, an agricultural field, a hospital or nursing home, 
a shop or any business establishment, a brick kiln, construction site, any banking 
establishment, any private office or house, any school, college, university or like 
institution, establishment for the exhibition of equestrian, acrobatic and other 
performances and any other such place where a woman is employed for any 
work whatsoever; 
(e) “factory” means a factory as defined in the Occupational Safety, Health 
and Working Conditions Code, 2020;
(f) “industry” means an industry as defined in the Industrial Relations Code, 
2020; 
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(h) “working woman” means a woman who is employed whether directly 
or indirectly through any agency or contractor, as the case may be, for wages in 
any establishment, factory or industry. 
      3.  It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure that no 
discrimination is done by any employer on gender basis against women employees 
particularly in the matter of payment of wages and other remuneration which are 
paid to her male counterpart in such establishment. 
4. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, every employer shall provide basic child care facilities such as 
milk, tiffin, clothes, toys, trained ayahs and other essential facilities for the 
children of women working in the establishment. 
(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure that every employer of an 
agricultural field provide mobile childcare facilities for the working women in 
his establishment: 
Provided that two or more such employers may provide common childcare 
facilities for their establishments. 
Appropriate 
Government 
to ensure non-
discrimination 
and equal 
wages for 
working 
women.
37 of 2020
35 of 2020
Employer to 
have childcare 
facilities 
for working 
women.
45

3
Power to make 
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
(3) The appropriate Government shall open such number of creches at 
such places as it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
 5. The appropriate Government shall ensure that every employer provides 
retiring rooms with facilities like bathroom, latrine, drinking water at the 
workplace or worksite of the working women and recreational facilities like 
radio and television for working women and their children.
 6. The appropriate Government alongwith the employer shall provide 
adequate and proper security measures for the safety of working women in the 
establishment, factory or industry, as the case may be, as well as to and from 
their places of residence. 
 7. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure reservation 
of beds and proper and adequate maternity facilities for the working women in 
the hospitals and dispensaries having indoor patient facilities therein.
 8. The appropriate Government as well as an employer shall provide hostel 
and residential facilities both for married and unmarried working women 
nearest to their place of work and cheap, safe and quick transport facilities for 
such working women.
 9. The appropriate Government shall ensure protection from health 
hazards particularly for the women working in factories or industries like 
beedi, tobacco, stone mines, cashew, fish processing, salt, silk construction 
projects and such other establishments as may be prescribed.
 10. (1) The appropriate Government shall maintain a register of working 
women in such manner and at such place as may be prescribed. 
 ( 2) The appropriate Government may require an employer to furnish for 
the purposes of this Act, such statistical and other information, in such form 
and within such period as may be prescribed.
 11.  The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in 
addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the time being applicable to 
the working women.
      12.  (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
     ( 2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly and the 
Legislative Council, as the case maybe, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
 ( 3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Recreational 
facilities.
Security 
Arrangements.
Maternity 
Facilities.
Hostel and 
transport 
facilities.
Protection 
from health 
hazards.
Register 
of women 
working.
Overriding 
effect of the 
Act.
45

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Despite the continuing female foeticides the declining girl-child ratio and the 
prevailing conservative mindset of the society towards women, more and more 
women are venturing out of their houses to work to support their families. As a 
result, the number of working women in Government services, factories, industries, 
commercial establishments, agriculture, mines, fish processing sector, silk industry 
and so on so forth is increasing day by day, but their conditions of employment need 
amelioration. Various basic and essential facilities which are supposed to be made 
available to the working women by the Government and private employers are 
either absent or not adequate and satisfactory. Unfortunately, in most of the private 
sector including agricultural sector, the facilities are rather minimal or negligible 
and the working women are an exploited lot there. The existing labour laws also 
do not provide for proper medical, educational, recreational and other facilities for 
the working women and their children. As regards, other social security measures 
like security, transport, accommodation have also not been made so far. In many 
establishments they are not given equal pay for work. This discrimination has to be 
stopped by enacting a proper legislation. 
Hence it has become necessary to enact a legislation to protect working women 
against discrimination and provide adequate welfare measures for the working 
women. 
Hence this Bill.
  New Delhi;        SMITA UDAY WAGH
July 6, 2025

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of childcare facilities for 
working women. Clause 5 provides for recreational facilities for working women 
and their children. Clause 6 provides that the appropriate Government to provide 
adequate and proper security measures for the safety of working women. Clause 7 
provides for maternity facilities. Clause 8 provides for hostel and transport facilities 
for the working women. Clause 9 provides for appropriate Government shall 
ensure protection from health hazards of the working women. Clause 10 stipulates 
that the appropriate Government shall maintain a register of working women. 
The expenditure relating to States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of 
the State Government concerned. However, the expenditure in relation to Union 
Territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, if enacted, 
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a 
sum of rupees two thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum. 
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five thousand crore is also likely to 
involve.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details 
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of working women against discrimination and to ensure 
that essential facilities such as crèche service, recreational amenities, maternity 
benefits, hostel and transport support are available to working women and  
also to mandate for welfare measures by the employers to improve the state  
for the women employees working in Government establishments; public  
sector undertaking including banks and ports, educational institutions  
including universities, colleges and schools; as well as in factories,  
mines, plantations, agricultural lands, orchards and other  
such work places; and for matters connected  
therewith and incidental thereto.
(Shrimati Smita Uday Wagh,  M.P.)