Short title and
commencement.
THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE AND CREDIT GUARANTEE
CORPORATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMATI DARSHANA VIKRAM JARDOSH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation
(Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In section 2 of the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961,
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act)—
(i) after clause (dd), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
Bill No. 83 of  2017
Amendment
of Section 2.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
47 of 1961.

2
Insertion of
new section
11B.
“(dda) ‘co-operative credit society’ means a society registered under
the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912”.
(ii) in clause (eea), after sub-clause (v), the following sub-clause shall be added
at the end, namely:—
“(vi) a co-operative credit society”;
(iii) in clause (g), for the words “banking company or a co-operative bank” at
both the places they occur, the words “banking company, co-operative credit society
or a co-operative bank” shall be substituted.
3. After section 11A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“11B. The Corporation shall register every co-operative credit society within
thirty days from the date of establishment of such society.”.
4. In section 14 of the principal Act, for the words “Regional Rural Bank or a
co-operative bank” at both the places they occur, the words “Regional Rural Bank,
co-operative credit society or a co-operative bank” shall be substituted.
Registration of
co-operative
credit society.
Amendment
of Section 14.
2 of 1912.
5
10
15

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There are many investment companies operating in the country which cater to the
need of different kinds of investors. While big banking companies have educated wealthy
persons as their clientele, small workmen and daily wagers park their savings in small
co-operative societies formed in and around their workplaces or residences, which also lend
them money in times of need. There occur cases of default by these investment companies.
Though the investors of banking companies be it a rural bank, cooperative bank or a
urban bank have a very unique facility of safeguarding of their savings in cases of default by
the banking company, which has been guaranteed under the provisions of the Deposit
Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961, such facility is not available to the
depositors of the co-operative credit societies.
In the event of default of payment by the co-operative societies, small investors lose
their lifetime savings. In view of the hardships faced by the small investors, it is felt that the
facility of safeguarding of their savings as provided under the Deposit Insurance and Credit
Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961 should be extended to cover the cooperative societies also.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DARSHANA VIKRAM JARDOSH
March 30, 2017.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM DEPOSIT INSURANCE AND CREDIT GUARANTEE CORPORA TION ACT, 1961
(NO. 47 OF 1961)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires.
* * * * *
(dd) "co-operative bank" means a State co-operative bank, a Central
co-operative bank and a primary co-operative bank:
* * * * *
(eea) "credit institution" means all or any of the following namely:—
(i) a banking company:
(ii) a corresponding new bank:
(iii) a Regional Rural Bank:
(iv) a co-operative bank:
(v) a financial institution:
* * * * *
(g) "deposit" means the aggregate of the unpaid balances due to a depositor
(other than a foreign Government, the Central Government, a State Government, a
corresponding new bank, Regional Rural Bank or a banking company or a co-operative
bank) in respect of all his accounts, by whatever name called, with a corresponding
new bank or with a Regional Rural Bank or with a banking company or a co-operative
bank and includes, credit balances in any cash credit account but does not include.
(i) where a banking company or a corresponding new bank at the
commencement of this Act or where an eligible co-operative bank at the
commencement of the Deposit Insurance Corporation (Amendment) Act, 1968 is work-
ing under a scheme of compromise or arrangement or of reconstruction sanctioned by
any competent authority providing for the acceptance of fresh deposits, any amount
due to the depositor in respect of his deposit before the date of the coming into force
of the scheme to the extent it is not credited after the said date under the provisions of
that scheme; or
(ia) any amount due on account of any deposit with any insured bank which has
been specially exempted in this behalf by the Corporation with the previous approval
of the Reserve Bank or,
(ii) any amount due to account of any deposit received outside India:
* * * * *
11A. The Corporation shall register every Regional Rural Bank before the expiry of
thirty days from the date of its establishment.
* * * * *
14.  (1) Where the Corporation has registered any banking  company Regional Rural
Bank or co-operative bank as an insured bank, it shall, within thirty  days of is registration,
send an intimation in writing to the banking company, Regional Rural Bank or co-operative
bank that it has been registered as an insured bank.
(2) Every such intimation shall indicate the manner in which the premium payable by
the bank under section 15 may be calculated.
* * * * *
Registration
of Regional
Rural Bank
Intimation of
registration.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961.
————
(Shrimati Darshana Vikram Jardosh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—437LS(S3)—16.06.2017.