, 
CORRIGENm 
to THE EMIGRATION BILL, 1983 
(To balA.s introduqed in 10k Sabh),) 
1. Page 1, lin~ 14,-
!2I,' "certifiacte" means a certifiacte' 
~ '''certificate'' means a. certificate' 
2. page 3, line 19,-
!!u: "asistant" ~ "assistant" 
3. Page 5', against line 4,-
!Q.r. the marginal .citation ~ "45 of 186a." 
4. PaEe 5, line 31;,-
!Ql:. "ir" ~ "in" 
5'. Page 13, line 30,-
1:Q.t. "sub- section (2)" ~ "sub- section (1)" 
" .to Page 19, line 17,-
M ''p erm! t " ~ "a p o-rmi t " 
7. r~ge 19, line 20,-
!s;u: "valid" ~ "validity" 
e. P~go 19, line 21,-
after "require" insert "any" 
9. pa ge 19, 1n--th.e .. marg1.na.l..l'l.Ead:1.llg to-.c-J..IJ..UB~_:.-_~_ 
m. "1 of 1922" ~ "7 of 1922" 
10. Page 24, line 11,-
.tht. "Sub- clause" ~ "Sub-clauses" 
11. page 24, line 10 from bottom,-
12. Page 24, line' lrom bottom,-
after "power to" insert "the" 

13. Page 25', line ?,-
1:0.1: "th£: offences" ~ "offances" 
14. Pa ge 25, line 11,-
nu: "mentiont;Jd" t.e§J1 t'rnaintain .,}" 
15. page 25', line 4., !'rom bottom,-
!Q.r. ~'pro ITiSOT!3" llid "pro '"dsiolts II 
16. page 2?, line ?,-
NEW DELHI-, 
-. . -
.. 

I '" ~ ., , 
As nmWDUCED IN Lo~ 'SABH!.'" en. 
Dna No. 84 of 1983 
JF7 
THE EMIGRATION BILL, 1983 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPl'ER I 
PRELIMlNARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
EMIGRATION AUmORITIF.s 
3. Protectors of Emigrants. 
4. General duties of Protectors of Emigrants. 
5. Power to authorise persons to exerci'se functions of a Protector. 
6. Emigration check-posts. 
7. Other emigration officers and staff. 
8. Emigration officers to be public servants. 
CHAPTER III 
REGISTRATION OF RECRUITING AGENTS 
9. Registering authority. 
10. No person to function as recruiting agent without a valid certI-
ficate. 
11. Application for registration. , 
12. Terms and conditions of registration. 
13. Renewal of registration. 
14. Cancellation, suspension, etc., of a certificate. 
CHAPTER IV 
P'ERMI'IS FOR RECRUITMENT BY EMPLOYERS 
15. Competent authority. 
16. Recruitment by employers to be through recruiting agent or 
under permit. 
17. Procedure for obtaining permits. 
18. Period of ,validity of permit. 
19. Registration of certain permits. 
20. Cancellation or suspension of a permit. 
21. Power to f'xempt. 

(il) 
CHAPTER V 
EMIGRATJON CLEARANCE 
CLAUSES 
22. Requirement, etc., as to emigration clearance. 
23. Appeals. 
CHAPTER VI 
.APPEALS 
CHAPTER VII 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES • 
24. Offences and penalties. 
25. 0Jfences by companies. 
26. Offences to be cognizable. 
27. Previous sanction of Central Government necessary. 
28. Punishment to be without prejudice to any other action. 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
29. Determination of question as to w~ether a person is an emigrant. 
30. Power to prohibit emigration to any country in the interests of 
the general public, etc. 
31. Power to prohibit emigration due to outbreak of epidemics, 
civil disturbances, etc., in a country. 
32. Power to prohibit emigration of any class or category of persons. 
33. Provision as to security. 
34. Refund of security. 
;is. Power to search, seize and detain persons, conveyance, etc. 
36. Returns and registers. 
37. Authorities and officers. to have certain powers of civil court. 
38. Power to give 'directions. I 
39. Effect of other laws. 
40. Delegation. 
41. Power to exempt. 
42. Act not to apply to certain emigrants. 
43. Power to make rules. 
44. Notifications and rules to be laid before Parliament. 
45. Repeal of Act '1 of 1922. 

THE EMIGRATION BILL, 1983 
" BILL 
BiD No. 84 of 1983 
to CORIOlicLJte cmd Amend the law rel.ati.ng to emigration Of citizens C1/ 
India. 
Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELmmrARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Emigration Act, 1983. 
(2) It extends to tl1'e whole of India and applies also to citizens of 
India outside India. 
(3) It shall com'! into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification, appoint and different dates may be appointed for 
I () different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision 
to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the 
commencement of that provision. 
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires.-
(a) "certifiacte" means a certifiacte of registration issued under 
section 11; 
(b) "conveyance" includes n vessel, vehide, countr~'-craft and 
an aircraft; 
. (c) "dependent" means any person who is related to an emigrant 
and is dependent on that emigrant; 
Short 
title, 
extent, 
applica-
tion and 
commen-
cement. 
Defini_ 
tions. 

2 
(d) "emigrant" means any citizen of India who intends to emi-
grate, or emigrates, or has emigrated but does not include-
(i) a dependent of an emigrant, whe~her such dependent 
aecompanies that emigrant, or departs subsequently for the pur-
pose of joining that emigrant in the country to which that em i- 5 
grant bas lawfully emigrated; 
(ii) any person who has resided outside India at any time 
after attaining the age of eighteen years, for not less than three 
years or the SpOUSe or child of such person; 
(e) "emigrant conveyance" means any conveyance specially 10 
chartered. for conveyance of emigrants or for conveying emigrants 
exceeding such number as m'8y be prescribed: 
Provided that the Central Government may. by notification, de-
clare that any conveyance conveying emigrants to such place as may 
"be specified in the not;fication shall not be deem~d to be an emigrant 15 
conveyance; 
(f) "emigrate" and r'emigration" mean the departure out of India 
of any Person with a view to taking up any employment (whether 
or not under an agreement or other arrangements to take up such 
employment and whether with or without the assistance of a recruit- 20 
ing agent or employer) in any cMlntry or place outside Jndia; 
(Q) "employer" means any person providiUl!' or offering to 
provide. employment in any country or place outside Indfa: 
(h) "employment" means any service. occupation or engallement 
(not being service. occupation or enga~ement under the Central 
Government or a State Government). in any kind of work within t.he 25 
meaning of clause (0). for wages or for reward. and all its '{ramma-
tical variations ,and cognate expressions shall be construed accol'd-
fngly; 
(i) "notification" means a notiflcation published in the Oftlcfal 30 
Gazette; 
(j) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(k) "Protector of Emigran~s" means a Protector of Emigrants 
appoin~ under section 3 and includes a person authorised lln1er 35 
section 5; 
(l) "recruit;ng arent" mean~ a perSOn engaged in India in the 
hUsineS'c; of recruitment for an employer and representing such 
emplover with respect to any matter in relation to such recruitment 
Including de::dings with persons so recruited or desiring to be so 
recruitedj . . . 40 

" J 
(m) "recruitment" includ~s the issuing of any advertisement for 
the lJurpose of recri.litment, the Ilffering hy advertisement to secure 
Ot" assi::;t in securing any employment in any country or place out-
side India an"d the entering into any correspondence, negotiation, 
5 agreement or arrangement with any individual for or in relation to 
the employment of such individual in any country or place outside 
India; 
(n) "registering authority" means the officer appointed under 
section 9 to be the registering authority for the purposes of' this Act; 
In (0) "work" means-
20 
(i) any unskilled work, including any form of industrial or 
agricultural labour; 
(ii) any domestic service; 
(iii) any service, not being a service in a managerial capa-
city, in any hotel, restaurant, tea-touse or other place of public 
resort; 
(iv) work as a driver of a truck or other vehicle, mechanic, 
teclmician or skilled labOurer or artisan; 
(v) work as an office asistant or accountant or typist or 
stenographer Or salesman, or nurse or operator of any machine; 
(vi) work in connection with, or for the purposes of, any 
cinema, exhibition Or entertainment; 
(vii) any such work of a professional or of any other nature 
as the Central Government may, having regard to the need for 
the protection of citizens of India who may be employed in such 
work outside India and other relevant circumstances, specify by 
notification: 
Provided that the Central .Government may, if satisfied that it 
is necessary so to do having regard to the conditions of service ap-
plicable with respect to employment in any of the aforementioned 
categories of work or any sub-category thereof, whether generally or 
in relation to any particular oountry or place and other relevant cir-
cumstances, declare by notification that such category of work or 
sub-category of work shall not be deemed to be work within the 
meaning of this defin ition. 
(2) Any reference in this Act to any law which is not in force :n any 
area shall .. in relation to that area, be construed as a reference to the 
corresponding law, if any, in force in that area. 
CHAPTER II 
'EMIGRATION AUTHORITIES 
3. (1) The Central Govemment may, by notification, appoint a Pro-
tector General of Emigrants and as many Protectors of Emigr.ts. as it 
deems fit, for the purposes of this Act. 
(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order, d(~fine 
45 the area to "",I.ich the authority of a Prot~ctor of Emigrants so \.appointed 
shall extend and, where two or morE' Protectors of Emigrants are 
appointed for the SAme aren, nlso provide, by stich order, f(~r tht' ~idri­
hution nnd. allocation of the ;work to hl' performed tinder thiS Act 10 rt'-
llltion "to such area. 
(3) The Protectors of Emigrants shall perform the functions nssill,ned 
50 to them by or under this Act under ~he general superintendence and con-
trol' of the Protector General of Enugrants. 
Protec-
tors of 
Emi-
gl"ants. 

General 
duties 
of 
Protec-
tors 
of 
Emi-
grants. 
Power to 
autho_ 
rlBe 
persons 
to 
exercise 
functions 
ofa 
Protec-
tor. 
EmiJra-
tion 
check-
posts. 
other 
emigra-
tion 
omcers" 
and 
!taft. 
• 
(4) The Protector Gelleral of Emigrants may. in addition to the 
special functions assigned to him by or under this Act, perform all or 
any of the functions assigned to any Protector of Emigrants. 
4. Subject to the other provisions of this Act, every Protector of Emi-
grants shall, in addition to the special duties assigned to him by or under 5 
this Ac~ 
(CI) protect and aid with his advice all intending emigrants and 
emigrants; 
(b) cause, so far as he can, all the provisions of this Act and of 
the rules made thereunder to be complied with; 10 
(c) inspect, to such extent and in such manner as may be pres-
crfbed- . 
(i) any emigrant conveyance, or 
(ii) any other conveyance if he has reason to believe that any 
intending emigrants or emigrants are proceeding from, or return- J!) 
tng to, India to or from a place outside India by such other con-
veyance; 
(d) inqUire into the treatment received by emigrants during 
their voyage or journey to, and during the period of their residence 
in the country to which they emigrated and also 'during the return !20 
voyage or journey to India and report . thereon to the Protector 
General of Emigrants or S'Ilch other authority as may be prescribed; 
(e) aid and advise, so far as he reasonably can, emigrants who 
have returned to India. 
S. The Central Government may, if satisfied that it is necessllry 80 25 
to do in the interest of emigrants or intending emigrants, authod~e any 
person to perform all or any of the functions of a Protector of Emigrants 
under this Act. 
6. (1) Where the Central Government considers that, with a view to 30 
preventing or checking the contravention of the provisions of this Act, '. 
it is necessary so to do, it may, by notification, set up such number of 
emigration check-post!il at such places as may be specified. 
(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order made 
in this behalf, appoint.an officer of the Central Government or of a 35 
State Government to be an ofticer in charge of an emigration check-post 
set up under sub-sedion (1). 
(3) .An officer in charge of an emigration check-post 'Shall be subject 
to the general control and supervision of the Protector of Emigrant! 
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction thut emigration check-post 40 
is si tuated. 
7. The Central Government may appoint such-other officer's and em-
ployees (hereinafter referred to/as the emigration officers and emigra-
tion employees), as it may think fit, to assist the Protector General of 
Emil1'8nts and the Protectors of Emigrants in the performance of their 
duties under this Act. 15 

IS of 1880. 
5 
I. The Protector General of Emigt'ants, Pl:otectors ot Emigrants, the 
officers in charge of emigration check-posts, emigration officers and 
emigration employees appoi.nted under thi,s Act shall be public servants 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
CHAPTER III 
REGISTRA'ltON OF RECRUITING AGBNTS 
:.. The Central Government may, by notific.lf.ion, appoint the Protec-
tor General of Emigrants or any other officer of that Government of a 
rank higher than that of a Protector of Emigrants to be the registering 
10 authority for the purposes of this Act. 
10. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no Iecruiting agent shall, 
after the commencement of "this Act, commence or carry on the business 
of recruitment except under and in accordance with a certificate issued 
in that behalf by the registering authority: 
15 Provided that a person carrying on the business of recruiting agent 
immediately before the commencement of this Ac~ may cOJ.tinue to 
carry Qn such business without such a certificate for a period of one 
month from such comme'lcement, and if he has made an application for 
such certificate under this Act within the said period of one month and 
20 such application is in the prescribed form and contains the prescribed 
particulars, till the disposal of such application by the registering 
authority. 
11. (1) An application for registration shall be made to the regis-
tering authority in such form and shall contain such particulars 8S to 
125 the applicant's financial ss..tndness, trustwort.hiness, premises at which 
he intends to carryon his business, facilities at his disposal for 
recruitment, his antecedents (including information as to whether 
any certificate had been issued to him under this Chapter 
earlier and if so, whether such certificate had been cancelled) and pre-
So vious expel'ience, if any, of recruitment and other relevant matters as 
may be prescribed and shall be accompanied by a receipt evidencing the 
payment of the prescribed fee and an affidavit gjving his current finan-
cial standing and an undertaking in the form prescribed. to the effect 
that in the event of any jnformation furnished in or a10ng with the 
35 application for registration being found to be false or incorrect in any 
respect, the certificate shall be liable to be cancelled at any time fr 
accordance with the procedure prescribed: r 
Provided that no application shall be entertained under this sub-
section from a person disqualified under sub-section (6) of section 14 
40 till the expiry of the ,period of such disqualification. 
45 
(2) On receipt of such application, the registering authority shaU,-
(a) if the application is not in the pre!'lcribed form or does Dot 
contain any of the prescribed particulars, return the application tc 
the applicant; 
(b) if the application is in the prescribed form and contains the 
prescribed particulars, inform the. applicant that he is eligible for 
the grant of the certificate applied for and, after giving the applica.'1t 
an opportunity to be heard, determine, under sub-section (3), the 
amount of the security which the applicant shall furnish. 
Emlgra. 
tion 
officers 
to be 
public 
servants. 
Reglster-
iog 
authority. 
No 
person to 
function 
as 
recruit.. 
. ing agent 
without 
a valid, 
certifi-
cate. 
Appli_ 
cation 
for regis. 
tration. 

Terms 
and 
condi-
tions of 
l'egistra-
lion. 
Renewal 
of regis-
tration .. 
6 
(3) The registering authority shall, for securing the due performance 
of the terms and conditions of the certificate proposed to be issued by 
it under sub-section (2) to an applicant and for securing compliance 
with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder and for 
meeting expenses which may have to be incurred in the event of the 5 
repatriation to India of any of the emigrants who may be recruited by 
the applicant, determine, in accordance with the rules made in this behalf, 
the amount of security (not being in any case less than one lakh of 
rupees) which shall be furnished by the applicant. 
(4) If an applicant furnishes in the prescrit-ed manner the amount 10 
of security determined 'Wlder sub-section (3) within a period of 
one month from the date on which the registering authority 
requires him to furnish such security, he shall be issued the ,certificate 
applied for by him together with an endorsement thereon to the effect 
that the security requIred has been furnished by him. 15 
(5) If an applicant fails to turnish the security required to be fur-
nished by hlm within the period specified in sub-section (4). his applica-
tion shall be deemed to have been rejected by the registering authority 
on the date of expiry of that period. 
12. A certificate issued under section 11 shall be-
(4) in such form as may be prescribed; 
(b) valid for such period not exceeding five years as may be 
prescri bed: 
Provided that a certificate may be issued for a period- shorter 
than the prescribed period-
(i) if the person to whom it is issued so desires; or 
(ii) if the registering authority, for reasons to be commu-
nicated in writing to the applicant for the certificate, considers 
in any case that the certificate should be issued for a shorter 
20 
per~od; 30 
(c) subject to such other terms and conditions, including in 
particular, the maintenance by the holder of the' certificate of the 
prescribed records containing details of his financial transactions in 
regard to recruitment, persons recruited or assisted to emigrate by 
him, employers concerned, contracts and other arrangements entered 35 
into in connection with recrUitment, as may be prescribed: 
Provided that a certificate may contain, in addition to the pres-
cribed terms and conditions, such other terms and conditions as the 
registering authority may, for securing the purposes of this Act, 
. impose inariy particular case. 40 
13. A certificate may be renewed from time to time and the proviSIons 
of this Act and the rules made thereunder (inciuding provisions as to 
fees) shall apply to the renewal of a certificate u they apply to the issue 
thereof: 
Provided that no certificate shall be renewed unless the application 45 
for its renewal is made not less than three months prior to the date on 
which the certificate, would, but for such renewal, cease to be valid. 

7 of 1922. 
7 
14. (1) The registering authority may cancel any certificate on any 
Gfte or mure of the following grounds and.on no other ground, namely:-
(n) that having regard to the manner in which the holder of the 
certificate has carried on his business or any deterioration in his 
, financial position, the facilities at his disposal for recruitment, the 
holder of the certificate is not a fit person to continue to hold the 
certificate; 
(b) that 'the holder of the certificate has recruited emigrants 
for purposes prejudicial to the interests of India or for purposes . 
10 contrary to public policy; 
(c) that the holder of the certificate has, subsequent to the issue 
of the certificate, been convicted in India for any offence involving 
moral turpitude; 
(d) that the holder of the certificate has, subsequent to the 
ISSue of the certificate, been convicted by a court in India for any 
offence under this Act; the Emigration Act, 1922, or any other law 
relating to passports, foreign exchange, drugs, narcotics or 
smuggling and sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not 
less than six months; 
20 (e) that the certificate has been issued or renewed on mis-
representation or suppression of any material fact; 
(f)' that the holder of the certificate has violated any of the 
terms and conditions of the certificate; 
(g) that in the opinion of the Central Government it is neces-
25 .sary in the interests of friendly relations of India with any foreign 
country or in the interests of the general public to cancel the 
certificate. 
(2) Where the registering authority, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, is satisfied that pending the consideration of the question of 
30 cancelling any certificate on any of the grounds mentioned in sub-section 
(1) it is necessary so to do, the registering authority may, by order in 
writing, suspend the operation of the certifl..cat~ for such period not 
exceeding thirty days as may be specified in the order and require the 
holder of the certificate to show cause, within fifteen days from the date 
35 of receipt of such order, as to why the suspension of the certificate should 
not be extended till the determination of the question as to whether the 
registration should be cancelled. 
(3) A court convicting a holder of a certificate for an offence under 
this Act may also cancel the certificate: 
40 Provided that if the conviction is set aside in appeal or otherwise, 
the cancellation under sub-section (3) shall become void . 
• t. 
(4) An order of cancellation of a certificate may be made under sub-
section (3) by an appellate court or by a court exercising its powers of 
\ ,..Jrevision . 
. - (5) B~fore passing an order cancelling or suspending a certifl..~ate the 
45 registering authority or the court, as the case may be, shall conSIder the 
'tjuestion as to the provisions and arrangement!? which should be ~a~~ 
.. 
Cancella-
tion, sus. 
pension 
etc., ot'. 
certifi· 
cate. 

Competent 
authority, 
Recruit. 
ment by 
employers 
to be 
throu,h 
recruit· 
in, 
agent or 
under 
pt'rmlt. 
l'rocedure 
for 
obtaining 
permits. 
8 
for sa.ieglyanting the iu'erests of enu.I1a.n's and 0tUaer "~I ~ w~ 
the holder of the certificate had allY transactions in ~ilC course of hili 
bwoiness as recruitiug agent and may make such orders (includi.n,orcit!1's 
p,rm.ittini t}:le holder of the certificate to continue to carry on his ~usi· 
ness ~~tb respect to all or any of such emigrants and other ~sons) as .5 
it may consider necessary in this behalf. 
(/1) Where a certificate issued to any person has bl.!en ca.nceUed under 
Ws section, such person shall not be eliMible to make any applicati. for 
another certificate under this Chapter until the expiry of a perlO(t 01 
two years from the date of such cancelIation. • .. 
CHAPTER IV 
PERMITS FOR RECRUITMENT BY EMPLOYIJRS 
15. (1) The CeDtral Oi)vemment may, by DMjlcaU-. appaillt the 
Pl'otectGr General of Emigrants or aIil.y other 08ca of ihat ao •• 'meDt 
of a ~ higher tItan that of a Protector of EMigt18Dia to lie .. MIiMIority 1& 
(heNinafter refenred to as the campetf'nt au.tlaorioiy) lor ~ l*'1f! '.; 
under this Chapter. . 
(2) Notwithstanding anythiag eoa-tainad in ab-aeetiOll (t), the Cen .. 
tral Government may, by ROtitklatWn, authoriseaBY ,. ••• wJ10 is 
~ployed. und,er that GoveJln..meD.t in ~y COlQl~ or p14ce ouNide India 10 
to exercise the powers of the r:om~tent autbority, 8A«l _, ;wmtta 
under this Chapter to employers who are not citizens of India tor the 
purpose of recruiting any citizen of India lor empIa,waerw in such 
country or place and a person so authorised shaH· eniMse a dulyelltlfled 
eopy of every permit issued DY him under tftis Chapter te the Pretector 115 
General of Emigrants. 
lA Sa,ve ill ot.b.erwisp. provided by or Wl4er 'bis ~ no e .... ., 
~U reauit any citi.len of lDdia for ernplQ~nt i.n ., CO~I;Y. ., ~ 
ouw..p.e India. except- . 
(a) through a recruiting agent cQmpete~t und~r thjs Act" QlaU 30 
such recruitment, or 
<") in accordance with a valid permit issued in this behalf uftder 
this Chapter. 
17. (n An employer ~siring to obt.aill a peJ;mit under tbi. CUpter 
may make an application in that !lehal! in the prescribed form to. tM sa 
competent authority. . 
. (2) On receipt of such application, the competent authority shall, IIUb-
lect to any ifules made in this behalf, makE' such inquiry as be may deem 
~c;ess4lry al'}~ grant the permit applied tor 01' rej~ct the ~Uoat¥ilJ: 
, ~ovtded that. before granting a permit the competent authOrity. ma, 
Je~Ulre the a~pllCant ~~ cumply with such conditions as may be' preS. ~ 
crlbe~: fm~lud~ng cCHlshhons as to furnishing of 18C'Wit,y IUWl: .. b .. ther -
~Qn~htlQlls 3S that ~llthority may, fOr r.eascms to .be HCortW. m. ~ 
deem. ne~essilf8 in the int.er~st.s Qf t~ citiZ'lDl of lDdia. liUl. ~, .~ recrulted by the applicant. . . J .. 
. a 

5 
10 
I 
(at ... te • ou.r pro~ of this Act, the cornpe1lent wtIID-
rilt ..., ...... eppn.U\m under I\l~tion "(1) on any, ORe er more 
of .. foIiM.rilll ..... and on 11K> otl¥et .mft!ld, ~y)-
(8) that the application is not complete in all respects or that 
any of the material particulars furnished in the application are not 
we; 
(b) ~t UIe terms and conditions of employment which the 
~ant proposes 1.0 ofter to persons recruited or proposed to be 
recrui~d by him are discriminatory or exploitative; 
(C) that the employment which the applicant proposes to offer 
involves work of, a nature Whick is lltUawful according to the laws 
of India or offends against the public policy of India or is violative 
of norms of human dignity and decency; 
\4, tht having i'egird. to the antecedents of the appUcant, his 
~ 'IIhn4illl, thIe fa'Cilities at his di$posal, the working and 11,,-
in, t!U'ft'd!tiot\s or pets'o. 'elnpl'oyed by hi%Xl in the past, it wdUld hot 
be in the public interest or in the interests of the ~rsons who may 
-. Nmlitai byblm·, ~ lene 8 permit to him; 
(e) that having regard. to the prevailing circumstances in the 
country or in the place where the applicant proposes to employ the 
pltWIII recrui\1ed 'I&y him) :it would not be in the interests of any t:iti-
.. C)f Itldie tte emigrete for takiog lJP such employment. 
(4) Where the competent authority makes an order under sub-section 
(zt ~~ an appltee\ion, ~ shall record in writing a brief statement 
~5 of his reasons for making such order and furnish the appUcant, on 
demand, a copy of the same: 
f\-ov~ that if the competent authority is or the opinion that it is 
ne~ary Ol'e~iel\t in tile interests of friendly relations with a foreign 
eoU1ltry or in the Interests bf the general public so to do, he may refuse 
SO to provitb! sUCh Ct)~y or, as the case may be, furilish a copy of only such 
parts bt tbe statement as he may deem fit. 
JL A permit issued under section 17 shan be valid till the expiry of 
such period, not exceeding one year, as may be prescribed. from the date 
of issue thereof, or till the recruitment of the persons for whose recruit-
" l\lent such permit is issued is completed, whichever is earlier: 
PrcwNed that where the holder of the permit has been unable for 
sufficient cause, to complete such recruitment before the expiry of the 
prescri,bed period,· the prescribed authority may, subject to rules made 
in this behalf, extend the period of validity of the permit by such further 
40 pettod or l'!riC7C!s. not ~eed.ing three months at a time. 
"'Any pWMit oBtained ftom a person authorised under 8Ub-section 
(2t wi IlUttun 16 shall not be valid unless a certified copy thereof is ftled 
in _ pNStrtbed mllftMr with the Protector General of Emigrants. 
Period 
of vall-
dity of 
permit. 
Registra-
tion of 
certain 
permit~. 

Cancella-
tiOJl or 
81IIPen-
lion of a 
permit. 
Power to 
exempt. 
Require-
ment, etc., 
as to 
emilra-
tion clea-
rance. 
10 
• l'he provisions of section 14 relating to cancellation and suspen-
sion of a certificate referred. to therein shall, subject to such modifications 
as may be necessary (including modifications for construina the refer-
ences in that section to registering authority as references to competent 
authority under this Chapter), apply for the cancellation or suspension 5 
of a permit. . 
21. The Central Government may, if satisfied that it is neCe&Sary or 
expedient so to do in the public interest, by notification and subject to 
such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, exempt 
any class or classes of employers from the requirement of obtaining a 10 
permit under this Chapter. 
CHAPTER V 
ElWGRATION CLEARANCE 
22. (J) No citizen of India sh:a.ll emigrate unless he obtains under this 
Chapter from the Protector of Emigrallts .authorisation in the. prescrib- 15 
ed manner and form (Nch authoflsation being hereinafter referred to· 
as emigration clearance) for emigration. 
(2) An application for emigration clearance shall be in the prescribed 
form, shall contain the prescrlbed particulars and shall be made by the 
emigrant concerned to the Protector of Emigrants: 
Provided that such application may . be made through the recruiting 
agent, if any, through whom the emigrant has been recruited or through 
the employer concerned . 
.(3) Every application under sub-section .(2) shall be accompanied 
by-
lZO 
(a) a true copy (verified and authenticated in the prescri-
bed manner) oi the agreement with respect to the employment for . 
the taking up of which the applicant proposes to emigrate and 
where such agreement does not provide for all or any of the pres-
cribed matters, also a statement (verified. and authenticated in 
the prescribed manner) setting out the particulars with respect to go 
BUch matters; 
,(b) a statement (verified and authenticated in the prescribed 
manner) as to the provision by way of security for meeting -the ex-
penses which may be incurred in case it becomes necessary to 
arrange for the repatriation to India of the applicant; 35 
(c) a receipt evidencing the payment of the prescribed fee; 
(d) such other relevant documents or copies of relevant docu-
ments as may be prescribed. . 
(4) The Protector of Emigrants shall, after satisfying himself about +b 
the a~curacy of the particulars mentioned in the application and in the 
other documents submitted along with the application, authorise in the 
prescribed manner and form, the emigration of the applicant or intimate 
by order in writing the applicant or, as the case may be, the recruiting 
agent or t!mployer through whom the applications have been made 45 
about the deficiencies and require him to make good such deficiencies 
within such time as may be specified in the order or reject the appU-
cation. 

11 
(5) Subject to the other proViisions of this Act, the Protector of Emi-
gr~ts may reject an application for emigration clearance under thii 
section on anyone or more of the following groWlds and on 110 other 
ground, n:amely:-
5 . (a) that the terms and conditions of employment which the 
appllcant propol;;es to take up are discClminatory or exploitative; 
(b) that the employment which the applicant proposes to take 
up involves work 01 a nature wluch is UnJ.awful according to the 
laws of India or offends against the public policy of India or is 
10 violat!Ve of norms of human dignity and, decency; 
(c) that t.!le applicant will have to work or live in sub-standard 
working or living conditions; 
(d) that having regard to the prevailiIli circumstances in the 
country or place whel'e the applicant proposes to take up employment 
15 or the antecedents of the employer under whom the applicant pro--
poses to take up employment or any other relevant cU'Cumstances, 
it would not be in the interests of the applicant to emigrate; 
(e) that no provision or arrangement has been made for 
meeting the expenses which may be incurred in case it becomes ne-
~o cessary to arrange for the repatriation to India of the applicant, or 
that the provisions or arrangements made in this behalf are not 
adequate for the purpose. 
(6) Every order rejecting an application for emigration clearance 
shall set out clearly the ground or grounds on which the order has beeD 
25 made and the facts or circumstances on which such groWld or grounds 
are ·based. 
35 
45 
CHAPTER VI 
APPEALS 
23. (1) Any person aggrieved by-
(0) an order of the registering authority rejecting his applica-
tion for registration or requiring him to furnish any security or to 
comply with any term or condition (not being a prescr~bed term 
or condition) specified in the certificate issued to him or suspending 
or cancelling or refusing to renew the certificate issued to him; or 
(b) an order of the competent authority rejecting his application 
for a permit or requiring him to comply with any terms or cm:td1. 
tions (not being a prescribed term or condition) speci1led in the 
permit issued to him, or suspending or cancelling or refusing to 
extend the period of the validity of the permit issued to him; or 
(c) an order of the Protector of Emigrants rejecting his applica-
tion for emigration clearance; or 
(d) an order of the registering authority or the competent au-
thority or the Protector of Emigrants or the prescribed authority re-
quiring him to furnish any security, additional security or fresh 
security under thii Act, or forfeiting or rejecting his claim for re-
fund (whether wholly or partly in either case) of the security, the 
additional security or the fresh security furnished by him; 
may ~refer an appeal agaihst such order to the Central Government 
wi thin such period as may be prescribed. 
Appeals. 

Offences 
and 
penalties. 
12 . 
(J) Ne appeal shall be admitted if it is pn&mtd aftel' .... ...., 
of the peri«i prescribed therefor; 
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after thI! expity of the 
period prescribed tileretor if the appellant satisfies the Cen'tral Go'ftHl-
mellt that t\e had au:Jlicient c.ause for IIOt prefemng tile .ppeIIl within :5 
that pel"i'otl. 
(-Sl The period prescribed for an appeal shall be mmpated in 
acctl!'dance with the provisions of the Limitation Act, 1883, wftb ft8IIICt 38011'-. 
to the comp!l'tatioit of periods tIIlereunder. 
(4) Every appeal under this section shall be made in such form as 10 
may be prescribed and sbaU be accompanied by a copy of tale order 
appealed against and by such fee as may be pruc&-ibed. 
(5) The procedure for disposillg of an appeal (tnctudiftg r.-and of 
the matter for further consideration to the autbority whole ot6!r 1IU 
been appealed against) shall be such as may be presa1be4: 1,5 
Provided that before disposing of an appeal, the appel!ant shall be 
giWD a 1'88Onable opportWlity of representing his case. 
(6) Evtlryorder made on an ap~al under this sectiOh c~, 
modifying or reversilli the order appealed against shall be 8naL 
CHAPTER VII 
OFFENCEs AND PJ:NALTUS .. ~ 
24. (1) Whoever-
(a)" except in cunformity with the prOvisions of this Act 
emigrat.es; or 
aD 
(b) contravenes the provisions of section 10 or section 16; or :zs 
(c) by intentionally furnishing any false information or sUp-
preS8ing any material information obtains a certifiC:ate or a permft 01' 
an emigration clearance under this Act; or 
(<<I) without lawful authority makes or Gause. to be IUIIe any 
alteration in any certiflcate or permit or in any doicumaat '01' 30 • 
endorsemeht by way of emigration clearance issued or macle under 
thil Act; or 
(e) disobeys or neglects to comply with any or_ 01. tile Pro-
tectl)r of Emigrants -under this Act; or . 
. (1) collects from an emigrant any charges in excesa ~f the limit. 35 
pNSCribed under this Act; or 
(9) cheats any emigrant; 
shall be punishable with imprisonment fOr a term which may exfald 
to two years and with fine which may extend to two thousand replllt 

2of1974. 
.......... - .-
13 
PlOviMd .. t in the alDs&Dce of any speeial and adequate :reasOils to 
__ "_.Y to 1te Blentioned in tlae judgment of the court. such im-
prisonment shall ..,t be leI!) than 'six months and such fine sha1l not IDe 
less 'than one theusand rupees. 
, (2) Whoever attempts to commit any offence under sub-section (1) 
shall be punishable with the pUAishment p!'ovided for such offence under 
that sub-section. 
(3) Whot'ver contravenes any term or condition subject to which 
any emJsration clearance has been given under this Act, sh~ll, if 1U).0thM 
10 punlBbment is provided elsewhere in this Act for such contravention. be 
lIunlshable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year 
or with ftlle which may extend to two thousand rupees or with both. 
(4) Whoever abets any offence punishable under this Act shall, if the 
_ Metted; is commi.tted· in consequence of the abetment, be punis~ 
15 ... w." ... punishl'llel\~ provided for that offence. 
(5) Whoever, having been convicted o~ an offence under any pcovisiQll 
ot this Act is aga.in convicted of an offence under the same provision, shan 
be punishable, for the second anel for each subsequent offence, with 
double the penalty provided for that offe*ce. 
IG It. ('1l Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a Offences 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was by com-
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the panics. 
8111iDe. of the- COlllpan~, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
auUty af t8e·off.eDce and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
25 JllaishM: accwdiug4r: 
~icl8d.' that nl'1' .ing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment. if he proves th,t the offence was 
committed without his knowle1ge or that he had exercised. all due dili-
gence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
30 (~\ Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), where 
.Y otI'enee under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or conni-
vance ofl or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the c, Ilpany, such dir.ector, man-
35 ager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that 
aIence., and shall be liable to be prooeeded against and punished 
aocordingly. 
E~4nCI&io •. -i'Qr the purposes of this section,-
(G~. "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b). "diraetor."; in relation to a firm, means a partner in tbe 
tinn. 
II. NoiNIUl19tandiGg a.Rything contained in the Code of Crjminal Pro-
cedure, 1973, all offences under this Act shall be cognizable. 
ft. No pN88CUtiOIl shaH be instituted against any person in respect 
.. 5 of .,'.offa\ce under this Act without the previous sanction of the Central 
.... aent or such officer or authority as may be authorised by that 
8o~ent by order in writing in this behalf. 
Oft'ences 
to be 
COlDizable. 
Previous 
sanction 
of Central 
Govern-
ment 
necessary. 

Punish-
ment to 
be without 
prejudice 
to any 
other 
action. 
Determi-
nation of 
question 
as to 
whether 
a person 
ilan 
emigrant. 
Power to 
prohibit 
emilra-
tion to 
any coun· 
try in the 
interests 
of the 
general 
public, 
etc. 
Power to 
prohibit 
emf,ration 
due to out-
break of 
epidemics, 
civil dIstur-
bances, 
etc .• in a 
country. 
14 
28. The award of punishment for an offence under this Act shaU be 
without prejudice to any other action which has been or which may be 
taken under this Act with respect to such contravention. 
• 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
28. Where a question arises before a Protector of Emigrants 88 to 
whether a person intending to depart from India is or is not an emigrant, 
the Protector of Emigrants shRll decide the question after holding an 
inquiry in such manner and upon considering such evidence a~ may 
5 
be prescribed and such other evidence as may be relevant, and communi- 10 
cate the decision to such person in the prescribed manner. 
30. (1) Where the Central Government has reason to believe that 
sufficient grounds exist for prohibiting emigration to any country, having 
regard to the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of India, 
friendly relations of India with any foreign country or the interests of 15 
the general public, it may, by notification, prohibit emigration to that 
country. 
(2) A notification issued under sub-section (1) shall have effect for 
such period not exceeding six months as may be specified in the notifica-
tion: 20 
Provided that if the Central Government has reason to beUeve 
that the grounds mentioned in sub-section (1) continues to exist, it may, 
from time to time, by notification, prohibit emigration to that coun-
try for such further period, not exceeding six months on each occasion, 
as may be speci~ed in the notification. 25 
31. (1) Where the Central Government has reason to believe-
(4) that intending emigrants if allowed to emigrate to any 
country would be exposed to serious risk to life on arrival. there ·by 
reason of-
(i) outbreak of any disease or grave pollution of environ- 30 
ment in such country, or 
(it) outbreak of hostilities or civil war or civil commotion 
or political disturbances;, 
(b) that by reason of India not being in diplomatic relations 
with that country it- is not possible to protect the emigrants from 35 
discrimination, maltreatment and exploitation, 
it may, by notification, prohibit emigration to that country. 
(2) A notification issued under sUb-section (I) shall have effect for 
such period not exceeding six months as may be specifled in the notiflca-
tion: 
Provided that if the Central Government has reason to believe that 
any ground mentioned in sub-sec~on (I) continues to exist, it 
may, from time to time, by notification, prohibit emigration to that coun-
try for such further period, not exceeding six months on each occasion, 
Be may be spt:cified in the notification. 
40 

15 
32. (1) Where the Central Government considers that in the interests 
of ~he general public, emigration of any class or category of- persons, 
having regard to their age, sex or other relevant factors, to any country 
should be prohibited, it may, by notification, prohibit the emigration to 
6 s\lch country of such class or category of persons as may be specified in 
the notification. 
(2) A notification Issued under sub-section (1) shall have effect for 
such period not exceeding six months as may be specified in the notifi-
cation: 
Power to 
prohibit 
emigration 
of any 
class or 
category of 
persons. 
'10 Provided that if the Central Government has reason to believe that 
any of the grounds mentioned in sub-section (I) continues to exist it 
may, from time to time, by notification, prohibit emigration of 'such ciass . 
or category of persons to that country for such fUrther period, not exceed-
ing six months on each occasion, as may be specified in the notification. 
15 33. (1) 'Any security or other finar.cial provision which may be re-
quired to be made under this Act shall be reasonable having regard to 
the purpose for which such security or other financial provision is re-
quired to be made. 
(2) The pl'escribed a'Uthority may, after giving notice in the pres-
QO cribed manner to a person who has furnished any security for any 
purpose and after giving to such person an opportunity to represent his 
case. by order in writing, direct that the whole or any part of such sec\lri-
ty may be forfeited for being utilised for such purpose and in such 
manner as may be specified in the order. 
25 (3) Where it appears to the prescribed authority that the security 
furnished by any person under this Act for any purpose has, for any 
reason, become inadequate, or has ceased to be available for any reason 
whatsoever, the prescribed 3uthoritv'may, after giving him an oppprtu-
nity to ,represent hi~ case. by order in writing, require such person 
30 to furnish such additional securitv or. as the caSe may be, such fresh 
security as may bc specified in the order. 
Provision 
as 10 
security. 
:l4. Any security furnished under this Act shall be refunded or, as Refund of 
the case may be. released. when no longer required for the purpose for 5Clcurity. 
which it has been furnished and the other circumstances in which and 
35 t.he manner in which any security furnished under this Act may be 
released or refunded shall be such as may be prescribed. 
35. All the powers for the time being conferred by the Customs 
52 of 1062 Act, 1962, on officers of clIstoms with regard to the searching and deten-
tion of persons, vessels or aircraft or any other conveyance, or seizure 
40 of any document or thing or arrest of anyp-erson or otherwise for the 
purp~se of prevention or -detection of any offence under that Act or for 
apprehendinq a person suspected to have committed any offence under 
that Act mav be exercised. for' the purpose of prevention or detection 
of any offen~e under tlii's Act or for apprehending a person suspected 
4-5 to have committed any offence under this Act, by-
(a) any such officer of customs, or 
(b) the Protector General of ~migrants or a Protector of Emig-
.rllnts, or 
'(c) an officer in charge of an emigration check-post, 
Power to 
search, 
seize and 
detain 
persODS, 
convey-
ance, etc. 

lletuma 
and 
rqislers. 
Authoritie~ 
and offiocrs 
to have 
certain 
powers of 
aivil courl. 
Power to 
live direc-
tions. 
Effect of 
other laws. 
IS 
36. (1) Every recruiting agent shall maintain sqch registers and 
other records and shall submit to the prescribed authorities such periodi-
calor other returns as may be prescribed, 
(2) The Protector General of Emigrants, the registering authority. 
the competent authority or a Protector of Emigrants may, by order, call 5 
for any other ret'urn or information from a recruiting agent. 
(3) The Protector General of Emigrants, the registering authority, 
the competent authority Or a Protector of Emigrants or an officer in charge 
of an emigration check-post may inspect any register or other record 
maintained by a recruiting agent under sub-section (1) and for the 10 
purpose of such inspection, enter, at any reasonable time, the business 
premises of a recruiting agent. 
37. (1) The Protector General of Emigrants, the registering authority, 
the competent authority and every Protector of Emigrants shall, for the 
purpose of discharging their functions UPlder this Act, have the same 15 
powers as are vested in a court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely: - .5 of 1'08. 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses; 
(b) requiring the- discovery and production of any document; 
(e) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any 20 
court or office; 
(d) receiving evidence on affidavits; and 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or 
documents. 
(2) Every proceeding before the Protector General of Emigrants. 25 
or the rp.gistering authority or the competent authority or a Protector of 
Emigrants ~hal1 be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections .cs of 18611. 
193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code and the Protector General of Emi-
J!l'ants. the registering au~hority, the competent authority. and every 
Protector of Emigrants shall be deemed to be a civil court for the pur- 30 
poses of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Proce-
dure, 1973. ..:-: 2 of 1974. 
38. The Central Government may give directions to the Protector 
General of Emigrants. the registering authority. the competent authority 
or any Protector of Emigrants as to the carrying into eXl'cution of any 35 
provision of this Act. 
39. (1) The provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder shall 
have effect not,withstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained 
in any enactment other than this Act or in any .agreement or other im;tru-
ment having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act. 
(2) Save as provided in sub .. section (1), the provisions of this Act 
£hall be in addition to, and nof in derogation of, any other law for the 
time being in force, . 

I of 1'.56. 
48. The Central Gov~rnment may, by notificaticm, dil"'!r.t that any DeleglltiolJ, 
power or function-
(a) which may be exercised or perfoI'med by it under this Act, or 
(b) which may be exercised or performed by a registering auth~ 
5 rity, a competent authority or a Protector of Erriigrarits under this 
Act, 
may, in relatioh to such matters, and subject to such conditions, if any, 
Is it may specify in the notification, be ,also exercised or performed-
(i) by such omcer or authority sUbordinate to the Central Gov-
J() ernment, or . 
(ii) by any State Government Or by any officer or authority sub-
ordinate to such State Government, or 
(iii) in any foreign country in which there is no diplomatic mis-
sion of India. by such foreign consular office. 
15 as may be specified in the notification. 
41. (1) Where the Centra] Government, on a reference made to it or Power 10 
otherwise, is satisfied that having regard to- exempt. 
(a) the friendly relations with any foreign country; or 
(b) the known rep"utation of any foreign employer or class of 
110 foreign employers, for providing to emigrants standard conditions 
of living and working, and their methods of recruitment and condi-
tions of employment; or 
(c) the methods of recruitment followed and the conditions of 
employment provided by a public undertaking or an approved con-
2~ cern for the execution of its projects abroad; or ' 
go 
(d) the facilities and conditions of service provided by Govern-
ment officen; posted abroad to thel.r domestic servants accompanying 
such Government officers, where the expenditure in respect of the 
passage of such domestic servants is borne by the Government; and 
(e) all other relevant con~iqerations, 
it is necessary or expedient in the public interest so to do. the Central 
Government may, by n:>tification, and subject to such conditions. jf any. 
as ma;y be specified in the notification. exempt from the operation of all 
or any of the provisions of this Act, such foreign dignitary or class of 
35 foreign e-mployers, public undertaking. approved concern· or Gov~­
ment omcen. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section-
(a) "pubijc undertaking" means-
(i) an undertaking owned and controlled by Government; or 
(ii) a Government company as defined in section 617 of the 
Companies Act, 1956; or 
(iii) a body corporate established by or under any Central, 
Provincial or State Act; 

Act not to 
apply to 
certain 
emigrants. 
Power to 
make rule~. 
IS 
(b) "appfoved concern" means such company incorporated 'Under 
.ihe Companies· Act, 1956 or partnership firm registered under the 
Indian Partnership Act, 1932, or society registered under the Socie-
ties Registration Act, 1860 or any other law relating to societies for 
the time being in force iri ariy State, or co-operative society l'egistered 
under any Central, Provincial or State iaw, as the Central Govern-
ment may, by no1ification, approve for the purposes of this section. 
(2) If t.he Central Gov6rnment is satisfied that it is necessary lor 
implementing any treaty, agreement 'or convention between India atid 
5 
Ii foreign country or foreignc:>untries so to do, it may, by notification, 10 
undo "Subject to such conditions. if any, as may be specified in the notift-
. cation, exempt from the operation' of all or any of the provisions of this 
Act. recruitment by such authorities, agencies or persons as may be 
specified in the notification either gen'erally or for such purposes as mas 
be specified in the notification. 15 
42. Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to . apply to---
(a) the recruitment Or emigration of any person who is not a 
citizen of India; 
(b) the control of recruiting in India for the service of foreign 
States to which the Foreign Recruiting Act, 1874 applies. 20 
43. (/) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to 
carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following m2..t-
ters, namely:- ~5 
(a) the powers and duties of officers and employees appointed 
for the purposes of this Act and the terms and conditions of their 
service; 
(b) the for~ of~ 
(i) a certificate to commence or carryon the business of re- 30 . 
, cruitment, and of an application for the issue or renewal thereof; 
(ii) a permit for the recruitment Of persons for employ-
ment outside India, and of an application for the issue thereof; 
(iii) an application for emigration clearance; 
(iv) an appeal to be preferred to the Central Govern~ent; 
! 
. (c). the manner and form in which an authorisation by way of 
emigration clearance may be given; 
35 
(d) p~rticulars to be contained in an applicaUon for a certificate 
lOr a permit or for an emigration clearance' 40 , 
1 of 1956 
9 of 1932 
21 of 1860 
4 of 1874, 

5 
10 
ig 
(e) the manner in which different inquiries required to be hiM 
under this Act may be held; 
(f) the manner in which the amount of security for securing 
the due performance of the terms and conditions of the certificate 
Or permit or for compliance with the prdvisions of thi:; Act shall be 
furnished: 
(g) the manner of verifying or authenticAting documents atld 
copies of documents for the purposes of this Act: 
(h) the procedure to be followed in hearing an appeal preferred 
to the Central Governmentj 
(i) the fees to be paid in respect of applications and other 
matters under this Act; 
(j) the charges which a recruiting a~ent may recover from an 
emigrant in respect' of services rendered and the IIcales and limits of 
such charges;' 
(k) the terms and conditions subject to which a cert:ficate or 
permit or an ·emigration clearance may be issued under this Act; 
(l) the period' of the validity of a certificate Or a permit issued 
under thi's Act; 
.0 (m) the authority compe~ent to extend the period of valid of Ll 
permit or to forfeit .security or to require additjonal security or 
fresh security under this Act; 
(71) the Accommodation, the provisions, the medical stores and 
staff, the life saving and sanitary arrangements and other provisions 
., and arrangement for the well-being, security and protection of emi-
grants which shall be provided and the records which shall be 
maintained in any emigrant conveyance; 
(0) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, pres-
cribed. 
30 44. Every notification issued under section 30, section 31 or section 32 
and every rule made under section 43 shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is issued or made, before each House of Parliament, while it is 
in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before t\le expiry 
95 of the session immediately following the session or the successive ses-
sIons aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
notification or the rule or both Houses agree that the notification or the 
rule should not be issued or made, the notification or the rule shall there-
after have effect only in such' modified form or be of no effect, as the 
to case may be; so, howevcI', that any such modifi~ation or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validiiy of anything previously done under 
that notification or rule . 
• :1. The Emigration Act, 1922" is hereby r.epealed. 
Notifica-
tions and 
rules to 
be laid 
before 
Parliament. 
Repeal. 
of Act 
t otl922. 

, . 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Emigration Act, 1922 which governs the regulation of emigration 
of skilled and unskilled workers from India was tailored to meet the re-
quirements of a different era and has gradually ceased ~o be an effective 
regulatory instrument. During"the past five years or so, with the'rapid1y 
increasing flow of Indian workers to foreign countries for emp10yment 
purposes, the subjec: emigration has become a matter Qf, increasing con-
cern both for Government' and the public in general. The Goverrtment 
had initiated a system of registration of recruiting agents and laid down 
certain minimum terms and conditions of service on which emigration 
of different categories of workers was to be allowed. The Supreme Court 
in its order dated 20th March. 1979 in the case of Kanga and others 'Ver-
sus the Union of India laid down four basic conditions according to which 
emigration of Indian workers was to be regulated until the passage of a 
new legislation on the subject. This order was issued on the basis of 
information provided to the Supreme Court that Government was in the 
process of introducing a new legislation on the . subject which was ex-
pected to be finalised by July, 1979. This, however, could not be accom-
plished and on Aug·ust 21, 1979, the Supreme Court reiterated that emi-
gration applications will be, proce~sed in accordance with the conditions 
laid down earlier and that no new conditions should be imposed by the 
Government except by new legislation or rules. Following the Supreme 
Court order of August, 1979, which, in effect, took away from the Govern-
ment the power to scrutinise terms and conditions of Indian workers 
emigrating abroad for employment, action had been taken to bring le-
gi~lationfor the purpose. The present Bill is the culmination of these 
efforts. 
2. The following are the salient features of the Bil1:-
(i) No Indian citizen (unless exempted) can leave India for 
taking up abroad work as defined in the Bill without obtaining a 
certitlcate of emigration clearance from the Protector of Emigrants. 
(ii) An emigrant worker can be recruited for a job in a foreign 
country either by a recruiting agent registered under the Act or by 
an employer, subject to his being permitted to do so under the 
Act. 
(iii) No prior scrutiny of applications for registration of agents 
is required. Registration of recruiting agent has been made subject 
to an affidavit, an undertaking and an amount of security which shall 
not be less than rupees one lakh. When a certificate issued to a per-
s?n has been cancelled, ,he shall not be eligible to make any applica-. 
bon for another certificate until a period of two )"ears from the' date 
of ·such cancellation. , 
(iv) The decisions of the specified authorities ,in regard to can-
cellation, suspension and rejection Qf permits, registration and other 
matters are appealable to the Central Government. 
20 

21 
(V) Taking into account the cO.ncern expressed at varioul 
forums on the matter of exploitation of emigrants by recruiting 
agents and employers, provision has been made for offences of this 
nature and punishment by way of imprisonment up to a period of 
two years and fine up to two thousand rupees have been provided in 
the Bill. . 
(vi) Provision has been made for the repeal of the Emigration 
Act, 1922. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
VEERENDRA PATIL 
NEW DELHI; 
The 18th July, 1983. 

Notes (in clauses 
Clause 2 gives the definition of words and phrases used in the Bill. 
Sub-clause (1) (d) defines an emigrant as a citizen of India who intend'S 
to emigra~e or emigrates or has emigrated but excludes a dependent 
of such emigrant and persons who have resided outside India for n01 
less than 3 years aHer attaining the age of 18 years. DefinitIon of 
'work' covers particularly un'skilled, semi-skilled and skilled occupations. 
Clause 3 specifies the emigration authorities under the Act. 
Provision is made for the Central Government to appoint at the apex 
level a Protector General of Emigrants and at the field level as many 
Protectors of Emigrants as it deems fit. 
Clouse 4 gives the general duties of the Protector of Emigrants 
Which includes protecting, aiding and advising emigrants and intending 
emigrants and administration of the provi'sions of the Act. 
Clause 5 gives power to the Central Government to authorise any 
person to perform all Or arty of the functions of a Protector of Emigrants. 
Clause 6 empowers the Central Government to set up emigration 
check-posts for preventing or checking the contravention of the' provi-
siam; of the Act and to appoint a Central Government or Stafe Govern-
ment officer to be in charge of a check-post subject to the control of the 
Protector of Emigrants within whose jurisdiction the check-post is situated. 
Clause 7 gives power to the Central Government to appoint other 
emigration officers and staff to assist the Protector General of Emigrants. 
Clause 8 declares all emigration officers to be public servants under 
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
Clau,,'1e 9 provides for the appointment of a registering authority, 
who may be the Protector General of Emigrants or any other officer of 
the Central Government of a rank higher than that of a Protector of 
Emigrants. 
-Clause 10 makes it obligatory for the recruiting agent to commence or 
carryon the business of recruitment only on the ba'sis of a valid certificate 
of registration. In the case of a recruiting agent Who is carrying on such 
business at the commencemen.t Of the Act, 'B period of one month has been 
provided fer hlm -to make' an application for a certificate and if he does 
so, he is allowed to carryon such busineS's till the disposal of such appli-
cation by the registering authority. 
~'. 
~~ .. -

sij 
bause 1 i specifies the procedure for making an application for th6 
issue of a certificate of registration. The procedure aims at achieving an 
automatic system of registration based on furnishing by the applicant of 
all re~evant information, fees and an affidavit as to the financial standing 
of the applicant. The only restriction is that on being found eligible, the 
applicant has to deposit an amount of security of not less than 1 lakh 6f 
rupees within a period. of one month from the date the registering autho-
rity requires him to do so. 
Cla'use 12 provides that the form of a certificate of registration, the 
period of iti validity and the terms and conditions subject to which it 'Shall 
be issue,d will be provided for by the rules. 
Clause 13 gives the procedure and conditions for the renewal of re-
gistration, 
Clause 14 outlines the circums1!ances in which a registration cer-
tificate may be cancelled or suspended. It provides that where a certi-
ficate issued to any person has been cancelled under any of the grounds 
mentioned therein, such person 'shall not be eligible to make any applica-
tion for another certificate until the expiry of a period of two years from 
the date of such cancellation. 
Clause 15 (1) empowers the Central Government to appoint a 
!:ompetent authority who may be the Protector General of Emigrants 
or an officer higher in rank than the Protector of Emigrants for issu-
ing per.mits to employers wishing to recruit persons fOr employment out-
side India directly, without the intervention of a recruiting agent. Sub-
clause (2) provides that the Central Government may appoint any person 
employed under that Government in any country or place outside India 
to exercise the powers of the competent authority and issue permits to 
employers who are not citizens of India for the purpose of recruiting any 
citizen of India for employment in such country Or place. 
Clause 16 provides that an Indian citizen can be recruited for a 
job abroad either through a recruiting agcnt or through an employer 
holding a permi,t issued by the competent authority. 
Cl.ause 17 gives the procedure for obtaining permits. Sub-clause 
(3) thereof provides the grounds for rejecting an application for a per-
mit. These include incomplete information in the application for permit, 
discriminatory or exploitative terms and conditions of employment offered 
to recruits. work for which recruitment is being made being unlawful 
according to ,the' laws in India, or offends public policy, or violative of 
norms of human dignity and decency, etc. The competent authority shall, 
however, record in writing, his rca'sons for rejecting an application which. 
shall normally be furnished to the applicant. 
Clause 18 provides tha't the permit will·be valid for a period, not 
exceeding one year, as may be prescribed by rules from the date of issue 
or till the recruitment is completed, whichever is earlier, subject to ex-
tension for a period not exceeding three months at a time for sufficient 
cause. 

Clause 19 prescribeS that any permit obtained from a person authori-
sed to exercise the powers of the competent authority outside India 
shall not be valid unless a certified copy thereof is filed with the Protec-
tor General of Emigrants. 
Clause 20 makes the provisions relating to cancellation and suspension 
of certificates under section 14 applicable to cancellation and suspension 
of permits with necessary modifications. 
Clause 21 empowers the Central Government to exempt any class 
or classes of employers from the requirement of obtaining a permit if it· 
is necessary or expedient so to do in the public interest. 
Clause 22.-Sub-clause (1) to (4) of this clause prohibit emigra.tion 
by any citizen of India without obtaining an emigration clearance from 
the Protector of Emigrants and lays down the procedure for making 
an application therefor and its grant by the Protector of Emigrants. 
Sub-clause (5) lays down the grounds on which the Protector of Emi-
grants may reject an application for emigration clearance. 
Clause ·23 prOvides for appeals to the Central Government against 
the orders passed by various authorities under the Act. 
Clause 24 lists out the offences under the Act, which includes cheating 
of an emigrant, and provides for punishment for alI such offences with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and fine which 
may extend to two thousand rupees. 
Clause 25 provides for the commission of offences 1,Ulder the Act by 
companies. 
Clause 26 makes all the offences under the Act cegnizable. 
Clause 27 provides that no prosecution shall be instituted against any 
person in respect of any offence under the Act without the previous 
sanction of the Central Government. 
Clause 28 provides that the award of punishment for an offence under 
the Act shall be without prejudice to any other action which has been 
or which may be taken under the Act for such contravention. 
Clause 29 gives power to the Protector of Emigrants to determine as 
to whether a person is an emigrant or not in cases where such a question 
arises. 
Cause 30 gives power to the Central Government to prohibit emigra-
tion to any country in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of 
India, the security of India, friendly relations of India with any foreign. 
country or in the int(.!rests of the general pUblic. 
Clause 31 gives power to Central Government to prohibit emigration 
to a country in cases of outbreak of epidemics, civil disturbances, etc., in 
that country for a period not exceeding six months at a time. 
Crause 32 gives power to the Central Government to prohibit emi-
gration of any class or category of persons in the interests of the general 
public. 

Clauses 33 and 34 make provision as to determination of the amC1..tnt 
of security or financial provision required to be made under the Act and 
for the refund of such seCurity. 
Clause 3!l provides that the power<; conferred on officers of customs 
with regard to the powers of search, seizure, detention of persons, con-
veyances, etc.. by the Customs Act may be exercised by officers of cus-
toms, and emigr~tionofficers in regard to the offences under the Act. 
Clause 36 provides for the mainten:ance of certain registers by the 
recruiting agent and the furnishing of certain returns. The emigration 
at'olthorities will also have the power to call for any return and to inspect 
any register or record mentioned. by the recruiting sgent. 
Clo.use 37 provides that emigration authorities shall kave certain 
powers of civil court. 
Clause 38 gives power to the Central Government to gi'·e directions 
to emigration authorities. 
Clause 39 provides that the provisions of the Act shall be in 
addition to, and not in derogation of, any other law in force. 
Clause 40 outlines the principles of delegation. 
Clause 41 gives power to the Central Government to exempt, by 
notification, any foreign dignitary, class of foreign employers. etc., from 
the operation of all or any of the provisions of the Act if it is necessary 
or expedient in the public interest to do so. 
Clause ·1,2 specifies that the Act shall not apryly to emigrants who are 
not citizens of India and those who were recruited under the Foreign 
Recruiting Act, 1874. 
Clause 43 empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry 
out the provisons of the Act. 
Clause 44 specifies that 'notifications and rules issued or made under 
the Act shall be laid before Parliament. 
Clause' 45 repeals the Emigration Act, 192~~ 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM ". 
Clause 3 provides for appointm~nt by the Central Govern-
men~ of a Protector General of Emigrants and as many Protectors 
of Emigrants as it deems fit for the purposes of the Act. Clause 6 
provides for the establishment of emigration check-posts at such places as 
may be specified by thO! Cenlral Government. Clause 7 provides for the 
arpointment by the Central Government of such other emigration offi-
cers and employees as it may think fit to assist the Protectors of Emi-
grants nnd the Protector General of Emigrants in the performance of 
their duties under the Ac~. The aforementioned provisions of the Bill in-
volve expenditure of a recurring and non-recurring nature. The exact 
quen:um of such expendihtre cannot be stated acc\lrately at this stage. 
However, for maintaining the existing set-up which ~il1, immediately 
~m e'lactment of the Bill, take over the administrative burden, an annual 
recurring expenditure of about 6 lakhs is projected. 
2. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure. .', " 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 43 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of the Act. The matters in 
respect of which rules may be made, inter alia, relate to the powers and 
duties of officers appointed for the purposes of the Act and the terms and 
condition's of their service; the form of the certificate or permit and ap-
plications for the issue, tetc., of such certificates, permit or emigra-
tion clearance to be issued under the Act; the manner and fonn 
of authorisation for emigration clearance; the particulars to be 
contained in 'an application for a ce~tificate or permit or emigra-
tion clearance; the manner in which enquiri~g under the Act may be 
held: the manner of verifying or authenticating documents; the form 
and procedure to be followed in hearing an appeal preferred to the Cen-
tral Government; fees to be p3id in respect of applic4tions and other 
matters under the Act; the charges which recruiting agents may recover 
from an emigrant; the terms and conditions subject to which a certifi-
cate, permit or emigration clearance may be issued; the period of validity 
of a certificate or permit and any other matter which is required to be 
prescribed by rules 'Under the Act, 
2. Clause 21 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government 
to exempt by notification in the Official Gazette' any class or classes of 
employers from obtaining a permit under the Act. 
3. Clauses 30 and 31 of the Bill seek to empower the Central Govern-
ment to prohibit by notification in the Official Gazette emigration to any 
country specified in the notification. While the power to prohibit under 
clause 30 can be exercised having regard to the sovereignty and inte-
grity of India, security of India, friendly relations of India with any 
foreign country and the interests of the general public, the power under 
clause 31 can be exercised on grounds such as outbreak of epidemics or 
civil disturbances or on the ground of absence of diplomatic relations bet-
ween such country and India. Clause 32 seeks to empower the Central 
Government to prohibit, by notification, emigration of any class or cate-
gory of persons having regard to their age; sex or other relevant factors 
to eny country specified in the notification. It has been provided that a 
notification prohibiting emigration under any of these clauses shall have 
efff'ct for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in 
the notification. In other words, the prohibition would be only for a tem-
porary period. -
4. Clause 40 seeks to empower the Central Government to delegate 
nnv of the powers and functions that may be performed by it under the" 
Act to the registering authority, a competent wthority or such other 
offir.er or suthority 'Subordinate to the Central Government or to any 
State Government or, in a foreign country where there is no diplomatie 
mission of India, to a foreign consular office. 

18 
5. Power is also given to the Central Governme~t under clause 41 
to exempt public undertakings, foreign dignitaries, foreign employ.-s, 
etc., from the operation of all or any of the provisions of the Act. 
6. The various mattera in respect of which powers are proposed to 
be delegated to the Central Government under the aforementioned pro-
visions of the Bill pertain t8 matters of administrative detail or proce-
dure or to matters fot which it is not practicable to make any provision 
in the .Bill. The delegation of legislati'(e power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. . 

· . 
LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law relating to emigration of citizens 
of India. 
(Shri Veerendra Patit, Minister of Labour dnd nehahilitation) 