AS INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA

; 249 060 1999

Bill No, 84 of 1999

THE MEDICAL PROFESSION (REGULATION) BILL, 1999
By

Dr. V. Saroya, M.P.
A
BILL

| medical profession with a view to provide best available health care to
है the citizens of the country.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as
/$:--

1. (1) This Act may be called the Medical Profession (Regulation) Act, 1999,

Short title, ex-
i tent and com-
(2) It extends to the whole of India. mencement.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
ification in the official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.

(i) “appropriate Government” means the Central Government or a State
Government, as the case may be;

(8) “Arbitrator” means Arbitrator appointed under section 6;

(iii) “Council” means the Indian Health Care Council established under
section 3;


Establishment
of Indian
Health Care
Council.

Branches of
Council.

Arbitration
Authority,

Appointment
of Arbitrator.

Registration of
Medical Practi-
tioners,

Compulsory
Registration,

Complaint
against Medical
Practitioner.

Power to con-
duct inquiry.

(iv) “medical practitioner” means a practitioner who is eligible to practise |
any system of Indian medicine or Allopathy or any other system of medicine fort
time being recognised as a system of medicine; and

(v) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this act.

3. (1) The fen ral Government shall establish a Council to be known as Indi
Health-Care Coancil’consisting of a Chairman and four other members.

(2) The Chairman and the other members shall possess knowledge and expe
rience of at least a period of ten years in Allopathy or in any system of Indian medicin

(3) The Chairman and the other members shall be appointed for a tet
five years from the date of appointment or until they attain sixty two years of ag
whichever is earlier.

(4) The Chairman and the other members shall be entitled to such si
and allowances as may be prescribed.

4, The Council shall set up a Branch in every State and Union Territory.

5. For the purposes of this Act, the Council shall set up an Arbitration Au
in every district:

Provided that more than one Arbitration Authority may be set up in any dis
in accordance with the need and requirements.

6. (7) Every Arbitration Authority set up under section 5 shall consist of an Arbi
and two other members.

(2) The Arbitrator so appointed shall possess adequate knowledge in mediei
and should have practised medicine atleast for a period of five years and the me
shall be appointed from persons having experience in the fields of social service or const

affairs.

(3) The Arbitrator and other members of every Arbitration Autority अं
entitled to such salaries and allowances, as may be prescribed.

7. Every medical practitioner shall register himself with the Council as soon
has become entitled to practise.

8. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Medical Council Act, 195¢
person who has not registered himself with the Council shall be qualified to pra¢
medicine in any part of the territory of India.

9, (1) Any person who has been affected by an action of a medical practitioner il
course of his duties and functions as such, and has suffered a mental or physical
capable of being quantified or has suffered any disability, whether permanent or tempor
in nature, out of the negligence or inaction of the medical practitioner, may make
complaint to the concerned Arbitration Authroity.

(2) Any complaint under sub-section (/) shall be in writing and addressed tot
concerned Arbitrator and shall be given within a period of one month from the date
occurrence of negligence or inaction on the part of the medical practitioner.

10. The Arbitratior® Authority, on receipt of a complaint under section 9, shall mak
such inquiry as may be deemed necessary for the purpose of redressal of the complai

Provided that while making inquiry, the Arbitration Authority may require th
attendance of the medical practitioner and other persons involved in the suit or af
other person, who in the opinion of the Arbitration Authority, can tender evidenced
submit documents in connection with the suit or tender expert advice.


a

| While discharging its functions, the Arbitration Authority shall have all the powers
civil court as provided under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 with respect to issue
mons, taking of evidence and examination of witnesses.

12. The Arbitration Authority shall dispose of a complaint as soon as possible, but in
ase not later than two months from the date of receipt of the complaint.

13. The Arbitration Authority, while disposing of a complaint, may award
nsation for the injury suffered or treatment free of cost as may be required for
plete recovery of the affected person or recommend to the Council for the
tion of the registration of the medical practitioner for a specified period or
ently.

14. The Arbitration Authority, while discharging its functions under the provisions
ais Act may take into account the circumstances and merits of each case and evidence
‘uments tendered, if any, and shall have the power to seek opinion of any medical
joner, who is specialised in any field of medicine or any other person.

15, The award passed by the Arbitration Authority shall be binding on all the parties
complaint.

16. If any person has made a complaint of a frivolous nature or if the complaint is of
a nature that it should not have been brought to the notice of the Arbitration Authority
‘the complaint has no cause of action or if the Arbitration Authority feels that the
has made the complaint deliberately or intentionally with a view to denigrating the
of the medical practitioner and with a view to hurt his practice, the Arbitration
ily may punish the person who has made such a complaint with imprisonment for
‘of one year and a fine of rupees ten thousand:

Provided that where the person who has made the complaint proves that he
has made the complaint in the good faith and with a good intention on the basis of
‘information available with him and to the best of his*knowledge, the Arbitration
Authority shall not pass any sentence against the person who has made the complaint.

17. The Indian Health Care Council shall perform the following functions:—

(i) advise the Central Government in the formulation of a health plan covering

all sections of the society, from time to time, with a view to making available best
health care to the citizens of the country;

(ii) recommend to the Government in the matter of qualifications and
experience required for a medical practitioner before he is entitled to practise in any
‘system of medicine;

(iii) may, on a request from State Government, advise the State Government
about the health care and restructuring of hospitals and dispensaries with a view to
making available cheap and good health care to the citizens; and

(iv) recommend to the Central Government on any matter pertaining to medical
fession or health care,

18, (1) On and from the date of commencement of this Act, no suit shall be filed

a medical practitioner for his negligence or inaction in the course of his duties as
in any court:

Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the suits already pending in
court of law,

(2) On and from the date of commencement of this Act, any complaint against the
practitioner shall be filed only before the Arbitration Authority,

. An appeal against the decision of the Arbitration Authority shall lie in a High

Powers of
Arbitration
Authority.

Disposal of
‘Complaints.

Compensation

Adinission of
evidences and
to seek
opinion of
experts.

‘Award shall be
binding,

Punishment
for frivolous
complaints!

Functions of
Council

Jurisdiction,

Appeal spainst
Ashiiration

Auth



4

Overriding 20. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything |

poy ofthe in the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 or any other law for the time being in force pertai
. to medical profession.

Power to make 21. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,

rules.

rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Medical profession is one of the important professions providing health care to the
citizens. Persons suffering from any illness or disease look upon doctors as Gods. Of late,
it has been observed that with the advent of consumer movement in the country, people
make complaints against medical practitioners even on petty grounds appearing for huge

jounts as compensation. Though, the medical practitioners who are guilty or who have
negligent or inactive should be punished severely yet, the attitude of making com-
ints should not become a common trend.

In the recent past many cases have been filed in consumer courts for redressal of
rievances against medical practitioners. Though, it is the duty of the Government to
ensure best health care to the citizens of the country and to ensure that medical practition-
ers follow professionalism and ethics in their profession, yet it is the duty of the Govern-
it also to see that the medical practitioners are not harassed unnecessarily on petty
105. Though, it is understandable that the consumer movement has gained momen-
tum in the country and cases are disposed of quickly as never before, yet cases relating to
ical profession should not be filed in consumer courts because the Judges of the con-
sumer courts, it is often found, do not possess even basic knowledge in medicine or do not
inderstand the problems faced by medical practitioners in their profession.

Therefore, it is essential to set up a machinery for the redressal of grievances against
ical practitioners possessing adequate knowledge and experience in medicine so that
merits and circumstances of each case can be gone into detail and a fair and just
ement can be given. It is also proposed to make provision for punishment to persons
ing frivolous complaints in order to reduce the piling up of cases against medical
practitioners.

The Bill seeks to regulate the medical profession in such a way so as to enable the
medical practitioners to cater to the needs of the public at large in the best way.

Hence this Bill.

New Det, V. SAROJA.
October 21, 1999.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bili provides for setting up of the Indian Health Care |
sisting of a Chairman and four other members. They are entitled to such salaries
allowances as may be prescribed. Clause 4 enables the Council to set up a branch in 6१
State and Union Territory. Clause 5 provides for the constitution of Arbitrary Au
in every district for hearing the cases filed against medical professionals. Clause 6
vides for salaries and allowances to Arbitrator and other members of every Arbit
Authority. Clause 13 provides for award of compensation. The Bill, therefore, if eni
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. A recurring expendi
about rupees ten crore is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of Indi
non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty five thousand is also likely to
volved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 21 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will regulate the matters of detail only, the
ion of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A

BILL
to regulate medical profession with a view to provide best available health care to
citizens of the country.

(Dr. ४ Saroja, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1726LS—18.11.1999.