Dill No. It ., lpo 
THE MATERNITY llENEFIT BILL, 1960 
(To BB INTRODUCBD IN l..OK SABRA) 

THE MATERNITY BENEFIT BILL, 1960 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSIB 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Application of Act. 
3. Definitions. 
4. Employment of, or work by women prohibited during 
certain period. 
5. Right to payment cf maternity benefit. 
6. Notice of claim for maternity benefit and payment thereof. 
7. Payment of maternity benefit in case of claimant's death. 
8. Payment of medical bonus. 
9. Leave of miscarriage. 
10. Leave for illness arising out of pregnancy, delivery, prema-
ture birth of child, or miscarriage. 
11. Nursing. breaks. 
12. Dismissal during absence or pregnancy. 
13. No deduction of wages in certain cases. 
14. Appointment of Inspectors. 
15. Powers and duties of Inspectors. 
16. Inspectors to be public servants. 
17. Powers of Inspectar to direct payments to be made. 
18. Forfeiture of maternity benefit. 
19. Abstract of Act and rules thereunder to be exhibited. 
20. Register., etc. 

CLAUSES 
21. Penalty for contravention of Act by employer. 
22. Penalty for obstructing Inspector. 
23. Cognizance of offences. 
24. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
25. Power of Central Govemm-ent to give directions. 
26. Power to exempt establishments. 
27. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Act. 
28. Power to make rules. 
29. Amendment of Act 69 of 1951. 
30. Repeal. 

Bill No. 8.t of 1,,0 
.. ;,,; i 
THE MATERNITY BENEFIT BILL, 1960 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN Lolt SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to regulate the employment of women in certain. .eltabliBhmtnts fOT 
certain periods before and after child-birth and to pTovide fOT 
paymerut of maternity benefit to them. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic 
cf India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be caned the Maternity Benefit Act, 1960. ~:t:Sc, 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jrunmu ::.ence-
5 and Kashmia-. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as may be notified in 
this behalf in the Official Gazette,-
(a) in relation to mines in the territories to which this Act 
extenda, by the Central Government; and 
10 ' (b) in relation to other establishments in a State, by the 
State Government. 
2. (1) It applies, in the first instance, to every establishment Application 
being a factory, mine or plantation including such establishments of Act. 
belonging to Government: 
J 5, Provided that the State Government may, with the approval of 
~he Central Government, after giving not less than two months' 
notice of its intention of so doing, by n<1tification in the Official 
Gazette, decl~ that all or any of the provisions of Ws Act shall 

~ 
apply also to any other establishment or class of establishments, 
industrial, commercial or agricultural. 
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to any factory or 
other establishment to which the provisions of the Employees' State 
Insurance Act, 1948, apply for the time being. S 
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appropriate Gove!I"nment" means, in relation to an 
establishment being a mine, the Central Government and in 
relation to any other establishment, the State Govemmen,t; 
(b) "child" includes a still-born child; 
(c) "deolivery" means the birth of a child; 
(d) "employer" means--
10 
(i) in relation to an establishment which is under the 
control of the Government, a person or authority e.ppointed 
by the Government for the supervision and control of IS 
employees and where no person or authority is so appointed, 
the head of the department; 
(ii) in relation to an establishment under any local 
authority, the person appointed by such authority for the 
supervision and control of employees or whe,re no person 20 
is so appointed, the chief executive officer of the local 
authority; 
(iii) in any other case the person who, or the authority 
which, has the ultimate control over the, affairs of the 
establishment and where the said affairs are entrusted to 2, 
any other person whe~her called a manager, managing direc-
tor, managing agent, or by any other name, such person; 
(e) "establishment" means a factory, mine, or plantation, 
Or an establishment to which the proviSions of this Act have 
been declared under sub-section (1) of section 2 to be appli- 30 
cable; 
(f) "factory" means a factory as defined in clause (m) of 
34 of 19048. 
section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948; 63 ef 1941. 
(g) "Inspector" means an Inspector appointed under section 
14; 
(h) "maternity be,nefit" means the amount of money payable 
under the provisions of this Act to a woman e.mployed in an 
e9l:ahlishment; . 

35 of 195a. 
690f I9<U· 
.~ 
-
• 
5 
10 
3 
(i) "mine" means a mine as defined in clause (;) of section 
2 of the Mines Act, 1952; 
(j) "miscarriage" means expulsion of the contents of • 
pre,gnant uterus at any period prior to ocr during the twenty-
sixth week of pregnancy but does not include any miscarriage, 
the causing of which is punishable under the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860; . 
(Ie) "plantation" means a plantation as defined in clause (j) 
of section 2 of the Plantations Labour Act, 1951; 
(l) "prescribed" means prescribed by !rUles made 
this Act; 
under 
(m) "State Government", in relation to a Union territory, 
means the Administrator thereof; 
(n) "wages" means all remuneration paid or payable in 
IS cash to a woman, if the terms of the contract of employment, 
express or implied, were fulfilled and includes-
(i) such cash allowances (including dearness allowance 
and house rent allowance) as a woman is for the time being 
entitled to; and 
(ii) the money value of the concessional supply of 
foodgrains and other articles, 
but does not include-
(i) any bonus; 
(ii) over-time earnings and any deduction or payment 
25 made on account of fines; 
30 
(iii) any contribution paid or payable by the employer 
to any pension fund or provident fund or f(lI' the benefit 
of the, woman under any law for the time being in force; 
and 
(iv) any gratuity payable on the termination of service; 
(0) "woman" means a woman employed, whether directly 
or through any agency, for wages in any establishment, 
4. (1) No employer shall knowingly employ a woman in any Employment 
establishment during the six weeks immediately following the day of, or work by women 35 of her delivery or her miscarriage. prohibited 
during cer-
(3) No woman shall work in any establishment during the six taiD period. 
weeki immediately following the day of her delivery or her mie-
carriap, 

4 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of section a, no pregnant 
woman shall, on a request being made by her in this behalf, be re-
quired by her employer to do during the period specified in sub-
section (4) any work which is of an arduous nature or which involv-
es long hours of standing, or which in any way is likely to interfere 5 
with her pregnancy or the, normal development of the foetus, or is 
likely to cause her miscarriage or otherwise to adversely affect her 
health. 
(4) The period referred to in sub-section (3) shall be-
(a) the period of one month immediately preceding the 10 
period of six weeks, before the date of her expected delivery; 
(b) any period during the said period of six weeks for 
which the pregnant woman does not avail of leave of absence 
unde·r section 6. 
Right to pay- 5. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every woman shall J 5 
~:t:yOf=!: be entitled to, and her employer shall be liable for, the payment of 
fit. maternity benefit at the rate of the average daily wage for the period 
of her actual absence immediately preceding and including the day 
of her delivery and for the six weeks immediately following that 
-. ~ 
E:rp1.anation.-For the purpose of this sub-section, the average daily 
wage means the average of the woman's wages payable to her for 
the days on which she has worked during the period of twelve 
calendar months immediately preceding the date from which she 
absents herself on account of maternity, or seventy-five naye paise 25 
a day, whichever is higher. 
(2) No women shall be entitled to maternity benefit unless she 
has been employed in an establishment of the employer from whom 
she claims maternity benefit, for a period of not less than two 
hundred Wld forty days in the twelve months immediately preceding 30 
the date of her expected delivery: 
Provided that the qualifying period of two hundred and forty days 
aforesaid shall not apply to a womoan who has immigrated into the 
State of Assam and was pregnant at the time of the immigmtion. 
(3) The maximum period for whkh any woman shall be entitled 35 
to the payment of maternity benefit shall be twelve weeks, that is to 
say, six weeks up to and including the day of her deUvery and six 
weeks immediately following that de,.~ 
Provided that where a woman dies during this period. the mater-
nity benefit shall be payable Qnly fPI' the day. up to fJld ~cl.Ud.!ni 40 
the day of her death. .,. 

S 
6. (1) Any woman employed in an establishment and entitled to NO.rice ()f 
maternity benefit under the provisions of this Act may give notice =!~ 
in writing in such form as may be prescribed, to her employer, stating benefit .nd 
that her maternity benefit may be paid to her or to such person 8S rhl::E' 
5 she may nominate in the notice and that she will not work in any 
establishment during the period for which she receives maternity 
benefit. 
(2) In the case of a woman who is pregnant, such notice shall 
sbate the date from which she will be absent from work, not being 
10 a ante eo.rlier than six weeks from the date of her expected deli-
very. 
(3) Any woman who has not given the notice when she was preg-
nant may give such notice as soon' as possible after the delivE'ry. , 
(4) On receipt of the notice, the employer shall permit such woman 
IS to absent herself from the establishment until the expiry of six 
weeks after the day of her delivery. 
(5) The amount of maternity benefit for the period preceding the 
date of her expected delivery shall be paid in advance by the em-
ployer to the woman on production of such proof as may be pres-
20 cribed that the 'WOman is pregnant, and the amount due for the 
subsequent period shalt b' paid by the employer to the woman with-
in forty-eight hours of production of such proof as may be prescribed 
that the woman has been delivered of a chiJd. 
(6) The failure to give notice under this section shall not disen-
25 title a woman to maternity benefit under this Act if she is other-
wise entitled to such benefit and in any such case an Inspector may. 
either of his own motion or on an application made to him by thE' 
woman, order the payment oi such benefit within such period as 
may be specified in the order. 
30 '1. If a woman dies during the period for which she is entitled PaymeI,l' of 
to maternity benefit, the employer shall pay the mount of mater- =tdi~liK 
nity benefit due to her to the person nominated by her in thp case of c1ai-
t·· d . 6 d' h' ch . mant's dea h. no lCe gIven un er sectIOn an In case t ere tS no su nommee. 
to her legal representative. 
35 8. Every woman entitled to maternity benefit under this Act =..!Jt of 
.l1al1 also be entitled to receive from her employer a medical bonus t:oaus. , 
of twenty-Rve, rupees, If no pre-natal, confinement and post-natal 
care is provided for by the employer free of charge. 
9. In case of miscarriage, 8 woman shaU, on production of such Lc:ave for 
An f b -bed b . led 1'· ' mllcarr.,e • ..... proo as may e prescn " e enflt to eave wIth wages at the 
1". '01 .... .,mity -'flt,for. perled of iii" weeks immediatel,. 
followtnr the day of her miscarriage. 

6 
Leave for ill- 10. A woman suffering from illness arising out of pregnancy, 
~:'o~r~~: delivery, premature birth of child or miscarriare shall, en produc-
naney, deli- tion of such proof as may be prescribed, be entitled, in addition to 
~::l'bf~hma- the period of absence allowed. to her under section 6, or as the case 5 
of. chi1~, or may be. under section 9, to leave with wages at the rate of mater-
mlscamage. nity benefit for a maximum period of one month: 
Nursing 
breaks. 
Di.mi.sal 
during 
absence or 
prepney. 
11. Every woman delivered of a child who returns to duty after 
such delivery shall, in oaddition to the interval for rest allowed to 
her, be allowed in the course of her daily work two breaks of the 10 
prescribed duration for nursing the child until the child attains 
the age of fifteen months. 
12. (1) When a woman absents herself from work in accord-
ence with the provisions of this Act, it shall be unlawful for her 
employer to dismiss her during or on account of such absence or 
to give notice of dismissal on such a day that the notice will ex- 15 
pire during su~h absence, or to vary to her disadvantage any of 
the conditions of her service. 
(2) (a) The dismissal of a woman at any time during her preg-
n9Ilcy, if the woman but for such dismissal would have been 
entitled to maternity benefit under this Act, shall not have the 20 
effect of depriving her of that maternity benefit except in the case 
of dismissal for gross misconduct. 
(b) If any quest 'on arises whether dismissal was or was not 
for gross misconduct, it shall be referred to the Inspector for deci-
sion. 25 
(c) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Inspector may, 
within thirty days from the date on which such decision is com-
municated to such person, appeal to the prescribed authority. 
(d) The decision of the prescribed authority where an appeal 
has been preferred to it under clauae (c) or of the Inspector where 30 
no such appro1 has been preferred, shall be final. 
(e) Nothing contaained in this sub-section shall affect the pro-
visions contained in sub-section (1). 
l!lo deduc-. 13. No deduction from the normal and usual daily wages of a 
I:;':~ woman entitled to the payment of maternity benefit under the pro- 35 
visions of this Act shall be made by reason only of-
(a) the nature of work assigned to her by virtue of tbe 
provisions contained in sub-section (3) of section 4; or 
(b) breaks for nursing the child allowed to her UDder the 010 
prOVil1ons of section 11. . 

« 
• 
.. 4, t:/( 1860 
7 
14. The appropriate Government may, by notification in the An:intment 
Official Gazette, appoint such officers as it thinks fit to be Inspectors 0 In.pectora. 
for the purposes of this Act and may define the local limits of the 
jUrisdiction within which they shall exercise their functions under 
S this Act. 
15. An Inspector may, subject to such restrictions or conditions dPo'Yer'fAnd 
. . 11 f h f 11 . utles 0 as may be prescrIbed, exerCIse a or any 0 teo owmg powers, In!!pectora. 
namely:-
10 
(a) enter at all reasonable times with such assistants, if 
any, being persons in the service of the Government or any 
local or other public authority, as he thinks fit, any premises 
or place where women are employed or work is given to them 
in an establishment, for the purposes of examining' any regis-
ters, records and notices required to be kept or exhibited by 
or under this Act and require their production for inspection; 
I' (b) examine any person whom he finds in any premises 
or place and who,' he has reasonable cause to believe, is em-
ployed in the establishment: 
Provided that no person shall be compelled under this 
section to answer any question or give any evidence tending 
to incriminate .himself; 
(c) requite the employer to give information regarding 
the names and addresses of women employed, payments made 
to them, and applications or notices received from them under 
this Act; and 
(d) take copies of any registers and records or notices or 
any portions thereof . 
16. Every Inspector appointed under this Act shall be deemed to Inspectors to 
be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian !:r~~~~c 
30 Penal Code. 
17. (1) Any woman claiming that maternity benefit to which Power of 
she is entitled under this Act and any person claiming that pay- dI~spector to Ireet pay· 
ment due under section 7 has been improperly withheld may make ments 0 be 
a complaint to the Inspector. made. 
3' (2) The Inspector may, of his own motion or on receipt of a 
complaint referred to in sub-section (1), make an inquiry or cause 
an inquiry to be made and if satisfied that payment has been wrong-
fully withheld, may direct the payment to be made in accordance 
with his orders. : 

8 
(3) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Inspector under 
sub-section (2) may, within thirty days from the citate on which 
such decision is communicated to such person, appeal to the pres-
cribed authority. 
(4) The decision of the prescribed authority where an appeal 5 
has been preferred to it under sub-section (3) or of the Inspector 
where no such appeal has been preferred, shall be final. 
(5) Any emount payable under this section shall be recoverable 
as an arrear of land revenue. 
P rfi . f 18. If a woman works in any establishment after she has been 10 o enure 0 •• 
maternity permitted by her employer to absent herself under the proVlSlOns 
benefit. of section 6 for any period during such authorised absence, she 
shall forfeit her claim to the payment of the maternity l1enefit for 
such period.. 
Abstract of 19. An abstract of the provisions of this Act and the rules made 15 
Act and rules thereunder in the language or languages of the Inr:ality shall be 
~b!~j- exhibited in a conspicuous place by the employer in ('very part of 
ted. the establishment in which women are employed. 
Registers, 
etc. 
20. Every emphyer shell prepare and maintain such registers, 
records and muster-rolls and in such manner as may be prescribed. 20 
Penalty for 21. If any employer contravenes the provisions of this Act or 
c;ontBfveAn-t the rules made thereunder, he shall be punishable with imprison-tlono c . 
by employer. ment whIch may extend to three months, or with fine which may 
Penalty for 
ob'tructing 
Inspector. 
Cognizance 
of offences. 
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both; and where the con-
travention is of any provision regarding maternity benefit and the 25 
amount has not been already recovered, the Court shall, in addi-
tion, recover the amount due on account of maternity benefit as if 
it were a fine and pay such amount to the person entitled thereto. 
22. Whoever fails to produce on demand by the Inspector any 
register or document in his custody kept in pursuance of this Act 30 
or the rules made thereunder or conceals or prevents any person 
from appearing before or being examined by an Inspector shall 
be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three 
months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or 
with both. 
23. (1) No prosecution for an offence punishable under this Act 
35 
or any rule made thereunder shall be instituted after the expiry of 
one year from the date on which the offence is alleged to oove been 
committed and no such prosecution shall be instituted except by, 
or with the previous sanction of, the Inspector: 40 

9 
Provided that in computing the period of one year aforesaid, 
the time, if any, taken for the purpose of obtaining such previous 
sanction shall be excluded. 
5 (2) No court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a 
Magistrate of the .First Class shall try any such offence. 
24. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie Pr~tection of 
against any person for anything which is in good faith done or ~ct1on t~n In good faith. 
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rule or 
order made thereunder. 
10 25. The Central Government may give such directions as it may Power of 
S G din th .. t Central Go-deem necessary to a tate overllment regar g e carrymg m 0 vemment to 
execution of the provisions of this Act and the State Government ~ive direc-
sh 11 1 ·th h d' t' tlons. a comp y WI suc lrec lOns. 
26. If the appropriate Government is satisfied that having re- Power to exempt esta-
I 5 gard te>- ~.. blishment .. 
(i) the seasonal character of the working of any establish-
ment other than a mine and 6 plantation or of a class of estab-
li~hments other than mines and plantations, or 
(ii) an establishment or a class of establishments provid-
ing for the grant of benefits which are not less favourable than 
those provided in this Act, or 
(iii) any other sufficient reason, 
it is necessary so to do, it may, be notification in the Official 
Gazette, exempt, subject to such conditions and restrictions, if 
25 any, as may be specified in the notification, the establishment 
or class of establishments from the operation of all or any of 
the provisions of this Act or of any rule made thereunder. 
27. (1) The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstand- Etrectoflaws 
o ing anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or ~~ts agr:: 
3 in the terms of any award, agreement or contract of service, whether consistent 
made before or after the coming into force of this Act: A~~ this 
Provided that where under any such award, agreement, contract 
of service or otherwise, a woman is entitled to benefits in respect of 
any matter which are more favourable to her than those to which 
35 &he would be entitled under this Act, the woman shall continue to 
be entitled to the more favourable benefits in respect of that matter, 
notwithstanding that she is entitled to receive benefits in respect of 
other matters under this Act. 

Power to 
mKerulCI. 
to 
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to preclude 
a woman from entering into an agreement with her employer for 
granting her rights or privileges in respect of any matter which are 
more favourable to her than those to which she would be entitled 
under this Act. 5 
28 (1) The appropriate Government mey, subject to the condition 
of previous publication and by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for- 10 
(a) the preparation and maintenance of registers, records 
and muster-rolls; 
(b) the exercise of powers (including the inspection of estab-
lishments) and the performance of duties by Inspectors for the 
purposes of this Act; 15 
(c) the method of payment of maternity benefit and other 
benefits under this Act in so far as provision has not been made 
therefor in this Act; 
(d) the form of notices under section 6; 
(e) the nature of proof required under the provisions of this 20 
Act; 
(f> the duration of nursing breaks referred to in section 11; 
(g) the procedure to be observed in referring questions for 
decision to Inspectors under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of sec-
tion 12; ·25 
(h) the authority to which an appeal shall lie against the 
decision of the Inspector under section 12 or section 17; the form 
and manner in which such appeal may be made and the procedure 
to be followed in disposal thereof; 
(i) the form and manner in which complaints may be made 30 
to Inspectors under sub-section (1) of section 17 and the pro~ 
dure to be followed by them when making inquiries or causing 
inquiries to be made under sub-section (2) of that section; 
(j) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this sec- 35 
tion shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House, 
of Parliament while it is in session for a total period. of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, 

and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the 
session i~ediately following, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should 
not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modi-
S fied form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the vali-
dity of anything previously done under that rule. 
29. In section 32 of the Plantations Labour Act, 1951,- Amendment 
of Act 69 of 
(a) in sub-section (1), the letter and brackets "(a)" before 19S I. 
10 the words "in the case of sickness", the word "and" after the 
words '!.$ickness allowance" and clause (ib) shall be omitted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), the words "or maternity" shall be 
omitted.. 
30. On the coming into force of this Act in relation to mines, the Repeal. 
15 Mines Maternity Benefit Act, 1941, shall stand repealed. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Maternity protection is at present provided under the difterent 
State Acts on the subject and three Central Acts, viz., the Mines 
Maternity Benefit Act, 1941, the Employees' State Insurance Act, 
1948 and the Plantations Labour Act, 1951. There is considerable 
diversity in their provisions relating to qualifying conditions, period 
and rate of benefit, etc. The proposed legislation seeks to reduce as 
far as possible the existing disparities in this respect. It will apply 
to all establishments, including mines, factories and plantations, except 
those to which the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 
applies and its provisions approximate as nearly as possible to those 
of that Act. 
2. The notes on clauses explain the main provisions contained in 
the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; G. L. NANDA. 
The 21st November, 1960 
12 

Notes of dawes 
Cl4use 2.-The proposed legislation applies, in the first instance, 
to all establishments being factories, mines or plantations as defined 
in the Factories Act, 1948, the Mines Act, 1952, and the plantations 
Labour Act, 1951, respectively including such establishments belong-
ing to Government. The State Governments have also been em-
powered to apply the legislation to any other establishment or class 
of establishments, industrial, commercial or agricultural. However, 
it will not apply to any factory or establishment to which the 
Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 applies. 
Clause 4.-This clause prohibits the employment of, and work by, 
a woman during the six weeks immediately following the day of 
her delivery or her miscarriage. It also provides that a woman, on 
her request, will not be employed on arduous work during a period 
of one month before proceeding on maternity leave. 
Clause 5.-This clause entitles a woman to receive maternity 
benefit at the rate of her average daily wage subject to a minimum 
of seventy-five naye paise per day for a maximum period of 12 
weeks, including 6 weeks following the day of her delivery. The 
qualifying condition is employment for 240 days in the twelve months 
immediately preceding the expected date of delivery, but there is 
no such restriction as to entitlem.ent in the case of an immigrant 
woman who is pregnant when she first arrives in Assam. 
Clause 6.-This clause deals with the procedure for claiming 
maternity benefit and for its payment and grant of maternity leave. 
Clause 7.-This clause provides for payment of maternity benefit 
in case of the cl'aimant's death to her nominee or legal representa-
tive. 
Clause 8.-This clause entitles a woman to receive a medical 
bonus of Rs. 25 if no pre-natal, confinement and post-natal care is 
provided for by the employer free of charge. 
Clause 9.-This clause provides for grant of leave with wages at 
the rate of maternity benefit for six weeks in the case of mis-
carriage. 
CZawe 10.-This clause provides for grant of additional leave with 
wagel!l at the rate of maternity benefit for a maximum period of one 
13 

14 
month in case of illness arising out of a pregnancy, delivery, pre-
mature birth of child or miscarriage. 
Clause n.-This clause provides for grant of two nursing breaks 
a day in addition to the daily interval for rest to mothers for feed-
ing infants. 
Clause 12.-This clause prohibits dismissal of a woman during or 
on account of absence on maternity leave and ensures that the condi-
tions of her service will not be varied to her disadvantage during her 
absence. It also provides that a woman shall not be deprived of the 
maternity benefit to which she may be entitled, on account of dis-
missal at any time during her pregnancy, except in cases of dis-
missal for gross misconduct. 
Clauses 14 and l5.-These clauses relate to the appointments of 
Inspectors and their powers and duties. 
Clause l7.-This clause empowers the Inspector to direct pay-
ments to be made after enquiring into complaints. It also provides 
that the amount payable shall be recoverable as an arrear of land 
revenue. 
Clause lS.-This clause provides for forfeiture of maternity 
benefit in respect of the period for which a woman may work in any 
establishment during maternity leave. 
Clauses 21 to 23.-These clauses relate to penalties, procedure for 
prosecution and jurisdiction of courts to try offences under the Bill. 
Clause 26.-This clause provides for exemption from the provi-
sions of the Bill in certain cases. 
Clause 27.-This clause ensures that if a woman worker is. enti-
tled to benefits which are more favourable than those provided for 
in the Bill, she shall continue to enjoy those benefits. 
Clauses 29 and 30.-These clauses provide for repeal of (i) the 
provisions of the Plantations Labour Act, 1951, relating to maternity 
benefit and (ii) the Mines Maternity Benefit Act, 1941. Necessary 
action to repeal the State Maternity Benefit Acts will be taken by 
the State Governments. 

, 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The le,gislation involves expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India on account of its administration in mines and payment of 
benefits to women workers in Central Government factories, mines, 
etc. There will, however, be· no additional expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India on account of the administration of the 
legislation in mines as the Mines Maternity Benefit Act, 1941, which 
will be superseded, is already being administered by the Central 
Government. As regards payment of benefits, the legislation will 
involve additional expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, 
as mate·rnity benefit in Central Government establishments will 
have tc be paid under clause 5 at the rate of average daily wage 
subject to a minimum of seventy-five naye paise per dey for a period 
of 12 weeks in cases where the present rate is lower or (he period of 
benefit is less than 12 weeks. The legislation will further affect the 
number of women workers who qualify for the benefit and, conse-
quently, also the liability of employers including the Central Gov-
ernment. However, it is not possible to give an estimate of the addi-
tional expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of Indie, as this would 
require the collection of a large volume of statistics and the expe.ndi-
ture will also have to be calculated on the basis of certain assump-
tions. 
2. In addition to the maternity benefit, the Bill also provides for 
the following benefits:-
(i) Payment of medical bonus of Rs. 25 if no pre-natal, 
confinement and post-natal care is provided by the employer free 
of charge, (clause 8). . 
(ii) Leave for miscarriage with wages at the rate of 
maternity benefit for a period of 6 weeks (clause 9). 
(iii) Additional leave with wages at the rate of maternity 
benefit for a maximum period of one month in case of illness 
arising out of pregnancy, delivery, premature birth of child or 
miscarriage (clause 10). 
The, above benefits are not available under all the existing Mater-
nity Benefit Acts, and as a result of the proposed legislatien, the 
15 

16 
liability of employers, including the Central Government, will 
increase in this regard. As, however, these benefits are admissible 
only in case of non-provision of free medical care or in the event of 
miscarriage or illness, it is also not possible to estimate the amount 
of additional expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India in 
such cases. 
• 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATTION 
Clause 28 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to 
make rules to caxry out the purposes of the Act. The matters in 
respect of which such rules may be made have been specified there-
in. They relate, inter alia, to the form of notice for claiming the 
maternity benefit, the proof of pregnancy, delivery, miscarriage or 
illness, the authority to which appeals will lie against the decision 
of the Inspector under clauses 12 and 17, powers and duties of Inspec-
tors, the preparation and maintenance of registers, records and 
muster-rolls. Thus the matters in respect of which rules may be 
made, are matters of procedure or detail. 
2. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a nocmal 
character. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE PLANTATIONS LABOUB ACT, 1951 (69 or 1951) 
• • • • 
SickDes. and 32. (1) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf 
=::~y every worker shall be entitled to obtain from his employer-
• • • • 
(a) in the case of sickness certified by a qualified medical 
practitioner, sickness allowance, and 
(b) if a woman, in the case of confinement or expected 
confinement, maternity allowance, 
at such rate, for such period and at such intervals as may be 
prescribed. 
• • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to regulate the employment of women in certain establishments 
for certain periods before and after child-birth and to 
provide for payment of meternity benefit to them. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 of 
the Constitution of India, reconunended to Lok Sabha the 
consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Gul.aril4l Nanda, . 
Minister cO Labuur and 
Employment.) 