As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA ON 
" .~' ( . , "i'! 
Bill No . ., of 19'70 
THE NATIONAL SERVICE BILL, 1970 
CLAUSES 
1. 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
Short title, extent and comm(!'ncemcnt. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
LIABILITY OF PERsuNS TO RENDER NATIONAL SERVICE 
3. Liability of persons to be called up for national service. 
4. Voluntary service in lieu of natmal service. 
5. Liability to complete interrupted service. 
r 
6. Power of Central Government to direct a person to render ser-
vice with the Armed Forces of' Union or other national 
service. 
7. Discipline. 
8. Power of Central Government to require any employer to re-
lease qualified persons. 
9. Transfer. 
10. Persons not to leave national service or be discharged thQrefrom 
unless permitted by Central G<>vernment. 
CHAPTER III 
REGISTRATION AND ENLISTMENT FOR NATIONAL SERVICE , 
11. Persons required to register. 
12. Registration. 
13. Notice of likelihood of calling up for national service. 
14. Enlistment for national service. 
15. Salary, wages, etc., and travelling allowances to be paid to 
persons enlisted for national service. 
16. Training. 
17. Discharge. 
18. 
19. 
CHAPTER IV 
POSTPONEMENT OF NATIONAL SERVICE 
National Service (Hardship) Committee. 
Application for postponement on grounds of hardship. 
(i) 

(ii) 
20. Appeal from decision of the National Service (Hardship) Com-
mittee. 
21. Revocation of postponement certificate. 
22. .Suipension of right to postponement of liability to be called up 
for national service. 
CHAPTER V 
RE1NSTATEMENT OF QUALIFIED PERSONS CALLED UP FOR NATIONAL SERVICE 
23. Reinstatement. 
24. Preservation of certain rights of qualified persons required to 
render national service. 
CHAPTER VI 
OTHER OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
25. False statement and forgery. 
26. General provision as to offences. 
27. Offences by companies. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
2S. Information to be furnished by Universities, etc. 
29. Information to be furnished by District Magistrate. 
30. Priority of debts. 
31. Summary trial of offences. 
32. JUrisdiction to try offences. 
33. Protection of acti<ln taken in good faith. 
34. Removal of difficulties. 
35. Powers to delegate. 
36. Power to make rules. 
37. Power to make regulations. 
;is. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. 
, 

s 
8m No Itot I~ 
THE NATIONAL SERViCE BILL, 1970 
A 
BILL 
to provide /0'1' the registration a/qualified persons and /01' the rendering 
&j national service by such persons and f01' matters connected there-
with. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPl'ER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Service Act, 1970. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
10 (a) "employer" means any person who employs any qualifled 
person for doing any work in any e;;;tablishment and includes any 
person entrusted with the supervision a1\d cantrol of quallfied persons 
in such establishment; 
(b) "establishment" mean~ 
(i) any oftiee, or 
Short 
ti~,. 
ezt,mt· 
and~1D­
mence-
ment. 
Defini-
tions. 

Liability 
of persons 
to be 
called 
up for 
national 
service, 
'-. 
(ii) any place where any industry, trade, business or occupa· 
tion is carried on, and includes any technical institution or train-
ing centre; 
(c) "national service" means any service which is likely to assist 
the defence of India and civil defence or the efficient conduct of mili- 5 
tary operations and includes such social service as the Central Gov-
ernment may, if it is of opinion that it is necessary for public pur-
poses so to do, by notification specify in this behalf; 
(d) "notification" means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette; IC 
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(f) "qualified person" means a citizen of India who is ordinarily 
re!1ident in India and who,-
. ..., (i) has obtained a recognised medical qualification within 102 of 
IS 1956. 
L. 
the meaning of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, or 
(ii) has obtained, or has passed an examination which entitles 
him to obtain a degree of a University or its equivalent qualifica-
tion in any branch of engineering or technology or both. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this Act, a qualified person who 
is resident in India shall be deemed to be ordinarily resident there 20 
unless-
(a) he is residing there only for the purposes of attending a 
course of education; or 
(b) the circumstances of his residence there are otherwise 
such as to show that he is residing there for a temporary purpose 2S 
only; or 
(c) he, being a person who was born or domiciled in any 
country outside India, has heen resident there for less than two 
years. 
CHAPTER II 
LIABILITY OF PERSONS TO RENDER NATIONAL SERVICE 
3. (1) Every person wh(J-
(a) is a qualified person at the commencement of this Act, or 
(b) becomes a qualified person after such commencement, 
shall, if he has not attained the age of thirty years at such commencement, 35 
or, as the case may be, on the date on which he becomes a qualified 
person, be liable until he attains the age of thirty years, to' be called up 
for national service for a period of not more than four years. 
(2) The period of national service for which a qualified person shall 
be l,iable to be called up ~nder this Act shall begin from the date on which 40 
he IS required by an enlIstment notice served under this Act to present 
himself to the authority specified therein and shall end on the day when 
his term of national service is completed in accordance with the provi-
.iona of this Act. 

'of 1888. 
56 of 1948. 
62 of 1952. 
62 of 1957 
.. 
.. (1) If a qualified person has been enlisted under any other law for 
the time being in rorce, for service in one of the Armed Forces of the 
Union for a period of not less than four years, he shall perform the ser-
vice required of the members of that Force in lieu of the National service 
$ required under this Act. 
(2) If a qualified person has rendered or is rendering service, other 
than service in one of the Armed i'orces of the Union and such servicC' 
is declared by the Central Government to be equivalent to national ser-
vice, the period of such service shall be deemed to be service in lieu of 
10 the national service required under this Act and he shall (unless he has 
ceased to be liable under this Act to be called up for national service), 
be liable to be called up for national service for such term as will, together 
with the service completed by him, be equivalent to the term of service 
for which persons are liable to serve under this Act. 
IS (3) If any qualified person has been enlisted as a member of-
20 
(a) the Indian Reserve Forces, regulated under the Indian Re-
serve Forces Act, 1888, 
(b) the Territorial Army constituted under the Territorial Army 
Act, 1948, 
(c) the Air Force Reserve or the Auxiliary Air FOTce Reserve 
constituted under the Reserve and Auxiliary Air Forces Act, 1952, 
(d) the Indian Naval Reserve Forces raised and maintained 
under the Navy Act, 1957, or 
(e) any other Force of the foregOing nature, 
25 he shall not be called upon, so long as he continues to be a member 
of that Force, to render national service under this Act: 
Provided that he shall, after he has ceased to be a member of such 
Force, be liable to render national service (unless he has ceased to be 
liable under this Act to be called up for national service), fOT such term 
30 as will, together with the actual service rendered by him 8S a member 
of that Force, be equivalent to the term of service for which persons 
are liable t(l serve under this Act. 
5. If any qualified person serving in the Armed Forces of the Union 
ceases to serve therein before he has completed four years of such ser-
3S vice, he shall, unless he has ceased to be liable under this Act to be called 
up for nat.ional service, be liable to be called up to serve for such term 
as will, together with tlie service completed by him, be equivalent to the 
term of service for which persons are liable to serve under this Act. 
6. Subject to the provisions of section 3, the Central Government may, 
40 by order, require a qualified person to render service in the Armed Forces 
of the Union or such other national service, as it may specify in this 
behalf, for such period and at such place as may be specified in the order. 
Voluntary 
servIce 
in lieu of 
national 
lIel'vice. 
LiabiUty 
to com-
plete in-
terrupted 
.ervlce. 
Powerot' 
Central 
Govern-
me-nt to 
direct a 
person to 
render 
iIIervice 
with the 
Armed 
Foreea 
of Union 
or other 
national 
aervice. 

Discipline. 
Power of 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
require 
anyem-
ployer to 
release 
qualified 
persons. 
Transfer. 
Persons 
not to 
leave 
national 
service 
or be 
discharged 
therefrom 
unless 
permitted 
by Central 
Goverr.a-
ment. 
4 
'I. (1) Every qualified person enlisted under this Act for natitn1ai 
service in the Armed Forces of the Union shall, subject to such condi-
tions as may be prescribed, be bound to serve in any branch of the 
Armed Forces to which he is for the time being attached, and shall be 
subject to all laws, rules, regulations and orders in force for the time s 
being in relation to such branch. 
(2) Every qualified person enlisted for any national service, other 
than service in .the Armed Forces of the Union shall, subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed, be bound to serve in my position or 
post to which he is appointed for the time being, and shall be subject to 10 
all laws, rules, regulations and orders in force for the time i:?eing inrela-
tion to such position or post. 
S. (1) The Central Government may, by order in writing. require 
any employer to release any qualified person for employment in national 
scrvice within such time as may be specified in the order. IS 
(2) Where an employer releases a qualified person, for employment 
in national service, such employer shall not be liable to pay the salary, 
wages and other emoluments, if any, of the qualified peIsonfor the 
period during which national service is or has been rendered by the 
qualified person. 20 
(3) No contract, subsisting between a qualified person and his employer 
on the date of release of the qualified pcrs~m for employment in national 
service, shall be enforceable until such qualified persons has been diE;-
charged from national service. 
(4) In computing the period specified in any contract of ser.vice in 25 
relation to a qualified person who has been called upon to render nation-
al service, the period of national service actually rendered by such quali-
fied person shall be excluded.' 
(5) If any cmployer fails without sufficient cause to comply with the 
order made under sub-section (1), he shall be liable to be punished with 30 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years aDd also with 
fine which may extend to one. thousand rupees. 
9. The Central Government may, by regulations, make provisions for 
enabling or requiring a qualified person rendering national service in 
any branch of the Armed Forces of the Union to be transferred to Rny 35 
other branch O'f that Force or to any other braI;lch of national l"ervice or 
vice versa. 
10. (1) No qualified person rendering national service under this Ac.t 
shall leave such service until he is discharged thel'efrom under Se.ction 1'7. 
(2) No .qualified person who has been served with anoti<:e under 40 
sub-section (1) of section 13 or an enlist.ment notice under section 14 
shall, if he is in any employment at the date ·of service of such notice, 
leave such employment or be discharged therefrom, except in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act: 
Prt)vided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply where the em- 45' 
ployment of a qualified person is terminated for the reason that the said 
person has been guilty of gross insubordination, habitual absence from 
work, or serious misconduct or has been convicted of an offence. 

5 
(3) If a qualified person who has been served with a notice under 
sub·section (1) of section 13 or an enlistment notice under section 14 
leaves any employment in which he is engaged at the date of service 
of such notice or is discharged therefrom otherwise than in accordance 
5 with the provisions of this Act, he or, as the case may be, the person by 
whom he is discharged, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to five years, and also with fine which may extend to 
two thousand rupees. 
CHAPTER III 
10 REGISTRATION AND ENLISTMENT FOR NATIONAL SERVICE 
11. (1) Every qualified person shall, if he is liable, at the commence-
ment of this Act, to be called up for national service, make an appliea. 
tion, within ninety days from such commencement, to be registered 
under this Act. 
IS (2) Every qualified person who becomes liable after the commence-
ment of this Act. to be called uoon for national service, shall withill 
thirty days from the date on which he becomes so liable, make an appli. 
cation to be registered under this Act. 
Persons 
required 
to regis-
ter. 
12. (1) The Central Government shall, by general order. direct Regima-
20 
25 
quaUfied persons who are required to be registered under this Act,- tion. 
(a) to furnish at luch place aad time, in such manner and to 
such authority or person 08 may be specified therein, such particu-
lars about themselves as the order may require; and 
(b) to make at such place, in such manner and to such authority 
or person as may be specified in the order, an application to be 
registered under this Act. 
(2) The order mad~ under sub-section (1) Jru:ly make different pro-
visions in relation to different classes of qualified persons subject to 
registration and may provide for exempting from any requirements of 
the order of any class of qualified persons with respect to whom the 
30 Central Government is satisfied that particulars sufficient for the purposes 
of this Act can be ascertained otherwi£e than by virtue of those require-
ments. 
(3) If any qualified person fails to comply with any requirement of 
the order made under sub-section (1), he shall be liable to be punished 
35 with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with 
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
4S 
(4) The Central Government shall ensure-
(a) that upon an application duly made for registration under 
this Act, the name and address of the applicant together with the 
particulars of the matters with respect to which information was 
given by the applicant in pursuance of the order made under sub-
seetion (1) are entered in a register kept for the purposes of this 
Act, to be known as the "National Service Register"; and 
(b) that upon the applicant being registered, a certificate of 
registration is issued to the applicant in the prescribed form. 

Notice of 
likelihood 
of calling 
up for 
national 
service. 
6 
(5) The information contained in the National Service Register shall 
not be used for any purpose other than the purposes of this Act: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall preclude the Central 
Government from disclosing, for statistical purposes, any information 
contained in the National Service Register. 5 
(6) The Central Government may cause registration to be made of, 
and a certificate of registration to be issued to, any qualified person of 
a class exempted from any of the reqUirements of sub-section (1) as if 
that person had duly applied to be registered under this Act. 
(7) (a) If any qualified person subject to registration under this 10 
Act communicates to the Central Government in the prescribed manner, 
that he has a preference for the Army, Air Force or Naval Service, 
that fact shall be recorded in the National Service Register. 
(b) If a qualified person belonging to a class which is exempted from 
registration under this Act has a preference for the Army, Air Force or IS 
Naval Service, he shall intimate such preference to the Central Govern-
ment in such manner as that Government may specify and, on receipt of 
such intimation. the Central Government shall cause such preference to 
be recorded in the National Service Register. 
(8) (a) If any change occurs in the name or address of any qualified 20 
person while such person remlains registered under this Act, or if any 
such person acquires any additional academic or professional qualifica-
tion or distinction, he shall iorthwith communicate the change of his 
name or address, or, as the case may be, the acquisition by him of 
additional academic or professional qualification or distinction to the 2S 
Central Government in the prescribed manner and at the same time 
return to the Central Government. for correction. any certificate of 
registration held by him and if he fails to communicate the change of 
his name or address, or, as the case may be, the acquisition by him 
of the additional academic or professional qualification or distinction, 30 
he shall be liable to be punished with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees. 
(b) Upon the receipt of a communication of the change of name or 
address of any qualified person registered under this Act or of acquisi-
tion by him of additional academic or professional qualification or distinc- 35 
tion, the Central Government shall cause the necessary corrections to 
be made in the entries in the National Service Register and shall either 
cause the certificate to be corrected and returned to such person or 
cause a fresh certificate to be issued to him. 
(9) The Central Government may, by rules made under this Act. 40 
provide for the issue. in specified circumstances, of fresh certificates of 
registration in place of certificates which have been lost, destroyed or 
defaced. 
13. (1) The Central Government may from time to time cause to be 
served on any qualified person subject to registration under this Act, 45 
and. if he is engaged in any employment, also on his employer, a written 
notice in the prescribed form stating that such person is likely to be 
called upon, at any time within a period of twelve months next follow-
ing. to render national service. 
(2) Omission to serve any notice referred to in sub-section (1) on an 50 
employer or the service of such notice on a person who is not, at the 

1 
lime of service of such notice, the employer of the qualified person 
ctincemed, shall not invalidate the notice served under sub-section (1) 
on the qUalified person and shall not affect the liability of the qualified 
person to be called up for national service. 
".5 (3) The Central Government may cause to be served on any qualified 
perIIcm served with a notice referred to in sub-section (1), a 'written 
.Q.OUce requiring that person to submit himself to an examination, by 
such IJ.lltbority. at such place and at such time, as may be specified in the 
notice, of his physical and mental fitness for being called up for national 
10 service . 
. (4) The Central Government may make regulations for the examina-
tion of the physical and mental fitness of persons subject to registra-
tion under this Act and such regulations may, in particular, enable the 
medical and other authority-
IS .' . (4) in a case where he is unable to complete the examination 
on one Qccasion, to direct the person examined to submit himself 
for a further examination on a specified time and place; 
(b) to direct the person examined to submit himself for exaJni.. 
nation by a specialist. 
20,. (.5) The Central Government may by regulations determine the 
.oai4IaOries in which persons examined under this section are to be placed 
with reference to their physical and mental condition . 
. (6) If any qualified person fails to comply with the requirements of 
.• notice Iel'ved 011 him under sub-section (3) or any regulations made 
2S'or directions given under sub-section (4), he shall be liable to be punish~ 
ed with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
(7) The court by which a qualified person is conVicted of an offence 
. tinder this section may, without prejudice to any penalty which may 
30 be imposed on him, order him to submit himself to an examination of 
IUs pby.aical and mental fitness, further examination or examination by 
a~t, at the case may be, at such place and at such time as may 
be flxed by the court and any such order may provide that such person 
~ll. be detained in custody until that time and shall be taken by a 
3S police officer to that place and at that time: 
Provided that no person shall be detained in custody by virtue of 
any such order for more than twenty-four hours. 
(8) A qualified person who, having been ordered by a court under 
.iib-sectian (1) to submit himself to an examination of his physical and 
40 mental fitness and to be detained in custody, is taken by a police officer 
to the p1aee and at the time at which he is to be examined, does not 
submit himself to an examination of his physical and mental fitness in 
aecordanee with the order, he may be arrested by a police officer without 
a warrat. 
41. (9) A qualified person who fails to submit himself to an examination 
of his pbysieal and mental fitness in accordance with an order made 
under sub-ee'ction (7), shall be liable to be punished with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to three years, and also with fin" which 
·may extend to one thouaand rupees. 

Enlist. 
mentfor 
national 
aervlce. 
Salary, 
wa .... 
etc., and 
travellina 
allow-
ancesto 
,be p&id 
to perlOns 
enliJtecJ 
for 
national 
aervlee. 
8 
(10) A notice served on any qualified person under this section abaU 
cease to have effect if, before that date on which he is required to 
submit himself to an examination of his physical and mental fitness, 
he ceases to be subject to registration under this Act. . 
(11) The Central Government may pay to the medical or other auttao- S 
rity, specialist, or any qualified person undergoing examination of Wa 
physical and mental fitness under this section such travelliq and other 
allowances, inclndinl compensation for loss of remunerative time, In 
accordance with such sca»es as may be prescribed. 
14:. (1) Subject to such priorities as may be prescribed, the Central 10 
Government may cause to be served on any qualified person for the 
time being liable under this Act to be called up for national service, 
who has been found, after an examination of his physical and mental 
condition, fit for such service, a written notice in the prescribed forrril 
(in this Act referred to as the "enlistment notice") stating that he is I, 
called up for national ~ervice in such one of the Armed Forces of the 
Union or in such other service as may be specified in the enlistment no-
tice and requiring him to present himself at such place and at such tUne 
and to such authority, as may be specifled in the notice: 
Provided that an enlistment notice under this section shall not 20 
require the person upon whom it is served to present himself on a day 
earlier than the fourteenth day after the date of service of the notice 
or such earlier day as may be determdned at his request. 
(2) An enlistment notice served on any qualified person shall cease 
to have effect if, before the day on which he is thereby required ~ as 
present himself, he ceases to be liable to be called up for national service 
under this Act. 
(3) The Central Government may pay to persons required to preteDt 
themselves in pursuance of all enlistment notice served upon them 
travelling and other allowances in accordance with such scales as ma, 30 
he prescribed. . . . .. , •• 
(4) If on the day specified in the enlistment notice as the day on 
which the person to whom the notice relates is reqUired to present him-
self for national service-
(a) a postponement certificate relating to him is in foree, or " 
(b) any appeal or application by him for postponement af 
national service is pending, 
the enlistment notice served on him shan be of no effect. 
(5) The enlistment notice shall be served in such manner as mil 
be prescribed. . 40 
15. (1) Every qualified person who is called up for natioDal senice 
under this Act, or who is transferred from one form. of natioaal aeniee 
to another, shall be paid such salary, wales, allOWUlC:n, peualoa, dJa.. 
ability and death compensations and other benefits as may he pl'eIUiW: 
Provided that such payments shall be on IIcales not lesa favourable'" 
than those admissible to persons of like quaUfications, ezperienee .... 
lenKth of service in similar positions under the Government. 

- 9 
Explcnation.-For the purposes of the foregoing proviso, the length 
of standing of a qualified person as an engineer or medical practitioner, 
as the case may be, shall be construed as the length of his service. 
(2) Any qualUled person who· is called up for national service or 
S tl'alllferrecl from one form of national sel'vice, or from one place of 
eJIl,loyment in the national service, to another shall be paid travellin, 
allowance for jouraey to his place of employment under this Act at such 
rat .. as may be prescribed. 
(3) A quaUfted person who, on the date of the service of the enlist. 
10 ment aotice on him, is en,ared in any empolyment, or a qualified person 
wlao is transferred from one form of national service, er from one place 
of employment in the national service, to another. shan be paid, for 
tbe period of his transit from the place of his former employment to 
the place of hH employment under this Ad, salary or wages (including 
IS aDowances) at the rate fixed by the Central Government under IlUh· 
section (1). 
(4) A qualified person who was in any employment on tbe date on 
wbleh he was called for national service under this Act, shall, on his 
dille_re from such service, be paid salary or wages (including anow. 
20 anees) for the period of his transit from the place of his employment 
__ tid. Act to the place of his former employment at the rate fixed 
hy tbe Central Government under sub·seetion (1). 
(5) A qualified person who is called for national service under 
this Act shall, on the termination of his national service, be paid 
~S traveUina expenses at such rate as may be prescribed. for journey to 
whea the place of his former employment, or, if he was unemployed when 
he wu &rat called up for natioDal service under this Act, to the place 
of his resicleDce. 
16. During his term of national service a qualified person may be Trainin,. 
30 required to undergo training for such period as may be prescribed. 
17. (1) Every qualified person enlisted under this Act shall be entitled Dischar,e. 
to receive his discharge from national service on the expiration of the 
period for which he was enlisted and such person may, prior to the 
expiration of that period, be discharged from national service by such 
35 .uthor~ty and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. 
(2) A person receiving discharge under this section shall be given 
a eertiftcate in such form, as may be prescrib~. certifyiniZ that he has 
. been dil!lCharged from national service. 
. (3) A perron who has receh cd discharge under this section shall not, 
4.0 Pe required t.o render national· s~rvice after such discharge: 
Provided that a oerson who has received discharge under this section 
: -betore'he hlis compl~ted four years of national service, shall. unless he has 
ceased to be liable to be;clllled up for national service under this Act; be 
.. liable to j;,e caUed. up for n;ltional service under this Act for such term a~ 
4J wm~ tog~tller. witlt the ~riQ'd qf (la.tlonal service rendered bv him, be equl' 
val."t _to. fo.ur years .. 
_":.. ..--

National 
Service 
(Hard· 
ship) 
Commit· 
tee. 
Applica. 
tionfor 
postpone. 
menton 
lI'ounds of 
hardahip. 
10 
CHAPTER IV 
POSTPONEMENT OF NATIONAL SERVICE 
18. (1) The Central Govemment shaD cOMtitate a )iati..uSel~". 
(Bar~hip) Committee consisti., of a Cbai ..... __ 0 ,.ther~ 
appointed by it. S 
(2) The Chairman of the National Service (Hardship) Committee shall 
be a person who is, or has been, or is qualified t()f be, a Judge of a High 
Court. 
(3) The members of the National Service (Hardship) Committeethln 
hold otlice for a period of three years but shall be eligi~le for r.p,oMt. 10 
ment. 
(4) The proceedings of the National Service (Hardship) Co.m.mUtee 
shall not be invalid by reason of any defect in the constitutioll of, or any 
vacancy in, such Committee. 
(5) Any vacancy in the National Service (Hardship) Commi.tt.ee lihall 15 
be filled by the Central Government in such manner as it may thinkftt. 
(6) The Central Government may constitute·BegiDal Nltioaa. 's.r.ice' 
(Hardship) Committees for such regions as it maytbUlk. aaa oa: .. h 
constitutin such Regional Natiollal Serviee (Hudallip) c.-aitt.1e8 
shall have all the powers, functions and privileges of the National Ser- 20 
vice (Hardship) Committee and shall be subject to the IlllBeprorisions 
as are applicable to tbat' Committee. 
(7) The National Service (Hardship) Committee shan have power to 
regulate its own procedure with regard to any investigation under t+ltsAct 
and shall have for the purposes of such irlvestigationthe powers ofa etvil 25 
court while trying a sujt under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in 'tes~ 
pect of the following matters, namely:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath; , 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documentsprodu- 30 
cible as evidence; 
.... '"" • ,; I 
(c) receiving evidence on oath; 
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of wit1les!resordecu 
ments; 
(e) such other matters as may be prescribed. 35 
19. (1) Any qualified 'ilerson who is for the time being liable to be I 
called up for national service under this Act and who baa .Qaen ,uned 
with 8 notice rekrred to in sub-section (1) of section 13, or any employer 
of sncll qualified penon, may apply, in the prescribed manner:to the 
Central Government for a certificate of postponement of liability. to ~ 40 
called up for national service on the ground that exceptional hardshii'· 
would ensue if such qualified person were called up for'natioDaleervice, 
.and may, on that gro'lnld apply, in the prescribed 1MJJWI", 1m tIIe: __ .l 
of the postponement eertifteate granted to him. 
(2) Where an application for a postponeme~t certifiateorfor the 45 
renewal thereof is made, the Central Government shaD referfhe ap~'D"" 
tion for dtefsion to the National Service (Hardship) CcJmmmee. .< 
5 of 1908. 

11 
(I) No application for the grant of a postponement certificate aball 
be referred by the Central Government to the NatiGnal Service (Hud-
~) Committee unless such application is made within sixty days from 
the date of service of the notice referred to in sub-section (l) of section 
S 13: 
Pzov.idad that the Central Government may refer .an application for 
the grant of a poItponement certificate to the National Service (Hardshi~) 
CotaaUttee made after the expiry of the said period if it is flatisfiecl, 
baving regard to the grounds on which the application is made, that the 
IO'making thereof has not been unreasonably delayed. 
(4) The Central Government may by regulatiON' speeify the princi-
ples to be applied and the circumstances to which regard is to be or not io 
be had for the hearing of an application for the grant or renewal 01 a 
postponement certificate and as to the period for which the postpone-
IS ment certificate may be granted or renewed. 
(5) The Natioul Service (Har-dship) Committee may, after consi-
deration of the application for a postponement certiftC8~ or reuewal 
thereof, gram: or reject the same. 
(6) The period within which the postponement ('.erUftcate is tn fOllGe 
20 shall be added to the period during which the person to whom the certi-
ficate was g:canted is liable under this Act to be called up for national 
&ervice and accordingly this Act shall in relation to that person have 
eftect as if for reference therein to the age of thirty years, there were 
substituted, an age being the sum of thirty years and the period during 
2swhich-
(i) the postponement certificate is in force, and 
(ii) the enlistment notice was of no effect by reason of the pro-
visions of clause (b) of sub-section (4) of section 14· 
(7) If any qualified person or an employer makef> 8n application for 
30 a postponement certificate on a ground which he knows to be fatlle or 
doe!! not believe to be true or on a ground which, is in the opinion of 
the National Service (Hardship) Committee, is frivolous, he shall 
be liable to be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to one year, or with fine which may extend to orie thousand rupees, or 
35 with both. 
ZOo (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), an appeal aU 
,lie again&t the decision of the National Service (Hardghip) Commtttee 10 
the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to the tel'I'itory In whkh 
the applicant for the postponement certificate voluntarily resides, carrles 
40 on business or personally works for again. 
45 
(2) No appeal referred to in lub-aecMn (1) shall lie unless-
(i) it is preferred within thirty day. from the date of the de<:i6ion 
of the National Service (Hardship) Committee, and 
(u,) .tbeNatioa.al Servioe (Hardship) Committee certifies that 
the cue iDvelves a substantial question of law. . 
(3) Where the Nattoaal Service (Haniship)CommiUee la.s refused 
to give 'a eertiftcate refenredto in "ub..section (2), the High Court may, 
if it I_ satisfied that the eale involves a substantial question of law, grant 
Appeal 
from 
decillion 
ot the 
National 
Bervie. 
(Hard-
slUp) 
Commit-
tee. 

Revoca-
tionot 
postpone-
mentcer-
UScate. 
Suspen-
sion or 
ri,ht to 
postpone-
mentor 
liability 
to be 
called 
up for 
national 
service. 
" ..... , 
lteinstate-
ment. 
12 
special leave to appeal against the decision of the National Set'vice 
(H&1'dship) Committee. 
(4) The High Court may, after hearing the appeal, confirm, modify 
or reverse the decision of the National Service (Hardship) Committee. -
21. (1) If, at any time, while a postponement certificate is in force, it 5 
appears to the Central Government that, by re8S'on of any change in the 
circumstances of the qualified person to whom the certificate was granted 
or of his employer, where such certificate was granted on the application 
of such employer, the certificate ought to be revoked or the 'Period _ for 
which it was granted or last renewed ought to be shortened, the Central 10 
Government may apply to the National Service (Hardship) Committee, 
and that Committee may either reject the application or cancel the 
certificate or vary it by shortening the period. -
(2) WhEmean application is made under sub-section (1), the person to 
whom the postponement certificate in question was granted, and where IS 
such certificate was -granted on the application of an employer, such 
employer, shall be entitJoad to be heard on the application and the provi-
sions as to appeals contained in section 20 shall awly in relation to the 
application as if it were an application for the grant of a postponement 
certificate. -' . . .{::~: 20 
22. (1) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied at any time 
that by reason of the gravity of the situation it is necessary so to do, by 
order- ... .". -
(a) cancel, either generally or in relation to a specified class of 
qualified persons, all postponement certificates in force at the date of 25 
the order, and 
(b) aborgate, either generally or in relation to a specified class 
of qualified persons, any right to apply for the grant of a postpone-
ment certificate and any right to appeal from the refusal to grant 
such a certificate, and the Central Government may, by ordet', vary 3Cl 
or revoke any order in force under this ~ection, without prejudice 
however to the previous effect of that order. 
(2) Where, on the day on which an order comes into force under this 
section abrogating any right to appeal from the refusal to grant a post-
ponement certificate, an appeal preferred by a person to whom the order 35 
applies or the time for preferring such appeal by such. person has not 
expired, the appeal shall be deemed to be dismissed or the time shall be 
deemed to expire on the expiry of that day. 
CHAPTER V 
REINSTATEMENT 0,. QUALIFIED PERSONS CALLED UP FOR NATIONAL SERVICE 40 
23. (1) In this section,-
(a) "former employee" means a qua~ified persori who was relea-
sed by an employer for employment in national serVici; _.,,, -
(b) "former employer" . means the employer by whom a former 
employee was employed in .an establishment immediately be~ot"e ~pe 45 
enUstment of such employee for national servicej . 

13 
(c) "former employment" means the employment in which the 
former employee was employed immediately before his enlistment 
for national service. 
(2) (a) A former employee may, on the termination of his naUonal 
5 service, make an application in such manner and within such period as 
may be prescribed to his former employer for reinstatement in his former 
employment. ~ . ~!"!! 
(b) On receipt of an application referred to in clause (4), the former 
employer shall be under an obligation (unless the employment of the 
10 former employee in the national service was terminated by dismissal for 
misconduct) to reinstate such employee before the expiry of a period of 
fifteen days from the date of receipt of such application. 
(3) (4) Lf, on receipt of an application referred to in sub-section (2), 
the former employer refuses to reinstate the applicant on the ground 
15 that hiS' circumstances have so changed as to make it impossible or 
unreasonable for him to do so, or denies his liability to reinstate s'Jch 
former employee, or represents that the reinstatement by him of the 
former ~mployee is impracticable, he shall, before the expiry of a period 
of fifteen days from the date of receipt of such application, make an 
20 application to the National Service (Hardship) Committee for relieving 
him from the obligation referred to in SUb-section (2). 
(b) A former employee, who is not re-instated in hiS' former employ-
ment within fifteen days from the date of delivery of the appUcation 
madre under sub-section (2), may, within a further period of fifteen daya 
25 (computed from the date on which the first-mentioned period of fifteen 
days expires), represent to the National Service (Hardship) Committee 
that his former employer has not discharged the obligation imposed on 
him by sub-section (2). 
(c) On receipt of the application referred to in clause (a) or the 
30 representation referred to in clause (b), the National Service (Hardship) 
Committee shall, after considering all matters placed before it ,and after 
making Buch inquiry in the matter as it may think fit, make an order-
(i) relieving the former employer from the obligation referred 
to in sub-section (2), or 
35 (ii) reqUiring the former employer to re-instate the former em-
ployee in his former employment, or 
(iii) requiring the former employer to pay to the former employee 
by way of ompensation, tor failure or inability to reinstate him. a 
sum not exeeding an amount equal to six months' remuneration. at 
40 the rate at which remuneration was last payable by the fonner em-
ployer to the former employee. 
(d) Where the National Service (Hardship) Committee bas directed 
the reinstatement of any person in his former employment, the former 
employer shall be under an obligation to pay to such person salary and 
45 allowances at the rates specified by the National Service (Hardship) Com-
mittee from the date of receipt of the application referred to in sub-
section (2). 
(4) (4) A former employer, who has refused to reimltate his former 
employee on any of the grounds specified in sub-section (3) and who' cal 

14 - I 
~tU:tdor failed, without any. realWllable exc~, to make an applicatiorl 
tn the National Service (Hardship) Committee within the time specified 
in sub-section (3), shall be punished, without any prejudice to the plX>Vi-
sions of clause (b) of this sub-section, with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five thoUHlld S 
rupees, or with both. 
(b) If any former emplayer fails to obey any order made by the Na-
tional Service (Hardship) Committee under sub-section (3), he shall be 
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one morrth. 
or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both, 10 
and the court by which such former employer is convicted under this 
sub-secti-an shall order him to pay to the person whom he has failed to 
re·employ, a sum not exceeding an amount equal to six months' re-
muneration at the rate at which his last remuneration was payable to 
him by the former employer and any amount so required to be paid shall IS 
be l'ecoverable as if it were a fioe imposed by such court. 
(5) Where in pursuance of the pI'Jvisions of sub-seetion (2) a former 
employer reinstates his former employee and tbereaft8l" terminates the 
employment of such former employee at any time within a period of. lis 
months from the date of such reinstatement, the former employer shall, 20 
notWithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the conditiOns of 
employment of the former employee, be liable to pay to the iIormer em-
ployee, at the time of terminating his employment as aforesaid, a sum 
equal' to the remuneration which the former employee would have eamed 
under the terms and conditions of his re-employment for the unexpired 2S 
portion of the said period of six months; 
Provided that a former employer shall not be liable to make such pay-
meAt u a10ruaid where the employment of the former eml'loyee is 
terminated for the reason that the former employee has been guilty of 
gross insubordination, habitual absence from work or any serious mis- 30 
ccnduct or has been convicted of any offence: 
Prcwided further that a farmer employee whoseemploymel\t is terali .. 
na-ted within the said period for any sucb reaaon as aforeeaicl. Illay I!8fer 
t.he matter to the National Service (Hardship) Committee and that Com-
mittee shall after due conSideration, decide whether or not the employer 35 
is liable as aforesaid under this sub-section; and any such decision shall 
be final and binding on the parties. 
Ezp14nation: -Any sum required to be paid under this sub-section 
shall be in addition to the amount, if any, which the employer may, 
. under the conditions of employment be liable to pay in r~t of the 40 
termination of the employment of the bmer employee without notice. 
(6) No change in the name, constitution or character of the former 
employer saIl affect the right of reinstatement of a former employee 
. who has been released from empJQyment in national service. 
(7) (a) The occupation in which and the terms and condltioDs UBder 45 
which a qualifled person may be reinstated after eompl~ of·nati0la81 
.ervice shall not be less favourable to him than those which weuld have 
been applicable to him had his employment not been interrupted by 
reason of his being called up or national service. 
(b) In determining the terms and conditioas of re;.m.tatement of the 50 
former employee, regard shall be had to the additional skill aud 

t5 
experienced acquired by such emp10yee in the <:ourse otbjs employment 
in national service. 
24. While any qualitiA;ld. ~son, J'tQtUfB1il to r~ ~a1 llU'Vioe 
under this Act, has any rights under any provident fund or other scheme 
5 for the ·benefit of employees maintained in connection with the ~ploy­
ment he relinquishes, he shall continue, so long as he is engaged in natio-
nal service and if he is reinstated, untll such reinstatement under the 
provisions of this Act, to have in respect of such fund or scheme S1,1t'h 
rights as may be prescribed. 
10 
IS 
CHA.PT'ER VI 
0rH!:R OFFENCES AND PENALITIES 
25. (1) If any qualified pe:,son-
(4) on whom an enlistQlent notice has been served JJ.nder this 
Act and in respect of whom no postponement certificate is in force 
or no application or appe. tor plItpQnement of national service is 
pending, fails or omits to render the service which he is required by 
such notice to render, or 
(b) having commenced to r-ender national service, leaves that 
service without obtaining a discharge under section 1'7, 
2Ol)e ih-all be ~d wj.th imprjao~t wr 11 t.4lrrn wbU;b mJy e~ tp 
4v.t y#ar-s and also with fine which JnU' ex~D4 to two iluJu.wu:l J'u,PNf. 
(2) Any person who-
(a) in giving any information for the purpose of this Act, know-
ingly or recklessly makes a statement which is false in mate$l 
25 particUlars or which he does not believe to be true, or 
(b) (i) with the isl~ntion of ~vini, fQrg~s .0J' UW OX lM.d,s 
qr allows to ~ wed fm an), pel'JOR I¥l)' ,eert.iAeate iN~ed. ~ tWa 
Act, or 
(ii) makes. or bas in his possession, any: docijDl8nt 80 cJgsely 
30 re,sembUng aa1 certificate so issued. as to .be c.akul,aW to ~ecdv.e. 
shell be punished with impdsenmeat fOl' • tel'm Rot eICceedtag tJINe 
years, or with 8ne not exceecliD.g one thousand rupiletl.· or with botb. 
26. Any qualified perSQn who contravenes any provision ot this Act 
for the contravention of which no penalty is separately specifted in this 
35 Act, shall be punished with fine which may extend to five htmdred 
. 1'JI(MIIIII: 
Provided that in any proceedings for en offence puniShable under 
.tbJI; SectiPD. it shall be a defence tor the accused to prove that ~ .was 
prevated from complying with the provisions of this Act by ClfClI.rn-
40 .~ beyond his con.trol. 
Preserva. 
tion of 
certain 
rights of 
qualified 
persona 
required 
to render 
national 
service. 
False 
statement 
and for-
gery. 
GeJMnl 
provWoa 
a. to 
offences • 
2'1. (1) Where any provision of this Act or of any order made there-
under is contravened by a company, every person who at the time the 
~travention was made was in charge of, and was responsible to, the com.-
pany for the conduct of the busipess of the company as well as the co,m-
pany shall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be 
Otrencel 
byeom.. 
pan1ea. 
45 liabl~ to ~ proceeded against and punished accordingly: 

Informa-
tion to be 
furnished 
byUniver-
sities, etc. 
Informa-
tion to be 
furnished 
by Dis-
trict 
MagIs-
trate. 
Priority 
ofdebu. 
Summary 
trial of 
oft'ences. ' 
Jurisdic-
tion to tr'Y 
oft'ences. 
Protection 
of action 
taken in 
eood 
faith. 
16 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render Lny 
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the ofience was 
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due cllli-
gence to prevent the commission of such offence. . 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), \\ cere 5 
any such offence has been committed and it is proved that the offence 
has been committed with the consent or connivance, or is attributable to, 
any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable 10 
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or 
other association of individualsj and 
(b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm. 15 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
28. It shall be the duty of every University or other persons having 
the management of any University, school or other educational institu-
tion, to give to the Central Government, at its request, such information 20 
in their possession, or reasonably aVailable to them, about persona receiv-
ing, or who have received education in engineering, technology, medical 
sciences or surgery as the Central Government may, by notification, 
specify in this behalf. 
29. It shall be the duty of every District Magistrate to give to the State 25 
Government such information in his possession about qualitied persons 
within the local limits of his jurisdiction as may be prescribed, and it 
ahal' be the duty of every State Government to give to the Central Gov-
err. ment all information in its possession 'about qualified persons in the 
State. 30 
30. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Presidency Towns In-
solvency Act, 1909, the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920, the Companies 3 of 1909. 
Act, 1956, or the Partnership Act, 1932, any compensation payable under 5 of 1920. 
h A -~ 11 h 1 of 1958. t is ct zwa ave priority over all other unsecured debts. 9 of 1932. 
31. Notwithsanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Pro- 35 B of 1898. 
cedure, 1898, every offence punishable under this Act shall be tried sum-
marily. . ~ , !' 
J '_.. • ••• ~ 1 '.-.i 
32. No court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate 
of the tirst class shall try any offence punishable under this Act. 
33. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 40 
any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done in pursuance of this Act or any rules, regulations or orders made 
thereunder. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
Government for any damage caused or likely to be caused for anything 45 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this 
Act or any rules, regulations or orders made thereunder. 

17 
M. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may make such order. not inconsistent with 
the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary for the 
purpose of removing the difficulty; 
5 Provided that no order shall be made under this sub-section after the 
expiry of a period of two years from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid before both 
Houses of Parliament as soon as may be after it is made and the provi-
sions of section 38 shall apply to such order as if it were a rule made under 
10 this Act. 
Removal 
of cWIl-
cultiea. 
35. The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all or Powers to 
any of the powers which may be exercised by it under this Act shall, in delegate. 
such circumstances and under such conditions, if any. as may be speci-
fied in the notification, be exercised also by any State Government or 
IS any other authority owned or controlled by the Central Government. 
36. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for Power to 
carrying out the purposes of this Act. make rules. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all CJr any of the following 
20 matters, namely:-
(a) principles governing the calling up of persons for national 
service; 
(b) the form and contents of the National Service Register; 
(c) the form in which the certificate of registration is to be 
25 issued; 
3S 
40 
(d) manner of notification of preference for any branch of the 
Armed Forces of the Union; 
(e) manner of notification of change of name ar address of. or 
acquisition of academic or professional qualification or distinctions 
by, a qualified person registered under the Act; 
(f) circumstances under which fresh certiftcates of registration 
in place of certificates which have been lost, destroyed or defaced 
may be issued; 
(g) the form and contents of the notice for examination of 
physical and mental fitness; 
(h) the scale in accordance with which travelling and other 
allowances may be paid to medical or other authority or specialist or 
to any qualified person undergoing any examination of physical and 
meutal fitness and the scale according to which compensation may 
be paid for loss of remunerative time; 
(i) the priorities in accordance with which qualified persons 
may be enlisted for national service; 
(j) the form and contents of the enlistment notice and the 
manner of service thereof; 

Power to 
make 
regula-
tions. 
18 
(1c) the scales of salary, wages, aUowancei.penlions j disability 
Imd death compensations and other financial benefit. admiiIib1le to 
bs. performing nlltiomtl ser.,iee; 
(l) scales of travelling allowanceS required to be paid under t1ke 
~ct; , 
(m) authority by whieh and conditions subject to which prior 
discharge from national service may be made; 
(rt.) the form of discharge certificate; 
(0) manner of application for a certificate of postponement of 
liability to be called up for national service or for renewal thereof to 
and the time within which such application for renewal should be 
made; 
(p) conditions of reinstatement <If. perllOnl released from 
emploYMent in the national setVit!e and: maUers eonnected therewith; 
(q) further inquiry which may be made by the National Service i5 
(Hatdshp) Committee where reinstatement of qualiied persons 
released from employment in the natiOllal servi~e is refused or denied 
or where such reinstatement is represented to be impracticable; 
(r) preservatioR of rights of provident fund, etc., of qualified 
persons rendering national service; 20 
(s) infonnation relatihg to quaUfied petsoDl which every 
District Magistrate shall furnish to the State Government; 
(t) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, pres-
~ibed tmdt!t this Aet. 
(.'~) Any rule made under this Act may provide that a contravention 25 
of the rule shall be punished with ifnprisonment fot' a tc!t.1ft not exceeding 
six months, or with fine not exceeding orte thausattd ruP1!e8, or with both. 
''f. The Central Government may make regulations not inconsistent 
with this Act, to provide for all or any of the following matters, ttjlme1y:-
(4) enablinl or requiring a qualified person to be transferred to 30 
aay branch of the Armed Forces of the Union or to any other branch 
of national service; 
(c) examination of physical and mental fitness of qualified 
persons subject to registration under this Act; 
(c) determination of the categories in which qualified persons 
\VhfJ!I~ physical and rnet1tal fttiie9S hlUl Been examined shall be placed 35 
by reference to their physicbl or mental conditions or both; 
(el) specification of the principles to be applied and the circum-
stances to be considered while hearing of an application fo» the grant 
or renewal of a postponement certificate. , 
(e) speCification m the 'period for Which a postponement certifi- 40 
cate may be granted or renewed· , 
(f) any other matter for 'Which tegulatlonB Sh! required to be 
or may be, made under this Act. ' 

19 
38. Every rule and every regulation made by the Central Govern-
ment under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of 
thirty days, which may be comprised in one session, or in two successive 
5 sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or 
the session immediately following, both HOlJ~ agree in making any 
modification in t.he rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule 
or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the cas may 
10 be, so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything preViously don.e under that rule or 
teiulation. 
Rules and 
regula. 
tionsto 
be laid 
before 
Parlia. 
ment. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In the wake of the Chinese aggression, Government formulated a Com~ 
pulsory Liability Scheme whereby engineers and doctors belonging to 
certain age groups, who were either in Government service or in the ser~ 
vice of any public sector undertaking, were made liable to render service 
in the Armed Forces of the Union for a specified period. It is apprehended 
that this scheme might lead to a diversion of medical and engineering 
graduates away from Government service or service in any public sector 
undertaking. Besides, it has been found that the Compulsory Liability 
Scheme cannot, by itself, be relied upon to provide a sufficient number of 
doctors and engineers for the Armed Forces of the Union or for other forms 
of national service. It is, therefore, considered necessary that this liability 
should be extended to all persons who hold recognised medical qualifica~ 
tions within the meaning of the Indian Medic,al Council Act, 1956, or a 
degree in engineering or technology, or both. It is also felt that the 
Scheme should cover any kind of national s'ervice which the Govenunent 
may specify and that the Scheme should not be restricted in its scope to 
defence efforts only. This will have the advantage of widening the base 
of recruitment to the Armed Forces of the Union and will also help in 
ensuring that doctors or engineers required for activities of national im~ 
portance, such as, construction of dams in l'emote and difficult areas, 
family planning programme and health services in rural areas, etc., become 
available. It will also enable the setting up of an agency fully equipped 
with detailed and up-to~date information regarding the availability of 
engineers and doctors and of a machinery for their mobilisation which 
will be essential in the event of an emerg~ncy. . 
2. The Bill seeks to restrict the period for which persons may be called 
up for rendering national service to a period not exceeding four years. 'l'he 
Bill seeks to impose a further restriction to the effect that the liability of 
a qualified person shall come to an end on his attaining the age of thirty 
years. 
3. The Bill also provides for payment to persons called up for rendering 
national service of remuneration at a scale which is not less favourable than 
the remuneration admissible to similarly placed Government employees. 
The Bill also provides that where a person, in employment, is called up for 
rendering national service, his former employer shall be under an obliga~ 
tion to r~instate him in his former employment on terms and conditions 
which are not less favourable to him than those to which he was entitled 
before he was called up for national servioe. 
4. The Bill seeks to give effect to the purposes mentioned above. 
NEW DELHI; K. C. PANT. 
The 20th July. 1970. 
ao 

FINANCLAL MEMORANDUM 
Clauses 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15 of the Bill provide for compulsory registra-
tion of persons liable to perform national service and the Central Govern-
ment is required under the Bill to register and enlist qualified persons for 
national service. It is intended that the registration of qualified persons 
and other items of work connected therewith may be done through the 
agency of employment exchanges. A headquarters establishment would 
have to be set up to consolidate registration particulars and act on indents, 
issue various notifications and notices, etc. 
Clause 18 of the Bill requires the Central Government to constitute 
a National Service (Hardship) Committee which will decide on applica-
tions for postponement of national service and enforce the re-instatement 
of an employ~ after completion of the national service. 
The expenditure on account of the staff that may have to be incurred 
in this connection, together with incidental expenses, will be about 
Rs. 5,57,000 per year. There will be no non-recurring expenditure. 
21 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING l}ELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 86 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make 
rules for caITying out the purposes of the Bill. The mat~rs in respect m 
whlch r.uch rules may be made relate to the principles governing the call-
ing up of persons for national service, form and contents of the National 
Service Register and the Certificate of Registration, priorities in accord-
ance with which qualified persons may be enUsted for national serviee, 
scales of travelling allowances required to be paid, etc, 
Clause 37 of the Bill empowers the Central Govern1l).J!ot t.o make regu-
lations. 'The power of making regulations is cOllftned to making proviSion 
for the examination of physical and mental fttne:;s of qualified persons sub-
ject to registration, determination of the categories to which the persons 
who have been examined should be placed aod specification of the princi-
ples to be applied by the National Service (Hardship) .Committee while 
hearing an application for the grant of postpoaement arti1icate. 
The matters In respect of which any rule or regulation may be made 
are matters of detail or of procedure within the scope of the general pro-
visions and guiding principles of the Act and it is not possible to provide 
for them in the Act. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of 
a normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the registration of qualified peI'S(D8 IIld for the rendering of national 
setvice by such persons aDd for matterS cormected therewith. 
(Shri Krishna Chandra Pant, 
Minister of Stale in the 
Ministry of Home Affairs) 