As IN'l'RODUCED IN LoK SABRA ~ J 9 AUG 19', 
Bill No. 84 of 1987 
THE TERRORIST AND DISRUPTIVE ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) 
BILL, 1987 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent, application, commencement, duration and 
savings. 
2 . .Definitions. 
PART II 
PUNISHMENTS FOR, AND MEASUREs FOR COPING WITH, TERRORIST AND 
DISRvPnVE ACTIVITIES 
3. PWliahment for terrorist acts. 
4. Punishment for disruptive activities. 
5. Possession of certain unauthorised arms, etc., in specified areSil. 
6. Enhanced penalties. 
7. Conferment of powers. 
8. Forfeiture of property of certain persons. 
PART III 
DESIGNATED COURTS 
9. Designated Courts. 
10. Place' of sitting. 
11. JUrisdiction of Designated Courts. 
12. Power of Designated Courts with respect to other offences. 
13. Public Prosecutors. 
14. Procedure and powers of Designated Courts. 
15. Certain confessions made to police officers to be taken into con· 
sideration. 
16. Protection of witnesses. 
17. Trial by Designated Courts to have precedence. 
18. Power to transfer cases to regular courts. 
19. Appeal. 
PART IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
20. Modified application of certain provisions of the Code. 
21. Presumption as to offences under section 3. 
22. Identification of accused. 
23. Saving. 
24. Saving as to orders. 
25. Overriding effect. 
26. Protection of action taken under this Act. 
27. Power of the Supreme Court to make rules. 
28. Power to make rules. 
29. Rules to be laid before Houses of Parliament. 
30. Repeal and saving. 

8m No. 84 of 1987 
THE TERRORIST AND DISRUPTIVE ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) 
BILL, 1987 
A 
BILL 
to make special prcz·!f.iolls jor the prevention of, and for coping with, 
terrorist and disruptive activities and for matters connected there-
with or incidental theTl~to. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thhty-eighth Year of the Republic 
Gf IJ}dia as follows:-
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
S . 1. (1) This Act may be called the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1987. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India, and it applies abo-
(a) to citizens of India outside India; 
(b) to persons in the service of the Government, wherever they 
10 may be; and 
(c) to pers(\ns on ships and aircraft registered in India, where-
!' ever they may be. 
(3) Sections 5, 15, 21 and 22 shall come into' force at once and the re-
.... ~, prrovilioils of this Act, shall be deemed to have come into foree 
I' "",.Ja.; Uth:daJ-ot May, 188'7. 
Short 
title, 
extent, 
applica-
lion, 
commenc»o 
ment, 
dura-
tion Bnd 
savings. 

2 
(4) It shall remain in force for a period of two ~ars from the !4th 
day of May, 1987, but its expiry under the operation of this sub-section 
'hall not effect- ! 
(a) the previous ('}leration of, or anything duly done or sufter-
ed under, this Act Uf any rule made thereunder or any order made S 
under any such rule .. or 
(b) any right, priviJege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued 
or incurred under this Act or any rule made thereunder or any 
order made under any such rule, or 
(c) any penalty, toi"feiture or punishment incurred in respect 10 
of any offence under this Act or any contravention of any rule 
made under this Act or of any order made under any such rule, or 
(ei) any investiga1ion, legal proceeding or remedy in respect 
of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture 
or punishment as aforesaid. 15 
and any such investigaticll, legal proceeding or remedy may be institut-
ed, continued or enforced and any such penalty, forfeiture or punisb-
ment may be imposed as' if this Act had not expired. 
Z. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "abet", with 1tS grammatical variations and cognate expret- 20 
sions, includes-
(i) the communication or association with any pers!)n or 
class of persons who is engaged in assisting in any manner ter-
rorists or disruptionists; 
(ii) the passing on, or pUblication of, without any lawful 2S 
authority. any infOlmation likely to assist the terrorists or dis-
ruptionists, and the passing on, or publication of, or distribution 
of, any document or matter obtained from terrorists or disrup.. 
tionists; 
(W) the rendering of any assistance, whether financIal (lr 30 
otherwise, to terrotists or disruptionists; 
(b) "Code" means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; 
(c) "DeSignated Cl)Urt" means a Designated COl. con~t!tuted 
unde~ section 9; 
(d) "disruptive activity" has the meaning assi ~d to it in 35 
section 4.. and the expression "disruptionist" shall be construed 
accordingly; 
(e) "High Court" means the High Court of the State in whit'h 
a jud~e or an additional judge of a Designated Court was working 
immediately before his appointment as such judge or addttionaJ 40 
judge; 
(f) "notified area" means such area as the State Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify; 
(g) "Public Prosecutor" means a Public Prosecutor or an 
A~ditional Public. Prosecutor or ~ Special Public Prosecutor ap- 45 
pOInted under sectIon 13, and includes any person acting under the 
directions of the Public Prosecutor' , 
(h) "terrorist act" has the meaning aSligned to it in. RB-Nett_ 
(1) Of. section 3, and the expression "terrorist" shall be c.CnUJtriJ .. 
aecordmgly; 
~. 
2 of 1974. 

I 
(i) words and expressions used but not defined in thia Act 
and defined in the Code shall have the meanings respectively .1Il-
ed to them in the Cc.de. 
(2) Any reference in this Act to any enactment or any provUlon 
5 thereof shall, in relation to an area in which such enactment or IUch 
provision is not in force, be construed as a reference to the correspond-
ing law or the !'elevant provision of the corresponding law, if any, in 
force in that area. 
PART II 
10 PUNISHMENTS FOR, AND MEASURES FOR COPING WITH, TERRORIST AND 
DISRUPTIVE ACTIVITIES 
,3. (1) Whoever with intent to overawe the Government as by law 
established or to strike terror in the people Or any section of the people 
or to alienate any section of the people Or to adversely affect the har-
15 mony amongst different sections of the people does any ac1 or thing by 
Wlingbombs, dynamite or other explosive substances or inflammable 
substances or fire-arms Or other lethal weapons or poisons or noxious 
gases or other chemicals or by any other substances (whether biologl. 
calor otherwise) of a hazardous nature in such a manner as to cause, 
o or as is likely to cause, death of, or injuries to, any person or persons 
• or loss of, or damage to, or destruction of, property or disruption of any 
. supplies or services essential to the life of the community, or detains 
any person and threatens to kill Or injure such person in -order to com-
pel the Government or any' other person to do or abstain from doing 
15 any act, commits a terrorist act. 
(2) Vlhoever commits a terrorist act, shalI,-
(i) if such act has resulted in the death of any person, he 
punishable with dearh Or imprisonment for life and shall also be 
liable to fine; 
30 (ii) in any other case, be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend 
to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine. 
(3) Whoever conspires or attempts to commit, or advocates, abets, 
advises or incites or lmowingly facilitates the commission of a terrorist , 
35 act or any act preparatory to a terrorist act, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but 
which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fiDe. 
(4) Whoever harbours or conceals, or attempts to harbour or con-
ceal, any terrorist shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
4G which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprison-
ment for life and shall also be liable to fine. 
4. (1) Whoever commits or conspires or attempts to commit or 
abets, advocates, advises, or knowingly facilitates the commission of, 
any disruptive activity or any act preparatory to a dlsruptive activity 
45 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be 
less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and 
shall also be liable to fine. 
(2) For the purposes of $ub-section (1), "disruptive aetivi~" m""5 
~ . action taken, whether by act or by speech Or through any otker 
~ media or in any other manner whateoever,-

$ .... :i"! 
m'l ,-,:':" 
Pouesaion 
of certain 
unautllorl. 
aed . arms, 
etc. in 
lp8Cifted 
areas. 
·r:'e.!.~:''1 
'!"~ ~ r:- .. ~ 
~tH'l!;" :~ 
.~fv···"~ 
4 
~. ",' (i) which questions, disrupts or is intended to disrupt, whether 
'"!"" . dUecUy or indirectly, the sovereignty and territonaT mwgrlt, of 
, India; or 
(ii) which is intended to bring about or supports any claim, 
f' . whether directly or indirectly, for the cession of any part of IncUa 5~ 
!; • . Or . the secession of any part of· India from the Union. 
::, 'Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section,-
. (a) "cession" includes the admission of any claim ·of any foreign 
country to any part of Jndia, and 
(b) "secession" includes the assertion of any claim to deter- 10 
mine' whether a part of India will remain within the Union. . 
(3) Without prejudice to the generRlity of the provisions of sub--
qc.tion (2), it is hereby declared that any action taken, whether by act 
~by .speech or through any: other media or in any other manner what-
speyer, which- IS 
(a) advocates, advises, suggests or incites; or 
(b) predicts, prophesies or pronounces Or otherwise expresses, 
. '" in such· manner as to incite, advise," suggest or prompt, 
tl1E . killing or the destruction of any person bound by oath under the 
Constitution to uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India or any to 
public serVant shall be deemed to be a disruptive activity within the 
meaning of this section. 
~:~ (~) Whoever harbours or conceals, or attempts" to harbour or eon-
ceal, any disruptionist shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to 25 
imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine. 
,.. . ~ , 
_.f 5. Where any person is in possession of any arms and ammunition 
specified in columns 2 and 3 of Category I Or Category III (a) of Sche-
dule ~ to the Arms Rules, 1962, or bombs, dynamite or other explosive 
stibstances unauthorisedly in a notified area, he shall, notwithstanding 30 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
fiye years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also 
be 'liable to fine. 
I' .' 
~ .. 6 .. (1) If any person with intent to aid any terrorist or disruptio:nist. 35 
cOl)kavenes any provision of. or any rule made under, the Arms Act, 
1~5~, the Explosives Act, 1884, the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 (lr 54. of 1959. 
t~~. Inflammable Substances Act, 1952, he shall, notwithstanding any- 4 of 1884. 
thing contamed in any of the aforesaid Acts or the rules made there- , 6 of 1901. 
ut\der. be punishable with imprisonment for a term wfrich shall not be 40 lOot 1951-
less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and 
snttl1 A Iso be liable to fine. ,. 
. : ~(2) For the purposes of this section, any person who attemp+s to 
contravene or abets, or attempts to abet, or does any'''act preparatory' to 
~., contravention of any provision of any law, rule or order. shall be 45 
deemed to have contravened that provision, and the provisions 'of sub-
~fml .(1)· shall. in relation to such person, have effect subject to the 
nAOliitication. ·that 'the reference to "imprisonment for life" shaUbe eolll-
trued as" a reference to "imprisonment for ten years". . 

'1. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code or 1D. any eo..r. 
other provision of this Act, the Central Government may, if it ~onside" JDeDt crI 
it neceisary': or expedient so to do,- powera. 
5_ 
(a) for the prevention of, and for coping with, any offence tind~ 
section 3 or section 4; or .1 
(0) for any- case Or class or group of cases under section 3 '·or 
sectlon 4, . W 
. " 
in any State or part thereof, confer, by notification in the Ofticial 
Gazette. on any office:..' of the Central Government, powers exercisable 
J 0 by a police officer under the Code in such Stat., or part thereof or, -as 
the case mal be, for such case or class or group of cases and in parti-
cular, the powez;s of arrest, investigation and prosecution of persons 
bef<ll'e any court. -.. " 
(2) All officers of police and all officers of Government are hereby 
J 5 required and empowl?red to assist the officer of the Central Gevern--
ment. referred to in sub-section (1), in the execution of the provisions 
of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder. 
(3) 'l'he' provisions of the Code shall, so far as may be and subject 
to such modifications made in this Act, apply to the exercise of the 
powel"s by an officer under sub-section (1). 
·~o 
';"'i~ 
":'~j'~:~~ 
8. (1) Where a person has been convicted of any offence punishable 
under this Act or lany rule made thereunder, the Designated' CCl\irt 
may, in addition to uwarcimg any punishment, by order ill wJ;'iting, 
declare that any property. movable or immovable or both.. belongiI~g .ta 
'!25 -tile accused and speciJJed in the order, shall stand forfeited to tlle 
Government free from all encumbrances. 
(2) Where any person is accused of any offence under this A.,ct Ql" 
any rule made thereunder, it shall be open to the Designated .Couri 
tryinahim to pass an order that all or any properties, mova?le III 
30,Immovable or both belonging to him, shall. during the period of such 
"trial~ be attached, and where such trial ends in conviction, the properttes 
10 attached shall stand forfeited to the Government free from aU 
pncumbrances. 
(3) (a) If upon a report in writing made by a police ofticer or an 
officer referred to. in sub-section (1) of section 7, any Designated CotJi"t 
35 has reason to believe that any person, who has committed an offence 
punishable under this Act or any rule made thereunder, has abscond~ 
or is concealing himself no that he may not be apprehended, such court 
may, notwithstancing anything contained in section 82 of th~ Code, 
40 publish a written proclamatIOn requiriog him to appear at a specified 
place and at a specified tIme not less than fifteen days but not. maliif' 
'than thirty ciays from the date of publication of such proclamation.., 
(b) The Designated Court issuing a proclamation under clause '(d) 
~, at any time, order the attachment of any property, movaoie or 
\ immovable or both, belonging to the proclaimed person. and thereupen 
45 ,the provisions of sections 83 to 85 of the Code shall apply to such att ... 
ment a~ if such attachment were made under that Code. ".~'j 
Forfcr~· . 
ture of 
propeJtJ 
of 
certain 
perso_ 

6 
(c) If, within six months from {the date of the attachment, an,! 
person, whose property is, or has been, at the disposal of the Govern-
ment under sub-section (2) of section 85 of the Code, appears volun-
tarily or is apprehended <lnd brought before the Designated Court by 
whose order the property was attached, or the Court to which such 5 
Court is subordinate, and proves to the satisfaction of such Court that 
he did not abscond or conceal himself for the purpose of aVOIding 
apprehension Hnd that he had not received such notice of the proclama-
tion as to enable him to attend within the time specified therein, such 
property or, if the same has been sold, the net proceeds of the sale and 10 
the residue of the property, shall, after satisfying therefrom all costs 
incurred in cunsequence of the attachment, be delivered to him . 
• 
(4) Where any shares in a company stand forfeited to the Govern-
ment under this section, tben, the company shall, notwithstanding any-
thing contained in the Companies Act, 1956, or the articles of assot!lation 15 let 1_ 
oi the company, forthwith legister the Government as the transferee of 
sUCh shares. . 
PART III 
DESIGNATED COVRTS 
9. (1) The Central Governmt!nt or a State Government may, bJ SlO 
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute one or more Des~ted 
Courts for such area or areas, or for such ca,se or class or poup of Casel, 
as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) Where a notification constituting a Designated Court for any 
area or areas or for any <:asc or class or group of cases is issued by the 2 
Central Government under sub-section (1), and a notification constitut- 5 
ing a Designated Court for the same area or areas. or for the same case 
or class or group of ca~cs has also been issued by a State Government 
under that sub-section, the Designated Court constituted by the Central 
Government, whether the notification constituting such Court is iliSued SO 
before or after the issue 01 the notification constituting the Designated 
Court by the State Government, shall have, and the Designated Court 
constituted by the State Government shall not have, jurisdiction 
to try any offence committed in that area or areas or. as the case may 
be, the case or class or group of cases, and all cases pending before any 
Desianated Court constituted by the State Government shall stand trans- 35 
!erred to the Desigllated Court constituted by the Central Government. 
(3) Where any question arises as to the jurisdiction of any DeSignated 
Court, it shall be referred to the Central Government whose deci&loD 
thereon shall be final ' 
(4) A Designated Court shall be presided over by a juqe to.be ap-. 
!'Olnted by the Central, Government or, as the case may be, the Stat. 
Govenament, with the concurrence of the Chief JustiCe of the ~ 
Court. 
(5) The Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Gov- .. 
.... eat may also appoint, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of 5 
tile m,h Court, additional judps to exercise jurisdiction in • Desipated 
Court. 

(6) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a judge or 8ll 
additional judge of a Designated Court unless he is, immediately· before 
such appointment, a sessions judge or an additional sessions judge in any 
State. 
S (7) }t'or the removal of doubts, it is hereby provided that the attain-
ment by a person appointed as a judge or an additional judge of a 
Designated Court of the age of superannuation under the rules appli" 
cabl~ to him in the service to which he belongs, shall not affect his 
continuance as such judge or additional judge. 
1~ (8) Where any additional judge Or additional judges is or areappoint~ 
eo in a Designated Court, t.he judge of the Designated Court maY,trom 
time to time, by general or special order, in writing, provide for the 
distribution of business of the Designated Court among himself and the 
2dditional judge or additional judges and also for the disposal of urgent 
15 business in the event of his absence or the absence of any additional 
judge. 
10. A Designated Court may, on its own motion or on an application 
made by the Public Prosecutor, and if it considers it expedient or desir-
able so to do, sit for any of its proceedings at any place, other than its 
20 ordmary place of 'SItting: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to change the 
place of sitting of a DeSignated Court constituted by a State Government 
to any place outside that State. . 
11. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, every 
25 oftence pwushable under any provision of this Act or any rule made 
thereWlder shall be triable only by the DeSIgnated Court within whosa 
Ioeal Jurisdiction It was committed or, as the case may be, by the 
DeSignated Court constituted for trying such offence under Bub-section 
30 
35 
(1) of section 9. . 
(2) If, havini regard to the exigencies of the situation prevailing in 
a State, the Central Govcnunent is of the opinion that-
(a) the situation prevailing in such State is not conducive to a 
fair, impartial or speedy trial, or 
(0) it is not likely to be feasible without occasioning the breach 
of peace or grave risk to the safety of the accused, the witnessesl the 
Public Prosecutor and l.he judge of· the DeSignated Court or any of 
them, or 
(c) it is not otherwise in the interests of justice, 
it may, wiUl the concurrence of the Chief Ju~tice of India (such concur-
40 r~nce to .be obtained on a motion moved in that behalf by the Attorney-
General), transfer any case pending before a Designated Court in that 
State to any other Designated Court within that State or in any other 
State. 
(3) Where the whole or any part of the area within the local lim,its 
45 of the jurisdiction of u Designated Court has been declared to be~ or 
forms part of, any are~ which has been declared to be a disturbed area 
. under . any .enactment for the time being in force making provision for 
. the suppression of disorder and restoration and maintenance of pUblic 
order, and the Central Government is of opinion that the situation pr .. 
Place of 
aittin,. 
Jurisdic-
tion of 
Desig-
nated 
Courts. 

Power 
of DeIia-
aated 
Oaurta 
with 
reepoct 
to other 
oIeoces. 
vaUing in the State is not conducive to fair, impartial or speedy trial 
within the State of offences under this Act or the rules made thereunder , . 
which such Designated Court is competent t9 try, the Central Govern-
mentmay, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of India, specify, 
by notification in the Oflkia] Gazette, in relation to such court (here- 5 
after in this sub-section referred to as the local court) a Designated 
Court outside the State (hereafter in this section referred to as the 
specified court), and thereupon-
(a) it shall not be competent, at any time during the perJod of 
operatlOn of such notification, for such local court to exercise any 10 
jurisdiction in respect of, or try, any offence under this Act or the 
rules made there"Jnder; 
(b) the jurisdiction which would have been, but for the issue of 
such notification, exercisable by such local court in respect of such 
offences conun~tted during the period of operation of such notifiea- IS 
tion shall be exerciF:able by the specified court; 
(c) all cases relating to such offences pending immediately 
before the ~ate of issue of such notification before such local court 
shall stand transferred on that date to the specified court; 
(d) all cases taken cognizance of by, or transferred to, the 20 
specified court under clause (b) or clause (c) shall be dealt with and 
tried in accordance with this Act (whether during the perjod of 
operation of such notification or thereafter) as if such offences had 
been committed within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the 
specified court or, as the case may be, tran~ferred for trial t('l it 25 
under sub-section (2). 
Ea"Planation 1.-A notification issued under this sub-section in rela-
tion to any local court ~~hal1 cease to operate on the date on which the 
whole or. as the case may be, the aforementioned part of the area within 
the local limits or its· jurisdiction, ceases to be a disturbed area. 30 
ExPlanation 2.-For the purposes of this section, "Attorney-
General" means the Attorney-General of India or, in his absence, the 
Solicitor-General of India or, in the absence of both, one of the Addi-
tional Solicitors-General of India. 
12. (1) When trying any offence, a Designated Court may also try 35 
any other offence with which the accused may, under the Code, be 
charged at the same trial if the offence is connected with such other 
offence. 
(2) If, in the course of any trial under this Act of any offence, it 
is found U.at the accused person has committed any other offence under +<> 
this Ac~ or any rule made thereunder or under any other law, the 
Designated Court may convict such person of such other offence and pass 
any sentence authorised by this Act Or such rule or, as the cas'! may 
be, such other law, for the punishment thereof. 
13. (1) For every Designated Court, the Central Govel1llment or, 
the case may be, the State Government, shall appoint a person to 
the Public Prosecutor and may appoint one or more persons to be 
Additional Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Pr088eutora, 
the 
Provided that the Cent ... l Government or, as the case may be, the-
State Gavenunent, may also appoint for any case or cia$! or «roup of So 
caSH a Special Public Prosecutor 

9 
(2) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed as a Public 
Prosecutor or an Additional Public Prosecutor or a Special Public 
Prosecutor under this section llnless he has been in practice III an Advo-
cate for not less than seven years or has held any post, for a period of 
5 not leis than seven years, under the Union or a State, requtrina lpecial 
knowledge of law. 
(3) Every person appointed as a Public Prosecutor or an Additional 
Public Prosecutor or a Special Public Prosecutor under this section shall 
10 tie deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the meaning of clause (u~ 
of section 2 of the Code. and the provisions of the Code' shall have 
effect accordingly. 
14. (1) A Designated Court may take cognizance of any of!enee, 
without the accused being committed to it for trial, upon receiving a 
eomplaint of facts which' constitute such offence or upon a pollce report 
15. of such facts. 
(2) Where an offence triable by a Designated Court is punishable 
with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or with ftae 
or with both, the Designated Court may, notwithstanding anything con-
tained in sub-secf;ion (1) of section 260 or seetion 262 of the Code, try 
20 the oft'enee in a summary way in accordance with the procedure pres-
cribed in the Code and the provisions of sections 263 to 265 of the Co<le, 
shall, so far as may be, apply to such trial: 
Provided th~t ween. in the course of a summary trial under this sub-
section, it appears to the Designated Court that the nature of the casa 
25 is such that it is undesirable to try it in a summary way. the Designated 
Court shall recall any witnesses who may have been examined and pro-
ceed to re-hear the case in the manner prOVided by the provisions of 
the Code for the trial of such offence and the said provisions shall apply 
3 to and in relation to a Designated Court as they apply to and in relation 
o to a Mllgistrate: 
Provided further that in the case of any conviction in a summary 
trial under this section, it shall be lawful for a designated Court to pass 
a sentenee of imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years. 
(3) Subject to the other proviSions of this Act, a Designated Court 
35 Il1a11. for the purpose of trial of any oft'ence.. have all the powers of a 
Court of Session and shall try such offence as if it were a Court of 
Session SO far as may be in accordance with the procedure prelcribed 
In the Code for the trial before a Court of Session. 
(4) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, every case tran~er-
40 red to a Designated Court under sub-section (2) of section 11 shall be 
del.lt with as if such case had been transferred under secti-on 406 of the 
Code to such Designated Court. 
(5) Notwithstanding 'anything, conta,ined in the Code. a Designated, 
0Nrt may, if'it'thinks fltandfor reasons to be recorded by it. proceed 
.s with < the trial in the absence of the accused or his pleader and reeerd 
the evidence of any witness, sub1ect to the right of the accused to reea1J , 
.1.A witness for cross-examination. 
Proce-
dure 
and 
po ...... 
of~ 
nated 
Co~; 

CertaiA 
confet-
sioos 
madoto 
pollce 
officers 
to be 
taken 
into 
considera-
tion. 
Protec· 
tion ,of 
wit-
'nessel. 
TrIal by 
DeBil-
nated 
Courls 
to have 
Prece· 
dence. 
10 
15. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the Code or in the Indian Evi-
dence Act, 1872. but subject to the provisions of this section, a confession 
made by a ~rson before a police officer not lower in rank than a Super-
intendent of Police and recorded. by such police officer either in writing 
or on any mechanical device like cassettes. tapes or sound tracks from 5 
out of which· 'sounds or images can be reproduced, shall be admissible 
in the trial of such person for an offence under this Act or rules made 
thereunder. 
(2) The police officer shall, before recording any confession under 
sub-section (I), explain to the person making it that he is not bound 10 
to make a confession and that.. if he does so, it may be used as evidence 
against him and such police 'officer shall not record any such confession 
unless upon questioning the person making it. he has reason to believe 
that it is being made voluntarily. 
IS, (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, all pro- IS 
ceedings before a Designated Court shall be conducted in camera: 
Provided that where the Public Prosecutor so applies. any proceed-
in~ or part thereof may be held in open court. 
(2) A Designated Court may, on an application made by a witness 20 
in any proceedings before it or by the Public Prosecutor in relation ~ 
such witness or on its own motion, take such measures as it deems fit 
for keeping the identity and address of any witness secret. 
lit 
(3) In particular, and without prejudice to the ~nerality of the 
provisi<:,>ns of sub-section. (2). the measures which a Designated Court 2S 
may take under that su1:i-~ction may include-
(a) the holding of the proceedings at a place to be decided by 
the Designated Court; 
'(b) the avoiding of the mention of the names and addresses of 
the witnesses in its orders or judgments or in any rftcordsof the 30, 
case accessible to public: I. 
(e) the issuing of any directions for securing that the identity 
and addresses of the witneS'Ses are not disclosed; 
(If) that it is in the public interest to order that all or anv of .' 
the prl"ceedings pending before such a court shall not be published 35 
in any manner. 
'(4) Any person who contravenes any direction issued under sub-
!Section (3) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which m'ay 
extend to one year and witb fine which may extend to 'one' thousana' t,' 
rupees. 
.,. -r •• :'~ ~"'I'Tif\o.,~"". 
17. The trial under this Act of any offence by a Designated Court 
shan l1ave precedence over the trial of anv other case a~afnst theaceuged 
'n' IInyethel' court (n"lt being a Designated Co'urt) and shall be c()ne1u8ed" 
In; priterence to the trial of such other cas'e 'and accordingly the trial '~f" ~~.~~ 
meh otber ease shan remain in abeyance. 

11 
,IS. Where, after taking cognizance of any offence, a Designated Court 
is of opinion that the offence is not triable by it, it shall. notwithstanding 
that it has no jurisdiction to try such offence, transfer the case for the 
trial of such offence to any court having jurisdiction under the Code lind 
5 the court to which the case is transferred may proceed with the trial of 
the offence as if it had taken cognizance of the ofl'ence. 
19. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, an appeal 
shan lie as a matter of right from any judgment, sentence or order, not 
being an interlocutory order, of a Designated Court to the Supreme Court 
lO both on facts and on law. ' 
(2) Except as aforesaid, no appeal or revision shall lie to any ecrurt 
from any judgment, sentence or order including an interlocutory order 
of a Designated Court. 
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period 
15 01 thtrty days from the date of the judgment. selltence or order appealed 
from: 
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain an appeal after the 
expiry of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that the appellant 
had sufficient caMe for not preferring the appeal within the period of 
20 !htrty da~. 
PART IV 
MISCEI"LAlfEOUS 
20. (1) Notwithstandin~ anythin~ contained in the Code or any other 
law. every offence punishable under this Act or any rule made there-
25 under shall be deemed to be a cOJmizable offence within the meanin!:! 
of clause' (c) of section 2 of the Code. and "cognizable case" as defined 
in that clause shall be construed accordingly. 
(2) Section 21 of the, Code shall apply in relation to a case involving 
an offence punishable under this Act or any rule made thereunder. 
30 suhJect to the modification that the reference to "the StatE' Government" 
therein shall be construed as a reference to "the Central Government 
or the State Government". 
(3) Section 164 of the Code shall apply in relation t~ a case fnvolvfnlt 
an offence punfshltble under this Act or any rule made thereunder, 
35 sl1bfect to the modification that the reference in !'!ub-section (1) thereof 
to ''Mptrooolitan MMi!'!trate or .Turlicial Malrl!iltrate" shall be con!ltrued 
as a reference to "Metronolitan Mal!istrate" Judicial Magistrate, ExecutiVe 
Ma~strate or Special Executive Magistrate". 
(4) ~tion 1&7 of the Code shall apply in relation to 8 case jnvolvfn~ 
40 an offence punishable under this Act or any rule made thereunder sub. 
ject to the modifications that-
45 
I 
(~) .the Tef~renc~' in sub-!'!ection '(1) thereof to'I.TI1,nC'i:tl Ma!!f3-
. trllte" shall. be construerl .as a refpren~p t"l' u.TurliclA 1 M'al!i~trate or 
Execu~vp, Mal!f~trate Or Soecial Executive MamstrAte": 
(M t"e !'@f~on"~ fn ~1h-!'!P.f't;on (2) thereof to 'lftft:fI'f!n davs", 
"nfnetv da'Vl'l" antl, "six+v rtavs", wherever thev occur. shan be cons-
trued as referenees to -stxty days", "one yea~ and ·~n!_ ~ar"'.~., 
pectfw!,; anC! . 
Modlfte4 
applica-
tiOn of 
certain 
provi81ODl 
Of the 
Code. 

PrOlUlDJI" 
uon u to 
oJfeDceI 
under He> 
tion 3. 
12 
(e) sub-section (2A) thereof shall be deemed to have been 
omitted. . 
(5) Section 268 of the Code shall apply in relation to a case involving . 
an offence punishable under this Act or any rule made thereunder sub· 
,ect to the modifications that- 5 
Ca) the reference in sub-section (1) thereof-
(i) to "the State Government" shall be construed LlJ a refer ... 
enee to "the Central Government or the State Government"; 
(ii) to "order of the State Government" shall be construed 
as a reference to "order of the Central Government or the State 10 
Government. as the case may be"; and 
(b) the reference in sub-section (2) thereof. to "State Govern-
ment" shall be construed as a reference to "Central Government or 
the State Government. as the caservay be". 
(6) Sections 366 to 371 and section 392 of the Code shall apply ill 15 
relation to a case involving an offence triable by a Designated Court 
Bub~ect to the modifications that the references to "Court of Session" and 
"High Court", wherever occurring therein, shall be construed as refer-
ences to "Designated Court" and "Supreme Court". r~ctively. 
(7) Nothing in section 438 of the Code ahall apply in relation to any 20 
case involving the arrest of any person on an accusation of having com-
mitted an offence punishable under this Act or any rule made there-
under. 
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code. no person 
accused of an offence punishable under this Act or any rule made 2S 
thereunder shall. if in custody. be released on bail or on his own bond 
unless-
(a) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to 
oppose the application for such release. and 
(b) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application; .the 30 
court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that 
he is not guiltv of such offence and that he is not likely to commit 
any offence while on bail. 
(9) The ltmitatfons on granting of bail specified in sub-section (8) 
are in· addition to the limitations under the Code or any other . law for 35 
the time being in force on granting of bail. 
2t. (1) In a prosecution for an offence tmder sub-section (1) of'see-
tion 3. if it is proved-
(a) that the arms or explosives or any other substances specift~ 
in section 3 were recovered from the possession of the accused and 40 
there is reason to believe that such arms or explosives or other 
substance8 of a similar nature, were used in the commission of such 
of!enee: or 
(b) that by the evidence of an exPert the ftnger prints of the 
aceused ~ fOUT!d at thf! site of the oi!ence or on .nythfng.inct ud- " 

J atllft. 
5 
ing arms and vehicles used in connection with the commission ot 
such ot!ence; or 
(c) that a confession has been. made by a co-accused that the 
accused had committed the offence; or 
, (d) that the accused had made a confession of the offence to 
any person other than a police officer, .-
the Designated Court shall presume, unless the contrary is proved, that 
the accused had committed such offence. 
(2) In a prosecution for an offence under sub-section (3) of section 
10 3, if it is proved that the accused rendered any financial assistance to a 
person accused 01, or reasonably suspected of, an offence under that 
section. the DesignaJ:ed Court shall presume, unless the contrary is 
proved, that such person has committed the offence under that sub-
section. 
15 22. Where a person has been declared a proclaimed offender in a 
terrorist case, the evidence regarding his identification by witnesses on 
the basis of his photograph shall have the same value as the evidence 
of a test identification parade. 
23. (1) Nothing in this Act shall affect the jurisdiction exercisable 
10 by, or the procedure applica.ble to, any court or other authority under 
any law relating to the naval. military or air forces or other armed forces 
of th~ Union. 
(2) For the removal of doubts. it is hereby declared that for the pur-
poses of any such law as is referred to in sub-section (1), a Designated 
2S Court shall be deemed to be a court of ordinary criminal justice. 
Z4. Where an order purports to ha ve been made alld signed by any 
authority in exerciSe of any power conferred by or under this Act. a 
court shall, within the meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, pre-
sume that such order was so made by that authority. 
30 25. The provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder or any 
order made under any such rule shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than 
this Act or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment. 
other than this Act. 
35 26. No suit, prosecution Or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the Central Government or a State Government or any officer or auth~ 
rity of the Central Government or State Government or any other autho-
ri ty to whom powers have been conferred under thia Act or any rules 
made thereunder, for anything which is in good faith done or purported 
40 to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rules made thereunder or 
any order issued under any such rule. 
21. The Supreme Court may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make such rules. if any, as it may deem necessary for carrying out the 
provisions of this Act relating to Designated Courts. 
Identifica-
tion of 
accuaed. 
Savini. 
Savin, 
as to 
orders. 
Overrid-
ing effect. 
Protee· 
tion ot 
uction 
taken 
under 
this Act 
Power of 
the 
Supreme 
Court .. 
maU 
rulel. 

hwer 
to mate 
ruIeI. 
ilulea to 
be laid 
"afore 
;OaO~ til 
Parlla-
'1MDt. 
28. (1) Without prejudice to the powers of the Supreme Court to 
make rules under sectJ.on 27, the Central Gi:Jvernment may, by notifica-
tion in the OffiCIal Gazette" make rules for carrying out the provisiona 
of t.b.is Act. • . , 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore- S 
ioing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely: - I 
.(a) regulating the conduct of persons in respect of areas the 
control of which is considered necessary or expedient and the re-
mo'O'al of such persons ~rom su-::h areas; 10 
(b) the entry into, and search of,-
(i) any vehicle, vessel or aircraft; or 
(ii) any place, whatsoever, 
reasonably suspected of being used for committing the offences re-
ferred: to in section 3 or section 4 or for manufacturing or storing IS 
anything for the corrunission of any such offence; 
(c) conferring powers upon,-
(i.) the Central Government; 
(ii) a State Government; 
(iii) an AdministIrator of a Union territory under article 20 
239 of the Constitution; 
.(iv) an officer of the Central Government not lower in 
.rank than that of a Joint Secretary; or 
(VI an officer of a State Government not lower in rank 
than that of a DistrlCt MagIstrate, 
to make general or f>pecial orders to prevent or cope with terrorist 
acts or wsruptive activities; 
(d) the arrest and trial of persons contravening any of the 
rules or any order made thereunder; . 
25 
(e) the punishment of any person who contravenes or attempts 30 
to contravene or abets or attempts to abet the contravention of any 
rule or order made thereunder with imprisonment for a term which 
ma;' extend to seven years or for a term which may not be less than 
six months but WhIch may extend to seven years or with fine or 
with imprisonment as aforesaid and fine; 35 
I (1) pro~iding for the seizure and detention of any property in 
respect of which such contravention, attempt or abetment as is, r 
referred to in clause (e) has been committed and for the adjudica-
tion of such seizure and detention, whether by any court or by any 
other authority. 40 
29. Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall 
be laid, as Boon as may be after it is made, before each House ofParlia .. 
mant, while it is in seSSion, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one sessiori' or in two or more successive seSSions, and 
if, before the expiry of 'the session immediately followini the aeslion 45 

Ord. 
I of 1987. 
6t the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making aftY 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not 
be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modlft .. 
5 cation or annulment shall be without pre1udice to the validity of any-
thing previously done under that rule. 
30. (1) The Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Ordi-
nance, 1987, hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal. anything done or any action taken 
10 under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been dllne or taken 
under the corresponding proVisions of this Act. 
Repe~ 
and .... 
In,. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1985, waS 
enacted in May, 1985, in the background of escalation of terrorist activi-
ties in many parts of the country at that time. It was expected then 
that it would be possible to control the menace within a period of two 
years and, therefore, the life of the said Act was restricted to a period of 
two years from the date of its commencement. However, it was subse-
quently realised that on account of various factors,what were stray inci-
dents in the beginning have now become a continuing menace specially in 
States like Punjab. On the basis of experience, it was felt that in order 
to combat and cope with terrorist and disruptive activities effectively, it 
is not only necessary to continue the said law but also to strengthen it 
further. The aforesaid Act of 1985 was due to expire on the 23rd May, 
1987. Since both Houses of Parliament were not in session and it was 
necessary to take immediate action, the President promulgated the Terro· 
rist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Ordinance, 1987 (2 of 1987), 
on the 23rd May, 1987, which came into force with effect from the 24th 
May, 1987. 
2. The Ordinance included all the provisions of the Act of 1985 except 
the following main changes, namely:-
(a) punishments for terrorist acts and disruptive activities were 
made more deterrent; 
(b) the Central Government has also been empowered to consti-
tute Designated Courts; 
(c) the exhaustive enumeration of rule making powers, as con-
tained in section 5 of the 19850-Act, had been dispensed with and the 
Central Government had been given power to make rules for carl"Y.-
ing out the provisions of the Ordinance. 
3. Subsequent to the promulgation of the Ordinance, it was felt thai 
the provisions need further strengthening in order to cope with the menus 
of terro.rism. It is, therefore, proposed that persons who are in posses-
sion of· certain arms and amm uni tion specified in the Arms Rules, 1962 
or other explosive substances unauthorisedly in an area to be notified by 
the State Government, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a tarm 
which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprison-
ment for life and with fine. It is further proposed to provide that con-
fession made by a person before a police officer not lower in rank than 
a Superintendent of Police and recorded by such police officer either in 
writing or on any mechanical device shall be admissible in the trial of 
such person for an offence under the proposed legislation or any rules 
made thereunder. It is also proposed to provide that the Designated 
Cou.rt shall presume, unless the contrary is proved, that the accused had 
committed an offence where arms Or explosives or any other substances 
16 

17 
specified in section 3 were recovered from his possession, Or where b7 
the evidence of an expert the finger prints of the accused were found a~ 
the site of offence or where a confession has been made by a co-accused 
that the accused had committed the offence or where the accused had 
made a confeision of the offence to any other person except a police 
oOicer. It is also proposed to provide that in the case of a person de-
clared as a proclaimed offender in a terrorist case, the evidence regard .. 
ing his identification by witnesses on the basis of his photograph shall 
have the same value as t.he evidence of a test identification parade. 
Further, the Designated Courts are also proposed to be empowered to 
try certain offences in a summary way in accordance with the procedure 
prescribed in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. The matters in 
respect of which rules may be made by the Central Government are also 
proposed to be enumerated. The said amendments included in the Bill, 
have been explained in the Memorandum attached to the Bill. 
4. The Bill seeks to replaCe the aforesaid Ordinance and to include 
therein the aforesaid amendments. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 17th August, 1987. BUTA SINGH. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 (3) OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 617187-Legal Cell dated 17th August 1987 from 
Shri Buta Singh, Minister of Home Affairs to the Secretary-General, Lok 
Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of Terrorist 
and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Bill, 1987 recommends to the 
House the consideration of the Bill under article 117 (3) of the Constitu-
tion. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
ClaUSe 9 of the Bill provides for the constitution of Designated Court. 
:by the Central Government or the State Governments and also for ap-
pointment of Judges and Additional Judges of those Courts. Clause 13 
of the Bill provides for appointment of Public Prosecutors, Additional 
Public Prosecutors and Special Public Prosecutors by the Central Govem-
'tnent or the State Governments, as the case may be. 
2. The expenditure towards the setting up of Designated Courts by the 
State Governments and towards salaries and allowances of the Judget, 
Public Prosecutors and staff of such courts will be defrayed out of the 
Consolidated FUnds of the States. The expenditure towards setting \lp 
of Designated Courts by the Central Government in any State or Union 
territory (other ~han Pondicherry) will be met out of th~ Consolidated 
Fund of India. The likely expenditure for each Designated Court and 
on the salaries and allowances of the Judges, Public Prosecutors, Addi-
tional Public Prosecutors, staff, etc., over a .period of six months is expect-
ed to be about Rs. 7 lakhs out of which Rs. 3.5 lakhs will be of· a recurring 
nature and Rs. 3.5 lakhs of a non-recurring nature. As it is not possib18 
at this stage to visualise the number of such Courts that may have te 
be established, it is not possible to giv~ an estimate of actual expenditure 
that may have to be incurred in this behalf. 
18 

.. 
MltMO'RANDUM 'REGARDlNG 'DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 7 of the Bill enables the Central Government to confer on an, 
tmlter of' the' Central Gove'mm~t powers exercisable by a police oftlcer 
'tInder the Code 'of Crirtdnal Proeedure, 19r3, in a State or part thereof, 
tn'''far such case or class 'or gtoup 'of eases and in particular the powers 
c;farrest, investigation Bnd prO!eCUtion of persons before any court. 
Provisions to confer powers as provided. in clause 7 are necessary for 
~·eflec~ve aGministration of the provisions of the Bill. 
2. ClaUse'J:T of the Bill seekJ to empower the SUpreme Court to frame 
such ,rules, if any, 88 it may deem necessary for carrying out the provi-
sions of the Bill relating to Designate~ Courts. The matters in respect 
of rwhich the Supreme Court can make rules would relate to ma~ters of 
detaU and procedure. The power is sought to be conferred on the Supreme 
Court to enable it to prOvide' for continge.ncies which it is not practicable 
to visualise and 'thereby secure the effective functioning of the Desig-
nated Courts. 
3. Clauae· 28 of the BUI seeks to empower the Central Gove.mment to 
make rules for carryiIlgout tae provisions of the Bill. The particular 
matters in respect of which such rules may be made have been specified 
insUb-clause (2) of the clause. The .rule making power under this 
elauN is of suft1cient amplttude to enable the Central Governmer.t to 
prdyide for stringent 'punishments .within the limits specifted in sub-
clause (2) (d) and (e) for contraventions of the rules and for other 
matters connected 'with such contraventions. The sitaations which may 
arise as a result of terrorist and disruptive activities are of a very grave 
: u.ture. Further it is not possible to visualise the various types of situa-
tions which terrorists and disruptionists may create. 
4. In the context of the ci~umstances as explained above, the delega-
tion of legislative power involved is of a normal character. 
19 

Memora.ndum expZaiT,ing the modifica.tions contained in the- BtU to replace 
the Terrorist and Di'sruptive Activities (Prevent;on) Ordinance, 1987. 
The Terrorist and Disruptive Activities ,(Prevention) Bill, 1987, which 
seeks to repeal and replace the Terrorist and Disruptive Activitie. 
(Prevention) Ordinance, 1987, proposes to make the following modifica~ 
tions, apart from modifications of minor drafting nature, in the provisiOll! 
contained in the said Ordinance:-
(i) sub-clause (3) of clause I seeks to provide that sections 5, 15, 
21 and 22 shall come into force at once and the remaining provisions 
of the proposed law shall be deemed to have come into force on the 
24th day of May, 1987, that is to say, the date on which the aforesaid 
Ordinance came into effect, and shall remain in force for a period .of 
two years from that date. Sub-clause (4) also includes a saving pro-
vision to the effect that the expiry of the proposed legislation will not 
affect pending proceedings on the lines of section 6 of the General 
Clauses Act, 1897. 
(ii) Sub-clause (1) of clause 2 is being amended to include the 
definition of "notified area" to mean such area as the State G<>vem-
ment may. by notification in the Official 'Gazette, specify. 
(iii) Clause 5 seeks to provide that any person who is in posses-
sion of certain arms and ammunitions specified in Schedule I to the 
Arms Rules, 1962, or bombs, dynamite or other explosive substances 
unauthorisedly in a notified area, shall be punishl:ble with imprison-
ment for a term which shall not be less than five years, but which 
may extend to imprisonment for life and also with fine. 
(iv) Sub-clause (2) of clause 14 seeks to empower the Designated 
Court to try any offence, which is punishable with imprisonment for 
a term not exceeding three years or with fine or ,with both, in a 
summary way in accordance with procedure prescribed in the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973, and the provisions of sections 263 to 
265 of the said Code, shall, so far as may be, apply to such trial . 
. (v) Clause 15 seeks to provide that a confession made by a 
person before a police officer not lower in rank than a Superintendent 
of Police and recorded by such police officer either in writing or on 
an} mechanical device like cassettes, tapes or sound tracks from 
out of which sounds or images can be reproduced, shall be admissible 
in the trial of such person for an offence under the proposed legis~ 
lation or any rules made the.reunder. The police officer shall, how-
ever, explain to the person making the· confession that he is not bound 
to make it and that, if he does so, it may be used as evidence against 
him. 
(vi) Clause 21 seeks to provide that where it is proved that the 
anns or explosives or any other substances specified in clause 3 
were recovered from the possession of the accused and there is reason 
20 

21 
to believe that such arms or explosives or other substances of a 
similar nature were used in the commission of an offence under that 
clause or where by the evidence of an expert the finger prints of 
the accused were found at the site of offence. or on anything including 
arms and vehicles used in connection with the commission of such 
offence or where a confession has been made by a co-accUSed that 
the accused had committed the offence or where the accused had 
made a confession of the offence to any other person except a 
police officer, the Designated Court shall presume, unless the contrary 
is proved, that the accused had committed such offence. 
(vii) Clause 22 seeks to provide that where a person has been 
declared a proclaimed offender in a terrorist case, the evidence 
regarding his' identification by witnesses on the basis of his photo-
graph shall have the same value as the evidence of a test identifica-
tion parade. \ 
(viii) Sub-clause (2) of clause 28 enumerates various matters 
in relation to which rules may be made by the Central Government 
without p.rejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by sub-
clause (1) of that clause. Some of the important matters for which 
rules may be made relate to conferring powers upon the Central 
Government, a State Government, an Administrator of the Union 
territory, an officer of the Central Government of and above the 
ran.k of a Joint Secretary O.r an officer Of a State GovernmeJtt of and 
above the rank of a District Magistrate to make general or special 
orders to prevent, or cope Iwlth terrorist or disruptive activities: arrest 
and trial of persons contavening any of the rules or any order made 
thereunder; the punishment of any person who contravenes or 
attempts to contravene or abets or attempts to abet the contraven-
tion of any rule or order made thereunder with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to seven years or for a term which may not 
be less than. six months but which may extend to seven years OT 
with fine or with imprisonment as aforesaid and fine. 

·f 
.&. 
BILL 
to make special prOV1S1<l1lS for the prevention of, and tor copiq: with, 
terrorist and dill'upUve activities aAd for matter. conn~. (there-
with or incident'"· thereto. 
• 
(Shri Buta. Singh, Minister oj Home Affair •. } 