AS INTRODUCED IN THE Lox SasHa

24 jut 199

Bill No. 84 of 1998.

| PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998

By
‘Suri Ravi S. Natk, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.

it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as

(0) This Act may be called the Prevention of Cuelty to Animals (Amendment) Shon nis,
application 2nd
coniuencement.

It shali apply to the State of Goa.
It shall come into force at once.

In section 11 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1966, in sub-section (3), Amendment of
(©), the following clause shall be added, namely:— section 11.

“() “Dhirio” as organised in the prescribed manner”,

rion.— “Dhirio” means a traditional game for trial of strength between bulls,
in the State of Goa.”.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

“Dhirio” (Bull fights) is a traditional, popular and unique sport | i
Stale of Goa wherein the bulls are trained properly.by the bull owners to fight each
and (o develop their strength and stamina. “Dhirio’ 4 sports event held for fun
entertainment and the winning bull is awarded a cash prize by the sponsorers and |
helps the owner in rhaintaining the bull.

In “Dhirio”, usually no injuries occur (० the participating bulls, however, occasi
there may be minor injuries which are treated immediately. Also, no cruelty is invol
this sport.

Moreover, the game is a source of livelihood for a large section of the populat
who specially maintain and nourish the bulls for the purpose of “Dhirio”.

Hence, with a view to protect the interests of the people involved in this
sport and which is also a source of livelihood for them, itis necessary to amend the Prevent
of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960, in its application to the State of Goa.

This Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New Deut; RAVIS. N,
June 22, 1998.



ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960
(Act No. 59 or 1960)

* * * .

वा. (3) Nothing in this section shall apply to—

(a) + * * *

* * * *

(e) the commission or omission of any act in the course of the destruction
or the preparation for destruction of any animal as food for mankind
unless such destruction or preparation was accompanied by the infliction
of unnecessary pain or suffering

* * * *


LOK SABHA

A

BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.

(Shri Ravi 5. Naik, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1409LS—15-7-98