1 • Page 
2. Page 
Page 
WK SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE CENTRAL SALES TAX (AMENDHENT) BILL, 1976 
rTo be/As introduced in wk Sabha 7 
2, line 2,-
for "me anin g " ~ "me anin g s " 
2, line 26,-
for "as as" read "as an" 
4, line -:p, -
fo r " ( i v) " re ad "( v) " 
4. Page 8, line 2 from bottom,-
for "purpose" read "purposes II 
5. Page 8, line 1 from bottom,-
for "Orissa" ~ ''l'iaharashtra'' 
6. Page 10, line 6 from bottom,-
1Qr "ben" read IIbeen" 
NEW DELHI; 
August 24, 1~76 
Bhadra 2, 1 98 (Saka) 

.or 
!SUI No. " of 1&74 
THE CENTRAL SALES TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1976 
A 
BILL 
further to armend the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-seventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Central Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 
1976. 
Short 
title. 
74011956. S 2. In section 2 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred Amend-
to as the principal Act) ,- ment of 
IeCtion 2. 
IS 
20 
(a) after clause (a), the follOWing clauses shall be inserted. 
namely:-
'(aa) "business" includes-
(i) any trade, commerce or manufacture, or any adven-
ture or concern in the nature of trade, commerce or manu-
facture, whether or not such trade, commerce, manufacture, 
adventure or concern is carried on with a motive to make 
gain or profit and whether or not any gain or profit accrues 
trom such trade, commerce, manufacture, adventure or con-
cern; and 
(ii) any transaction in connection with, or incidental or 
ancillary to, such trade, commerce, manufacture, adventure or 
concern; 
(ab) "crossing the customs frontiers of India" means crossing 
the limits of the area of a customs station in which imported 
goods or export goods are ordinarily kept before clearance by 
customs authorities. 

Explanation.-}l'or the purposes of this clause, "customs 
statIOn" and ··cust.oms authOrlLleS" shaH have tne same meaning 
\ as m thE: Customs Act, 1962;'; 152 of 1962. 
(b) tor clause (/), the following clause shall be substitutec\, 
namely:- S 
• (b) "dealer" means any person who carries on (whether 
reiwarly or or..nerwlse) the ousmess of buying, selling, supplying 
or dlstl'lOu~ •• !g goods, directil' or indirectlY, for cash, or for defer-
red paymena.. or lor comnusslOn, remuneratIOn or other valuable 
conslCleration, and mcluces- 10 
(i) a local authority, a body corporate, a company. any 
co-operative socIety or other soc:iety, clUb, firm, Hindu un-
dlvided family or other association of persons which carries 
on such buslIlesS; 
l't) a factor, broker, commission agent, del credere agent, IS 
or any otner mercantl1e agent, by whatever name called, and 
whether of the same deSCription as hereinbefore mentioned 
or not, who carries on the business of buying, selling, supply-
ing or distributing, goods belonging to any principal whether 
dlsclosed or not; an.d 20 
(iii) an auctioneer who carries on the business of selling 
or auctioning goods belonging to any prinCipal, whether dis-
closed or not and whether the offer of the intending pur-
chaser is accepted by him or by the principal or a nominee 
of the principal. 25 
Erp;,ana.tion I.-Every person who. acts as as agent, in any 
State, of a dealer residing outside that State and buys, sells, sup-
plies, or C\istributes, goods in the State or acts on behalf of such 
dealer as-
(i) a mercantile agent as defined in the Sale of Goods 30 
Act, 1930, or 3 of 19aO. 
I 
(ii) an agent for handling of goods or documents of title 
relating to goods, or 
(iii) an agent for the collectioll or the payment of the 
sale price of goods or as a guarantor for such collection or 35 
payment, 
and every local branch or office in a State of a fum registered 
outside that State or a comp~y Or other body corporate, the 
principal office or headquarters whereof is outside that State, 
shall be deemed to be a r\ealer for the purposes of this Act. 40 
.' , Explanation 2.-A Government which, whether or not in the 
course of business. buys, sells, supplies or distributes, goods, 
cllrectly or otherwise, for cash or for deferred payment or for 
commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration, shall, 
except in relation to any sale, supply or distribution of surplus, 45 
un-serviceable or old stores or materials or waste products or 
obsolete or discarded machinery or parts or accessories thereof, 
be deemed to be a dealer for the purposes of this Act;'. 

5 
10 
IS 
8 
3. In section 5 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following 
sub-section shall be inserted, and shall be deemed to have been inserted 
with effect :6I'om the 1st day of April, 1976, namely:-
"(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
last sale or purchase of any goods preceding the sale or purchase 
occasioninjt the export of those goods out of the territory of India 
shall also be deemed to be in the course of such export, if such last 
sale or purchase took place after, and was for the purpose of comply-
ing with, the agreement or order for or in relation to such export.". 
4_ In section 6 of the principal Act. in sub-section (1), the following 
proviso shall be inserted. and shall be deemed to have been inserted, 
with effect from the 1st day of April. 1976, namely:-
"Provided that a dpaler shall not be liable to pay tax under 
this Act on any sale of goods which, in accordance with thf' pro-
visions of sub-section (3) of section 5. is a sale in the course of 
ex·port of those goods out of the territory of India.". 
5. In section 7 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3B), the foU"wing 
sub-sections shall be substituted. namely:-
CI (3B) No dealer shall be required to furnish any security under 
20 sub-section (2A) or any security or additional security lmder sub-
section (3A) unless he has been given an opportunity of being hearn_ 
(3BB) The amount of security which a dealer may be required 
to furnish under sub-section (2A) or sub-section '(3A) or the aggre-
gate of the amount of such security and the amount of additional 
2S security which he may be required 'to furnish under sub-section (3A), 
by the authority referred to therein, shall not exceed.:.-
(a) in the case of a neater other than 8 dealer who has made 
an application. or who has been rel1.istered in pursuance of an 
application. under sub-section (2'. a sum equal to the tax pavable 
30 under this Act. in accorn:mce with the estimRte of Rllch authoritv. 
on the turnover of such dealer for the year in which such securitv 
or, as the case may be, additional security is required to be 
furnished; and 
(b) in the casp of a dealer who has mRde an :It)Plication. or 
3S who has bel''n re~stered in pursuance of an APplication. under 
sub-section (2). a sum eaual to the tax leviAble under this Art. 
In accordance with the estimatp of Rllf'h a11thnrlty on the sales 
to such dealE'r in the course of intf!r-St~te trane flr ('ommerce in 
the veal' in which such securitv nr. A" thp case mav he. AdditionAl 
40 secnritv is reouirerl to hp furnished, had such dealer been not 
registered under this Act.". 
Amend-
ment of 
section 5. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 6. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 7. 
6. In section 9 of the principal Act.- Amend-
(a) in sub-section (1). for the proviso. the following proviso shall 
be substituted. namely:-
45 "Provided that. in the case of 8 lIale of ~onds durin~ their 
movement from one St~tp to :mother. bpin!! a !l!ale subspouent to 
th". flrst sale in rel'ltler.t of' the SAmp ItOO"~ anrt hefn!! 81'10 R SAle 
whiC'h does not fall within s11b-section (2) of section 6. the tax 
shan be levied and collected-
So (4) where such sl1bsMllent ~ale h::ls heen effected bv A 
registered dealer. in the Stllte from which the rf>~sterert 
ment of 
section 9. 

Amend-
mental 
IeCtionl4. 
nealer obtained or, as the case may be, could have obtained, 
the f()rm prescribed for the purposes of clause (a) of sub-
section (4) of section 8 in connection with the purchase of 
such goods, and 
(b) where such subsequent sale has been effected by an $ 
unregistered dealer, in the State from which such subse-
quent sale has been effected."; 
(b) in sub-section (2), before the words "compounding of 
offences", the words "charging or payment of interest," shall be 
inserted and shall be deemed always to have been inserted; 10 
(c) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
inserte<\, namely:-
"(2A) All the provisions relating to offences and penalties 
(including provisions relating to penalties in lieu of prosecution 
for an offence or in addition to the penalties or punishment for IS 
an offence but excluding the provisions relating to matters pro-
vided for in. sections 10 and lOA) of the general sales tax law 
of each State shall. with necessary modifications, apply in 
relation to the assessment, re-assessment, collection and the 
enforcement of payment of any tax required to be collected zo 
under this Act in such State or in relation to any process con-
nected with such assessment, re-assessment, collection or enforce-
ment of payment as if the tax under this Act were a tax under 
such sales tax law!'. 
1. In section 14 of the prinCipal Act, with effect from the 1st day of zs 
September,1976,-
(a) clause ('i) shall be re-numbered as clause (ia) and before 
clause (ia) as so re-numbered, the following clause shall be inser-
ted, namely:-
"(i) cereals, that is to say..-
(i) paddy (Oryza sativa L.); 
(ti) rice (Oryza sCltiva L.); 
(iii) wheat (Triticum tmlgare. T. compactum, T. aphae-
rococcum, T. durum, T. aestivwm L., T. dicoocum); 
(iv) jowar or milo (Sorghum V"UIga1!e Pen); 3S 
(iv) bajra (Pennisetum typ'Mideum L.); 
(vi) maize (Zea mays L.); 
(t?ii) ragi (Ele'U8ine coracana Gaertn.); 
(viii) kodon (Pa..!palum scrobiculatum L.); 
(i,r) kutki (Panicum miliare L.); 
(r) barley (Hordeum oolgare L.) ;"; 
(b) after clause (iib) , the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
II (tic) crude oil, that is to say, cnlde petroleum oils and 
crude oils obtained from bituminous minerals (such as shale, 45 
calcareous rock sand). whatever their composition. whether-" 

5 
10 
20 
5 
obtained from normal or condensation oil-deposits or by the 
destructive distillation of bituminous minerals and whether or 
not subjected to all or any of the following processes:-
(1) decantation; 
(2) de-salting; 
(3) dehydration; 
(4) stabilisation in order to normalise the vapour pres-
sure; 
(5) elimination of very light fractions with a view to 
returning them to the oil-deposits in order to improve 
the drainage and maintain the pressure; 
(6) the addition of only those hydrocarbons previously 
recovered by physical methods during the course of the 
above-mentioned processes; 
(7) any other minor process (including addition of pour 
point depressants or flow improvers) which does not change 
the essential character of the substance;"; 
(e) after clause (Ui), the following clause shall be inserteCl, 
namely:-
"(via) pulses, that is to say,-
(i) gram or gulab gram (Cieerarietinum L.); 
(ii) tur or arhar (Cajanus cajan); 
(iii) moong or green gram (Phaseolus aureu.s); 
(tv) m4Sun- or lentil (Lens esculenta Moench, Lens 
culinaris Medic.); 
(v) urad or black gram (Phaseolus mungo); 
(vi) moth (Ph4seolus aconitifolius Ja.cq); 
(V'ii) lakh or khesaT'i (Lathyr'U..'1 saiivtts L.) ;". 
8. In section 15 of the principal Act, after clause (b), the following 
30 clauses shall be inserted with effect from the 1st day of September, 1976, 
3S 
namely:- ~ 
II (e) where a tax has been levied under that law in respect of 
the sale or purchase inside the State of any paddy referred to in sub-
clause (i) of clause (i) of section 14, the tax leviable on rice pro-
cured out of such paddy shall be reduced by the amount of tax 
levied on such paddy; 
(d) each of the pulses referred to in clause (via) of section 14, 
whether whole or separated. and whether with or without husk, 
shall be treated as a single commodity for the purposes of levy of tax 
under that law.". 
Amend-
ment of 
section 15. 

Valida-
tion. 
9. (1) The provisions of section 9 of the principal Act shall have effect, 
and shall be deemed always to have had effect, in relation to the period 
commencing on the 5th day of January, 1957, and ending with the date 
immediately preceding the date of commencement of this Act, as if that 
section also provided- 5 
(a) that all the provisions relating to penalties (including provi-
sions reO.ating to penalties in lieu of prosecution for an offence or in 
addition to the penalties or punishment on conviction for an offence 
but excluding the provisions relating to matters provided for in 
sections 10 and lOA of the principal Act and the provisionSi relating 10 
to oft'en.ces) Oif the general sales tax law of each State shall, with 
necessary modifications, apply in relation to-
(i) the assessment, re-assessment, collection and enforcement 
of payment of any tax required to be collected under the principal 
Act in such State; and IS 
(ii) any process connected with such assessment, re-assess-
ment, collection or enforcement of payment; and 
(b) that for the purpose of the a~plication of the provisions of 
such law, the tax under the principal Act shall be deemed to be taX' 
under such law. 20 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or 
order of any court or tribunal or ot11er authority, all penalties under the 
general sales tax law of any State imposed or purporting to have been 
imposed in pursuance of the provisions of section 9 of the principal Act, 
and all proceedings, acts or things taken or done for the purpose of, or in 25 
relation to, the imposition or collection of such penalties, before the 
commencement of this Act shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be and 
to have always been imposed, taken or done as validly and effectively as 
if the provisions of sub-section (1) had been in force when such penalties 
were imposed or proceedings or acts or things were taken or done and, 30 
accordingly,-
(a) no suit or other proceedings shall be maintained or continued 
in or before any court or any tribunal or other authority for the 
refund of any amount received or realised by way of such penalty: 
(b) no Co.urt, tribunal or other authority shall enforce any 3S 
decree or order directing the refund of any amount received or 
realised by way of such penalty; 
(e) where any amount which had been received or realised by 
way of such penalty had been refunded before the commencement of 
this Act and such refund would not ~ave been allowed if the provisions 40 
of sub-section (1) had been in force on the date on which the orde+r 
for such refund was passed, the amount so refunded may be recovered 
as an arrear of tax under the principal Act; 
(d) any proceeding, act or thing which co.uld have been validly 
taken, continued or done for the imposition of such penalty at any 4S 
time bef.are the commencement of this Act if the provisions of sub-
section (1) had then been in force but which had not been taken, conti-
nued or done, may after such commencement be taken, continued or 
done. 

s 
., 
(3) Nothing in sub-section (2) shall be construed as preventing any 
person,-
(a) from questioning the imposition or collection ~ any penalty 
or any proceedings, act or thing in connection thereWith; or 
(b) from claiming any refund, 
in accordance with the provisions of the principal Act read with sub-sec-
tion (1). 
Explanation.-In computing the period of limitation, if any, for ques-
tioning as provided. in clause (a) or for claiming as provided in clause 
10 (b), the period commencing on the 27th day of February, 1975 and ending 
with the date of .commencement of this Act shall be excluded. 
(4) Any interest cbarged or paid or purporting to have been charged. 
or paid, and any proceeding, act or thing taken or done or purporting 
to have been taken or done for charging or paying any interest, under 
IS the provisions of the general sales tax law of any State read with section 
9 of the principal Act, before the commencement of this Act, shall be 
deemed to be and to have always been as validly charged, paid, taken 
or done as if the amendment made by clause (b) of section 6 had been 
in force when such interest was charged or paid or when such proceeding, 
20 act or thing was taken or done. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, "general sales tax law" 
shall have the same meaning as in the principal Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, formulates the principles for deter-
mimng when a sale or purchase of goods takes place in the course of inter-
State trade or commerce or outside a State ':>r in the course of import into, 
or export from, India. The Act also provides for the levy, assessment and 
collection of tax on sales of goods in the course of inter-State trade or 
commerce. Further, the Act declares certain goods to be of special im-
portance in inter-State trade or commerce and specifies the restrictions 
and conditions to which State laws relating to sales tax shall be subject 
in regard to the levy of tax on the sale or purchase of such goods. 
2. According to section 5(1) of the Central Sales Tax Act, a sale or 
purchase of goods can qualify as a sale in the course of eXl»rt of the goods 
out of the territory of India only if the sale or purchase has either occasion-
ed such export or is by a transfer of documents of title to the goods after 
the goods have crossed the customs frontiers of India. The Supreme 
Court has held (vide MoM. Serajuddin 'os. State of Orissa, 36 S.T.C., 136) 
that the sale by an Indian exporter from India to the foreign importer 
alone qualifies as a sale which has occasioned the export of the goods. 
According to the Export Control Orders, exp:>rts of certain goods can be 
made only by specified agencies such as the state Trading Corporation. 
In other cases also, manufacturers of goods, particularly in the small scale 
and m.ediwn sectors, have to depend upon some experienced export house 
for exporting the goods because special expertise is needed for carrying on 
export trade. A sale of goods made to an export canalising agency such 
as the State Trading Corporation or to an export house to enable such 
agency or export house to export those goods in compliance with an 
existing contract or order is inextricably connected with the export of the 
goods. Further. if such sales do not qualify as sales in the course of ex-
port, they wouln be liable to State sales tax and there would be a corres-
ponding increase in the price of the goods. This would make our exports 
uncompetitive in the fiercely competitive international markets. It is, 
therefore, prop:>sed to amend, with effect from the beginning of the cur-
rent financial year, section 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act to provide that 
the last sale or purchase of any goods preceding the sale or purchase 
occasioning export of those goods out of the territory of India. shall also 
be deemed to be in the course of such export if such last sale or purchase 
took place after, and was for the purpose of complying with, the agree-
ment or order for, or in relation to, such export. 
3. Sub-section (2) of section 9 of the Central Sales Tax Act empowers 
the State sales tax authorities to assess, re-assess, collect ana enforce pay-
ment of Central sales tax. The sub-section also authorises the authorities 
under the State sales tax laws to exercise all the powers which they have 
under those laws (including, inter alia, the power to impose penalties) 
for the purpose of the Central Sales Tax Act also. In Khemka " Co. 
(Agencies) Private Ltd. vs. State of Orissa (31) S.T.C., 1)71), the Supreme 
8 

9 
Court, by a majority of 3:2, held that the provisions of the State sales tax 
laws as to penalties do not apply for purposes of the Central sales tax. In 
view ol! this judgment, the State Governments are faced with the prob-
lem of having to refund the amounts collected in the past by way of pen-
alties. The judgment has also resulted in a vacuum being created in re-
gard to levy of penalties. It is, therefore, necessary to amend section 9 of 
the Central Sales Tax Act to provide expressly that the provisions relat-
ing to offences and penalties under the general sales tax law of each 
State shall, with necessary modifications, apply in relation to the assess-
ment, re-assessment, collection and the enforcement of "tax ur.der the 
Central Sales Tax Act. It is also necessary to validate the penalt'es which 
have been levied in the past, for the purposes of the Central Sales Tax 
Act, on the basis of the provisions of the State sales tax laws. 
4. It is proposed to avail of the present opportunity to declare crude 
oil and certain cereals and pulses as goods of special importance in the 
course of inter-State trade or (..'Ommerce and to make certain other amend-
ments to remove difficulties which have been experienced in the adminis-
tration of the Act. 
5. The· Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. The notes on clauses 
explain the provisions of the Bill. 
NEW DEUlIj 
The 18th August, 1976. PRANAB MUKHERJEE. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 274 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 2313175·ST (Vol. III), dated the 21st August, 1976 
from Shri Pranab Kumar Mukherjee, Minister of Revenue and Banking 
~o the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been apprised of· the subject matter of the Bill 
further to amend the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 has been pleased to re-
commend in pursuance of clause (1) of article 117 and clause (1) of arti-
cle 274 of the Constitution of India. the introduction of the Bill in Lok 
Sabha. 

Notes on clauses 
Clause 2.-Sub-clause fa) seeks to insert definitions of the expressions 
"business" and "crossing the customs frontiers of India". 
The definition of "business" is for making it clear that a dealer carry-
ing on' a business would be liable to tax under this Act whether he carrIes 
on such business with or without profit motive. 
The expression "customs frontiers of India" is used in section 5 ·:>f the 
Act. In the absence of a definition, "customs fronters" has been inter-
preted to be co-terminus with the extent of the territorial waters. This 
gives rise to practical difficulties as in many cases it would be difficult to 
determine the question whether at the time of the sale or purchase the 
goods have entered or crossen the territorial waters. The actual checking 
of the goods takes place in' the customs station and not at the edge of the 
territorial waters. Hence, it is proposed to define the expression "crossing 
the customs frontiers of India" as meaning "crossing the limits of the area 
of a customs station in which imported goods or export goods are ordinarily 
kept before clearance by customs authorities". 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to substitute the existing definition of the term 
"dealer" by a new comprehensive definition. 
CLause 3.-This clause seeks to insert with retrospective effect from 
1-4-76 a new sub-section (3) in section 5. The new sub-section provides 
that the last sale or purchase of any goods preceding the sale or purchase 
occasioning export of those goods out Qf the territory of India shall also 
be deemed to be in the course ot such export if such last sale or purchase 
took place after, and was for the purpose of complying wah the agreement 
or order for, or in relation to. such export. 
Clause 4.-This clause seeks to amend, with retrospective effect from 
1-4-76, sub-section (1) of section 6 to provide that the sales of goods 
which qualify as sales in the course of export out of the territory of Inc\ia 
under suh-section (3) as proposed to be inserted in section 5 by clause 3 
of the Bill shall not be liable to Central sales tax. 
Clause 5.-This clause seeks to amend section 7 to enable the amount 
of security to be demanded being computed in the case of a dealer who 
applies for registration under section 7 (2) of the Act. The amount of 
security in such a case shall not exceed the sum equal to the tax which 
would have been levied on sales to such dealer in the course of inter-State 
trade or commerce if such dealer had not been registered under the Act. 
The security cannot be demanded unless the dealer has ben given an oppor-
tunity of being heard. 
Clause 6.-Sub-clause (a) of this clause seeks to plug a lacuna and pr0-
vide that where a subsequent sale not exempt from tax under section 
6(2) of the Act is made by an unregistered dealer, the tax will be collected 
in the State from which such subsequent sale is effected. 
10 

II 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to amend sub-section (2) of aection 9 retrospect-
ively to make it clear that provisions relating to charging or payment of 
interest in the general sales tax law of the State are applicable for the 
purposes of the Central Sales Tax Act. 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to insert a new sub-section (2A) in section 9 to 
provide that provisions relating to offences and penalties (including 
provisions relating to penalties in lieu of prosecution for an offence or 
in additi<.:m to the penalties or punishment for an offence but excluding 
the provisions relating to matters provided for in sections 10 and lOA) 
of the general sales tax law of each State shall with necessary modi-
fications apply in relation to the assessment, re-assessment, collection 
and enforcement of payment of any tax required to be collected under 
this Act. 
Clause 7.-Thi3 clause seeks to amend with effect from 1-9-76 section 
14 of the Act to declare "crude oil" and certain cereals and pulses as goods 
of special importance in Inter-State trade or commerce. 
C£ause B.-This clause seeks to insert with effect from 1·9-76 two new 
clauses (c) and (d) in section 15 of the Act t<) make it clear that there will 
be no double taxation on paddy and rice produced from such paddy and 
that pulses whether whole or separated and whether with or without husk 
shall be treated as a single commodity for the purposes of levy of sales 
tax by States. 
CLause 9.-This clause seeks to make applicable all the provisions relat-
ing to penalties (including provisions relating to penalties in lieu of pro-
secution for an offence or in addition to the penalties or punishment on con-
viction for an 'offence but excluding the provisions relating to matters pro-
vided for in secticms 10 and lOA of the Act and the provisions relating to 
offences) of the general sales tax law of each State for the purpose of 
assessment, re-assessment, collection and enforcement of payment of any 
tax required to be collected under this Act in the past. The clause also 
provides for the validation of any penalties imposed, proceedings. acts, or 
things taken or done, interest charged or paid or purporting to have been 
charged or paid in the past. 
It has been made clear that a person shall not be prevented from ques-
tioning the imposition or collection of any penalty or any proceeding, act 
or thing in connection therewith or from claiming any refund in accor-
dance with the provisions of the Act read with the provisions of sub-clause 
(a) of this clause. It has also been provided that in computing the period 
of limitation, if any, the period commencing on the 27th day of February, 
1975 (being the date on which the Supreme Court delivered its judginent 
in Khemka's case) and ending with the date of commencement of this Act 
shall be excluded. 

Definitions. 
Liability 
to tax 
on 
inter_ 
State 
sales. 
Registra-
tion of 
dealers. 
Levy and 
collection 
of tax ant 
penal tieL 
ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE CENTRAL SALES TAX ACT, 1956 
(74 OF 1956) 
• • • • • 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(b) "dealer" means any person who carries on the business of 
buying or selling goods, and includes a Government which canies on 
such business; 
• • • • • 
6. (1) Subject to the other proviSions contained in this Act, every 
dealer shall, with effect from such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the OfticialGazette, appoint, not being earlier than thirty 
days from the date of such notification, be liable to pay tax under this Act 
on all sales of goods other than electrical energy effected by him in the 
course of inter-State trade or commerce during any year on and from the 
date so notified. 
• • • • • 
7. (1) • • • • • 
(3B) No dealer shall be required to furnish any security under sub-
section (2A) or an} security or additional security under sub-section 
(3A) by the authority referred to therein, unless he has been given an 
opportunity of being heard and the amount of security that may be re-
quired to be furnished by any dealer under either of the aforesaid sub-
sections or the aggregate of the amount of such security and the amount 
of additional security that may be required to be furnished by any dealer 
under sub-section (3A), shall in no case exceed the tax payable, in ac-
cordance with the estimate of such authority, on the turnover of the 
dealer for the year in which such security or, as the case may be, addi-
tional security is required to be furnished 
• • • • • 
t. (1) The tax payable by any dealer under this Act on sales of goods 
effected by him in the course of inter-State trade or commerce, whether 
such sales fall within clause (a) or clause (b) o~ section 3, shall be levied 
by the Government of India and the tax so levied shall be collected by 
that Gove;-nment in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2), in 
the State from which the movement of the goods commenced: 
Provicied that, in the case of a sale of goods during their movement 
from one State to another, being a sale subsequent to the first sale in res-
pect of the same goods, the tax shall, where such sale does not fall 
within sub-section (2) of section 6, be levied and collected in the State 
12 

from which the registered dealer effecting the subsequent sale obtained 
or, as the case may be, could have obtained, the form prescribed for the 
purposes of clause (a) of sub-section (4) of section 8 in connection with 
the purchase of such goods. 
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, the authorities for the time being empowered to assess, re-
assess, collect and enforce payment of any tax under the general sales 
tax law of the appropriate State shall, on behalf of the Government of 
India, assess, re-assess, collect and enforce payment of tax, including any 
penalty, payable by a dealer under this Act as if the tax or penalty pay-
able by such a dealer under this Act is a tax or penalty payable under 
the general sales tax law of the State; and for this ~purpose they may 
exercise all or any of the powers they have under the general sales tax law 
of the State; and the provisions of such law, including provisions relating 
to returns, provisional assessment, advance payment of tax, registration 
of the transferee of any bUSiness, imposition of the tax liability of a 
person carrying on business on the transferee of, or successor to, such 
business, transfer of liability of any firm or Hindu undivided family to 
pay tax in the event of the dissolution of such firm or partition of such 
family, recovery of, tax from third parties. appeals, reviews, revisions, 
references, refunds, rebates, penalties, compounding of offences and treat-
ment of documents furnished by a dealer as confidential, shall apply accord-
ingly: 
Provided that if in any State or part thereof there is no general sales 
tax law in force, the Central Government may, by rQles made in this 
behalf, make necessary provision fOlr all or any cYf the matters speoifted 
in this sub-section. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. 
(Sh.,.i Pranab Kumar Jlukherjee, 
Mini8ter of Revenue and Banking). 