THE PREVENTIVE DETENTION (SECOND AMEND~ 
KENT) BILL, 1952 
r A 8 INTRODUCED IN TIlB HOUSE OF THE PROPI,B] 
A 
BILJ~ 
further to amend the Preventive Detention Act, 1950. 
BB it enacted by Parliament aA follows:-
1. Short Utle aDCl commacemlllt.-(l) This Act may be ('ailed the 
Preventive Detention (Second Amendment) Act, 1952. 
(S) It shall come into foree on i'uC'h date as t·heCentral Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 5 
2 • .&mendmen'oh8Ctlon 1, Act IV of 196O.-ln lIub·sect;on (.1) of section 
1 of tile Preventive Detention Aci, 1950 (hel"einaiter rp.ferred to as the 
principal Act), for the words and figures "hit day of October, 1952" 
the words and figures "31st day of December, 1954" shall be substituted. 
8. bfndment oj aeetion B, .Act IV of 19&O.-ln section 2 (Jf the 10 
principal Act, in dause (a), for the words "Chip.f CommiRsioner" the words 
"Lieutenant-Governor or, as the ·case mllY be, the Chief Commissioner" 
aban be substituted. 
. '. t. Amendment of .ection 3, Act IV of 1960.-1n section' 3 of . the 
principal Act,- 15 
(I) to Buh·section (3), the following words shall be added at the 
end, namely:-
"and no I!uch order made nfter the commencement of the 
Preventive Dp-tention "'(&iMnd Amendment) Act, 1952, alM1 
remain in force for more than fifteen days after the making 20 
thereof unlesl1 in the meantime it has been approved by the 
State Government."; 
(ji) after sub· section (.'l), the following sub·section shall be in· 
serted, namely:-
"(4) When any order is made or approved by the St.ate Gov· 25. 
ernment under this section, the Stnte Government sha.ll, as soon 
as ma.y be, report th~ fact to the Central Government together 
with thtl groundp on which the order has been made and such· 
other particulars as in the opinion of the State Government have 
&: bearill~ on the neceslity for the order." SC) 
a. Amendmat of section 8, Act IV of 19&O.-Section 6 of the principal 
Act shall b~ renumbered as sub·section (1) thereof and after that Bub·section 
8S 90 renumbered. the following Bub·section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898) every offence under clause (b) of 35 
Bub·section (1) Bba.l! be cognizable." 

2 
6. AmeDdment of lectioD 10, Act IV of 1950.-1n sub·section (1) of 
section 10 of the principal Act, for the words. "if in any partinulaf case it 
eonsiders it· e88entild" the words "if in any particular case it considers 
it essentinl 80 to do or if the person concerned desires to be heard," shall 
6 be 8ubstnuted.: .• 
10 
15 
7. IDIwtiOD of Dew aectlOll lU, ID Aot IV of 19SO.-After se'}tion 12 
of the princ.ipal Act, the following sectJon shall be jnserted" namely:-
"12A. Mazimum period of qetention.-(l) The maximum period 
for which any person may be detained in purSURnce of any detentioll 
order which has been confinnM' 'under section 11 shall be twelve 
months from the date on which the said order has been so confirmed. 
(2) Notwithstanding anythip, qontained in sub·seotion (1), every 
detention order which hus been confirmed under section 11 before the 
commencement af the Preventive Deteution (SeccMld Amendment) Act. 
1952. shall, unless a shorter peJ'.i~ js 'specified in the order. 'continue 
to remain in force until the 1st dRy of AI?ril, 1953, or, wltil the ex· 
piration of twelve months from the dAte on which it was. confirmed 
under section 11, whichever penoc'1of detention expires later. ' 
(.':1) The provisions of sub·sectlion (9) shall have eHec.t not'Yith. 
standing anything to' the eontrary contained in section 3 ol the 
Preventive Detention (Amendment,Act, 1952 (XXXIV of 1052). but 
nothing coutaim'd in this seotion shall affect the l,ower of the appto· 
prin~e Government to revoke or JIlodify the deteution order ,at:nny 
earlier time." 
25 8. AmelLdmeat of IIctloa 18, Act lY of 1915O.-In,sub-secnon (2) o~ 
aeotion 13 of the principal Act. for the word "revOcation" the words 
Ilrevoca'tioD or expiry'! shall be 8I1bstitutea. 
'~:" 

3 
STATEMENT OF O,BJECTS· AND REASONS 
. The Preventive Detention Aet, 1950, is due to expire on the 1st 
-October, 1952. The primary reason for ,jibe enactment of this legislation 
was to protect the country against activitie~ intended to subvert the Con-
-stitution and the maintenance of law and order or 'to interfere with the 
ulaintenance of Supplies and Services essential to the community .. Attempts 
to do so, though oOllsiderably reduoed jn tempo; have not ceased and it 18 
considered essential that the powers conferred by the Preventive Detention 
Act should be continued. Instead of going' to Parliament year after year for 
th(l extension of the life of the Act, it is proposed to extend its life up to 31st 
December, 1954. At the samt' time, a maximum period of detention bas 
been provided in the BiU, so that no person will hereafter be detained 
for mor" than twelve months from the date of confirmation of the deten-
tion order, while those already in detention may be detained until the 1st. 
April, 1~58 or until the expiry of twelve months from the date On which 
their detention orders were confirmed, whichever period expires later. 
"rhe Bill also contains the following other main provisions:-
(I) The existing Act authorises district magistrates, additional 
district magistrates special!y empowered in this hehalf by the State 
Government, Commissioners of Police in Bombay, Ca.lcutta, ){BdrRs 
and Hyclerabad und Colledors ·in 1ryderabad State to paRS detention 
orders. These orders have to be reported by thl'm for the informa-
tion of the State Government but are not I>ubject to confirmation. 
Provision has now been made that the orders passed by them here-
after shall be suhject to the approval of the State Governments 
within a period of fifteen days. 
(ii) 'fa enable the Central Government effectively ~o discharge, 
whef8 neoessary, its functions under section 13 of the Act, p~ovision 
has been made (or a copy of the order of detention issued or approved 
by State Goveruments to be sent to the Central Government. 
(iiI) The Act provides that an Advisory Boai'd may heAr 0. detenu 
in person if in any pat1iiclllat CBle it considers it essential to do so. 
In addition, vroviRion has IIQW been ~Bde in tQ.e 13m th~t a detenu 
shall be heard in person if he desires to be so heard. 
(iv) It has re~ently been pointed out by ~ High Court that 0laus8 
(b) of section 6 of the Act does not permit the attest of atf absconding 
person wherever he is found because the offence under that clause 
is not cognizable and there is no knowing where the absconder will 
discover himself And the police officer arresting him may not have 
the detention order with him in all calles. To obviate this difficulty, 
it is now being provided that the offence shall be cogniz,able. 
The other amendments Bre of B minor character. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 8rd July, 19ti2. 
KAIDA.S ~ATH KA'fJU. 

4 
ANNEXURJ<.: 
EXTRACTS FROM THE PREVENTIVE DETENTION ACT, 1950 (IV OF 1900) 
Section 1(8) 
• • • • * ... 
(3) It shall ceose to have effect on the 1st day of October, 1952, save! 
as respects thinglf done or omitted to be done before that date. 
Section I(a) 
• • • • * 
(4) "State Government" meanB, in relation to a Part C StatE', the-
Chief Commissioner of the State; 
• • • • * ... 
Section 8(8) 
• • • • * ... 
(3) When any order is made under this section by an officer mentioned" 
in Bub·seation (2), he shall forthwith report the fact to the State Govern· 
ment to which he is subordinate together with the grounds on which the 
order 4a8 been made and such other pllt'ticulars as in his opinion have a 
bearing on the necessity for the order. 
• • • • * ... 
hctton 10(1) 
10. Procedure of Advilory BO&I'48.-(1) 'fhe Advisory Board shall, after 
considering the materials placed before it and, after calliol for Buch further 
mfomlation, liS it may deem" necessary from the appropriate Government 
or from the pen;on concerned, and if 10 any particular O&'8e it considers it 
essentiul aft~r hearing him in person submit its report to the o"ppropriate 
liovernmt'ut within ten weeks from the date specified in" Bub· section (2) of 
lection 9. 
• • • • * • SectlOa 18(2) 
• • • • * • 
(2) The revocation of a detention order shall not bar the making of Ii 
fresh detention order under section a against the lame person. 
-. • • • * ... 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPl .. E 
A 
BILL 
further to a.mend the Preventive Detention Act, 1950 
(Dr. KauaB NatA Katju, 
M iniBter Jor Horne Affair8) 