Bill No. " of 19S7 
THE CAPITAL ISSUES (CONTROL) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

Bill No. &t of 19$1 
THE CAPITAL ISSUES (CONTROL) AMENDMENT 
BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amen.d the Capital Issues (Control) Act, 1947. 
BE it enacted. by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Repubtic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Capital Issues (Control) Amend- Short title. 
ment Act, 1957. 
19 of 1947. S Z. In the Capital Issues (Control) Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred S;bltltution 
to as the principal Act), for section 2, the following section shall be ~ec~= for 
lor 19S6. 10 
substituted, namely: _ section 2. 
'2. (I) In this Act, unl,ss the context otherwise requires,- Definitions 
and interpre-
(a) "company" means a company as defined in section 3 tation. 
of the Companies Act, 1956, and includes a foreign company 
within the meaning of section 591 of that Act; 
(b) "issue of capital" means the issuing or creation of 
any securities whether for cash or otherwise, and includes 
the capitalisation of profits or reserves for the purpose of • 
IS converting partly paid-up shares into fully paid-up shares 
or increasing the par value of shares already issued; 
(c) "private company" means a private company as 
defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956; 

2 
(d) "prospectus" means any prospectus, notice, circular, 
advertisement or other document inviting offers from the 
public for the subscription or purchase of any securities of 
a company; 
(e) "securities" means any of the following instruments 5 
issued or to be issued, or created or to be created, by or for 
the benefit of a company, namely:-
(i) shares, stocks and bonds; 
(ii) debentures; 
(iii) mortgage deeds, instruments of pawn, pledge 10 
or hypothecation and any other instruments, creating or 
evidencing a charge or lien on the assets of the com-
pany; and . 
(iv) instruments acknowledging loan to or indebted-
ness of the company and guaranteed by a third party or IS 
entered into jointly with a third party; 
(1) "States" means the territories of India to which this 
. Act extends. 
(2) Any reference in this Act to offering securities to the 
public shall be construed as in<?luding a reference to offering 20 
them to any section of the public, whether selected as mempers, 
debenture-holders or holders of any other securities of the com-
pany concerned or as clients of the person issuing any prospectus 
in relation to such securities, or selected in any other manner: 
Provided that the foregoing provisions shall not be taken as 25 
requiring any offer to be treated as made to the publi: if it can 
properly be regarded, in all the circumstances, as not being 
calculated to result directly or indirectly in the securities becom-
ing available for the subscription or purchase by persons other 
than those receiving the offer, or otherwise as being a domestic 30 
concern of the persons making or receiving it.'. 
Amendment 3. In section 3 of the principal Act, after sub-section (5), the 
oflcctiOn 3· following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:-
"(6) The Central Government may by order at any time-
(a) revoke the eonsent or recognition accorded under 3S 
any of the provisions of this section; or 

3 
(b) where such consent or recognition has been qualified 
with any conditions, vary all or any of those conditions: 
Provided that before an order under this sub-section is 
made the company concerned shall be given a reasonable 
5 opportunity of showing cause why such order should not be 
made. 
(7) Where an order has been made under sub-section (6) • 
the Central Government shall, upon the request of the company 
concerned, communicate to it in writing the reasons for such 
10 order.". 
20 
30 
4. For section 4 of the principal Act, the following section· shall Substitution 
of new be substituted, namely: - section for 
section 4. 
"4. (1) No person shall circulate any offer, being a public Control of 
offer, in the States for the subscription, or purchase of any advetrtlfse-men 0 
securities unless consent or recognition has been accorded by orfe: s of 
the Central Government under this Act to the issue or creation :~~i:l;:i~~: 
of such securities and a statement has been made to that effect in etc. 
the offer. 
(2) No company shall circulate any offer, being an offer to 
existing holders of the securities of that company or to existing 
holders of the securities of any other company specified in the 
offer, in the States for the subscription or purchase of any 
securities of such company unless recognition has been accorded 
by the Central Government under this Act to the issue or crea-
tion of such securities and a statement has been made to that 
effect in the offer. 
(3) No person shall without the consent of the Central Gov-
ernment circulate any offer, being a public offer, in the States 
for the sale of any securities issued or created with the consent 
or recognition of the Central Government if such issue or crea-
tion was made by a private company or if the order according 
consent or recognition contained a condition that the securities 
should be privately subscribed." 
5. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the Amendment 
word and figure "section 4" in both the places where they occur, the of section 6. 
35 words and figure "or section 5" shall be inserted. 

Substitution 
of new 
section for 
section 7. 
Power to 
call for in-
formation. 
4 
6. For section 7 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"7. Any officer authorised in this behalf by the Central Gov-
ernment may, for the purpose of inquiring into the correctness 
of any statement made in an application for consent or recogni- S 
tion to an issue of capital or for the purpose of ascertaining 
whether or not the requirements of any condition attached to an 
order according such consent or recognition have been complied 
with or for the purpose of obtaining particulars as to the total 
capital issued or for any other purposes of this Act, require any 10 
company or any officer of a company to submit and furnish to 
him within such time as may be specified in the requisition, such 
accounts, books or other documents and such infonnation as he 
may reasonably think necessary.". 
~~:~ 7. In section 8 of the principal Act, after the words "issue of 15 
Amendment 
capital", the words "or in connection with any of the other provi-
sions of this Act", shall be inserted. 
of~aectioD I:Z· 8. Section 12 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-
section (1) of that section and a.fter the said sub-section as so re- 20 
numbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
II (2) All rules made under this sectton shall be laid for not 
less than thirty days before each House of Parliament as soon 
as possible after they are made and shall be subject to such 
modifications as Parliament may make during the session im-
mediately following.". 25 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Capital Issues (Control) Act, 1947, does not specify that capi-
talisation of reserves for the purpose of crediting partly paid shares 
as fully paid or for increasing the par value of shares already issued, 
requires prior permission. This Bill, therefore, seeks to clarify the 
position in this regard. 
2. It has been the intention, ever since the inception of control on 
capital issues, that the execution of mortgages or hypothecations 
should require prior approval under the Act. As the expression 
'other instruments' occurring in section 2 (b) (iii) of the Act is not 
sufficiently clear and has given room for doubts, it is proposed to put 
the matter beyond doubt by amplifying the definition of the term 
'securities' in section 2 (b) so as to cover the transactions mentioned 
above. Similarly opportunity has now been taken to define the 
expressions 'company', 'prospectus', etc., which the Act has so far left 
undefined and also for providing for certain other minor but relevant 
lTlGtters such as taking powers for revoking or varying consent 
already accorded, condoning offences under section 5 of the Act and 
prohibition of the giving of false information in connection with any 
of the provisions of the Act. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
NEW DELIu; 
The 6th Septembe7', 1957. 

Definitions. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CAPITAL ISSUES (CoNTROL) Acr, 1944 (29 OF 1947) 
• • • • • • • 
2. In this Act,-
(a) "issue of capital" means the issuing of any securities 
whether for cash or otherwise; 
(b) "securities" means any of the following instruments issued, 
or to be issued, by or for the benefit of a company, whe-
ther incorporated in the States or not, namely:-
(i) shares, stocks and bonds; 
(ii) debentures; 
(iii) other instruments creating a charge or lien on the assets 
of the company; and 
(iv) instruments acknowledging loan to or indebtedness of the 
company and guaranteed by a third party or entered 
into jointly with a third party; 
(c) "States" means the territories comprised within the States 
to which this Act extends. 
• • • * * * * 
Control ove~ 4. No person shall issue in the States any prospectus or other 
prospectuses d ff· f b· t· bI· Iff· f 1 and other ocument 0 ermg or su scrIp JOn or pu IC y 0 ermg or sa e any 
advertise- securities which does not include a statement that the consent or ments. recognition, as the case may be, of the Central Government has 
Power to ex-
empt and 1O 
co:ldone con-
t raventlons. 
been obtained to the issue or offer of the securities, and no person 
shall without the consent of the Central Government issue in the 
States any document publicly offering for sale any security issued 
with the consent or recognition of the Central Government if such 
issue was made by a private company or if the order according its 
consent or recognition contained a condition that the securities 
should be privately supscribed. 
• • • • • * • 
6. (1) 
• • • 
I(: ':1 ~:t 
(2) The Central Government msy by order condone a contraven-
tion of any of the pr~visions of section 3 or section 4, and on the 
making of such order the provisions of this Act shall have effect as 
6 

7 
if an exemption had been granted under sub-section (1) of this 
section in respect of the thing done or omitted to be done in contra-
vention of ~ection 3 or section 4, as the case may be. 
7. Any officer authorized in this behalt by the Central Govern- Powe;ro c~1I 
ment may, for the purpose of enquiring into the correctness of any for. infor-
statement made in an application for consent or recognition to an mahon. 
issue of capital or for the purpose of ascertaining }Y'hether or not the 
requirements of any condition attached to an order according such 
consent or recognition have been complied with, require any company, 
or any officer of a company, which has made such application or 
obtained such order to submit to him such accounts, books or other 
documents, or to furnish to him such information, as he may reason-
ably think necessary. 
8. No person shell, when complying with any requisition under Falte 
section 7 or when making any application for consent or recognition menl. 
to an issue of capital, give any information or make any statement 
which he knows, or has reasonable cause to believe, to be false or 
not true in any material particular. 
• • • • • • • • 
state-
12 The Central Government may by notification in the Official Power to 
Gazette make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act and make rules. 
in particular for the levy of fees on applications made to the Central 
Government for its consent . 
• • • • • • • 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
.further to amend the Capital Issues (Control) Act, 1947· 
(Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, 
Minister of Finance). 
GlPND-LS 1-IS31 L.S.-%)-U-S1- 1,600. 
1. 