AS INTRODUCED IN Lox SaBHA

8 DEC. 2006

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
By
Dr. R. SENTHIL, M.P.
EN
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2006. Short title,

2. In article 15 of the Constitution, after clause (5), the following clause shall be Amendment of
5 added, namely:— article 15.

" (6) In making any special provisions for the advancement of any socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes, the State shall not apply or prescribe any criteria including economic
criteria notwithstanding any judgement of any court or authority to the contrary.".


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Article 15 (4) of the Constitution enables the State to make special provisions for the
advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. Accordingly, provision for reservation in jobs
and educational institutions has been made.

The policy of reservation strengthens the concept of equality enshrined in the
Constitution by promoting social equality in our country. The socially and educationally
backward classes of citizens, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes were
marginalized and oppressed for centuries as a result of caste system prevalent in the country.
Even after independence they have not been able to attain the level of economical and
educational advancement enjoyed by the upper caste. It must be realized that discrimination
on the basic of caste threatens the very fabric of our nation and therefore, safeguards for
Teservation which is a tool for promoting social equity should finda place in our Constitution.

Even after sixty years of affirmative action, the caste based discrimination and caste
based distinction exist on a large scale in our society. In its present form, it has not succeeded
in building capabilities and offering opportunities to those it has sought to benefit. To make
matters worse, efforts are being made to dilute the reservation system by introducing economic
criteria and concept of ‘creamy layer’.

It must be remembered that introducing economic or any criteria other than social and
educational backwardness will only nullify the object of this affirmative action. The economic
criterion is valid only in casteless societies. Since essence of discrimination and
marginalization in the Indian society is based on caste, exclusion of backward classes from
getting benefits under reservation on the basis of economic criteria or in the form of ‘creamy
layer’ or in any other form would further marginalize the citizens belonging to these classes.

Hence this Bill.

New Deu; R. SENTHIL.
November 8, 2006.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * * * *

15. (7) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion,
race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.

(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any
of them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to—

(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public entertainment,
or

(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort
maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of the general
public.

(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special provision
for women and children.

(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of article 29 shall prevent the State from
making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward
classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.

(5) Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) of clause (/) of article 19 shall prevent
the State from making any special provision, by law, for the advancement of any socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes in so far as such special provisions relate to their admission to educational institutions
including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State, other than
the minority educational institutions referred to in clause (/) of article 30.

* * * * * * *

Prohibition of
discrimination
on grounds of
religion, race,
caste, Sex OF

place of birth.


LOK SABHA

Ff
f

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Dr. R. Senthil, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—3263LS(S-3)—17. 11.2006.