Bill No. 84-F of 2010
THE  NEW DELHI MUNICIPAL COUNCIL
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT —
LOK  SABHA  ON  7 TH  DECEMBER , 2011
RAJYA SABHA ON 22ND DECEMBER , 2011)
ASSENTED  TO
ON 8TH JANUARY, 2012
ACT NO. 5 OF 2012

2
THE NEW DELHI MUNICIPAL COUNCIL (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2011
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT )
A
BILL
further to amend the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment) Act,
2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in section 4,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1),—
(i) in clause ( b), for the words "three members", the words "two
members" shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause ( d), for the words "two members", the words "four
members" shall be substituted;
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 4.
44 of 1994.
Bill No. 84-F of 2010

(iii) after clause ( d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(e) the Member of Parliament, representing constituency which
comprises wholly or partly the New Delhi area.";
(b) sub-section ( 2) shall be omitted;
(c) for sub-section ( 3), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"(3) Out of the thirteen members referred to in sub-section ( 1), there
shall be, at least,—
(a) three members who are women;
(b) two members belonging to the Scheduled Castes, out of which
one member shall be from the members nominated under clause ( d) of
sub-section ( 1).".
3. In section 25 of the principal Act, for  sub-section ( 1), the following sub-
section shall be substituted, namely:—
‘‘(1) The meetings of the Council shall be presided over, in the following
order, by,—
(a) the  Chief Minister of Delhi, if he is a member of the Legislative
Assembly of Delhi representing the constituency which comprises wholly
or partly the New Delhi area, and attends the meeting being  a member of the
Council under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 4; or
(b) the Union Minister, if he is a Member of Parliament representing
the constituency which comprises wholly or partly the New Delhi area, and
attends the meeting being a member of the Council under clause ( e) of sub-
section ( 1) of section 4; or
(c) the Minister in the Government of National Capital Territory of
Delhi, if he is a Member of the Legislative Assembly of Delhi representing
the constituency which comprises wholly or partly the New Delhi area, and
attends the meeting being a member of the Council under clause ( b)  of sub-
section ( 1) of section 4; or
(d) the Member of Parliament not being a Minister for the Union
representing the constituency which comprises wholly or partly the
New Delhi area, and attends the meeting being a member of the Council
under clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1) of section 4; or
(e) the Chairperson of the Council.’’.
Amendment
of section 25.
2

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
GMGIPMRND—3790RS(S3)—10-01-2012.