1
THE NATIONAL WITNESS PROTECTION BILL, 2016
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for protection of identity of threatened witnesses in criminal cases involving
serious offences and to provide for procedure and mechanism for such protection
and  for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the National Witness Protection Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Bill No. 84 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "concealment of identity of witness" includes any condition prohibiting
publication or revealing, in any manner, directly or indirectly, of the name, address and
other particulars relating to a witness which may lead to the identification of the
witness;
(c) "competent authority" means Member-Secretary of the National Legal
Services Authority or State Legal Services Authority, as the case may be;
(d) "family member" includes parents, spouse, siblings, children, and grand
children of the witness;
(e) "in-camera proceeding" means proceeding wherein the public and press are
not allowed to participate;
(f) "National Legal Services Authority" means the National Legal Services
Authority constituted under the Legal Services Authority Act, 1987;
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(h) "State Legal Service Authority" means the State Legal Services Authority
constituted under the Legal Services Authority Act, 1987.
(i) "threat analysis report" means a detailed report prepared by designated police
officers of the District/Unit investigating the case reflecting the seriousness and
credibility of the threat perception to a witness or his family members containing
specific details about the nature of threats faced by the witness or his family members
to their life, reputation or property;
(j) "witness" means any person, who possesses information or document about
any crime regarded by the competent authority as being material to any criminal
proceeding and who has made a statement or who has given or agreed to give evidence
in relation to such proceeding;
(k) "witness protection application" means an application moved by the witness
in the prescribed form before a competent authority for seeking witness protection
order; and
(l) "witness protection order" means an order passed by the competent authority
detailing the steps to be taken for ensuring the safety of life, reputation or property of
witness and his family members and shall include in interim order, if any, passed during
the pendency of witness protection application.
3. (1) During the course of investigation of any offence, the witness may apply for
witness protection order at the court in which the proceedings are being heard or before the
competent authority, as the case may be, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The court or the competent authority, as the case may be, shall, upon receipt of an
application under sub-section (1), call for the threat analysis report and, shall, upon receipt
of report, evaluate the threat to the life, reputation or property of the witness or his family
members or any other person, which it deems fit, to ascertain whether there is necessity to
pass a witness protection order or not.
(3) The threat analysis report shall be submitted within seventy-two hours of the
receipt of application.
Definitions.
39 of 1987.
39 of 1987.
Process of
availing
protection.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(4) During the course of  hearing of the application, the identity of the witness shall not
be revealed to any other person.
(5) It shall be the duty of the competent authority to provide legal aid to the applicant
free of cost.
4. The National Legal Services Authority shall frame policies for witness protection for
effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
5. (1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to formulate measures for the
protection of witness.
(2) Without generality of the foregoing provision, the measures shall include—
(a) concealment of the identity of the witness;
(b) avoidance of face to face contact between the witness and the accused;
(c) compulsory in camera proceedings so as to protect the identity of the witness;
(d) monitoring of the calls and mails of the witness and providing him with an
unlisted number;
(e) installation of security devices like Close Circuit Television (CCTV) at the
witness' place of residence; and
(f) undertaking any other measure issued under the witness protection order to
ensure safety of the witness.
6. The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, designate
a Legal Services Authority to perform, mutatis mutandis, the functions specified under
section 5.
7. Whoever violates the provisions of this Act shall be deemed to have committed the
offence of contempt of court and shall be punished accordingly.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite sums to the appropriate Governments for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
9. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of two years from the date of
commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
National
Legal Services
Authority to
frame policies
for witness
protection.
Measures for
the
protection of
witness.
Appropriate
Government
to designate
Legal Service
Authority to
perform
measures to
protect
witness.
Penalty.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite fund.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

4
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity if anything previously done under that rule.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In recent years organized crime has grown and is becoming stronger and more diverse.
In the course of investigation and prosecution of crime, particularly the more serious and
complex forms of organized crime, it is essential that witnesses, the cornerstones for
successful investigation and prosecution, have trust in criminal justice system. Witnesses
need to have the confidence to come forward to assist law enforcement and prosecutorial
authorities. They need to be assured that they will receive support and protection from
intimidation and the harm that criminal groups may seek to inflict upon them in attempts to
discourage or punish them. The Supreme Court as well as the Law Commission have
emphasized on the need for legislative measures for protection of witnesses.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT  PREMJIBHAI  SOLANKI
February  18, 2016.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for installation of security devices like Closed Circuit
Television at witness' place of residence. Clause 8 provides that the Central Government
shall provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes of the
Act. The expenditure relating to States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of
respective States. The expenditure relating to Union territory shall be incurred from the
Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees
seven hundred crore per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for protection of identity of threatened witnesses in criminal cases involving
serious offences and to provide for procedure and mechanism for such protection
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—66LS(S3)—19.04.2016.