Bill No. 84 of  2023
THE COMPULSORY TEACHING OF LIFESTYLE FOR 
ENVIRONMENT BILL, 2023 
By
Dඋ. Mൺඇඈඃ Rൺඃඈඋංൺ,  M.P.
ൺ
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of lifestyle environment education in 
all educational institutions and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.
 W ඁൾඋൾൺඌ India has made significant commitment in the UN Climate Change 
Conference (UNFCCC COP26) in Glasgow  on  1st  November  2021  regarding  the  
concept of Lifestyle for the Environment (Life) calling upon the global community 
of individuals and institutions to drive Life as an international mass movement 
towards “mindful and deliberate utilisation, instead of mindless and destructive 
consumption” to protect and preserve the environment.
 Aඇൽ Wඁൾඋൾൺඌ need is to encourage a lifestyle that focuses on mindful and 
deliberate utilization of resources and aims to change the present 'use and dispose 
of consumption habits and encourage individuals to adopt simple changes in their 
daily life that may contribute to climate change.
As ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ

 B ൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
 1. (1) This Act may be called the the Compulsory Teaching of Lifestyle for Environment Act, 2023.  
  ( 2) It shall come into force on such date  as the Central Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
  ( a) “National Centre” means the National Research Centre for Promotion and 
Teaching of Lifestyle Environment Education constituted under section 6;
  ( b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government 
of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
  ( c) “educational institution” means a primary or a middle or a secondary or 
a senior secondary level school or a University or College imparting education to 
children, by whatever name such institution is called but does not include a minority 
educational institution;
  ( d) “environment” includes water, both surface and underground, air and land 
including the surface of the earth, subsoil and the forests (the flora and the fauna) 
and the inter-relationship which exists amongst and between water, air and land, and 
human beings, other living creatures and plants;
  ( e) “lifestyle” means way of living;
  ( f) “lifestyle environment education” means education creating awareness 
of environment and to encourage a lifestyle that focuses on mindful utilization 
of resources and to nudge individual and community to preserve the 
environment; and
  ( g) “prescribed” means  prescribed by rules  made under  this Act.
 3.  From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette specify, the lifestyle environment  education shall be taught as 
a compulsory subject in all educational institutions from such class onwards as 
may be determined by the Central Government on the recommendation of the 
National Centre.
 4.  The appropriate Government shall, immediately after issuance of the 
notification under section 3, issue directions for compulsory teaching of lifestyle 
environment education in educational institutions from such class onwards as it 
may determine, within its jurisdiction.
 5. Subject to such rules, as may be prescribed, the appropriate Government 
shall ensure appointment of such number of teachers with such qualifications, 
as may be specified, for teaching lifestyle environment education in all 
educational institutions.
 6. ( 1) The Central Government shall, within six months of the coming 
into force of the Compulsory Teaching of Lifestyle for Environment Act, 
2023, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a National Centre 
to be known as the National Centre  for Promotion and Teaching of 
Lifestyle Environment Education.
2
Short title and 
commencement.

  ( 2) The National Centre shall consist of such number of  persons, having 
special knowledge or experience in the teaching of lifestyle environment 
education, as the Central Government may deem fit.
 7. The National Centre shall perform the following functions, namely:—
  ( a) recommend to the Central Government the class from which onwards the 
lifestyle environment education shall be taught in educational institutions;
  ( b) recommend to the appropriate Government the qualifications of teachers  
to  be appointed in educational  institutions  for teaching lifestyle environment 
education;
  ( c) recommend to the appropriate Government the institutions which may be 
given recognition for training teachers in lifestyle environment education for the 
purpose of their appointment in educational institutions;
  ( d) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government and the school authorities 
with a view to ensuring effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
 8.  The appropriate Government shall derecognize educational institutions, 
which does not comply with the provisions of section 4, after giving such institution 
a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
 9.  The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by 
Parliament in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
 10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
 11.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
  ( 2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
    
3

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
 Environmental degradation and climate change are global phenomena where 
actions in one part of the world impact ecosystems and populations across the 
globe. Estimates suggest that if requisite action is not taken against the changing 
environment, approximately three billion people globally could experience chronic 
water scarcity. The global economy could lose up to eighteen per cent. of GDP by 
the year 2050.
 Over the last two decades, several macro measures have been implemented 
globally to address environmental degradation and climate change, including policy 
reforms, economic incentives and regulations. Despite their enormous potential, 
actions required at the level of individuals, communities and institutions have 
received limited attention.
 Changing individual and community behaviour alone can make a significant 
dent in the environmental and climate crises. According to the United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP), if one billion people out of the global population 
of eight billion adopt environment-friendly behaviours in their daily lives, global 
carbon emissions could drop by approximately twenty  per cent.
 In this context, the concept of 'Lifestyle for the Environment (LiFE)' was 
introduced by Hon'ble Prime Minister at COP26 in Glasgow on 1st November 2021, 
calling upon the global community of individuals and institutions to drive LiFE as 
an international mass movement towards “mindful and deliberate utilisation, instead 
of mindless and destructive consumption” to protect and preserve the environment.
 The idea behind the LiFE intiative is to put individual and collective duty on 
everyone to live a life that is in tune with Earth and does not harm it. This initiative 
encourages a lifestyle that focuses on mindful and deliberate utilization of resources 
and aims to change the present 'use and dispose of' consumption habits. The idea 
behind is to encourage individuals to adopt simple changes in their daily life that 
can contribute to climate change.
 Another part of the LiFE mission is to use the strength of social networks to bring 
a change in the climate landscape. The mission also plans to create a global army of 
environment enthusiasts who shall be known as 'Pro-Planet People', committed to 
adopting and promoting environment-friendly lifestyles.
 The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for compulsory teaching of lifestyle 
environment education in all educational institutions statutory on the lines of the 
LiFE Mission to encourage individuals to adopt simple changes in their daily life 
that may contribute to climate change.
 Hence this Bill.
   Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං; MANOJ RAJORIA 
March 28, 2023.   
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for appointment of teachers for teaching 
lifestyle environment education in all educational institutions. Clause 6 provides 
for constitution of National Centre for Promotion and Teaching of Lifestyle 
Environment Education by the Central Government. Clause 9 provides for payment 
of adequate funds to the States for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill, 
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore 
will be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred and fifty crore is also 
likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail 
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
ൺ
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of lifestyle environment education in 
all educational institutions and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto.
(Dr. Manoj Rajoria, M.P .)