THE INSURANCE AGENTS WELFARE BILL, 2009
By
SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA, M.P.
A
BILL
to make provisions for the welfare of insurance agents and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Insurance Agents Welfare Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "Fund" means the Insurance Agents Welfare Fund constituted under
section 3 of this Act; and
(ii) the expression "Insurance Agent" shall have the same meaning as is assigned
to it in the Insurance Act, 1938; and
(iii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 84 of 2009
4 of 1938.
Definitions.
5
10
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Fund to be known as the Insurance
Agents Welfare Fund.
(2) The Fund shall consist of contributions from Central Government, the insurance
companies and the insurance agents in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by a Board, consisting of—
(a) the union finance minister, who shall be its ex-officio Chairperson;
(b) two members who shall be representatives of the Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority; and
(c) two members representing the insurance agents who shall be nominated by
the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
the members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Fund shall be utilized for the following purposes:—
(i) payment of adequate compensation to the next of kin of insurance agents in
case of death in harness;
(ii) payment of old age pension at such rate, as may be prescribed, to insurance
agent after he has attained the age of sixty-five years;
(iii) payment of family pension at such rate, as may be prescribed, to the
dependents of the deceased insurance agents;
(iv) payment of premium for medical insurance of the insurance agents and their
families; and
(v) such other purposes as the Board may deem necessary for the welfare of
insurance agents.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Insurance
Agents
Welfare Fund.
in
on of
w.
Power to
make rules.
Utilisation of
the Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The insurance agents play a major role in procuring business and in the growth of the
insurance sector. More than a million people are engaged as insurance agents in the public
sector Life Insurance Corporation alone. Majority of them have opted for this profession as
a full time job. The work requires a lot of time, energy and dedication. The competition
amongst insurance companies for business has tremendously increased after the opening
up of this sector to private players at national level and by permitting foreign direct investment.
It is estimated that seventy five per cent. of the insurance agents earn less than rupees
sixty thousnad per annum which is not sufficient to meet even minimum requirements of a
family. Their contribution to insurance sector is immense in creating assets and increasing
profit of the companies, at the same time providing benefits of insurance to the general
public. Due to absense of any welfare scheme aimed at providing the insurance agents the
necessary social security, they live in pathetic conditions. A portion of profit earned by the
insurance companies through hard work of such agents needs to be devoted for the welfare
of insurance agents and their families. It is the responsibility of the Government in a welfare
state to provide proper medical care, old age pension, family pension, etc. to every citizen of
the country. Therefore, a suitable legislation is urgently required to provide for general
welfare of persons working as agents in the insurance sector.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BASUDEB ACHARIA
July 21, 2009.
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a Fund to be known as the Insurance
Agents Welfare Fund and for the constitution of a Board to administer the Fund. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely
to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to make provisions for the welfare of insurance agents and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Basudeb Acharia, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3943LS(S5)—05.11.2009.