PS DEC ay

As IntropuceD IN Lox SABHA
Bill No. 84 of 2004

THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORY OF ANDAMAN
AND NICOBAR ISLANDS BILL, 2004

By

‘Suri Basupes AcHaRiA, M.P.
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES

PARTI

PRELIMINARY.
CLauses

1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
PART IT

Lecisvative ASSEMBLY
Legislative Assembly and its composition
Qualifications for membership of Legislative Assembly.
Duration of Legislative Assembly.
Session of Legislative Assembly, prorogation and dissolution.
Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Legislative Assembly,

Speaker or Deputy Speaker not to preside while a resolution for his removal from
office is under consideration.

9. Right of Lieutenant Governor to address and send message to Legislative Assembly.
10. Special address by the Lieutenant Governor.

11, Rights of Ministers as respects Legislative Assembly,

12. Oath oraffirmation by members.

13. Voting in Legislative Assembly, power of Assembly to act notwithstanding vacancies
and quorum.

14, Vacation of seats.

15... Disqualifications for membership.

16. Disqualification on ground of defection.

17. Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation or when not qualified
or when disqualified.

Powers, privileges, etc. of members.

Salaries and allowances of members.

Exemption of property of the Union from taxation.

Restrictions on laws passed by Legislative Assembly with respect to certain matters.
Special provisions as to financial Bills.

Procedure as to lapsing of Bills.

Assent to Bills.

Bills reserved for consideration.

PIAA के ०

REBBEBSE


35.

37,

S88

41.

43.

45.

¥BRSSS8 R58

55.

Requirements as to sanction, etc.

Annual financial statement.

Procedure in Legislative Assembly with respect to estimates,

Appropriation Bills.

‘Supplementary, additional or excess grants.

Votes on accounts.

Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by Legislative Assembly.
Rules of procedure.

Official language or languages of the Union territory and language or languages to
be used in Legislative Assembly.

Language to be used for Bills, Act, etc.
Restriction on discussion in the Legislative Assembly.
Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Legislative Assembly.
PARTIII
DELIMITATION OF CONSTITUENCIES:
Election Commission to delimit constituencies.
Power of Election Commission to maintain delimitation orders upto date.
Elections to the Legislative Assembly.

PARTIV
CERTAIN PROVISIONS RELATING TO LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR AND MINISTERS
Matters in which Lieutenant Governor to act in his discretion.
Advice by Ministers.
Other provisions as to Ministers.
Conduct of business.
Duties of Chief Ministers as respects the furnishing of information, etc. to the
Lieutenant Governor.
PART V
MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory.
Contingency Fund of the Union territory.
Audit reports.
Relation of Lieutenant Governor and his Ministers to President.
Period of order made under article and approval thereof by Parliament.
Authorisation of expenditure by President.
Contracts and suits.
Power of President to remove difficulties.
Laying of Rules before Legislative Assembly.
Amendments to the Constitution.
Amendment of section 27A of Act 43 of 1950.


Bill No. 84 of 2004.

THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORY OF ANDAMANAND
NICOBAR ISLANDS BILL, 2004

By
Suet Basuves ACHARIA, M.P.
A

BILL
10 provide for the creation of a Legislative Assembly for the Union territory of Andaman
and Nicobar Islands and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Be itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
PARTI
PRELIMINARY

1. (1) This Act may be called the Government of Union Territory of Andaman and
5 Nicobar Islands Act, 2004,

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:

Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as
10 areference to the coming into force of that provision.

- 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) "article" means an article of the Constitution;

Short title and
commence-
ment,

Definitions.


Legislative
Assembly and
its composi=
Vion,

Qualifications
for member-
ship of
Legislative
Assembly.

Duration of
Legislative
Assembly.

figures of the population of the Union territory as published in relation to the 2001 |

2

(0) "Assembly constituency" means a constituency provided under this Act
the purpose of election to the Legislative Assembly;

(c) "Election Commission" means the Election Commission referred to i
article 324;

(७) "Legislative Assembly" means the Legislative Assembly of the Union
of Andaman and Nicobar Islands;

(०) "Scheduled Castes” in relation to the Union territory means such castes,
races or tribes or parts of or groups within such castes, races or tribes as are deemed
under article 341 of the Constitution to be Scheduled Castes in relation to that Union
territory;

("Scheduled Tribes” in relation to the Union territory means such tribes, races.
or parts of the groups within such tribes or races as are deemed under article 342 to be
Scheduled Tribes in relation to the Union territory; and

(8) "Union territory" means the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands,
PARTI
LeoIsLarive ASSEMBLY

3. (7) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly to be filled by persons
chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies shall be thirty.

(2) For the purposes of election to the Legislative Assembly, the Union territory shall
be divided into single-member assembly constituencies in accordance with the provisions
of Part पी in such manner that the population of each of the constituencies shall, so faras
practicable, be the same throughout the Union territory.

(3) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly, and
the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the
total number of seats in the Assembly as the population of the Scheduled Tribes in the Union
territory bears to the total population of the Union territory and the provisions of article
334 shall apply tosuch reservation.

Explanation.—In this section, the expression "population" means the population as
ascertained in the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published:

Provided that where such figures have not been published, then for the purposes of
elections for the constitution of the first Legislative Assembly under this Act, the provisional

shall be deemed to be the population of the Union territory.

4. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the Legislative Assembly
unless he—

(a) is acitizen of India and makes and subscribes before some person authorised
in that behalf by the Election Commission an oath or affirmation according to the form
set out for the purpose in the Schedule;

(8) is not less than twenty-five years of age; and

(c) possess such other qualifications as may be prescribed in that behalf by or
under any law made by Parliament.

5. The Legislative Assembly, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for five years
from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer and the expiration of the said
period of five years shall operate as a dissolution of the Assembly:


3

Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of Emergency issued under
clause (1) of article 352 is in operation, be extended by the President by order for a period not
exceeding one year at a time and not extending in any case beyond a period of six months
after the Proclamation has ceased to operate.

fa 6. (1) The Lieutenant Governor shall, from time to time, summon the Legislative
Assembly to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene
between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next
session.

(2) The Lieutenant Governor may, from time to time,—
lo (०) prorogue the Assembly;
(6) dissolve the Assembly.

7. (7) The Legislative Assembly shall, as soon as may be, choose two members of the
Assembly to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof and, so often as the office
of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes vacant, the Assembly shall choose another member

1S to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.

(2) A member holding office as Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly—

(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Assembly;

(8) may, at any time by writing under his hand addressed, if such member is the -

20 Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker, and if such member is the Deputy Speaker: to the
Speaker resign his office; and

(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Assembly passed by a
majority of all the then members of the Assembly:

Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved unless atleast
2S fourteen days' notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution:

Provided further that whenever the Assembly is dissolved, the Speaker shall not
vacate his office until immediately before the first meeting of the Assembly after the
dissolution.

(3) While the office of Speaker is vacant the duties of the office shall be performed by
३० the Deputy Speaker or, ifthe office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such member of the
Assembly as may be determined by the rules of procedure of the Assembly.

(4) During the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the Assembly, the Deputy
Speaker, or if he is also absent, such person as may be determined by the rules of procedure
of the Assembly, or if no such person is present, such other person as may be determined by

‘BS the Assembly, shall act as Speaker.

(5) There shall be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly such salaries and allowances as may be respectively fixed by the Legislative
Assembly by law and until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries and allowances
as the Lieutenant Governor may, with the approval of the President, by order determine.

Yo 8. (/) At any sitting of the Legislative Assembly, while any resolution for the removal
of the Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Speaker, or while any resolution for
the removal of the Deputy Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Deputy Speaker,
shall not, though he is present, preside and the provisions of sub-section (4) of section 7
shall apply in relation to every such sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from which

US the Speaker or, as the case may be, the Deputy Speaker is absent.

(2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak in and otherwise to take part in the

proceedings of the Legislative Assembly while any resolution for his removal from office
is under consideration in the Assembly and shall, notwithstanding anything in section 13,

Session of
Legislative
Assembly,
prorogation
and dissolu-
tion.

Speaker or
Deputy
Speaker of
Legislative
Assembly.

Speaker or
Deputy
Speaker not
to preside
while a
resolution for
his removal
from office
under
consideration,



Right of Lt.
Governor to
address and
send message
to Legislative
Assembly.

‘Special address
by the
Lieutenant
Governor,

Rights of
Ministers as
respects
Legislative
Assembly,

Oath or
affirmation by
member,

Voting in
Legislative
Assembly,
power of
Assembly to
act
notwithstanding
vacancies and
quorum.

Vacation of
seats,

4

be entitled to vote only in the first instance on such resolution or on any other matter during.
such proceedings but not in the case of an equality of votes.

9, (/) The Lieutenant Governor may address the Legislative Assembly and for that
purpose require the attendance of members.

(2) The Lieutenant Governor may send message to the Assembly whether with respect
to a Bill then pending in the Assembly or otherwise and when a message is so sent, the
Assembly shall with all convenient despatch consider any matter required by the message to
be taken into consideration.

10. (/) At the commencement of the first session after each general election to the
Legislative Assembly and at the commencement of the first session of each year, the Lieutenant
Governor shall address the Legislative Assembly and inform it of the causes of its summons.

(2) Provision shall be made by rules to be made by the Assembly regulating its
procedure for the allotment of time for discussion of the matters referred to in such address.

11, Every Minister shall have the right to speak in and otherwise to take part in the
proceedings of the Legislative Assembly and to speak in and otherwise to take part in the
proceedings of any committee of the Legislative Assembly of which he may be named a
member, but shall not by virtue of this section be entitled to vote.

|

12. Every member of the Legislative Assembly shall, before taking his seat, make and
subscribe before the Lieutenant Governor, or some person appointed in that behalf by him,
an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Schedule. 20

13. (1) Save as otherwise provided in the act, question at any sitting of the Legislative
Assembly shall be determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting
other than the Speaker or person acting as such

(2) The Speaker or person acting as such shall not vote in the first instance, but shall
have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes. 25

(3) The Legislative Assembly shall have power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in
the membership thereof, and any proceedings in the Legislative Assembly shall be valid
notwithstanding that it is discovered subsequently that some person who was not entitled
so to do, sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings.

(4) The quorum to constitute a meeting of the Legislative Assembly shall be one-third 30
of the total number of members of the Assembly.

(5) If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly there is no quorum. It
shall be the duty of the Speaker, or person acting as such, either to adjourn the Assembly or
to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum,

14. (7) No person shall be a member both of Parliament and of the Legislative Assembly 357
and if a person is chosen a member both of Parliament and of such Assembly, then at the

expiration of such period as is specified in or under the Representation of People Act, 1951, 43 of

and the rules made by the President under clause (2) of article 101 and clause (2) of article 190,

that person's seatsin Parliament shail become vacant, unless he had previously resigned his

seat in the Legislative Assembly. ५०
(2) Ifamember of the Legislative Assembly—

(०) becomes subject to any disqualification mentioned in section 15 or
section 16 for membership of the Assembly, or

(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the Speaker and nis
resignation is accepted by the Speaker, his seat shall thereupon become vacant: us

Provided that in the case of any resignation referred tq clause (b), if from the information
received or otherwise and after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, the Speaker is satisfied
that such resignation is not voluntary or genuine he shall not accept such resignation.


5

(९ If for a period of sixty days a member of the Legislative Assembly is without
Permission ofthe Assembly absent from all meetings thereof, the Assembly may declare hie
‘Seat vacant.

Provided that in computing the said period of sixty days no account shall be taken of
5 any period during which the Assembly is prorogued or is adjourned for more than four
consecutive days.

15. (7) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of Disqualification
the Legislative Assembly — for

(@)ifhe holds any office of profit under the Goverment of India or the Government
(oof any State or the Government of any Union teritory other than an office declared by
law made by Parliament or by the Legislature of any State or by the Legislative Assembly

of any other Union territory not to disqualify its holder; or

(8) if he is for the time being disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a

member of either House of Parliament under the provisions of sub-clause (b), sub-

1S clause (०) or sub-clause (d) of clause (1) of article 102 or of any law made in pursuance
of that article.

(2) For the purpose of the section, a person shall not be deemed to hold an office of
Profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State or the Government of
any Union territory by reason only that he is a Minister either for the Union or for such State
20 or Union territory,

membership.

(3) If any question arises as to whether a member of the Legislative Assembly has
become disqualified for being such a member under the provisions of sub-section (1), the
question shall be referred for the decision of the President and his decision shall be figal,

(A) Before giving any decision on any such question, the President shall obtain the
25 opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion,

16. The provisions of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution shall, subject to the Disqualification
recessary modifications (including modifications for construing reference therein to the on around ot
Legislative Assembly of a State, article 188, article 194 and article 212 as references, ‘fection.
respectively, to the Legislative Assembly, section 12, section 18 and section 37 of this Act),

30 apply to and in relation to the members of the Legislative Assembly as they apply to and in
relation to the members of the Legislative Assembly of a State and accordingly —

(a) the said Tenth Schedule as so modified shall be deemed to form part of this
Act; and

(8) person shall be disqualified for being a member of the Legislative Assembly
35 if he is so disqualified under the said Tenth Schedule as so modified

17. 118 person sits or votes as a member of the Legislative Assembly before he has Penalty for
complied with the requirements of section 12 or when he knows that he isnot qualified or that sitting and
he is disqualified for membership thereof, he shall be liable in respect of each day on which pire toes
he 0 sits or votes to a penalty of five hundred rupees to be recovered as a debt due to the of affirma-

५० Union, tion of when
‘ot qualified
or when

disqualified,

18. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules and Standing orders Powers,
regulating the procedure of the Legislative Assembly: there shall be freedom ofspeech inthe Privileges,
Legislative Assembly. Sac.

{2) No member of the Legislative Assembly shall be liable to any proceedings in any

US court in respect of anything said or any vote given by him in the Assembly or any committee


Salaries and
allowances of
members.

Exemption of
property of
the Union
from
taxation.

Restrictions
on laws
passed by
Legislative
Assembly
with respect
to certain
matters.

Special
provisions as
to financial
Bills

6

thereof and no person shall be so liable in respect of the publication by or under the authority
of such Assembly of any report, paper, votes or proceedings.

(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of the Legislative Assembly
and of the members and the committees thereof shall be such as are for the time being
enjoyed by the House of the people and its members and committees,

(4) The provisions of sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) shall apply in relation to persons
who by virtue of this Act have the right to speek in, and otherwise to take part in the
proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly or any committee thereof as they apply, in relation
to members of that Assembly.

19. Members of the Legislative Assembly shall be entitled to receive such salaries
and allowances as may from time to time be determined by the Legislative Assembly by law
and until provision in that behalfis so made, such salaries and allowances as the Lieutenant
Governor may, with the approval of the President, by order determine.

20. The property of the Union shall, save in so far as Parliament may by law otherwise
provide, be exempted from all taxes imposed by or under any law made by the Legislative
Assembly or by or under any other law in force in the Union territory.:

Provided that nothing in this section shall, until Parliament by law otherwise provides,
prevent any authority within the Union territory from levying any tax on any property of the
Union to which such property was immediately before the commencement of the Constitution
liable or treated as liable, so long as the tax continues to be levied in the Union territory. |

21. (1) The provisions of article 286, article 287 and article 288 shall apply in relation to
any law passed by the Legislative Assembly with respect to any of the matters referred to in
those articles as they apply in relation to any law passed by the Legislature of a State with
respect to those matters.

(2) The provisions of article 304 shall, with the necessary modification, apply in relation
to any law passed by the Legislative Assembly with respect to any of the matters referred to
in that article as they apply in relation to any law passed by the Legislature of a State with
respect to those matters.

22, (1) A Bill or amendment shall not be introduced into, or moved in, the Legislative
Assembly except on the recommendation of the Lieutenant Governor ifsuch bill or amendment 3;
makes provision for any of the following matters, namely:

(q) the imposition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax;

(8) the amendment of the law with respect to any financial obligations undertaken
or to be undertaken by the Government of the Union territory.

(c) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union
territory;

(व) the declaring of any expenditure to the expenditure charged on the
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory or the increasing of the amount of any such
expenditure;

(०) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of the Union
territory or the custody of such money:

Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this sub-section for the
moving of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.

(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the matters
aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary
penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or
by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of
any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.



7

(3) ABill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory shall not be passed by the Legislative Assembly
unless the Lieutenant Governor has recommended to that Assembly the consideration of
the Bill,

& 23. (1) A Bill pending in the Legislative Assembly shall not lapse by reason of the
prorogation of the Assembly.

(2) A Bill which is pending in the Legislative Assembly shall lapse on a dissolution of
the Assembly.

24. When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly it shall be presented to
10. the Lieutenant Governor and the Lieutenant Governor shall declare either that he assents to
the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom or that he reserves the Bill for the consideration

of the President:

Provided that the Lieutenant Governor may, as soon as possible after the

presentation of the Bill to him for assent, return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill together

15 with a message requesting that the Assembly will reconsider the Bill or any specified

provisions thereof, and, in particular, will consider the desirability of introducing any

such amendments as he may recommend in his message, and, when a Bill is so returned,

the Assembly will reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again with or

without amendment and presented to the Lieutenant Governor for assent, the Lieutenant

20 Governor shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he reserves the Bill for
the consideration of the President.

Provided further that the Lieutenant Governor shall not assent to, but shall reserve for
the consideration of the President, any Bill which —

(a) in the opinion of the Lieutenant Governor would if it became law so derogate
ac from the powers of the High Court as to endanger the position which that Court is by
the Constitution designed to fill; or

(6) the President may, by order direct to be reserved for his consideration; or

(c) relates to a matter referred to in sub-section (5) of section 7 or section 19 or
section 34 or sub-section (3) of section 43,

30 Explanation. —For the purposes of this section and section 25, a Bill shall be deemed
to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the matters
specified in sub-section (1) of section 22 or any matter incidental to any of those matters and
in either case, thete is endorsed thereon the certificate of the Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly signed by him that it is a Money Bill.

35 25. When a Bill is reserved by the Lieutenant Governor for the consideration of the
President, the President shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds
assent therefrom;

Provided that where the Bill is not a Money Bill, the President may direct the Lieutenant
Governor to return the Bill to the Legislative Assembly together with such a message as is

Yo mentioned in the first proviso to section 24 and when a Bill is so returned the Assembly shall
reconsider it accordingly within a period of six months from the date of receipt of such
message and if it is again passed by the Assembly with or without amendment it shall be
presented again to the President for his consideration.

26. No Act of the Legislative Assembly and no provision in any such Act shall be

US invalid by reason only that some previous sanction or recommendation required by this Act
was not given if assent to that Act was given by the Lieutenant Governor or on being
reserved by the Lieutenant Governor for the consideration of the President, by the President.

Procedure as
to lapsing of
Bills

Assent to
Bills,

Bills reserved
for considera-
tion,

Requirements
as to
sanction, etc.


Annual
financial
statement,

Procedure in
Legislative
Assembly
with respect
to estimates.

Appropriation
Bills,

8

27. (1) The Lieutenant Governor shall in respect of every financial year cause to |
before the Legislative Assembly, with the previous sanction of the President, a statement o
the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Union: territory for that year, in this Part ret
to as the "annual financial statement".

(2) The estimates, of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall
show separately—

(@) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Act as expenditure
charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory; and

(6) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue
account from other expenditure.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the
following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the Union.
territory:

(a) the emoluments and allowances of the Lieutenant Governor and other
expenditure relating to his office as determined by the President by general or special
order;

(2) the charges payable in respect of loans advanced to the Union territory from
the Consolidated Fund of India including interest, sinking fund charges and redemption
charges and other expenditure connected therewith;

(०) the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly;

(@) any sums required to satisfy any judgement, decree or award of any court or
arbitral tribunal;

(e) any other expenditure declared by the Constitution or by law made by
Parliament or by the Legislative Assembly to be so charged,

28. (/) So much of the estimates as relates to expenditure charged upon the
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory shall not be submitted to the vote of the Legislative
Assembly, but nothing in this sub-section shall be construed as preventing the discussion
in the Legislative assembly of any of those estimates,

(2) So much of the said estimates as relates to other expenditure shall be submitted in
the form of demands for grants to the Legislative Assembly, and the Legislative Assembly
shall have power to assent or to refuse to assent, to any demand, or to assent to any demand
subject to a reduction of the amount specified therein,

(3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on the recommendation of the Lieutenants 36°
Governor,

29, (1) As soon as may be after the grants under section 28 have been made by the
Legislative Assembly there shall be introduced a Bill to provide for the appropriation out of
the Consolidated Fund ०९७8 Union territory of all moneys required to meet—

(a) the grants so made by the Assembly; and ut

(4) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory but
not exceeding in any case the amount shown in the statement previously laid before
the Assembly.

(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in the Legislative Assembly
which will have the effect of varying the amount or altering the destination of any grant so
made or'of varying the amount of any expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the *
‘Union territory and the decision of the person presiding as to whether an amendment is
inadmissible under this sub-section shall be final. >


9

(3) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, no money shall be withdrawn from the
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory except under appropriation made by law passed in
accordance with provisions of this section.

30. (/) The Lieutenant Governor shall, —

5 (2) ifthe amount authorised by any law made in accordance with the provisions
of section 29 to be expanded for a particular service for the current financial year is
found to be insufficient for purposes of that year or when a need has arisen during the
Current financial year for supplementary or additional expenditure upon some new
service not contemplated in the annual financial statement for that year, or

lo (6) ifany money has been spent on any service during a financial year in excess
of the amount granted for that service and for that year, cause to be laid before the
Legislative Assembly, with the previous sanction of the President, another statement
showing the estimated amount of that expenditure or cause to be presented to the
Legislative Assembly with such previous sanction a demand for such excess, as the
15 case may be.

(2) The provisions of sections 27, 28 and 29 shall have effect in relation to any such
statement and expenditure or demand and also to any law to be made authorising the
appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory to meet such
expenditure or the grant in respect of such demand as they have effect in relation to the

20. annual financial statement and the expenditure mentioned therein or to a demand for a grant
and the law to be made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated
Fund of the Union territory to meet such expenditure or grant.

31. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, the Legislative
Assembly shall have power to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated

AF expenditure for apart of any financial year pending the completion of the procedure prescribed
in section 28 for the voting of such grant and the passing of the Law in accordance with the
Provisions of seciton 29 in relation to that expenditure and the Legislative Assembly shall
have power to authorise by law the withdrawal of moneys from the consolidated Fund of the
Union territory for the purposes for which the said grant is made.

30 (2) The provisons of sections 28 and 29 shall have effect in relation to the making of
any grant under sub-section (1) or to any law to be made under that sub-section as they have
effect in relation to the making of a grant with regard 10 any expenditure mentioned in the
annual financial statement and the law to be made for the authorisation of appropriation of
moneys, out of the Consolidated Fund to the Union territory to meet such expenditure,

35 32. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, the Lieutenant
Governor may authorise such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory
as he deems necessary for a period of not more than six months beginning with the date of
the constitution of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory, pending the sanction of
such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly.

Yo 33. (1) The Legislative Assembly may make rules for regulating, subject to the provisions
of this Act, its procedure and the conduct of its business:

Provided that the Lieutenant Governor shall, after consultation with the Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly and with the approval of the President, make rules—
(०) for securing the timely completion of financial business;
us (6) for regulating the procedure of, and the conduct of business in, the Legislative
Assembly in relation to any financial matter or to any Bill for the appropriation of
moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory;

(0) for prohibiting the discussion of, or the asking of questions on, any matter
which affects the discharge of the functions of the Lieutenant G ~vernor in so far as he
Ge is required by or under this Act or any law to act in his discretion.

‘Supplementary,
addition or
excess grants,

Votes on
account,

Authorisation
of expenditure
pending its
sanction by
Legislative
Assembly,

Rules of
procedure.


Official lang-
uage or
languages of
the Union
territory and
language or
languages to be
used in
Legislative
Assembly.

Language to
be used for
Bills, Acts,
ete

Restrictions
on discussion
in the
Legislative
Assembly

Courts not to
inguire into
proceedings
of Legislative
Assembly

10

(2) Until rules are made under sub-section (/), the rules of procedure and standi
orders with respect to the Legislative Assembly of the State of Uttar Pradesh in force”
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall have effect in relation to the Legislati
Assembly subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the
Lieutenant Governor.

34, (1) The Legislative Assembly may by law adopt any one or more of the k
in use in the Union territory or Hindi as the official language or languages to be used for al
or any of the official purposes of the Union territory:

Provided that the President may by order direct—

(0) that the official language of the Union shall be adopted for such of the official
purposes of the Union territory as may be specified in the order.

(ii) that any other language shall also be adopted throughout the Union territory.
or such part thereof for such of the official purposes of the Union territory as may be
specified in the order, if the President is satisfied that a substantial proportion of the
population of the Union territory desires the use of that other language for all or any of
such purposes.

(2) The business in the Legislative Assembly shall be transacted in the official language
or languages of the Union territory or in Hindi or in English:

Provided that the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly or the person acting as such, as
the case may be, may permit any member who cannot adequately express himself in any of
the languages aforesaid, to address the Assembly in his mother-tongue.

35. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 34, until Parliament by law otherwise
provides, the authoritative texts—

(q) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in the
Legislative Assembly;

(8) of all Acts passed by the Legislative Assembly; and

(c) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued under any law made by
the Legislative Assembly,

shall be in English language:

Provided that where the Legislative Assembly has prescribed any language other than
the English language for use in Bills introduced in, or Acts passed by the Legislative Assembly
or in any order, rule, regulation or bye-law issued under any law made by the Legislative
Assembly, a translation of the same in the English language published under the authority of
the Lieutenant Governor in the official Gazette shall be deemed to be the authoritative text
thereof in the English language.

36. No discussion shall take place in the Legislative Assembly with respect to the
conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of duties,

37. (1) The validity of any proceedings in the Legislative Assembly shall not be called
in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.

(2) No officer or member of the Legislative Assembly in whom powers are vested by or
under this Act for regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for maintaining order
in the Legislative Assembly shall be subject to the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the
exercise by him of those powers.


i
PART IIL
DELIMITATION OF CONSTITUENCIES

38. (7) The Election Commission shall, in the manner herein provided, distribute the
seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly under section 3 to single-member territorial
5 constituencies and delimit them having regard to the following provisions, namely:—

(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be delimited in such manner
that the ratio between the population of each of such constituencies and the total
population of the Union territory is the same; and

(6) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes/
10 ‘Tribes shall, as far as practicable, be located in areas where the proportion of their
population to the total population is comparatively large.

(2) The Election Commission shal!—

(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies in the official

Gazette and also in such other manner as the Commission may consider fit, together

1S with a notice inviting objections and suggestions in relation to the proposals and
specifying a date on or after which the proposals will be further considered by it;

(0) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it
before the date so specified;

(०) after considering all objections and suggestions which may haye been
ZO _ received byit before the date so specified, finalise delimitation of constituencies and
cause such order or orders to be published in the official Gazette; and upon such
publication, the order or orders shall have the full force of law and shall not be called

in question in any court.

39, The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notification in the official
25 Gazette—

(a) correct any printing mistakes in any order made under section 38 or any error
arising therein from inadversent slip or omission; and

(0) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned in any
such order are or is altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be necessary or
20 expedient for bringing such order uptodate,

40. (1) For the purpose of constituting the Legislative Assembly, a general election will
be held as soon as may be after the delimitation of all the assembly constituencies under
section 38.

(2) For the purpose of sub-section (/), the Lieutenant Governor shall, by one or more
35 notifications published in the official Gazette, call upon all the said assembly constituencies.
to elect members in accordance with the provisions of the Representation of the People

of 1951 Act, 1951 and of the rules and orders made or issued thereunder as applicable under sub-
section (3).

of 1950 (3) The Representation of the People Act, 1950, the Representation of the People Act,

vf 19514O 1951 the rules and orders made or issued under the said Acts and all other laws for the time

being in force relating to the elections shall apply with necessary modifications (including

modificmions for construing references therein to a State, State Government and Governor

as including references to the Union territory, Government of the Union territory and

Lieutenant Governor, respectively) to, and in relation to, the general election referred to in
Ug sub-section (/).

Election
Commission
to delimit
constituencies,

Power of
Election
Commission
to maintain
delimitations
orders upto
date

Election to
the
Legislative
Assembly.



Matters in
which
Lieutenant
Governor to
act in his
discretion,

Advice by
Ministers

Other
provisions as
to Ministers.

Conduct of
business.

Duties of
Chief Minister
aS respects the
furnishing of
information,
ete. to the
Lieutenant
Governor.

12
PARTIV

‘CERTAIN PROVISIONS RELATING TO LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR AND MINISTERS

41. (7) The Lieutenant Governor shall actin his discretion in a matter—

him by the President, or

(ii) in which he is required by or under any law to act in his discretion |
exercise any judicial or quasi-judicial functions.

(2) If any question arises as to whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects
which the Lieutenant Governor is by or under any law required to act in his discretion,
decision of the Lieutenant Governor thereon shall be final.

(3) If any question arises as to whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects
which the Lieutenant Governor is required by any law to exercise any judicial or quasi-
Judicial functions, the decision of the Lieutenant Governor thereon shall be final.

42, The question whether any, and if so, what, advise was tendered by Ministers to the
Lieutenant Governor shalll not be inquired into in any court.

43. (1) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the Lieutenant Governor shall administer
tohhim the oaths of office and of secrecy according to the forms set out for the purpose in the
Schedule,

(2) A Minister who, for any period of six consecutive months, is not a member of the
Legislative Assembly, at the expiration of that period, shall cease to be a Minister.
(3) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as the Legislative
Assembly may from time to time by law determine and until the Legislative Assembly so
determines, shall be determined by the Lieutenant Governor with the approval of the

President.
44, (1) The President shall make rules—

(a) for the allocation of business to the Ministers in so far as it is business with
respect to which the Lieutenant Governor is. required to act on the aid and advice of his
Council of Ministers; and

(6) for the more convenient transaction of business with the Ministers, including 3
the procedure to be adopted in the case ofa difference of opinion between the Lieutenant
Governor and the Council of Ministers or a Minister.

(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all executive action of the Lieutenant
Governor whether taken on the advice of his Ministers or otherwise shall be expressed to be
taken in the name of the Lieutenant Governor,

(3) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the Lieutenant
Governor shall be authenticated in such manner as may be specified in rules to be made by
the Lieutenant Governor and the validity of an order or instrument which is $0 authenticated

shall not be called in question on the ground that it is not an order or instrument made or
executed by the Lieutenant Governor.

45. It shall be the duty of the Chief Minister-—
(a) to communicate to the Lieutenant Governor all deci ns of Council of

Ministers relating to the administration ofthe affairs of the Union territory and proposals
for legislation;

(6)to furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of the
Union territory and proposals for legislation as Lieutenant Governor may call for; and


ज्‌

20

as

30

ड्ड

Yo

us

3

(©) if the Lieutenant Governor so requires, to submit for the consideration of the
Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a Minister but
which has not been considered by the Council,

t } PARTV
MisceLLANgous AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

46. (1) As from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint in this behalf, all revenues received in the Union territory by the Government
of India or the Lieutenant Governor in relation to any matter with respect to which the
Legislative Assembly has power to make laws, and all grants made and ail loans advanced to
the Union territory from the Consolidated Fund of India and all moneys received by the
Union territory in repayment of loans shall form one Consolidated Fund to be entitled "the
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory of Andaman and Nicoba; Islands" (referred to in
this Act as the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory).

(2) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory shall be appointed
except in accordance with and for the purposes and in the manner provided in this Act.

(3) The custody of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory, the payment of
moneys into such Fund, the withdrawal of moneys therefrom and all other matters connected
with or ancillary to those matters shall be regulated by rules made by the Lieutenant Governor
with the approval of the President.

47. (7) There shall be established a Contingency Fund in the nature of an imprest to be
entitled "the Contingency Fund of the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands” into
which shall be paid from and out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory such sums
as may, from time to time be determined by law made by the Legislative Assembly; and the
said Fund shall be held by the Lieutenant Governor to enable advances to be made by him
out of such Fund.

(2) No advances shall be made out of the Contingency Fund referred to in sub-
section (1) except for the purposes of meeting unforseen expenditure pending authorisation
of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly under appropriation made by law.

(3) The Lieutenant Governor may make rules regulating all matters connected with or
ancillary to the custody of, the payment of moneys into and the withdrawal of moneys from
the aforesaid Contingency Fund.

48. The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India relating to the accounts
of the Union territory for any period subsequent to the date referred to in sub-section (1) of
section 46 shall be submitted 10 the Lieutenant Governor who shall cause them to be laid
before the Legislative Assembly,

49, Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Lieutenant Governor and his Council of
Ministers shall be under the general control of, and comply with such particular directions,
if any, as may from time to time be given by the President.

50. (1) Every order made by the President under article 239AB shall expire at the end
of one year from the date of issue of the order and the provisions of clauses (2) and (3) of
article 356 shall, so far as may be, apply to such order as they apply to a Proclamation issued
under clause (1) of article 356.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the President may extend
the duration of the aforesaid order for a further period not exceeding two years from the date
of expiry of the order under sub-section (1) subject to the condition that every extension of
the said order for any period beyond the expiration of one year shall be approved: by
resolutions of both:Houses of Parliament.

Consolidated
Fund of the
Union
territory,

Contingency
Fund of the
Union
territory.

Audit reports,

Relation of
Lieutenant
Governor and
his Ministers
to President,

Period of
order made
under anicle
239AB and
approval
thereof by
Parliament,


Authorisation
of expenditure
by President

Contracts and
suits.

Power of
President to
remove
difficulties.

Laying of
Rules before
Legislative
Assembly.

Amendments
to the
Constitution,

Special
Provision
with respect
to Andaman
and Nicobar
Islands.

14

51. Where the Legislative Assembly is dissolved or its functioning as such Assembly
remains suspended, on account of an order made by the President under article 239AB, it
shall be competent for the President to authorise when the House of the People is not in
session expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory pending the sanction
of such expenditure by Parliament.

52. For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that—

(a) all contracts in connection with the administration of the Union territory are
contracts made in the exercise of the executive power of the Union; and

(6) all suits and proceedings in connection with the administration of the Union
territory shall be instituted by or against the Government of India.

53. (/) If any difficulty arises in relation to the transaction from the provisions of any
law repealed by the Act or in giving effect to the provisions of this Act and in particular in
relation to the constitution of the Legislative Assembly, the President may by order do
anything not inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution or of this Act which
appear to him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty.

Provided that no order under the sub-section shall be made after the expiry of three
years from the date of constitution of the first Legislative Assembly.

(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.

54. Every rule made by the Lieutenant Governor under this Act shall be laid as soon 85
it is made, before the Legislative Assembly.

55, On and from the appointed day—
(a) after article 239AA, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—

"239AAA. (1) As from the date of commencement of the Government of
Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands Act, 2004 the administrator of
the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands appointed under article 239
shall be designated as the Lieutenant Governor.

(2) The provisions of articles 239AA and 239AB shall, so far as may be, apply
‘mutatis mutandis in relation to the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Lieutenant
Governor and the Legislative Assembly, as they apply in relation to the National Capital
Territory of Delhi and its Legislature, respectively.";

(b) in article 240, in clause (1) for the existing proviso, the following provisos
shall be substituted namely:—

"Provided that when any body is created under article 239A or 239AAA to
function as a Legislature for the Union territory of Pondicherry or Union territory
of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, as the case may be, the President shall not
made any regulation for the peace, progress and good government of that Union
territory with effect from the date appointed for the first meeting of the Legislature;

Provided further that whenever the body functioning as a Legislature for the
Union Territory of Pondicherry or Andaman and Nicobar Islands, as the case may be,
is dissolved, or the functioning of that body as such Legislature remains suspended
on account of any action taken under any such law as is referred to in clause (1) of
article 239A or 239AB, as the case may be, the President may, during the period of such
dissolution or suspension, make regulations for the peace, progress and good
government of that Union territory."

30

35

uo


15
(0 In the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, in the Table—

(a) Entries 26 and 27 shall be re-numbered as entries 27 and 28
respectively, and before entry 27 as so re-numbered, the following entry shall
be inserted, namely:—

५“ 26, Andaman and Nicobar Islands....1",
(6) for the figures "233", the figures "234" shall be substituted,

56, In section 27A of the Representation of People Act, 1950, after sub-section (4), the
following sub-section shall be inserted namely:—

"(5) The electoral college for the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands
lo shall consist of the elected members of the Legislative Assembly constituted for the
territory under the Government of Union Territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands

Act, 2004,

THE SCHEDULE
(See sections 4, 12 and 43)
15 FORMS OF OATH ORAFFIRMATIONS
1

Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for election to the Legislative
Assembly:—

"I, A.B., having been nominated as a candidate to fill a seat in the Legislative
20 Assembly, do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and
allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I will uphold the
sovereignty and integrity of India.”
1
Form of Oath or affirmation to be made by amember of the Legislative Assembly:—

25 "I,A.B., having been elected a member of the Legislative Assembly, do swear in
the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the
Constitution of India as by law established, and that I will uphold the sovereignty and
integrity of India and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which lam about to
enter,”

30 ne
Form of Oath of office of a member of the Council of Ministers:—

"I, A.B., do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith
and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the
sovereignty and integrity of India, that { will faithfully and conscientiously discharge

35 7) duties as a Minister, and that | will do right to all manner of people in accordance
with the Constitution and the law without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.”

Vv
Form of Oath of Secrecy for a member of the Council of Ministers: —

"I, A.B., do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that | will not directly or
uo indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be
brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as a Minister except as

may be required for the due discharge of any duties as such Minister.”

Amendment
of section

27A of Act
43 of 1950,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Even after 57 years of Independence, the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar
Islands has not been provided with a democratic set-up with a Legislative Assembly for the
‘governance of the affairs of the Union territory Administration. All Powers are vested in the
Lieutenant Governor and the bureaucracy continues to reign supreme. In the absence of a
Legislative Assembly with devolution of powers, the people of the Islands are not enabled to
have a sense of belonging and involvement in the developmental activities of the Islands
and do not have a say in the utilisation of the funds provided by the Central Government, in
Proper perspective.

‘The type of Pradesh Council provided to the Union territory with members indirectly
elected from panchayats and a single munic’ ity with no powers is not at all befitting toa
democratic set-up and devolution of powers. However, the functioning of the Pradesh Council
since its formation in the year 1981 has set the background for constitution of a Legislative
Assembly on the pattern of Pondicherry or Delhi. The Population of the Union territory has
crossed three-lakh mark and the literacy percentage is more than 81 per cent and heading
towards achieving cent per cent literacy as per norms prescribed by the Government of India.

‘There have been series of demands from the people of the Union territory for providing
«Legislative Assembly atleast with limited powers. The Island Development Authority had
agreed in principle to constitute a Legislative Assembly for the Islands. The Estimates
Committee of the Parliament had also recommended for tne constitution of a Legislative
Assembly for the Union territory. Now, since a three-tier Panchayati Raj system is also in the
offing in pursuance of the Constitution (Seventy-third) Amendment Act with the idea of
devolution of powers at panchayat, block and district levels, itis high time that a Legislative
Assembly was provided to set the tone and direction for the governance of the Union
territory Administration on democratic norms,

The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.

New Deut; BASUDEB ACHARIA.
July §,2004


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a Legislative Assembly for the Union
territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Clauses 7(5), 19 and 43(3) related to payment of
salaries and allowances to the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, Members of the Legislature and
the Ministers. The expenditure on such salaries and allowances and other expenditure of
incidental nature such as on the additional staff in the Legislative Assembly and Council of

Ministers will be met from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory of Andaman and
Nicobar Islands.

Clause 38 provides for the delimitation of thirty single member territorial constituencies
for the proposed Assembly of the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands,
Clause 55 provides that Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands will be represented
by one member in the Council of States. For this purpose, a non-recurring expenditure of
about rupees twenty lakhs is likely to be incurred. This expenditure will be met from the
Consolidated Fund of India.

The Bill does not involve any other expenditure either of a recurring or non-recurring
nature.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 33 of the Bill empowers the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of
Andaman and Nicobar Islands to make rules, subject to the provisions of this Bill, for
regulating its procedure and conduct of its business. It also provides that the Lieutenant
Governor shall, after consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative ‘Assembly and with the
approval of the President make rules for securing the completion of the financial business,
regulating the procedure and conduct of business in the Legislative Assembly in relation to
any financial matter or to any Bill for appropriation of monies out of the Consolidated Fund
of the Union territory. of Andaman and Nicobar Islands and for prohibiting the discussion of
or asking any question which affect the discharge of the functions of the Lieutenant Governor
in so far as he is required to act in his discretion.

Clause 44 of the Bill empowers the President to make rules regarding allocation of
business to Ministers and transaction of such business. It further empowers the Lieutenant
Governor to make rules prohibiting the manner of authenticating the orders issued in his
name.

‘Clause 46(3) and 47(3) of the Bill provide that the Lieutenant Governor | may make rules
regarding the custody, etc., of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory of Andaman and
Nicobar Islands and the Contingency Fund of the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar
Islands.

Clause 53 of the Bill empowers the President to issue orders for removing any difficulty
in giving effect to the provisions of this Bill and in particular in relation to the constitution
of the Legislative Assembly.

‘The matters mentioned above are of a procedural nature and it is difficult to provide
for them in detail in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* . * * * *

240. (1) The President may make regulations for the peace, progress and good
government of the Union territory of —
(a) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands;
(9) Lakshadweep;
(c) Dadra and Nagar Haveli;
(d) Daman and Diu;
(e) Pondicherry;

Provided that when any body is created under article 239A to function as a Legislature
for the Union territory of Pondicherry the President shall not make any regulation for the
peace, progress and good government of that Union territory with effect from the date
appointed for the first meeting of the Legislature:

Provided further that whenever the body functioning as a Legislature for the Union
territory of Pondicherry is dissolved, or the functioning of that body as such Legislature
remains suspended on account of any action taken under any such law as is referred to in
clause (1) of article 239A, the President may, during the period of such dissolution or
suspension, make regulations for the peace, progress and good government of that Union
territory.

(2) Any regulation so made may repeal or amend any Act made by Parliament or any
other law, which is for the time being applicable to the Union territory and, when promulgated
by the President, shall have the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament which applies
to that territory.

. . . * * .

FOURTH SCHEDULE
{Articles 4(1) and 80(2)]
Allocation of Seats in the Council of States

To each State or Union territory specified in the first column of the following table,
there shall be allotted the number of seats specified in the second column thereof opposite
to that State or that Union territory, as the case may be.

TABLE
. * * ‘ * *
26. © Delhi 3
27. Pondicherry 1
TOTAL 233
x —
* * * . * .

EXTRACT FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PeopLe Act, 1950
(43 of 1950)
.

* * * * *

27A. (1) For the purpose of filling any seat or seats in the Council of States allotted to
any Union territory in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution there shall be an electoral

college for each such territory.
* + ‘ + * *

“(4) The electoral college of the Union territory of Pondicherry shall consist of the
elected members of the Legislative Assembly constituted for that territory under the
Government of Union territories Act, 1963 (20 of 1963)

* * * * * *

19

Power of
President to
make
regulations
for certain
Union
territories.

Constitution
of electoral
colleges for
the filling of
seats in the
council of
states allotted
to Union
territories:


हर LOK SABHA

BILL

to provide for the creation of a Legislative Asembly for the Union territory of Andaman
and Nicebar Islands and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Basudeb Acharia, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—2404LS—18. 11.2004.