1
THE HIGH COURT OF RAJASTHAN (EST ABLISHMENT OF
A PERMANENT BENCH AT RAJSAMAND) BILL, 2022
By
SHRIMATI DIYA KUMARI, M.P.
A
BILL
to pr ovide for the establishment of a permanent bench of the High Cour t
of Rajasthan at Rajsamand.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-Third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:–
1. This Act may be called the High Court of Rajasthan (Establishment of
a Permanent Bench at Rajsamand) Act, 2022.
2. There shall be established a permanent Bench of the High Court of
Rajasthan at Rajsamand and such Judges of the High Court of Rajasthan, being
not less than five in number , as the Chief Justice of that High Court may , from
time to time, nominate, shall sit at Rajsamand in order to exercise the jurisdiction
and power for the time being vested in that High Court in respect of cases arising
in the districts of Rajsamand, Pali, Ajmer, Sirohi, Bhilwara, Chittorgarh, Pratapgarh,
Dungarpur, Banswara and Udaipur .
Bill No. 84 of 2022
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title.
5 Establishment of a
permanent Bench of
the High Court of
Rajasthan at
Rajsamand.
10

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Since the time a Bench of the High Court of Rajasthan, which is functioning at
Jodhpur, was established at Jaipur , there has been a demand for the establishment of
a permanent Bench of the High Court at Rajsamand .
Rajasthan is one of the largest States. On average, there is only one High Court
Judge per twenty-five lakh of the population of the State. Hence there arises
a requirement of an additional permanent Bench of the High Court to effectively dispose
cases and reduce pendency .
The number of pending cases of Rajsamand division in the High Court are
numerous. Besides, in a large number of cases, the Government of Rajasthan, its various
departments or the Public Sector Undertakings and autonomous bodies under it happen
to be a party.
The Constitution of India provides the right of access to justice to every citizen.
District-wise distribution of tribal population for the State of Rajasthan shows that they
have their highest concentration in the Udaipur division, which includes, Banswara
district (72.3 per cent), followed by Dungarpur (65.1 per cent.) and Udaipur (47.9 per
cent). In fact a vast majority of this tribal population fall within the category of Scheduled
Tribes. A majority of this tribal population are financially weak and hence unable to
access justice due to the large distance between these districts to the Jodhpur and
Jaipur benches of the Rajasthan High Court. Therefore, establishment of a permanent
Bench at Rajsamand will not only reduce unnecessary expenditure from the public
exchequer but would also benefit the people, particularly tribal people, from Rajsamand,
Pali, Ajmer, Sirohi, Bhilwara, Chittorgarh, Pratapgarh, Dungarpur, Banswara and Udaipur
districts.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI; DIYA KUMARI
 28 February, 2022

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent bench of the High Court
of Rajasthan at Rajsamand.
————
(Shrimati Diya Kumari, M.P.)