     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 84 of 2021
THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND THE SCHEDULED TRIBES
(PREVENTION OF ATROCITIES) AMENDMENT BILL, 2021
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the  Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of Atrocities) Amendment Act, 2021.
Short title and
commencement.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of
Atrocities) Act,1989 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1),—
(i) after clause (bg), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(bh) “ragging” means any act of physical or mental abuse (including bullying
and exclusion) targeted at another student belonging to the Scheduled Castes or
the Scheduled Tribes (fresher or otherwise) on the ground of colour, race, religion,
caste, ethnicity, gender (including transgender), sexual orientation, appearance,
regional origin, linguistic identity, place of birth, place of resident or economic
background;”;
(ii) the existing  clauses (ec) and (ed) shall be re-numbered as (ed) and (ef)
and before the clauses (ed) and (ef) as so re-numbered, the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(ec) “unfavourable treatment” means any adverse changes in the
working environment, denial of training and denial of opportunities for
advancement, unfavourable probationary reports, vexatious grievances
and exclusion of any student belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes by his peers or any person in supervisory capacity.;”
      3. In section 3 of the principle act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) after clause (zc), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(zd) indulges in targeted ragging and humiliation of any student
or a section of students belonging to the Scheduled Caste or the Scheduled
Tribe; or
(ze) passes derogatory remarks against any student belonging to
the Scheduled Caste or the Scheduled Tribe indicating caste or linking
reservation quota as a reason for underperformance in classrooms of
educational institutions; or
(zf) indulges in or attempts in segregation of any  student or a section
 of the Scheduled Caste or the Scheduled Tribe students in classrooms
and sports facilities of educational institutions; or
(zg) makes or attempts to make an unfavourable treatment to any
student or a section of students belonging to the Scheduled Caste or the
Scheduled Tribe in making available various facilities like playgrounds,
labs, library, hostels or preventing them from participating in sports and
cultural events.”.
5
Amendment
of section 2.
2
10
15
20
25
30
Amendment
of section 3.
35
33 of 1989.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The cases of suicide by students belonging to the Scheduled Caste and
Scheduled Tribe communities due to caste based discrimination are taking place in
higher education institutions of our country. This is a worrisome phenomenon as the
social evil of caste based discrimination is still practiced even among the educated
sections of the society. The reports by Prof. S.K. Thorat Committee and Prof. B. L.
Mungekar Committee set up by the Government at various points of time to look into
complaints of caste based discrimination in some of the elite higher educational
institutions, point out rampant discrimination against the students belonging to the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Discrimination against the Scheduled Castes
or the Scheduled Tribes students take many forms such as segregation of students as
per caste, insulting by using derogatory remarks, ragging, labelling as below average
due to reservation etc. and has caused mental agony and stress among the students
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. This affects the students’
life in higher educational institutions adversely and pushes them to the brink of
committing suicide.
This Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 with a view to bring in ragging, segregation
of students as per caste and labelling students as reserved category students
unfavourable treatment in the category of offence under the parent Act and to put a
check on such unlawful activities.
Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
October 25, 2019.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND THE SCHEDULED TRIBES
(PREVENTION OF ATROCITIES) ACT, 1989
(33 of 1989)
* * * * *
2. (1) * * * *
 (bg) public servant means a public servant as defined under section 21 of the
Indian Penal Code, as well as any other person deemed to be a public servant under
any other law for the time being in force and includes any person acting in his official
capacity under the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be;
*                      *                      *                      *                      *
(ec) victim  means any individual who falls within the definition of the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section
2, and who has suffered or experienced physical, mental, psychological, emotional
or monetary harm or harm to his property as a result of the commission of any offence
under this Act and includes his relatives, legal guardian and legal heirs;
(ed) “witness” means any person who is acquainted with the facts and
circumstances, or is in possession of any information or has knowledge necessary for
the purpose of investigation, inquiry or trial of any crime involving an offence under
this Act, and who is or may be required to give information or make a statement or
produce any document during investigation, inquiry or trial of such case and includes
a victim of such offence;
* * * * *
3. (1) * * * *
(zc) imposes or threatens a social or economic boycott of any person or a
family or a group belonging to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
six months but which may extend to five years and with fine.
* * * * *
Definitions.
Punishments
for offences
atrocities.
4

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989.
————
( Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P . )