1
THE PAYMENT OF COMPENSATION TO VICTIMS OF NATURAL
CALAMITIES AND SNAKE BITE  BILL, 2014
By
SHRI M.K. RAGHAV AN,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for payment of compensation to victims of natural calamities and snake bite
and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Payment of Compensation to Victims of Natural
Calamities and Snake Bite Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “natural calamity” includes flood, lightning, thunder, tsunami, storm, hail
storm, dust storm, cyclone, cloud burst, high sea tide, drought,  landslide, earthquake;
(b) “victim of natural calamity” means a person who suffers bodily harm or loss
by way of damage or destruction of property, including livestock, crop, orchard, field,
machine or tools to such an extent as the Central Government may, by notification
specify, and shall include in the case of death of such victim, his family members; and
Short title and
extent.
Definitions.
Bill No.  84  of  2014
5
10
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(c) “victim of snake bite” means a person who suffers bodily harm to such an
extent as the Central Government may, by notification specify, by the bite of a venomous
snake, and shall include in the case of death of such victim, his family members.
3. (1) The Central Government shall frame a scheme for determining the amount of
compensation to be paid to the victims of natural calamities and the victims of snake bite.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the scheme shall
provide for—
(i) payment of minimum compensation of rupees two lakh in case of death
caused due to natural calamity or snake bite;
(ii) payment of minimum compensation of rupees fifty thousand in case of bodily
harm caused due to natural calamity or snake bite; and
(iii) an insurance scheme for persons residing near areas which are prone to
natural calamities or generally inhabited or frequented by venomous snakes.
4. The provisions of this Act shall have effect  notwithstanding  anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Scheme for
compensa-
tion to
victims of
natural
calamities
and  snake
bite.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There have been several cases of deaths due to natural calamities and bites by
venomous snake. Such calamities lead to loss of lives and property. Of course, the occurrence
of  natural calamities cannot be anticipated and innocent persons suffer without any prior
notice but miseries of the victims of natural calamities or snake bites could be minimized by
enacting suitable laws. At present, there is no provision for compensation either for the
victims of natural calamities or snake bites.
Therefore, the Bill makes provision of adequate compensation to the victims of natural
calamities and snake bites.
N
EW DELHI; M.K. RAGHA VAN
July 7, 2014.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall frame a Scheme for
payment of compensation to the victims of natural calamities and snake bites. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees three hundred crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for payment of compensation to victims of natural calamities and snake bite
and for matters connected therewith
————
(Shri M.K. Raghavan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1753LS(S3)—31.07.2014.