\~ . Bill No. 8S of I'S6. 
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) 
BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCm IN LoB: SABHA) 

43 of 19S1. 
27 of 19S6. 
BIU No. 8S of ItS.! 
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (MISCELLA-
NEOUS PROVISIONS) BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the removal of disqualifications for membership of, 
and voting at elections to, Parliament and State Legislatures, 
and for certain miscellaneous matters in connection with such 
elections. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Ye~r of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Mis- Short title. 
cellaneous Provisions) Act, 1956. 
S 2. (1) Every disqualification for membership of Parliament or of R~mo~ of 
the Legislature of a State incurred by any person under the Repre- ~:~t;8-
sentation of the People Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act) before the commencement of the Representation of 
the People (Second Amendment) Act, 1956, for failure to lodge a 
10 return of election expenses as required by clause (c) of section 7 of 
the principal Act is hereby removed. 
(2) Every disqualification for membership of Parliament or of 
the Legislature of a State or for voting at an election incurred by 
any person under the principal Act before the commencement of the 
IS Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Act, 1956, for 
any illegal practice or for any corrupt practice other than the cor-
rupt practice of bribery or undue influence is hereby removed. 

AmeDdmeot 
oflCCdoD 7. 
SF.ia1 pro-
vllion for " 
nomination 
in cue of 
~= territory. 
2 
3. In section 7. of the principal Act, in clause (e), for the words 
"any corporation in which the appropriate Government has any 
share or financial interest", the words and brackets "any company or 
corporation (other than a co-operative society) in the capital of 
which the appropriate Government has not less than twenty-five per 5 
cent. share" shall be substituted. 
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 33 of the prin-
cipal Act, where a person detained in prison or other custody in any 
Portuguese territory wishes to stand as a candidate at any election 
that may be held within one year from the commencement of this 10 
Act, the nomination paper of such person and any declaration con-
tained therein may be signed on his behalf by the proposerj but no 
such nomination paper shall be received by the returning officer un-
less at the time of its delivery the proposer produces before that 
officer-- IS 
(a) a writing signed by such person and showing his inten-
tion to stand as a candidate, and 
(b) a certificate signed by a Secretary to the Government 
of India in the Ministry of External Affairs that the person is 
detained in prison or other custody in Portuguese territory. 20 
r eDtion of 5. It is hereby declared that the office of member of the Council 
til:~~ca- of Advisers associated with the Chief Commissioner of Manipur or 
JDc:mfParb1,:nhip with the Chief Commissioner of Tripura shall not disqualify the o 'arnent . in certain holder thereof for bemg chosen as, or for being, a member of Parlia-
C8aea. ment. '5 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
While section 74(2) of the Representation of the People (Second 
Amendment) Act, 1956, removes the disqualification for voting at an 
election incurred by any person under the repealed section 143 of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951, for default in making a 
return of election expenses, no provision was made in the amend-
ing Act for the removal of disqualification for membership incurred 
by that person under sec~ion 7 (c) of the principal Act for the same 
default. The last mentioned section was amended reducing the maxi-
mum period of disqualification from five years to three years and the 
provisions relating to returns of election expenses were also consider-
ably modified in their scope by the amending Act. Despite this pro-
vision the disqualification for membership previously incurred under 
section 7 (c) of the principal Act might, on a strict view of the law, 
be held to continue for the full period unless in any particular case 
it is reduced by the Election Commission. Since the number of 
such persons is reported to be over 6,000, it is proposed that their 
disqualification for membership of Parliament or of a State Le!~is­
lature should be removed by an express statutory provision. 
The amending Act has done away with minor corrupt practices 
and illegal practices by repealing sections 124 and 125 of the princi-
pal Act and has also cut down the number, and reduced the scope, 
of the corrupt practices mentioned in section 123 thereof. Section 
72 (2) of the amending Act further provided that any disqualification 
for membership entailed by any act which has ceased to be a corrupt 
or illegal practice under the principal Act, as amended, shall stand 
removed. The application of this general provision to concrete cases 
might lead to doubts and disputes which it seems desirable to avoid. 
It is therefore proposed to make an express legal proVision that every 
disqualification for membership or for voting incurred by any per-
son for an illegal practice or for a corrupt practice other than that 
of bribery or undue influence shall stand removed 
Section 7(e) of the principal Act disqualifies for membership any 
person who is a director or managing agent of, or holds an office 
of profit under, any corporation in which the appropriate Govern-
ment has any share or financial interest. The wide wording of this 
section, and in particular the reference to financial interest of Gov-
ernment, has led to unforeseen difficulties. It can be argued that all 
local authorities, including even the District Councils established by 
3 

4 
the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution for the Autonomous Dis-
tricts of Assam, and co-operative societies are corporations in whi.ch 
the Government has a financial interest. It is doubtful whether this 
result was intended. It is, therefore, proposed in clause 3 of the Bill 
to restrict the scope to section 7(e) of the Act to companies and cor-
porations, other than co-operative societies, in the capital of whi.o.!h 
the Government has not less than 25 per cent. share. 
In clause 4 of the Bill, it is proposed to make a special protision 
to enable Indian citizens imprisoned in Portuguese territory to stand 
as candidates in the forthcoming general elections. If any of them 
wishes to stand for election, it might not be possible for him to com-
ply with the essential requirement of signing the nomination paper 
as provided in section 33 of the principal Act within the time allowed 
for the purpose. It is therefore proposed that in such a case the 
nomination paper may be signed on behalf of the .candidate by his 
proposer, provided the proposer has obtained the consent in writing 
of the candidate and a certificate signed by a Secretary to the Gov-
ernment of India in the Ministry of External Affairs that the candi-
date is detained in prison or other custody in Portuguese territory. 
The members of the Councils of Advisers for Manipur and Tripura 
hold offices of profit under the Government of India and are there-
fore disqualified for election to Parliament under article 102(1) (a) 
of the Constitution. It is considered desirable that these offices 
should be declared by law not to disqualify their holders for being 
chosen as members of Parliament. 
H.V.PATASKAR. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 7th December, 1956. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951 
(43 or 1951). 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER III.-Disq1.Ullifications. 
7. A person shall be disqualifiEd for being chosen as. and for being, I?~lftca­
a member of either House of Parliament or of the Legislative =~hip 
Assembly or Legislative Council of a State- of P~r1iament 
orofa State 
• • • • • 
(e) if he is a director or managing agent of, or holds any 
offlce of profit under, any corporation in which the appropriate 
Government has any share or financial interest; 
• • • • • 
Legialature. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the removal of disqualifications for membership of, 
and voting at elections to, Parliament and Sta te L~slatures, 
and for certain miscellaneous matters in COnnec1J.O, with 
such election... ~I 
(Shri H. V. Pataskar, 
Minister of Legal Affairs) 