BiD No. 8S of 1957 
THE INDIAN RAILWAYS (AMEND-
MENT) BILL, 1957 
lAs INTRODUCED IN Lolt SABRA) 

9 of 1890· 
Bill No. 85 of 1951 
THE INDIAN RAILWAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Railways Act. 1890. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Railways (Amendment) Short title and com-Act, 1957. mencement. 
, (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may. by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
10 
20 
2. In section 27 of the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (hereinafter Am~ent 
referred to as the principal Act), for sub-section (5), the following of aect10n "7· 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
"(5) Any decision given by the Central Government under 
sub-section (4) shall be final and binding on all parties con-
cerned.". .-
3. In section 27A of the principal Act, for sub-section (1). the Amendment 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely: - ofA.section 
27 
"(1) The Central Government may, if in its opinion it is 
necessary in the public interest so to do, by general ~r special 
order, direct any railway administration-
(a) to give special facilities for, or preference to, the 
transport of any such goods or class of goods consigned to 
the Central Government or to the Government of any State 
or of such other goods or class of goods, as may be speci-
fied in the order; 

Amendment 
of IeCtion ~9. 
Omillioa of 
lectiolll32 
IDd 33. 
2 
(b) to carry any goods or class of goods by such route 
or routes and at such rates as may be specified in the 
order." 
4. In section 29 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), the words uother than a minor rail- S 
way" shall be omitted; . 
(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be 
substituted, namely:-
.. (2) The Central Government may, by a like order, Ax 
the rates of any other charges for the whole or any part of 10 
a railway and prescribe the conditions in which such rates 
of charges shall apply. 
(3) Any complaint that a railway administration is 
contravening any order issued by the Central Government 
under sub-section (1) shall be determined by the Central IS 
Government.". 
5. Section 32 and section 33 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
Am.ldmeat 8. In section 34 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2) and sub-
of BectioD 34. section (3), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely: - 2Q 
U (2) The Tribunal shall consist of a Chairman and two other 
members to be appointed by the Central Government. 
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the 
Chairman of the Tribunal unless he is, or has been, a Judge of 
the Supreme Court or of a High Court and the other two mem- 25 
hers of the Tribunal shall be chosen from among persons who, 
in the opinion of the Central Government, have special know-
ledge of commercial, industrial or economic conditions of the 
country or of the commercial working of the railways. 
(4) The Chairman and the other members of the Tribunal 30 
shall 'hold office for such period, not exceeding five years, as 
may be specified in the order of their appointment; and if the 
Chairman or any other member is by infirmity or otherwise 
rendered incapable of carrying out his duties or is absent on 
leave or otherwise in circumstances not involving the vacation 35 
of his appointment, the Central Government may appoint another 
person to act in his place during his absence. 

3 
<;) A person who holds office as the Chairman or other 
member of the Tribunal shall, on the expiration of the term of 
his office (not being an office to fill a casual vacancy), be ineli-
gible for re-appointment to that office. 
(6) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4) and sub-
section (5), the Chairman and other members of the Tribunal 
shall hold office on such- terms and conditions as the Central 
Government may, by general or special order, prescribe. 
(7) No act or proceedings of the Tribunal shall be deemed 
10 to be invalid by reason merely of any vacancy in, or any defect ' 
in the constitution of, the Tribunal.". 
20 
Ominion 
of lection 35. 7. Section 35 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
8. In section 39 of the principal Act, the words and brackets "the ~:::n~ 
State Government (as the case may be)" shall be omitted. 
9. In section 41 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1), for clauses (b), to 
ing clauses shall be substituted, namely:-
Amendment 
of section ,.1 
(e), the follow-
" (b) is charging for the carriage of any commodity be-
tween two stations a rate which is unreasonable, or 
(c) is levying any other charge which is unreasonable,"; 
(ii) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(3) In the case of a complaint under clause (b) or 
clause (c) of sub-section (1), the Tribunal m~ fix sUc.!t rate 
or charge as it considers reasonable: 
Provided that the rate to be fixed under clause (b) of 
sub-section (1) shall be within the limit of the maximum and 
minimum rates fixed by the CentnlI Government under sub-
section (1) of section 29.". 
30 10. After section 41 of the principal Act, the following section Jnlertion of 
shall be inserted, namely: _ ncw _dOlI 
41A. 
"41A. Where a railway administration, bound by an order ~ of 
of the Tribunal, considers that since the order was made there has ~'­
been a material change in the circumstances on which it was 
35 based, the railway administration may, after the expiry of one' 
year from the date of the order, make an application to the 

I 
Tribunal for revision of the order and the TribUDllI may, after 
making due inquiry into the matter in accordance with the pro-
visions of this Chapter, vary or revoke the order.". 
Substitution 11. For section 42 of the principal Act, the following section shall ofnewlec-
tion for sec- be substituted, name1y:- 5 
tion 42. 
Power to 
clalsifY or re-
classify com-
modities Of 
to alter rate •. 
Omisaion of 
aec:tioll 43. 
Amendment 
of aection 44-
Substitution 
of new sec-
tion for lec-
tion 45. 
Bar ofjUriB-
diction of the 
Tribunal. 
"42. The Central Government alone shall have power-
(a) to claSsify or re-ciassify any commodity; 
(b) to increase or reduce the level of class rates and 
other charges.". 
12. Section 43 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
13. In section 44 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) clauses (a)'and (b) shall be omitted; 
(ii) in clause <f), the words "or as assessors" shall be 
omitted. 
10 
14. For section 45 of the principal Act, the following section shall IS 
be substituted, namely:-
"45. (1) Nothing in this Chapter shall confer jurisdiction on 
the Tribunal in respect of-
(a) classification or re-classification of any commodity; 
(b) fixation of wharfage and demurrage charges (includ- 20 
ing conditions attached to such charges); 
(c) scales of charges by a railway administration for 
the carriage of passengers and their luggage, parcels, military 
traftlc and traftlc in railway materials and stores. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in su1:>-section (1), 25 
the Central Government may make a reference to the Tribunal 
in respect of any of the matters specified in that sub-section and 
where any such reference is made in respect of any matter, the 
Tribunal shall make an inquiry into that matter and submit its 
report thereon to the Central Government. 30 
(3) On receipt of e repoJ;t under suh-section (2), the Central 
Government may take such action as it considers suitable in 
respect of the matters dealt With in the report.". 

6 
15. In section 46 of the principal Act,-
(a) in clause (ii) , for the words "or reduce", the 
"reduce or cancel" shall be substituted; 
(b) clause (iii) shall be omitted. 
words 
'Amendment 
of aection 46. 
, 16. In section 46A of the principal Act, the proviso shall be Amendment 
mitted of aection o . 46A. 
17. In section 46C of the principal Act,- Amendment 
ofleCtion 
(i) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted,4 6C• 
namely:- ' 
10 • (a) "classification" means the grouping of commodities' 
into classes (both for small and wagon loads) as duly 
authorised by the Central Government and notified in the 
Indian Railway Conference Association's Goods Tarift in 
force for the time being for the purpose of determining the 
IS rate to be charged;'; 
(it) clQuse (f) shall be omitted; 
(iii) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
• (h) "wharfage" means the charge levied on goods for 
not removing them from the railway premises after the 
expiry of the free time allowed for such removal.'. 
18. If, immediately before the commencement of this Act, there is Dis~ of 
pending any proceeding before the Railway Rates Tribunal constitut- ~~.pro­
ed' under the Indian Railways Act, 1890, as in force before such 
2S commencement, the proceeding shall stand transferred to the Railway 
Rates Tribunal constituted after such commencement "(hereinafter 
referred to as the new Tribunal) and the new Tribunal shall decide 
and dispose of that proceeding in accordance with the provisions of 
the said Act QS in force after such commencement; and for the 
30 removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the proceeding, in so far 
as it relates to any complaint in respect of which the new Tribunal 
has no jurisdiction, shall abate. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
There has been a public feeling that the Railway Rates Tribunal 
as now functioning has tended to be too formal and legalistic in its 
approach and that proceedings before it have been unduly prolonged 
and expensive. The Railway Freight Structure Enquiry Committee, 
which was set up in the year 1955, was, therefore, asked to examine 
what changes were needed in the existing constitution, jurisdiction 
and rules of procedure of the Railway Rates Tribunal, so that the 
Tribunal might be a more expeditious instrument for adjudication 
of railway freight matters at a reasonable cost to the litigant. The 
recommendations made by the Committee relating to this matter 
have been examined and it is proposed to suitably amend the Indian 
Railways Act, 1890, in regard to the constitution and jurisdiction of 
the Tribunal. The present Bill seeks to achieve this object. 
2. This Bill also seeks to remove c&rtain lacunae and defects in 
the provisions of Chapter V of the Indian Railways Act that have 
come to notice in the working of the Act. 
JAGnvAN RAM. 
NEW DBLIu; 
The' 13th Novembn, 1957. 
• 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN RAILWAYS ACT, 1890. 
(9 of 1890) 
• • • • • 
27. (1) Every railway administration shall, according to its Duty o!~­
powers, afford all reasonable facilities for the receiving, forward- :i:rratiODl t; 
ing and delivering of traffic upon and from the several railways be- a~~ !J 
longing to or worked by it and for the return of rolling stock. forwar~1 
• • • • • 
(5) The powers conferred by this section on the Central Govern-
ment shall, in relation to any dispute between two or more minor 
railways, be powers of the State Government. 
• • • • • 
traflic with-
out unrea-
BODable 
delay and 
without partiality. 
27A. (1) The Central Government may, if in its opinion it is Power of 
necessary in the public interest so to do, by general or special order, Central tGot 
direct any railway administration to give special facilities fOf, or :~endlre: 
preference to, the transport of any such goods or class of goods con- := to~r':: 
signed to the Central Government or to the Government of any State port of goods 
or of such other goods or class of goods as may be speciJled in the !1mini1~:}' 
order. tion. 
• • • • • 
29. (1) The Central Government may by general or special order Pawer of the 
fix maximum and minimum rates for tlie whole or any part of a rail- Central GoY-
way, other than a minor railway, and prescribe the conditions in ~:mu: 
which such rates will apply. IDd miDi-
mumratelo 
(2) Any complaint that a railway administration is contravening 
any order issued by the Central Government in accordance with the 
provisions of this section shall be determined by the Central Govern-
ment. 
• • • • • 
3Z. The Central Government may, by general or special order, fix Pawerof 
the rates of terminal and other charges for the whole or any part of a =t~V­
railway, and prescribe the conditions in which such rates will fIz teothrmiaal aad er apply. CIbar,.. 
7 

8 
~ in 33. Any decision given by the Central Government or the State 
with tbiI Government, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, shall 
~=.:u be final and binding on all parties concerned. 
CoIIItitution 
of the Tri-
bUDal. 
RAILWAY RATI'.S TRIBUNAL 
M. (1) There shall be a Tribunal called the Railway Rates 
Tribunal, for the purpose of discharging the functions hereinafter 
specified in this Chapter. 
(2) The Tribunal shall consist of a President, and two other mem-
bers, appointed by the Central Government; and they shall hold 
office for such periods and on such terms and conditions as the 
Central Government may, by general order, prescribe. 
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a member 
of the Tribunal unless he is or has been, or is quaIihed for appoint-
ment as, a Judge of a High Court . 
• • • • • 
Camtituticla 35. (1) The Central Government shall constitu'e two panels of 
ofpauela of assessors, namely, (a) the trade, industry and agriculture panel; and 
--.oR. (b) the railway panel-
(2) The trade, industry and agriculture panel shall consist of not 
more than sixty persons chosen by the Central Government; one-
third of the number chosen shall represent trade, one-third industry, 
and one-third agriculture, the representatives in each group being 
chosen after consulting such associations representing trade, industry 
or agriculture (as the case may be), as the Central Government may 
consider necessary. 
(3) The railway panel shall consist of not more than thirty per-
sons with railway experience, chosen by ,the Central Government. 
(4) Any appointment to either panel shall be notified in the 
Offtcial Gazette; and the notiftcation shall specify the term for which 
the appointment is made. The term shall not exceed two years, but 
the member shall be eligible for re-appointrnent after the expiry of 
his term. 
• • • • • 
3t. For the purpose of exercising the jurisdiction conferred on it 
by this Chapter, the Tribunal may pass such interim and ftnal orders 
a8 the circumstances may require, including orders for the payment, 
subject to the provisions of this Chapter, of costs; and it shall be the 

9 
duty of the Central Government, or the State Government (as the 
case may be) on whom any obligation is imposed by any such order, 
to carry it out. 
• • • • • 
41. (1) Any complaint that a railway administration- Complaints agaiDlt a 
(a) is contravening the provisions of section 28, or ~-e.~~ 
(b) is charging station to station rates or wagon load rates 
which are unreasonable or rates which are unreasonable owing 
to any condition attached to them regarding minimum weight. 
packing, assumption of risk or any other matter, or 
(c) is levying charges (other than standardised terminal 
charges) which are unreasonable, or 
(d) is unreasonably refusing to quote a new station to station 
rate, or 
(e) has unreasonably placed a commodity in a higher class, 
may be made to the Tribunal, and the Tribunal shall hear and 
decide any such complaint in uccordance with the provisions 
of this Chapter. 
• • • .' • 
(3) In the case of a complaint under clause (d) of sub-section (1), 
the Tribunal may fix a new station to station rate . 
• • • • • 
42. (1) The Tribunal alone shall have power to re-classify any Powerto 
commodity in a higher class but such power shall not be exercised a1~::; or 
except on the application of the Central Government. ~tieL 
(2) The Central Government alone shall have power-
(af to increase dt reduce the level of class rates, schedule 
rates and terminal and other charges; 
(b) to classify any commodity which has not been classifted 
before. 
(3) The Tribunal as well as the Central Government shall have 
power to r~-classify any "commodity in(' a lower class. 
43. (1) All matters shall be decided by the Tribunal with the TribuDal to 
aid of assessors. :::::. wi ... 
(2) Where, in the opinion of the President of the Tribunal, any ::r ..... 
matter prima facie appears to involve a question of principle, it 
shall be decided by a Full Bench consisting of the President and 

10 
the other two members, with the aid of not less than four assessors 
selected by the President ip equal numbers from the trade, industry 
and agriculture panel and from the railway panel. 
(3) All other matters may be decided by a single member of 
the Tribunal with the aid of not more than four assessors selected 
by the President of the Tribunal in equal numbers from the trade, 
industry and agriculture panel and from the railway panel: 
Provided that the President may, in his discretion, direct that 
any such matter shall be decided by the Full Bench: 
Provided further that where a single member of the Tribunal 
hearing any matter considers that it involves a question of 
principle, he shall refer the matter to the President who shall direct 
that it shall be decided by the Full Bench in the manner referred 
to in sub-section (2). 
(4) It shall be the duty of each assessor to advise the Tribunal 
and state his opinion on all questions arising in the matters before 
the Tribunal, but the Tribunal shall not be bound to act on the 
advice, or to conform to the opinion, of all or any of the assessors. 
Proce4ure. 44. (1) With the approval of the Central Government, the 
Tribunal may make rules regarding its practice and procedure and 
generally for the effective discharge of its functions under this 
Chapter. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of 
the foregoing power, such rules may provide for-
(4) the preparation of panels of assessors; 
(b) the terms and conditions of the appointment of 
assessors; . 
• • • • 
(I) the disposal by the Tribunal of any proceedings 
before it: notwithstanding that in the course thereof there has 
been a change in the persons sitting as members of the 
Tribunal or as assessors: 
• • • • 
8Ir ofjUJil- 45. Nothing in this Chapter shall confer jurisdiction on the 
=:'the Tribunal in" respect of scales of charges levied by a railway 
administration for the carriage, of passengers and their luggage, 
parcels, military traftic and traftic in railway materials and stores, 
and demurrage charges, except on a reference made to the Tribunal 
by "the Central Government. 

11 
46 Notwithstanding anything contained in- this Chapter, a Alt~atiOD . .. f and canccU .. railway administration may, m respect of the carriage 0 any tion of c:cr-
merchandise by goods train - taiD Itatioo to , ltalion nt .. 
(i) quote a new station to station rate; or 
(i1.) increase or reduce an existing station to station rate, 
not being a station to station rate introduced in compliance 
with an order made by the Tribunal; or 
(iii) after due notice in the manner prescribed by the 
Central Government, cancel any station to station rate which 
has not been introduced in compliance with an order made by 
the Tribunal, unless the Tribunal has, after notice has been 
given as aforesaid, granted an injunction against such cancella-
tion; or 
• • • • 
46A. The decision of the Tribunal shall be by a majority of the DeciliOD of 
members sitting and shall be final: the TribUDal. 
Provided that where a single member of the Tribunal has heard 
and decided an,y matter, he may, in his discretion, give leave to any 
party to appeal to the Full Bench; and if an appeal is filed in 
pursuance of such leave, the decision of the Full Bench or of a 
majority of the members thereof, as the case may be, shall be final. 
• • • • 
48C. In this Chapter, unless there is anything repugnant in the DefiDidODl. 
subject or context,-
(a) "classification" means the grouping of commodities 
into classes as notified in the Indian Railway Conference 
Association's Goods Tariff and as in force at the commencement 
of the Indian Railways (Second Amendment) Act, 1948, for 
the purpose of determining the rate to be charged; 
• • • • 
<I> "schedule rate" means a rate lower than the maximum 
or class- rate applied on a commodity basis; 
• • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Railways Act, 1890. 
(Shri JagjitJa" Ram, 
Minister of Rai/fJ)(JYs) 