8W No. 85 of '962 
THE OIL AND NATURAL GAS 
COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1962 
, 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABRA 
ON 30m AUGUST, 1962) 
~ Aft,l.IAMENT wBRMlY 
5 ..................... __ 
Datt- ••. ~ .L.lJ.~~ -

43 of 19';9. 
1 of 1956. 
Bill No 85 of 1962 
THE On.. AND NATURAL GAS COM,MISSION 
. (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1962 . 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Oil and Natural Gas Commission Act, 1959. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Oil and Natural Gas Commission Short title. 
(Amendment) Act, 1962. 
5 2. In section 1 of the Oil and Natural Gas Commission Act, 1959 Amendment 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (2), the of section r. 
words ", except the State of Jammu and Kashmir" shall be omitted. 
3. In section 14 of the principal Act, after clause (g), the following Amel1~ment 
clause shall be inserted, namely: _ of section 14· 
10 "(gg) to promote and form companies in compliance with 
20. 
the requirements of the Companies Act, 1956 for any of the 
purposes aforesaid;". 
4. In section 15 of the principal Act,- Amendment 
. of sectio:l (a) In clause (a), for the words "rupees two thousand a r;. 
month or more", in boto the places where they occur, the words 
"more than rupees two thousand two hundred and fifty" shall 
be substituted; 
(b) 'in clause ('b), fer the words "exceeding thirty lakhiCI 
of rupees", the words "exceeding fifty lakhs of rupees" shall be 
substituted. 
5. In section 21 of the principal Art, in clause (b) of the proviso to Ame:"!mem . of.ectlon sub-sectlon (3), the words "or seven and a half lakhs of rupee" 21, 
whichever is less," shall be omitted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In the light of the experience gained in the working of the Oil 
and Natural Gas Commission Act, 1959, it has become necessary to 
enhance the powers of the Oil and Natural Gas Commission as has 
been done in the case of other big public undertakings so that the 
Commission may function more effectively with speed and efficiency 
required for their increasing activity. Accordingly it is proposed to 
give powers to the Commission to promote and form companies in 
accordance with the Companies Act, 1956, and to create without the 
previous approval of the Central Government posts carrying the 
salary or honorarium of not more than Rs. 2,250 per month. It is 
also proposed to. enhance the Commission's powers in relation to re-
appropriation. 
The Bill is designed to give effect to these proposals. 
NEW Dl:LHI; K;. D. MALAVIYA. 
The 24th August, 1962. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE OIL AND NATURAL GAS COMMISSION ACT, 1959 
(43 OF 1959) 
* * * * 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act mav be Clllled the Oil and Natural Gas Commis!',on Short title, • extent and 
Act, 1959. commence-
ment. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India, except the State of JamIl1u 
and Kashmir. 
* * • * 
15. The Commission may exercise all such powers as may be powers of 
necessary or expedient for the purpose of carrying out its functions ~iss~~~­
under this Act: 
Prcvided that before exercising its powers in respect of the follow-
ing matters, it shall obtain the previous approwl of the Central 
Government, namely:-
(a) the creation of any post the salary or honorarium of 
which would be rupees two thousand a month or more or would 
be on a scale the maximum of which is rupees two thousand a 
month or more, and the appointIIl;ent of any person to any such 
post; 
(b) the implementation of any scheme or proposal which 
will involve a capital expenditure exceeding thirty lakhs of 
rupees: 
* • * * 
21. 
• • • * 
(3) The Commission may sanction any re-appropriation from one 
head of expenditure to another or from a provision made for one 
scheme to that for another: 
3 
Budget • 

4 
Provided that, except with the previous approval of the Central 
Government-
• • • • 
(b) no re;.appropriBtion which has the effect of augmenting 
the provision under \lny head of expenditure as approved by 
the Central Government by more than twenty per cent. or seven 
and a half lakhs of rupees, whichever is less, shall be made . 
• • • • 

LOK $A.BaA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Oil and Natural Gas Cominission Act, 1959. 
(Shri Keshava DeJ)a Ma/aviya, 
Mllifster of Mines 81 Fuel.) 