BILL No. 85 of 1958 (!j) 
THE SUGAR EXPORT PROMOTION 
BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUC!D IN LoK SABHA) 

BUI No. 85 of 1958. 
THE SUGAR EXPORT PROMOTION BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SARRA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the export of sugar in the public interest and for the 
levy and collection in certain circumstances of an additional 
duty of excise on sugar produced in India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Sugar Export Promotion Act, Shd"rt title 
1958. an extent. 
5 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "export" means taking out of India by sea, land or air; 
(b) "export agency" means any such agency as may be 
specified in this behalf under section 3, and when no such agency 
has been so specified, the Central Government; 
10 (c) "export quota" means the export quota referred to in 
section 5; 
(d) "factory" means any premises (including the precincts 
thereof) wherein sugar is being produced by the vacuum pan 
process; 
IS (e) "owner"-
(i) with reference to any factory the possession of 
which has been transferred by lease, mortgage or otherwise, 
Deft 

PiDtionof 
qua.ldty of 
aupr for 
pur,'OBes of 
export. 
2 
means the transferee so long as his right to possession 
subsists, 
.. ' 
(ii) with reference to any factory for which an agent, 
by whatever name called, is employed, means the agent if, S 
and in so far as, he has been duly authorised by the owner 
in that behalf, and 
(iii) with reference to any factory the management of 
which has been taken over by any person or body of persons 
under the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 
1951, means that person or body of persons; 10 6,5 of 19~I 
(f) "sugar" means any form of sugar containing more than 
ninety per cent. of sucrose; ! 
(g) "year" means the year beginning on the first day of 
May. 
3. (1) For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government 15 
may, by notification in ,the" Official Gazette; specify as an export 
agency any company within the meaning of the Companies Act, 
1956, or any body of persons established or recognised as a body 
corporate by or under any other law for the time being in force, 
(2) Where any such company or other body corporate has been 
specified as an export agency, it shall be lawful for such agency to 30 
perform all or any of the functions of an export agency under this 
Act, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in 
the memorandum or articles of association of the company or, 
as the case may be, the law applicable thereto. 25 
4. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette. fix from time to time the quantity of sugar which 
may be exported during any period, and, in fixing such quantity, 
the Central Government shall have regard t~ 
(a.) the quantity of sugar available in India, 30 
(b) the quantity of sugar which, in its opinion, would be 
reasonably required for consumption in India, 
(c) the necessity for exporting sugar with a view to earn-
ing foreign exchange in the public interest. 
(2) The power conferred by sub-section (1) shall be so exercised 35 
as to ensure that the quantity fixed under that sub-section for any 
year does not exceed in the aggregate twenty per cent. of the quan-
tity of sugar produced in India in the season ending with the month 
of October falling within that year. 

of 1944. 
of 1944. 
5. The Central Government shall, by order in writing, apportion Export fi 
the quantity of sugar fixed from time to time for purposes of export (a~:~~CB~r 
under section 4 among the owners in proportion to the quantity of 
sugar produced, or likely to be produced, by them respectively 
S during the season referred to in sub-section (2) of section 4, and 
such order shall be communicated to each of the owners, and the 
quantity so apportioned shall be deemed to be the export quota for 
the factory of that owner. 
6. (1) Every owner shall, on demand by the export agency, Liability of 
10 deliver to it from time to time sugar produced in his factory in' such ~:ti~to 
quantities (not exceeding in the aggregate his export quota fixed export 
for the factory or group of factories, as the case may be), of !luch i:~~/o 
grade, in such manner, within such time and at such place, as may ai~ncy. 
be specified by the export agency in this behalf. 
IS (2) When sugar has been delivered by an owner in accordance 
with the provisions of sub-section (1), the owner shall retain no 
rights in respect of such sugar except his right to receive payment 
therefor under section 9. 
7. (1) Where sugar delivered by any owner falls short of the ~cilii~~al 
20 export quota fixed for it by any quantity (hereinafter referred to as excise dUty 
the said quantity), there shall be levied and collected on so much of on sugar. 
the sugar despatched from the factory for consumption in India as . 
is equal to the said qutll'ltity, a duty of excise at the rate of seventeen 
rupees per maund. 
~5 (2) The duty of excise referred to in sub-section (1) shall be in 
addition to the duty of excise chargeable on sugar under any other 
law for the time being in force, and shall be paid by the owner to 
such authority as may be specified in the notice demanding the 
payment of duty and within such period not exceeding ninety days 
30 as may be specified in such notice. 
(3) If any such owner does not pay the whole or any part of the 
duty payable by aim within the period referred to in sub-section 
(2), he shall be liable to pay in respect of every period of thirty days 
or part thereof during which the default continues a penalty which 
35 may extend to ten per cent. of the duty outstanding from time to 
time, the penalty being adjudged in the same manner as the penalty 
to which a persl!ln is liable under the rules made under the Central 
Excises and Salt Act, 1944, is adjudged. 
(4) The provisioTls of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, and 
40 the rules made thereunder, including those relating to refunds and 
exemptions from duty, shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to 

Sale by 
export 
agency of 
sugar 
delivered. 
Payments to 
owners in 
reapect of 
lugar 
deliver~d. 
the levy and collection of the duty of excise or any other sum referred 
to in this section as they apply in relation to the levy and collection 
of the duty on sugar or other sums of money payable to the Central 
Government under that Act or the rules made thereunder. 
8. (J) The export agency shall take all practical measures to S 
export sugar delivered to it under this Act: 
Provided that, if the export agency is of opinion that having 
regard to the quality of the sugar delivered to it by any owner, or 
to the expenses involved in transporting the sugar from one place to 
another, or to the delay likely to be involved in exporting it, or to 10 
the conditions prevailing in the markets for sugar, whether in or out 
of India, or to any other relevant circumstance, it is expedient so to 
do, the export agency may sell the whole or any part of the sugar 
in India and may, if it thinks fit, purchase such quantity of sugar as 
it may consider necessary for export at the appropriate time. IS 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the export agency may 
itself sell sugar or permit the owner to sell the whole or any part of 
the export quota in his custody at a price approved by it on condition 
that the sale-proceeds are payable to it. 
9. (1) The export agency shall, at such time as it thinks fit, make 20 
to the owners who have delivered sugar to it under this Act, payments 
determined in accordance with the provisions hereinafter in this 
section contained. 
(2) From the total sale-proceeds in respect of the quantity fixed 
for export under section 4 for any year, there shall be deducted 25 
the total expenditure incurred by the export agency in respect of 
the sugar, whether by way of administrative expenses or otherwis~, 
and the balance shall be apportioned among the owners in proportion 
to the quantity of sugar delivered by them respectively during that Q 
year. 3 
(,'l) In making any distribution under this section, the export 
agency shall make such adjustments as may be necessary having 
regard to the grade of sugar delivered by any owner, the adjustments 
being made on the basis of sugar of ISS-E-29 grade and with 35 
reference to the price differential schedule for different grades of 
sugar which the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, publish in this behalf. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section and 
subject to the rules which may be made in this behalf, the export 

agency may make on account payments to owners against docu-
ments of delivery of sugar furnished by them, and such payments 
shall be adjusted at the time of final payment. 
10. The export agency specified under section 3 shall be bound, Power of 
S in the discharge of its functions under this Act, by such general CGentral t ovcrnmen 
or specie.l directions, as the Central Government may give to it in tc? giv~ 
writing. direcnons. 
11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Delegation 
Gazette, direct, that any power conferred on it by this Act shall, sub- of powers. 
10 ject to such conditions, if any, as me.y be specified in the notification, 
be exercisable also by such officer or authority subordinate to the 
Central Government as may be specified in the notification. 
12. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against Pr~tection of 
the export agency or the Centrol Government or any of its officers ~~~~~ X'!~n 
15 for or in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended 
to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made 
thereunder. 
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Power to 
Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this make rules. 
20 Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
(a) the submission by owners to such authority as may be 
25 specified in this behalf, of returns or reports or other information 
relating to the manuf\1cture, sale, despatch, stocks and prices of 
sugar; 
(b) the manner in which the accounts of the export agency 
may be maintained and audited; 
30 (c) the inspection of records end registers of factories and 
the export agency; 
(d) the making of payments by the export agency to owners; 
(e) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed 
under this Act. 
3S (3) In making a rule under this section, the Central Government 
may direct that a breach thereof shall be punishable with fine which 
may extend to five thousand rupees. 
(4) All rules made under this Act shall be laid for not less than 
thirty days before each House of Parliament as soon as may be after 

Repeal and 
savina. 
they are made and shall be subject to such modifications as ParHa .. 
ment mey make during the session in which they are so laid or the 
session immediately following. 
14. (1) The Sugar Export Promotion Ordinance, 1958, is hereby 
repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done 
or taken under this Act as if this Act had commenced on the 27th 
day of June, 1958. 
S of 1958, 
s 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
With a view to earning foreign exchange, it is necessary to 
promote export of sugar. The export.of sugar, however, involves a 
loss, even if excise duty and cane cess are remitted. AIJ Government 
have no powers under the existing law to earmark any portion of the 
production of the factories for export, and as the need for foreign 
exchange is pressing, it is necessary to empower the Central Govern-
ment to fix the quantity of sugar to be exported from time to time 
and to apportion the same to sugar producers, in proportion to their 
production, who shall be under obligation to supply their ~xport 
quota to the export agency. 
AJIT PRASAD JAIN. 
NJItV DELHI; , 
The 9tl August, 1958. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 13 empowers the Central Government to 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this law and sub-clause 
(2) thereof enumerates the various matters in resp }ct of which rules 
may be made. These matters relate to the submission by owners to 
a specified authority of returns, reports or other information relating 
to the manufacture, sale, despatch, stocks and prices of sugar, the 
manner in which the accounts of the export agency may be main-
tained and audited, the inspection of records and registers of hctories 
and the export agency and the making of payments by the export 
agency to owners. These are matters of detail which may best be 
regulated by rules. The delegation of powers is of a normal 
character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the export of sugar in the public interest and for 
the levy and collection in certain circumstances of an addi-
tional duty of excise on sugar produced in India 
(Shri Alit PrasadJmn, 
Minister of Food and Agril 