As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

.” 3 DEC 1999

Bill No, 85 of 1999,
—_———

IAN CITIZENS ABROAD (VOTING RIGHT AT ELEC-
TIONS) BILL, 1999

By
Suri G.M. Banatwa.ta, M.P.

A
BILL

| Indian citizens living abroad with the right to vote in elections to the House
People and the Legislative Assemblies of the States.

it'enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as

(1) This Act may be called the Indian citizens Abroad (Voting Right at Elections)

It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, “Indian citizen living abroad”
Indian citizen temporarily staying aboad for any work or for pursuing any

Shon title and
‘commence-
ment.

Definition,


Right to vote to
Indian citizens
living abroad.

Creation of
election
machinery.

Diplomatic
and consular
officers 10
assist Election
Commission
of India

Power to make
mules,

3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being, | for
an Indian citizen living abroad shall have the right to vote in any election to the House
the People and the Legislative Assemblies of the States.

4. The Election Commission of India shall make provision for and create
adequate machinery to enable Indian citizens living abroad to exercise their 1 is
in every election to the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies of
States.

5. All diplomatic and consular officers of the Government of India shall act in aid
the Election Commission of India in the discharge of its functions under section 4.

6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rul
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

) large number of Indian citizens stay abroad temporarily for any work or for

as the law allows only the ordinarily resident citizens to register themselves as
. No machinery exists to allow the Indian citizens working abroad to exercise their

ber 20, 1999. G.M. BANATWALLA



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the creation of machinery to enable Indian citizens
living abroad to vote in the elections held in India from time to time. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely
involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees two lakhs per annum from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is also likely to involve a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty
thousand.



MEMORANDUM OF DELEGATED LEGISLATION

© stake rules for carrying
uciail only, the delegation



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide the Indian citizens living abroad with the right to vote in elections to
of the People and the Legislative Assemblies of States.

(Shri G.M. Banatwaila, M.P.)

. MGIP(PLU)MRND—1762LS—18.11.1999.