As lNTBODVCJI:D IN LoB: 8.uHA OK 
BUI No. as of 1176 
• I' ; 
nm CONSTITUTION (FORTY-THIRD AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1976 
A 
BILL 
fu.rtheT to amend the Constitution of Incija. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-seventh Year of the Shart 
Republic of India as follows: - title. 
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) 
Act, 1976. 
S Z. In article 316 of the Constitution, in clause (2), for the words 
''sixty years", the words "sixty-two years" shall be substituted. 
Amend-
menta! 
article 
316. 

',,' 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Article 316 (2) of the Constitution provides that the Chairman and 
Members of a State Public Service Commission or Joint Commission shall 
retire at 60 or hold office for a term of six years from the elate on which 
they enter service, whichever is earlier. This was the position when 
the Constitution came into f<lrce. Subsequently, while the age of retire-
ment of the High Court Judges was raised to 62, that of the Chainnan 
and the Members of the State Public Service Commissions remained 
unchanged. 
The same article provides that one-half of the members of every 
Public Service Commission shall be employees of the Government of 
India or the Government of a State. The age of retirement of Govern-
ment employees was 55 originally but was later raised to 58 in the case 
of All-India Services, Central Government servants and the Government 
servants of several States. Membership of the Commission is no attraction, 
therefore, to them, as they will have only two years to serve on the 
Commission which position is not desirable from the point 01 view of the 
efficient functionin'g of the Commission. 
Academicians like University Professors are eligible for appointment 
to the State Public Service Commissions. The age of retirement of 
University Professors has been recently raised to 60. It will not be 
attractive for these academicians to serve on a Public Service Commission 
if the age of retirement remains sixty. The Chairman/Members of a 
State Public Service Commission are forbidden to serve unc\er the 
Government of India or a State Government after retirement. Conse-
quently, no eminent academician will be eager to accept appointment on 
the Commission unless the age of retirement is raised to 62. 
'; " ,.. .! ! I ~ 
The proPosal is to raise the age of retirement of the C,hairman and 
Members' of the State Public Service Commissions to 62. The Bill "seeks 
to give effect to this proposal. ' 
NEW DELHI; OM MEHTA. 
The 18th August, 1976. J 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION 01' INDIA 
316. (1) • • • • 
(2) A member of a Public Service Commission shall hold office for 8 
term of six years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until 
he attains, in the case of the Union Commission, the age of sixty-five 
years, and in the case of a State Commission or a Joint Commission, the 
age of sixty year!:, whichever is earlier: 
Provided that-
(a) a member of a Public. Service Commission may, by writing 
under his hand addressed, in the case of the Union Commission or a 
Joint Commission, to the President, and in the case of a State Commis-
sion, to the Governor of the State, resign his office; 
(b) a member of a Public Service Commission may be removed 
from his office in the manner provided in clause (1) or clause (3) 
of article 317. 
• 
( 
• • • 
a 
Appoint-
ment mel 
term of 
offiCe 
of 
members. 

LOK SABHA 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
(Shri Om Meht4, MinUter of 
State in the M in'ist.", of 
Home Affairs, Department 
of Personnel and Administra-
tive Reforms and Depa1't-
ment €If ParlUlmenta1"Jl 
AI"'''') . 