- Bill No. 85 of 952
THE MUSLIM WAKES BILL
[To BE INTRODUCED IN THE House 09 THE PEOPLE]
A
BILL
to provide for the better governance and admimstration of Muslim Wakfs
and the supervision of Mutawallis’ management of them, in India.
Be it enacted by Parliament as follows :—
: CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
34, Short title, extent and commencement.—(l) This Act shall be called
the Muslim Wakis Act, 9
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and
Kashmir.
(3) This section and sections 2 to 4 shall come into force at once. The
rest of the Act shall not come into force until such date as the Govern-
ment may by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf.
2. Application of the Act.—This Act shall apply to all Wakfs whether
created before or after the commencement of this Act and situated in any
-of the following States :—
Bombay, Madhya Pradesh, Madras, Orissa, Punjab, West Bengal,
Hyderabad, Madhya Bharat, Mysore, Patiala and East Punjab States
Union, Rajasthan, Saurashtra and Bhopal,
and Chapter III of the Act skall further apply to all Wakfs situated in
Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Ajmer and Delhi:
Provided that the Union Government may by notification in the Official
Gazette apply the Act to Wakfs situated in any other States or the whole
"0 the Act to the Wakfs situated in Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Ajmer or Delhi:
Provided further that the Union Government on the recommendation
of a State Government may by notification in the Official Gazette exempt
any Wakifs from the operation of this Act.
3. Definitions—In this Act unless there is anything repugnant in the
subject or context,—
(a) ‘Alim’ means a person who is a diploma holder of a ‘madarsa
Arabia’ as defined in clause (7) of this section;
(b) ‘beneficiary’ means a person or object for whose benefit a
wakf is created and includes religious, pious and charitable objects,
and any other objects of public utility established for the benefit of
the Muslim community;
(c) ‘benefit’ does not include any benefit which a mutawalli is
entitled to claim solely by reason of his being such mutawalli ;
(d) ‘Board’ means Board of Muslim Wakfs constituted under
this Act;
0
03]


30
5 व6
35
2
(e) ‘court’ means unless otherwise stated either expressly or by
implication, the court of the District Judge, or any court empowered
by the Government to exercise jurisdiction under this Act;
(f). ‘family’ includes :—
(a) descendants,
(b) parents and grand parents.
(c) wife or husband, and
(d) persons related through any ancestor male or female, who
live with and are maintained by the waktf;
) ‘Jamiat-Ulema’ means Jamiat-Ulamai-Hind which has got its
head-office at Delhi and includes all its branches in the various States
of India; i
(hk) ‘madarsa Arabia’ includes any educational institution where-
in,— :
(i) the Nizami Course or Shia Theological Course or Oriental
Course of studies is prescribed for grant of degrees:
Provided that a madarsa in which Shia Theological Course
is prescribed shall be called ‘Shia madarsa Arabia’ and all the
rest shall be called ‘Sunni madarsa Arabia’,
(ii) there are at least two teachers to teach Arabic, and
“(iti) the annual budget, at least for the previous two years
has amounted to a sum of five thousand rupees; डर
(i) ‘mutawalli’ means a manager of a wakf or endowment and
includes, an Amin, a Sajjadanishin, a Mujawar, a Khadim, a Naib-
Mutawalli, a committee of management and save, as otherwise pro
vided in this Act any person who is for the time being in-charge of,
or is administering, any endowment as such ;
(j) ‘net income’ means the total income minus land revenue,
and other cesses payable to the Government and local bodies;
(k) ‘person interested in wakf’ means any person who is entitled
to receive any pecuniary or other benefit from the wakf and includes,—
(i) any person who has a right to worship or to perform any
religious rite in a mosque, idgah, imambara, dargah, khanqgah,
maqbara, graveyard or any other religious institution connected
with the wakf or to participate in any religious or charitable
institution under the wakf;
(ii) the ‘wakif’ and any descendant of the wakif, and the
mutawalli; 2
(7) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made by the Govern-
ment and includes bye-laws"made by the Board under this Act;
(m) ‘property’ includes Government security bonds, shares in
firms, and companies, stocks, debentures, and other securities and
instruments: -
(x) ‘Shia Conference’ mearis all India Shia Conference which
has its head-office at Lucknow and ‘includes all its branches in the
various States of India: :
(०) “Shia Political Conference’ means. All ainda Shia Political
Conference and includes all its branches in the various States of India.


3 ,
CHAPTER II
Survey or WakFs AND BoArps or Wakes
4, Survey of wakfs—(l) Within three months of the ‘commencement -
of this Act the Government of each of the States to which this Act applies पे
shall by notification in the Official Gazette appoint for each district 8 5_
Gazetted Officer, either by name or by official designation, for the purpose
of making a survey of all wakfs. Such Officer shall be called ‘‘The Com-
missioner’ of Wakfs”’. | है
2) The State Government may, from time to time when necessary,
cancel any appointment made under sub-section (0) or make a new १0
. appointment. ¢
(3) “The Commissioner of Wakfs’’ shall, after making such enquiries
as he may consider necessary, ascertain and determine,—
(@) the number of all Muslim wak!s showing Shia or Sunni wakfs-
respectively: ॥5]
Provided that when there is a dispute whether a particular wakf
is a Shia wakf or a Smini wakf-and there are clear indications as to
the sect to which it pertains in the deed of wakf, such dispute shall
be decided on this basis;
(०) the nature of each wakt, 20 .
(०) the gross income of property comprised in the wakt,
(d) the amount of Government Land Revenue cesses and taxes
payable in respect of wakf property,
(०) expenses incurred in the realization of the income and the
pay of the Mutawalli of each wakd. : 28
(4) In making such enquiries as aforesaid thesCommissioner of Wakfs
shall exercise all the powers of a civil court for summoning and examining
witnesses and documents, making local inspections, appointing ~commis-
sioners for examination of witnesses, examining of accounts and making
local investigations. > é 30
(4) The Commissioner of Walkfs shall submit his report of enquiry to
the Government.
(6) The total cost of carrying ‘out the provisions of this section and
section 5 shall be borne by the Mutawallis of all wakfs in proportion to the
income of the property of such wakf situated in the State to be assessed 35
_ by the Chief Commissioner of Wakfs appointed under section 6..
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the. deed or instvument of
creating any wakf any Mutawalli, may pay from the income of the wak¢
any sum due from him under sub-Section (6).
(8) Any sum due from a Mutawalli under sub-section (6) may, on 8 - 40
certificate issued by the Government be recovered in the manner provided
by. law-for recovery of an arrear of Land Revenue.
5. Appointment of Additional Commissioners of Wakfs.—(I) In addition
to the Commissioner of Walfs, appointed under section 4, the Government
tnay, by notification in the Official Gazette appoint as many ‘‘Additional 45
Commissioners of Wakfs’’ in each State as it may think necessary. The
~ duties and powers of the Additional Commissioners of Wakfs shall be the
_ Same as those of the Commissioners of Wakfs under section 4. _


5
0
॥ 9]
20
25.
30
35
40
45
4
(2) One of such Additional Commissioners of Wakf shall be appointed
the ‘Chief State Commissioner of Wakis’ for the purpose of sub-section (3),
(8) The Chief State Commissioner of Wakfs shall apportion the work
of survey between the Additional Commissioners of Wakfs in such manner
as he may think proper, and shall direct by whom any enquiry made or
report should be submitted and such an enauiry made or a report sub-
mitted by an Additional Commissioner of Wakf shall, for the purposes of
this Act, be deemed to be the inquiry or report, as the case may be of the
Commissioner of Wakfs, under sub-section (5) of section 4:
Provided that a survey made in the State before the commencement
of the Act shall be deemed to haye been made under the Act.
6, Commissioner’s 70007.--(7) The Goyernment shall forward a copy of
the report of the Commissioner of Wals to the Board. The Board shall
88 soon as possible notify in the Official Gazette the wakfs, to which,
according to such reports the provisions of this Act apply.
(2) The Mutawalli of a Wakf or any person. interested ina wakf or the
Board may bring a suit in a Civil Court of competent jurisdiction for a
declaration that any transaction held by the Commissioner of Wakfs to be
a wakf, is not a wakt, or any transaction held or assumed by him not to
be a wakf, is a wakf or that wakf held by him to pertain to a particular
sect does not belong to that sect: लत 5
Provided that no such suit shall be instituted by the Board after more
than two years of the receipt of the report of the Commissioner of Wakfs
and by a Mutawalli or person interested in a wakf after more than two
years after notification referred to in sub-section (7):
Provided further that no proceedings under this Act in respect’ of any
walt shall be stayed or suspended merely by reason of the pendency of
any such suit or of any appeal arising out of any such suit.
(3) Subject to the final result of any suit instituted under sub-section
(2) the report of the Commissioner of Walkfs shall .be final and
conclusive.
(4) The Commissioner of Wakfs shall not be made a defendant to any
suit under sub-section (2) and no suit shall be instituted against him for
anything done by him in good faith in due discharge of his duties underthe Act.
7. Establishment of Board.—(Z) Each State Government shall establishwithin its territory a ‘Board of Muslim Wakts’,
(?) Bach such Board shall be a body corporate, and shall have perpetualSuccession and a common seal, with power to acquire and hold propertyand to transfer any such property subject to the conditions and restrictionsprescribed and shall by its said name, sue and be sued.
8. Constitution of the Board.-—‘The Board’ shall consist of,—
(@) four members to be elected in the manner prescribed by Muslimmembers of the respective State Legislatures,
(b) four members to be elected in the manner preseribed by theMuslim members of the district boards, Municipal Boards, Townarea and Notified area Committees of the respective States,
हे (०) four members to be elected in the manner prescribed by theamiat-Ulema and the teachers of the Sunni Madarsis Arabia, —


हा 5
(d) two members to be elected in the manner prescribed, by
Shia Political Conferenee and Shia Conference and the teachers of
the Shia Madarsas Arabia, ‘
(०) One Mutawalli to be co-opted by the Sunni members of the
Board and one Mutawalli to be co-opted by the Shia members of the
Board,
(f) the President to be elected by the members of the Board if he
is not one of the above seventeen members:
Provided that no Mutawalli of a Wakf shall be entitled to be elected in
any of the categories save as provided in clause (6):
Provided further that where any one of the bodies referred to in sub-
clauses (c) and (व) does not exist, the right of election shall he vested in the
other body or bodies mentioned in each sub-clause respectively which is
or are existing at that time.
9. Election of Members.—(7) If at any election of the Board no Muslim
member is available under clauses (a) and (b) of section 8, the requisite
number of such members shall be elected by the bodies referred to in sub-
clauses (c) and (d) to the extent of one half each and on their failure to do
so within the time fixed by the State Government, the deficiency shall be
made up by nomination by the State Government.
(2) If the bodies referred to in clauses (c) and (d) fail to return the
requisite number of members within the time as may be fixed by the State
Government the deficiency shall be made up by nomination by the State
Government. S :
0. Disqualification of a member.—A person shall not he eligible for
appointment or election as a member, if such person—
(a) is not a Muslim; :
(b) is less than twenty years of age;
(c) is of unsound mind; and stands so declared by a competent
court;
(d) has applied for being adjudged an insolvent or is an undis-
charged insolvent;
(e) has been convicted of any offence under this Act;
_ (f) has been convicted of any such offence or is subjected by a
criminal court to any such order as implies moral turpitude; and
(g) has on any previous occasion, been removed from office or
by order of a competent court from any position of trust either for
mismanagement or for corruption.
il, Term of Membership.—The members of the Board shall hold office
for five years:
Provided that an elected or co-opted member shall, notwithstanding the
expiration of his term of office, continue to hold office until the vacancy
caused by expiration of the said term has been filled.
2. Situation of Office —The office of the Board shall be located at such
a place as is determined by the State Government.
48. Quorum.—The quorum for a meeting of the Board shall be seven,
+ l0
I5
20
26
30
35
40
45


6
0
I5
20
25
30.
35
40
45
6
44. Decision.—The decision of the Central Board shall be by a majority
of its members present and voting. In case of equal division the President
shall haye a second or a easting vote:
Provided that the question of the use of surplus fund of Sunni or Shia
Wakis or the income of wakfs in accordance with the cy-pres doctrine and
in case of those wakts the objects of which are not evident from any written
instruments or in cases in which the objects for which they were created have
ceased to exist, shall be determined by the Board, by the votes, of only
Sunni or Shia members present at the yoting in respect of Sunni or Shia
Wakts respectively. :
45, Meetings of the Board.—(7) The Board shall meet for the transaction
of the business at least once in every three months and as often as is
necessary to meet for the transaction of the business.
(2) Hvery meeting of the Board shall be convened by. the Secretary,
under the direction of the Pres‘dent and at least three weeks’ notice shall be
given to the members.
i6. Special Meetings of the Board.—The special meetings of the Board
shall be called by the President on the receipt of a requisition signed by
not less than six members and specifying the business to be transacted at
such meeting:
Provided that if the President fails to call such. meeting — within ~one
month after the receipt of such a requisition, the meeting shall be called
by the members who have signed the requisition.
i7, PreSident and SecYetary._(/) Hach Board shall have a President
and a Secretary who shall be: Muslims:
Provided that no Mutawalli of a wakf or a Government Treasurer or a
whole-time seryant-of the Government or the servant of any wakf adminis-
tration, shall be elected as the President.
(2) Immediately after the formation of the Board and subsequently
whenever it becomes necessary by reason of an~ existing or anticipated
vacancy or otherwise to appoint a President, the Board shall elect one of
its members or any other person as ifs President. The President shall be
honorary atid shall hold office for a term of five years, but if he is a member
of the Board his term shall expire on the expiry of his term as a member.
(3) The Board shall appoint a Government, Gazetted Officer as its whole-
time Secretary on such terms or allowances and other conditions of service
as may be prescribed:
Provided that if a Government Gazetted Officer is not available the
Board may appoint another person.
48. Staff of Board.—(7) The Board may appoint such officers and staff
including superintendents of wakts, inspectors, auditors, and the like, on
such salaries, allowances and conditions of service as may be necessary for
the purpose of this Act and for such a pered as it may think fits <=
(2) The President, Secretary and all other persons appoiited under sub-
section (Z) shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of the
Indian Penal Code, 860.


7
(3) The Board may fine, suspend, dismiss or remove a-Secretary who is
not a Government Gazetted Officer, or any other person appointed by it
under sub-section (4): :
Provided that the Secretary who is a Government Gazetted Officer, shall
be liable to removal by the State Government on the recommendation of the
Board.
i9, Functions of the 808700,--(7) The General Superintendence of all
wakfs to which this Act applies shall vest in the Board. The Board
shali do all things reasonable and necessary to ensure that wakfs or endow-
ments under its superintendence are properly maintained, controlled and
administered and duly appropriated to the purposes for which they were
founded or for which they exist.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the proyisions of sub-section
(2) the powers and duties of the Board shall be,—
(a) to complete and maintain an authentic record of rights contain-
ing information relating to the origin, income, object and beneficiaries
of every wakf in each district,
(b) to prepare and settle its own budget,
(c) to settle and pass budget submitted by the Mutawallis, to the
Board : = ५
Provided it is in consonance with the wishes of the wakif and is in
accordance with the terms of the deed of wakf, or that of a resolution”
of the Board, if any,
(d) to appoint and remove Mutawallis according to the provisions
of this Act, >
(७) to institute and defend suits and proceedings in & court of law
welating to,—
(४) administration of walks,
(ii) taking of accounts, व
(iii) appointment and removal of Mutawallis in accordance
with the deed of wakf,
(iv) putting the Mutawallis in possession of a wakf or remov-
ing him from that possession, .
(v) settlement or, modifications of any scheme or management,
f) to sanction the institution of suits under section 92 of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 908, relating to wakts, to which this Act applies,
(g) to take measures for tlie recovery of lost properties of any wake,
(॥) to settle schemes of management for a wakf or application of
surplus fund of a wakf or income of wakf properties of a wakt in accord-
ance with the cy-pres doctrine in case of those wakts, the objects of
which are not evident from any written instrument or invcases in which
the object for which they were éreated have ceased to exist, ,
(6) to enter upon and inspect wakf property,
' (j) to cause mspection to. be made of the property and the office of
a wakf including accounts, and to authorise the Secretary, or any of its
members, officers, or sérvants for that purpose,
l0
6
20
25
30
35
40
45


40
05]
20
30
35
45
50
8
(४) to investigate into the nature and extent of walkfs and
properties of the wakf and call from time to time accounts and other
returns and information from the Mutawallis and give directions for
the proper administration of wakts,
(0) to arrange for the auditing of accounts submitted by Muta-
wallis,
(m).to direct, the deposit of surplus money in the hands of a
Mutawalli in any approved batik or to utilize it according to the
resolution of the Board,
{n) to administer the Wakf Fund,
(0) to keep regular account of receipts and disbursements and
submit the same, in the manner prescribed,
(p) to institute when necessary an enquiry relating to the ad-
ministration of the walt:
Provided that in the appointment of Mutawallis or making any
other arrangement for the management of wakf property, the Board
shall be guided as far as possible by the directions of wakif, if any,
(q) to sanction leases of properties for more than three years or
mortgage or exchange properties according to the provisions of the
* Muslim Law:
Rrovided that at least three-fourths of the members of the Board
vote in favour of such a transaction,
(7) to furnish to the State Government or to any such officer as
the State Government may appoint in this behalf, any statement, re-
port, return or other documents or any other information which the
State Government or any such officer, as the case may be, may require
from time to time, ॥
(8) to direct the Mutawalli to institute and defend suits in courts
of law, and take necessary action in respect of wakf property:.
Provided that in case of failure of Mutawalli to do so, or in case
when there is no Mutawalli or when the office of Mutawalli is dis-
puted, the Board shall do all these things itself and shall incur the
necessary expenses from the wakf fund,
(£) to realise, in the prescribed manner, and subject to prescribed
conditions, out of the income of any wakf, the costs incurred by the
Board in any of the matters mentioned in clause (s), in respect of such
wakt,
(u) to permit a Mutawalli to retire from his office and in case the
Mutawalli has power to appoint his successor, to permit him to make
appointment~in his life time. ; :
20. Delegation of Powers.—The Board may delegate any of its powers
and duties under this Act to the President or Secretary or to any one or
more of its members and may likewise withdraw such delegation.
Ql. Establishment of Committees —The Board whenever it considers
necessary, may, establish either generally for a particular purpose or in any
specific area or areas committees for the supervision of wakfs in that area.
The constitution, functions and duties of such committees shall be deter-
mined from time to time by the Board:
Provided that it shall not be necessary for the members of such com-
mittees that they should be members of the Board also.


9
22. Removal of a member.—The State Government on a report by the
Board may, by notification, in the Official Gazette, remove any member
from the Board if he—
(a) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting as a member of
the Board, or
(9) becomes subject to
section 0,
t
any disqualification mentioned in
(०) without excuse, sufficient in the opinion of the Board, is
absent without the consent of the Board, for more than six consecu-
tive meetings of the Board.
23, Resignation of a member.—A member of the Board may resign his
office by giving notice in writing to the President and on such resignation
being accepted by the Board, shall be deemed to have vacated his office.
24. Filling of a vacancy,—When a seat of a member becomes vacant by
his removal, resignation or death, a new member shall be elected or
co-opted as the case may be, in the manner provided in section 8 and shall
hold office as long as the member whose place he fills would have been en-
titled to hold office if such vacancy had not oceurred:
Provided that no act or order of the Board or its officer shall be deemed
invalid by reason only that the member or members of the Board at the
time of the performance of such an act or at the passing of such an order
was less than the number provided in section 7.
25. Removal of President.—The State Government may remove the
President if the President,—
(a) is or becomes subject to any disqualification specified in
section 0,
(b) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting, or acts in a
manner which the State Government after hearing any explanation
that he may offer, consider to be prejudicial to the interest of walks,
or
- __(c) if he fails without excuse to attend three consecutive meetings
of the Board.
26. Opinion of the Board.—The mutawalli of any wakf governed by this
Act may apply by petition to the Board for its opinion, adyice or direction
on any question affecting the management or administration of the property
of such wakf and the Board shall give such opinion, advice or direction:
Provided that the Board shall not be bound to give such opinion, advice
or direction on any question which is not in its opinion a fit question for
summary disposal.
27. Inspection and copies of Records.—The Board may grant inspection
and copies of its proceedings or other records in its custody on payment of
such fees and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by rules.
All copies issued under this section shall be certified by the Secretary of the
Board in the manner provided in section 76 of the Indian Evidence Act,
i872,
CHAPTER III
Centra, Boarp or Mustm Waxrrs
28. Central Board of Muslim Wakis—(/) The Union ~ Government
shall establish in the Union of India a Central Board of Muslim Walks.
0
58
20
25
30
35
45.


5
30
व5
90.
- 30
35,
+0
(2) The Central Board of Muslim Wakfs shall be a body, corporate and
shall have perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire
+ and hold property and to transfer any such property subject to the condi-
tions and restrictions prescribed and shall by its said name sue and be sued.
29, Constitution of the Central Board.—The Central Board shall con-
sist of: —
(a) one member from each of the following States to be elected
by the members of Board of Muslim Walks in that State :—
(4) Hyderabad, (2) Madhya Bharat, (3) Madhya Pradesh, (4)
Rajasthan, (5) East Punjab, (6) Patiala and E. P. States, (7) -
Orissa, and (8) Saurashtra; :
(b) two members from each of the following 8 States to be elected
by the members of the Board of Muslim Wakds in each of the States
one of them being a Shia and the other a Sunni:—
(l) West Bengal. (2) Bombay. (8) Madras;
(6) two members to be elected by the members of the two Boards
established in U.P. under Muslim Wakf Act, 936, (XIII of 936).
Hach of the two Boards electing one member each separately;
(d) two members to be electéd by the members of the two Boards
established in’ Bihar under the’ Bihar Wakis Act, 7948, (VIIT of 948)
Each of the two Boards électiiig one member each separately;
(e) two members to be elected by the two Boards established
in Delhi under the Delhi Muslim Wakts Act, 943 each of the two
Boards electing one member each separately; ”
(f) one member to be elected by the members of the Board of
Ajmer constituted under the Durgah Khwaja Sahib Act, 986, (XXIII
of 936);
(g) four members to be co-opted by the elected members of the
Board, one of them being a Shia and three of them being Sunni
members; ५
(0) the President, if he is not one of the members
Provided that in case where a Board has not been regularly con-
stituted as mentioned in clauses (a) and (b), the Central Board shall
nevertheless begin to function without a member from such a Board
of the State, but the State Boards shall have the right of electing their
representatives for the Central Board as soon as it is constituted.
30. Term of Membership.—The members of the Central Board- shall
hold office for a period of five years and in case of members elected by
the State Boards the period of theit membership of that Board or five
years, whichever is less:
Provided that an elected or ¢o-opted member shall notwithstanding the
expiration of his term of office continue to hold office until the vacancy
caused by the expiration of the said term has been filled
3l, Situation of Office.—The office of the Central Board shall be located
45 at Delhi:
Provided thatthe members of the Board shall have the power of chang-
the location of the office by passing a resolution to that effect by a
majority of the total membership of the Board-and a majority of not less
than two-thirds of the members of the Board present and voting.


व]
32, Quorum.—The quorum to constitute a meeting of the Central Board
shall! be seven, provided that the Board shall have power to change the
number by means of Rules made in that behalf
*. 38. Decision.—The decision of the Central Board shall be by a majority
of its members present and voting. In the case of an equality of votes, the
President shall have and exercise a second or casting vote:
Provided that the question of the use of the surplus funds or the income
of wakfs, in accordance with the cy pres doctrine and in case of these
walkfs the objects of which are not evident from any written instrument
or in cases in which the objects for which they were created have ceased
to exist, shall be determined by the Central Board by the votes of only
Sunni or Shia member's present at the meeting in’ respect of Sunni or Shia
wakfs respectively.
34, Meetings of the Central 80470 .--(7) The Board shall meet for
the transaction of business at least once im every year, and this meeting
shall be termed the Annual meeting.
(2) The date of the meeting of the’ Board shall-be fixed by. the Secre-
tary, under the directions of the President and at least one month's notice
shall be given to the-members in respect of the date so fixed:
Provided that the date of the first meeting of the Board after this Act
comes into force shall be fixed by the Union Government by notification
in the official Gazette and by sending information to the members
3) The President shall haye power to summon special meetings of the
-Board for the transaction of the business which he considers necessary, or
in pursuance of a resolution of the Board or on a requisition signed’ by not
less than seven members, and specifying the business to be transacted at
such a meeting. A notice of three weeks to the members shall be necessary’
for the holding of special meeting,
35. Stafii(7) The Central Board shall have a President and a Secre-
tary who shall be Muslims, provided that no Mutawalli of a walt or a
Government Treasurer or a whole-time servant of the Government or the
servant of any wakt Administration shall be elected as the President.
(2) Immediately after the formation of the Central Board and subse-
quently whenever it becomes necessary by reasons of an existing or anti-
eipated vacancy or otherwise to appoint a President, the Central Board
shall elect one of its members or any other person as its President. The
President shall be honorary and shall hold office for a term» of five years
but if he is a mémber of the ‘Board his term shall expire on the expiry of
his term as a member of the Board
(3) The Central Board shall appoint one person qualified to carry on the
work of the office of the Board as the Secretary The Secretary shall be a
0
20
25
30
35
40
salaried servant of the Board and shall hold office for a term of five years. -
_ He will be eligible for re-appomtment after the expiry of his term. “He
will not be a member of the Board
36. Staff of the Central Board.—The Central Board may appoint Secre-
tary and such officers on staff.on such salary and allowances and ¢onditions
of service as may be necessary for carrying out their duties under the Act,
and for such period as they think fit.
45


40
6
20
30
35
2
87, Functions and Powers of the Central Board.—The functions and
powers of the Central Board shall be— ;
(7) to lay down the principles for administration of wakts;
(2) to co-ordinate the activities of the various Boards in the matter
of administration of walkfs and for that purpose to receive annual
reports from the various wakfs Boards situated within the Union of
India including the wakfs Boards in U.P. and Bihar constituted under
the various statutes and of Delhi and Ajmer constituted under the
Central Acts and to give their opinion on such reports;
(9) to give their advice to the yarious Boards specially in case
such advice is sought by those, Boards;
4) in case of persistent non-compliance with the advice of the
Central Board by any Board of the State, the Central Board shall
have the power to make a report to the Government of the State to
take such action in respect of the Board as it may deem desirable.
38, Finance of the Central Board.—(I) ‘The expenses of the office,
officers and servants of the Central Board and the travelling and daily
allowances of the co-opted members of the Central Board and cf the
President, if he is not a member of a State Board, shall be distributed
equitably between the various, State Boards, and in case of there being
no agreement about it amongst the members of the Central Board, by the
Central Union Government. The amounts so fixed shall be payable in
advance every year.
(2) The travelling and daily
Board shall be determined and
these members belong.
39. Power to make Rules.—(J) The Central Board may make rules not
jnconsistent with this Act for the purposes of carrying out the provisions
of this Act.
(2) In particular and withou
going power the Central Board
respect of— ;
(a) procedure to be adopted at the annual meeting and the special
meetings of the Central Board ;
(b) quorum for meetings ;
(c) preparation and preservation
and meetings of the Board;
(d) method to be adopted
Reports of the various Boards, and the pr
respect of them; fe :
8) record of the advice tendered by the Central Board to various
Boards of the State and steps taken in respect thereto.
CHAPTER IV
REGISTRATION OF WAKFS
ry wakf whether created before or after the
all be registered at the office of the Board.
allowances of the members of the Central
paid by the various State Boards to which
% prejudice to the generality of the fore-
shall have the power to make rules with
of the record of the resolutions
for the scrutiny of the Administration
ocedure for giving adyice in
40, Registration.—(l) Eve
commencement of this Act sh


8
(2) The Mutawalli of every such wakf shall make an application for
registration within three months of his entering into possession of the wakf
property, or in the case of wakf existing at the time of formation of the .
first Board, within three months of the formation of such Board.
(3) Applications for registration may also be made by wakif or his
descendants or a beneficiary of the wakf or any Muslim belonging to the
sect to which the wakf belongs.
(4) An application under this section shall be accompanied by a true
copy of the deed or deeds of wakf, together with a statement containing the
following particulars as far as known to the applicant,—
(a) a description of the wakf properties sufficient for the
identification thereof.
(b) the gross annual income from such properties,
(c) the amount of Government revenue. and cesses and of all rents
and taxes payable in respect of the wakf properties,
(@) an estimate of expenses annually incurred in the realisation of
the income of the wakf properties,
(e) the amount set apart under the wakf for—
(i) the salary of the Mutawalli and allowances to individuals;
(ii) purely religious purposes ;
(iii) charitable purposes:
Provided that every such application shall be verified by the Mutawalli
in the manner laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 7908, for the
verification of pleadings. :
(6) The Board may require the applicant to supply any further parti-
culars or information that it may consider necessary. «
(6) On receipt of an application for registration, the Board may, before
registration of the wakf, make such enquiries as it thinks fit in respect of
its genuineness and yalidity and the correctness of any particulars, in the
statement filed with the application and when the application is made by
any person holding possession of any property or properties belonging to
the wakf, the Board shall give notice of the application to the person in
ees and hear him, if he desires to be heard before passing final
orders.
(7) An application for registration of wakfs may be presented or be sent
by registered post to the office of the Board.
4l, Register of wakis.—The Bédard shall maintain a register of wakfs
which shall contain the following particulars in respect of each wakf and
shall also contain a copy or copies of the deed or deeds creating the waktf
when ayailable,—
(a) the names of trustees, Mutawalli and other persons connected
with the administration of the wakf,
(b) the rule of the succession of the office of the Trustees (if any),
_ or Mutawallis under the deed or ए8) or by custom or by usage,
(0) particulars of the scheme of administration and the scale of
expenditure at the time of registration,
0
5
20
30


5
0
मु]
20
25
30
l4
(4) particulars of all properties relating to the wakf and all title
deeds and documents relating thereto, and
(e) such other particulars as may be prescribed.
42. Power to order Mutawalli to apply.—The Board may direct a Muta-
walli to apply for the registration of a-wakf, or to supply any information
regarding a wakf or may itself collect such information and may cause the
wakf to be registered or may at any time amend the register of wakfs.
CHAPTER V
2 एफाफ or Accocxts
43. Audit.—{J) The accounts kept by the Board and the accounts
submitted by Mutawallis under section 62 shall be audited annually or at
such other intervals as may be determined by the Board by the auditors
appointed under section 8 of this Act.
(2) The Auditors shall submit their report,—
(@) to the local Government in’ the case of accounts of a Board;
and
(b) to the Board, in the case of the accounts of a wakf.
(3) The audit report of the auditors shall among other things, specify
all cases of irregular, illegal or improper expenditure or of failure to recover
moneys or other property or of loss or of waste of money or other property
caused by neglect or misconduct of the Mutawalli.
44, Examination of the Auditor’s report.—The Board shall examine
the auditor’s report and after calling for the explanation of any person in
jegard to any matter mentioned therein shall pass such orders on the report
as it may think fit.
45. Realization of Amount.—Every sum certified to be due from any
person by an auditor in his report under section 62, unless such certificate
ig modified or cancelled by the Board by an order made under section 32
and every sum due on a modified certificate shall be recoverable from such
person by the Board.
CHAPTER VI
Enquiry anp SuPERvIsion 4
46. Enquiries by the Board.—For the purpose of verifying ‘the parti-
culars: contained’ in the statement filed under section 40 or acting on the
report of the auditor submitted under section 43;-the Board may enquire
into.any matter either through any of its officers or members or any other
person appointed under this behalf.
47. Application for enquiry.—=Any member of the community to which
the wakf belongs may by an application, supported by an affidavit, apply
to the Board to institute any enquiry relating tothe administration of a
wakf, and the Board may take such action as it may think fit.
48. Powers of enquiring officer.—For the purposes of an enquiry under
this Chapter the enquiring officer or committee shall have the same power
of enforcing the attendance of witnesses and production of documents ‘as
45 the Civil Court has under the Code of Civil Procedure, 908.


5
. CHAPTER VII
LeGat PRocEEDINGS
49. Civil suits relating to wakf.—Notwithstanding anything contained
in section 9256 the Code of Civil Procedure, 908 (Act V of 903), a suit
to obtain any relief mentioned in section 92 of the said Code, relating to
any wakf to which this Act applies may be instituted by the Board without
obiaining the consent referred to in that section, or by any person interest-
ed in the wakf with the previous sanction in writing of the Board and
without obtaining the consent referred to in that section:
Provided that if in such suit the validity or propriety of any order or
direction passed or made by the Board is challenged a suit shall be
instituted without previous sanction after giving two months notice to the
Board as provided in section 50. >
50. Suits under Religious Endowments Act——A suit under section -4
of the Religious Endowments Act, 863 (XX of 863), concerning a wakf
to which: this Act applies, may, notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained-in that» Act be instituted by the Board without obtaining the
leave referred to in section 8 of that Act, and no such suit shall be insti-
tuted by any person without the consent in writing of the Board.
5l. Protection of the Boatd Committees, and their staff.—(/) Save as
otherwise provided in this Act, no act done or direction issued by the Board
except an order settling the scheme of management of a wakf shall be
questioned in any court.
(2) No suit shall be instituted against the Board. or any of its members
or-servants or any other person deputed by the Board for carrying out any
enquiry under this Act, for anything done by it or him in-good faith in due
discharge of his duties under this Act.
52. Compromise in suits by or against mutawallis.—No suit or proceed-
ings in any court by or against a mutawalli of a wakf to which this’ Act
applies, and relating to title to wakf property or to the rights of the muta-
wallis shall be compromised without the sanction of the Board.
58. Notice of suits by courts.—When any suit relating to title to any
wakf property or to the right of Mutawalli is instituted m any Civil Court —
such court shall give a notice of such suit to the Board at the cost of the
plaintif. The Board may thereupon apply to be made a party to the~
suit, and the Court shall make the Board a party on such an application-
54. Notice of suits—No suit shall be instituted against the Board, in
respéct of any act purporting to be done by the Boatd in due discharge of
its-funetions under this Act, or for any relief in respect of any wakf, until
the expiration of two months next after notice in writing has been delivered
to the Secretary, or left at the office of the Board, stating the cause of
action, the name, description end place of residence of the plaintiff and
the relief which he claims: and the plaint shall contain a statement that
such notice has been so delivered or left.
55, Power of Board to make application to the court in case of failure
of-mutawalli to discharge his duties. — Where a charge exists on any property
for the performance of any religious, pious “or charitable act recognised as
such by Muslim Law and there is a failure to perform such ‘an act the
5
0
30:
35 =


30
वह
40
36
Board may apply to the Court for an order directing the person in posses-sion of the property to pay to the Board the amount necessary for the per-
formance by the Board, or to auy person appointed by the Board in thiybehalf, of the act for the performance of which the charge was created.
56, Application to compel mutawalli to discharge obligation or appoint-
ment of receiver —Where the mutawalli of a wakt wilfully fails to discharge
any of the duty imposed on him under the wakf, the Board or any person
interested in wakf may make an application to the court for an order,—
__ (a) directing the mutawalli to discharge such obligation within a
time to be specified in the order, or
(b) appointing receiver of the funds and property of the wakt if
the mutawalli fails to carry out such direction within the time so
specified,
57. Notice to Board of proceedings under the Land Acquisition Act,
894, in respect of wakf property.—(I) In the course of a proceeding
under the Land Acquisition Act, 894 (I of 894), the Collector before
making an award in respect of wakf property, shall issue a notice to the
Board and shall stay further proceedings to enable it to plead as a party:
to the proceedings at auy time within three months from the date of the
receipt, of the notice. “
(2) Where the Board has reason to believe that any property under
acquisition is a wakf property, it may at any time before the award is
made appear and plead as a party to the proceedings.
(3) When the Board has appeared under the provision of sub-section
(2), no order shall be passed under section 8 or section 82 of the Land
Acquisition Act, 894 (I of 894), without giving opportunity to the Board
to be heard.
(4) Any order passed under section 3 or section 82 of the Land Acquisi-
tion Act, 894 (I of I894), without giving opportunity to the Board to be
heard shall be voidable at the option of the Board.
58. Notice of sales to be given to Board.—() Whenever any wakf pro-
perty is notified for sale in execution of a decree of a Civil Court under
the provisions of any Act, for the recoveries of public demand or in pur-
suance of a decree or an order of a collector or any revenue officer such
court, collector, or reyenue officer, shall give notice thereof to the Board
also. . |
(2) If the notice required by sub-section (I) to be given to the Board
in respect of any sale is not given, the sale shall be voidable at the option
of the Board. i ;
CHAPTER VIII
ADMINISTRATION CHARGES
59, Contribution by waki.—(/) Every wakf to which this Act applies
shall contribute annually. for meeting the expenses incurred in the adminis-
tration of this Act, such sum not exceeding five per cent. of the net
annual income of such of its property as is situate in the State as the
Board, subject to the sanction of the State Government may determine:


) व
Provided that in case of those educational institutions which do not
receive any aid from the Government or of wakf whose income is less thin
rupees one hundred per annum the aforesaid percentage shall not be levied.
(2) Contribution under this section, shall be payable with effect from
the date on which this section comes into’ force.
(3) The Board may, in the case of any particular wakf or wakfs, reduce
or remit such contribution as it may think fit.
(4) Such contribution shall, subject to the prior payment of any dues
to the Government and any other Statutory charges on the wakf property
or the income thereof, be a first charge on the income of the wakf.
(5) Tf a mutawalli.or person incharge of the managing or administration
of the wakf realizes the income of the wakf and neglects or refuses to pay
such contribution he shall also be personally liable for such contribution
to the extent of the balance of realization remaining in his hand after pay-
ment of Land Revenue, césses and taxes due to Government and local
bodies, and the liability may be enforced in the manner as aforesaid.
(6) The mutawalli_ of a wakf may realize the fee payable by him amder
sub-section (7) from the beneficiaries of such wakf, but the realizable fee
from any one of such persons shall not exceed such amount as shall bear to
the total contribution payable the same proportion as the value of benefits
recoverable by such persons bears to the entire net available income of
such wakf:
Provided that, if there is any income of such walkf in excess of the
amount payable as due under this Act other than the fee payable under sub-
section (7) and in excess of the amount payable under the wakt deed, the
fee shall be paid in the first instance out of such income.
60. Board’s power to borrow.—The Board shall have the power with the
previous sanction of the State Government to borrow for the purpose of
giving effect to the provisions of this Act, such amount and on such
conditions as-the State Government may determine.
CHAPTER IX
Murawat.is,
6i. Appointment of mutawallis—When there is a vacancy in the office
of mutawalli of a wakf and there is no one competent to be appointed under
the terms of the deed of wakf, or where the right of any person to act as
mutawalli is disputed, the Board may appoint any person.to act as a
mutawalli from such period and on such conditions as it may think fit.
62. Duties of mutawallis—(J) Every mutawalli shall carry out all
directions consistent with the provisions of this Act, issued to him by the
Board of wakf or by a committee appointed by the Board for the purpose
of proper administration of wakis. Tn particular he shall,—
(a) supply the details of wakfs in his charge,
(0) submit within one month after the 3ist day of March, next
following the date on which the wakf has been registered under section
28 and thereafter within thirty days of the 3lst day of March, in every
year, a full and true statement of accounts in such form and containing
\
.
Sr
१0
25...
80
"40 -
Det


0
45
20
32.3]
30
35
* 40
45
48
such particulars as may be prescribed by the Board and verified in
manner prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure, 908, for verifica-
tion of pleadings of all moneys received or expended by him on behalf
of the wakf of which he is the mutawalli in respect of that portion of
the wakf property which is situate in the State during the period of
twelve months ending on the 3ist March preceding the submission of
such statement or during that portion of the said period during which
the provisions of this Act have been applicable to the wakf:
Provided that the date on which the annual accounts are to be closed
may be verified at the discretion of the Board.
(2) All the details, accounts, and statements mentioned in sub-section
(7) shall be submitted to Board. ‘The mutawalli shall if and when required
further be bound by himself or by his agent to attend at the audit of his
accounts and to give all information required relating to his accounts.
63, Power of the Board to make certain payment on behalf of wakf.—
Where a mutawalli refuses to pay or fails to pay any Land Revenue, cesses,
rent, rates of taxes due to the State or to a local Authority/Body from a
wakf, the Board may defray the charges from the wakf fund and may re-
cover the amount so paid from the wakf property and, if the refusal or
failure of the mutawalli was in the opinion of the Board wilful, the Board
may also recover from the mutawalli responsible for such refusal or failure
damages at the rate of twelve and a half per cent. of the amount so paid:
Provided that a mutawalli aggrieved by a decision of the Board to re-
cover damages under this sub-section may apply to the court to have the
order regarding damages set aside or modified and the order of the Court
on such application shall be final.
64. Removal of mutawallis by the Board.—The Board may remove a
mutawalli from his office if such mutawalli—
(a) after having once been convicted of an offence punishable under
section 66 is again convicted of any such offence;
3 (b) is convicted of an offence relating to the wakf property or
money which in the opinion of the Board renders him unfit to continue
to be a mutawalli; or
(c) refuses to act; and
(a) applies for being adjudicated or is an undischarged insolvent.
65. Committee of supervision.—(/) Whenever the supervision of a waki
is vested in any existing committee appointed by the wakf or any com-
petent court of authority such committee shall, notwithstanding anything
contained in the Act, continue to function until superseded by the Board
under sub-section (2):
Provided that such committee shall be under the control of the Board
and shall abide by such directions of the Board as are not inconsistent with
any directions of the wakf or of the court or authority appointing such
committee. A
(2) The Board may supersede any such committee as aforesaid if it does
‘not in its opinion function properly and satisfactorily, and on such super-
session any decree or order of a court or competent authority under which
such’ committee has been constituted shall cease to have any force.


i9
(8) Any order passed by a Board under sub-section (2) shall be final and
» shall not be questioned in any court of’ law. :
66. Penalties.—(I) If a mutawalli fails without reasonable cause or
excuse, the burden of proving which shall be upon him,—
(a) to apply for a registration of a wakf as provided in section 28, or
(b) to submit statement of particulars or of accounts and returns
as required by this Act, or | =
(c) to supply information or particulars required by the Board, or
(d) to allow inspection under the provision of this Act, of walt
properties and deeds and documents relating thereto, or
(e) to give assistance in enquiries and investigations when called
upon to do so by the Board or Committee appointed by the Board or by
superintendents or auditors working under the, orders of the Board, or
(f) to deliver possession of any wakf property if ordered to do so,
by the Board,
(g) to deposit any surplus income im his hands in any recognized
bank when directed to do so by the Board.
he will, on conviction before a magistrate of the first or second class be
‘punishable with fine which may extend to rupees two hundred and fifty
for the first offence and to rupees one thousand for every subsequent
offence.
(2) No Magistrate shall take cognizance of an offence under sub-
section (7) otherwise than on a complaint made by any person duly au-
thorised by the Board in this behalf. :
CHAPTER X
~ Rures ann Byenaws
67. Rules by State Govetnment.—() The State, Government may after
previous publication in the Official Gazette make rules not inconsistent
with this Act for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power the State Government may make rules with respect to all or any of
the following matters,
(a) the conditions and restrictions subject to which the Board may
transfer any property. under gub-section (2) of section 7 of the Act;
(b) the method in which the work of the survey of wakf under
Chapter I is carried on;
(c) the manner in which the member shall be elected under sec-
tion 8 of the Act;
(d) other matters expressly required or allowed by this Act to be
prescribed or done by the State Government.
. 68. Byelaws by the 80870 (7) The Board may subject to the approval
of the State Government make byelaws not inconsistent with this Act for
the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act.
0
है 5]
20
30
35
40


0
20
80
दरi
40
45
20
(2) im particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power the Board shall with the approval of the State Government
have power to make ‘byelaws with respect to, 3S
(a) all matters required or allowed by this Act to be prescribed
or done by the Board,
(b) the conduct of business by the Board,
__(¢) the grant of travelling allowances to the President and
members of the Board, 3
(8) the constitution, functions and procedure of the committee
appointed by the Board and their finance,
(e) the custedy and investment of wakf funds,
(f) the custéedy and investment of the Fund of any wakf, and the
conditions subject to which a mutawalli shall deposit wakt money in
his hands and the conditions subject to which a mutawalli can with-
draw such money,
(g) books and aceéunts to be kept at the office of the Board and
by the committee appointed by the Board,
(i) the manner in which the accounts of wakf shall be audited and
published, the time and place of such audit, the form and content of
the auditors’ report and the scale of remunerations to be paid to the
auditors,
(i) the number, designation, grades,, salaries, allowances, and other
conditions of service, including the power and duties of ‘the officers and
servants of the Board,
(j) the custody of the common seal,
(k) the person by whom receipts may be granted for money re.
ceived by the’ Board,
(0) the granting of pensions and gratuities out of wakf Funds,
(m) the method of calculating the income of a wakt, for the pur-
pose of levying contribution under this Act,
(n) the fee to be levied on applications before the Board of com-
mittees under the Act, or on application for inspection of register of
wakfs and other records and for copies of the proceedings and other
records of the Board.
(3) All byelaws framed under this gection ‘shall be published in the
Gazette and shall have thereafter the force of law.
69. Names of members and President to be notified.—The names of the
members and President of the Board shall be published in the official
_ Gazette of the State as soon as possible after their election or co-option as
the case may be-
70. Accounts and Budget of the. Board.—The Accounts of the Board
shall be audited annually by an auditor appointed by the Goyernment and
a copy of-the report and a copy of the Budget shallibe submitted to the
State Government and to the Central Board of Muslim Wakfs for infor-
mation. ‘The Board shall give such information and submit such reports
and statements as may be called for by the State Government and Central
Board of Muslim Wakts. .


pile :
7i. Extension of time—The Board may, if it is satisfied that’ there is
sufficient cause for doing so, extend time within which any act is required
or ordered to be done’ under this Act. :
72. Wakf Fund.—All moneys realized under section 59 and all moneys
realized from fees in respect of proceedings before the Board and all other 5
moneys realized under this Act, shall. form a Fund to be called the ‘Wakt
Fund’. है
Such fund shall be under the control of the Board subject to the
general supervision of the State Government and shall be applied. to the
following expenses which shall be met exclusively from that fund :— 0
(a) repayment of any loan incurred under section 60 and payment
of interest thereof, }
(b) payment of the cost of audit of Wakf Fund:
(c) payment of the salary and allowances of the Secretary ‘and
staff of the Board afd the Secretary and the Staff of sub-committee 5
under the Board;
(d) payment of travelling allowances to the President, members,
Secretary and staff of the Board or of any person deputed for any en-
quiry undér the Act; ~
(e) payment of all expenses incurred by the Board and the sub- 20
committee in the performance of, the duties imposed and the exercise
of the powers conferred by this Act.
73. Liability of Government for expenses.—Government shall not be
liable for any expenditure incurred in the administration of this Act.
>
CHAPTER XI ” 25
Savines anp REPEAL ;
74. Savings.—Nothing in the following Regulations, Acts and provisions
shall apply to any wakf to which this Act applies: —
(i) Bengal Regulation, XIX of 80. -
(ii) Section 5 of the Religious Endowments Act, 863 (XX of 863). 30
(iii) The Charitable Endowments Act, 890 (VI of 890).
(iv) The Charitable and Religious Trust Act, 920 (XIV of 920).
75, Repeal.—The following Acts are hereby repealed: —
Name of the Act Extent of Repeal
l. ‘The Bengal Wakf Act, 7984 (XIII of 934) iss ee sawielee uae
2, The Mussalman Wakfs (Bombay Amendt.) Act, Whole
4988 (XVIII of 933).
3. Mussalman Waktfs Act, 923 (XLII of 923) in so far Whole
as it extends to the States where this Act comes into :
force. : 2 40 -
76, Recovery of dues by distress.—Every sum recoverable under section
45 and the contribution under section 59 may be recovered by the Board «५
by means of distress of sale of movable property belonging to the person
liab'e for payment, in accordance with the rules framed by the State Gov-
ernment in this behalf. ६ f 46
का


93
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The management of Walkts though it vests immediately in a mutawalli,
is a subject which requires the supervision.of the State. The need for
supervision has been felt, and in addition to yarious enactments dealing
with the subject of charitable endowments, the Musalman Wakf Act 4928,
(No. 42 of 923) was enacted for the whole of India. This Act merely
provides for the submission of audited accounts by the Mutawallis, to the
district judges. This Act did not prove of much practical value. The
Musalman Wakf (Bombay Amendment) Act 935, (XVIII of 935) amended
the Musalman Walkf Act 923 (42 of 4928). The Bengal Wakf Act 934,
(No. XIII of 984) was enacted to-create a machinery for the supervision
of wakis in Bengal. The U.P. followed suit and the United Provinces
Muslim Walkts Act 936 (XIIT of 936) was passed ¢ereating a Central Wak
Board. Similarly Bihar also passed a legislation almost on the same lines.The working of these Acts has brought out the necessity of some amend-
ments. Further many of the States have got no Act for the purpose. It
is therefore necessary, that one uniform and consolidated legislation may
be passed by the Centre, which may be adopted as a model Act by the
various States. It is with this view that the presest Bill is introduced.
MOHAMMAD AHMAD KAZMI.
Pa


HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE
A
BILL
to provide for the better governance and administration of
Muslim Wakfs and the supervision of Mutawallis’ management
of them, in India.
(Syed Mohammad Ahmad Kazmi, M.P.)
GIPD—LAD— 457 98--9.7582--,400
