As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

24 JUL 1१५॥

Bill No. 85 of 1998

MEDICAL PROFESSION (REGULATION) BILL, 1998
By
Dr. ५. Sarosa, M.P.
A
BILL

‘medical profession with a view to provide best available health care to the
| of the country.

‘Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as

(J) This Act may be called the Medical Profession (Regulation) Act, 1998.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government ‘may, by
ion in the official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(0) “Council” means the Indian Health Care Council established under
section’3;

(ii) “Arbitrator” means Arbitrator appointed under section 6;

(iii), “appropriate Government” means the Central Government or a State
Government, as the case may be;

Shorttitle,
extent and


Establishment of
Indian Health
Care Council

Branches of
Council

Arbitration

Authority.

Appointment of
Arbitrator

Registration of
Medical
Practitioners.

Compulsory
Registration.

‘Complaint
‘against Medical
Practitioner,

Powerto
conduct
inquiry.

Powers of
Arbitration
Authority.

2

(iv) “medical practitioner” means a practitioner who is eligible to क्‍ i
any system of Indian medicine or Allopathy or any other system of medicine for
time being recognised as a system of medicine; and

(0) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this act.

3. (1) The Central Government shall establish a Council to be known as
Health Care Council consisting of a Chairman and four other members.

(2) The Chairman and the other members shall possess knowledge and e:
of at least a period of ten years in Allopathy or any system of Indian medicine.

(3) The Chairman and the other members shall be appointed for a term of
years from the date of appointment or until they attain sixty two years of age, whicl
is earlier.

(4) The Chairman and the other members shall be entitled to such salaries
allowances as may be prescribed.

4. The Council shall set up a Branch in every State and Union Territory.

5. For the purposes of this Act, the Council shall set up an Arbitration Authority in
every district:

Provided that more than one Arbitration Authority may be set up in any distri
in accordance with the need and requirements.

6. (1) Every Arbitration Authority set up under section 5 shall consist of an Arbitrator.
and two other members.

(2) The Arbitrator so appointed shall possess adequate knowledge in medicine and
should have practised medicine atleast for a period of five years and the members shall
appointed from persons having experience in the fields of social service or consumer affairs.

7, Every medical practitioner shall register himself with the Council as soon as he
has become entitled to practise.

8. No person who has not registered himself with the Council shall be qualified to
practise medicine in any part of the territory of India

9. (1) Any person who has been affected by an action of a medical practitioner in the
course of his duties and functions as such, and has suffered a mental or physical injury.
capable of being quantified or has suffered any disability, whether permanent or temporary
in nature, out of the negligence or inaction of the medical practitioner, may make a complaint
to the concerned Arbitration Authority.

(2) Any complaint under sub-section (/) shall be in writing and addressed to the
concerned Arbitrator and shall be given within a period of one month from the date of
occurrence of negligence or inaction on the part of the medical practitioner.

10. The Arbitration Authority, on receipt of a complaint under section 9, shall make
such inquiry as may be deemed necessary for the purpose of redressal of the complaint:

Provided that while making inquiry, the Arbitration Authority may require the
attendance of the medical practitioner and other persons involved in the-suit or any
other person, who in the opinion of the Arbitration Authority, can tender evidence or
submit documents in connection with the suit or tender expert advice.

11. While discharging its functions, the Arbitration Authority shal] have all the
powers of a civil court as provided under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 with respect to
issue of summons, taking of evidence and examination of witnesses.



12. The Arbitration Authority shall dispose of a complaint as soon as possible, but in
any case not later than two months from the date of receipt of the complaint.

13, The Arbitration Authority, while disposing of a complaint, may award
pensation for the injury suffered or treatment free of cost as may be required for
complete recovery of the affected person or recommend to the Council for the
tion of the registration of the medical practitioner for a specified period or
nently.

14, The Arbitration Authority, while discharging its functions under the provisions

‘Act may take into account the circumstances and merits of each case and evidence
d documents tendered, if any, and shall have the power to seck opinion of any medical
itioner, who is specialised in any field of medicine or any other person.

15. The award passed by the Arbitration Authority shall be binding on all the parties
the complaint.

16. If any person has made a complaint of a frivolous nature or if the complaint is of
‘such a nature that it should not have been brought to the notice of the Arbitration Authority
or if the complaint has. no cause of action or if the Arbitration Authority feels that the
has made the complaint deliberately or intentionally with a view to denigrating the
of the medical practitioner and with a view to hurt his practice, the Arbitration
ority may punish the person who has made such a complaint with imprisonment for a
100 of one year and a fine of rupees ten thousand:

Provided that where the person who has made the complaint proves that he
has made the complaint in the good faith and with a good intention on the basis of
information available with him and to the best of his knowledge, the Arbitration
‘Authority shall not pass any sentence against the person who has made the complaint.
17. The Indian Health Care Council shall perform the following functions: —

(i) advise the Central Government in the formulation of a health-plan covering
all sections of the society, from time to time, with a view to making available best
health care to the citizens of the country;

(ii) recommend to the Government in the matter of qualifications and experience
required for a medical practitioner before he is entitled to practise in any system of
medicine;

(iii) may, on a request from State*Government, advise the State Government
about the health care and restructuring of hospitals and dispensaries with a view (o
making available cheap and good health care to the citizens; and

(iv) recommend to the Central Government on any matter pertaining to medical
profession or health care.

18. (4) On and from the date of commencement of this Act, no suit shall be filed
against a medical practitioner for his negligence or inaction in the course of his duties as
uch in any court:

Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the suits already pending in
acourt of law,
(2) On and from the date of commencement of this Act, any complaint against the
nedical practitioner shall be filed only before the Arbitration Authority.

19. An appeal against the decision of the Arbitration Authority shall lic in a High

20. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained
in the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 or any other law for the time being in force pertaining
0 medical profession.

21. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

Disposal of
‘Complaints

‘Compensation

Admission of
evidences and
toscek opinion
of experts

‘Award shall be
binding.

Punishment for
frivolous
complaints.

Functions of
‘Council,

Jurisdiction,

Appeal against
Arbitration
Authority
Overriding

effect of the
Act

Powerto make
rules,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Medical profession is one of the important professions providing health care to
citizens. Persons suffering from any illness or disease look upon doctors as Gods. Of
it has been observed that with the advent of consumer movement in the country,
make complaints against medical practitioners even on petty grounds appealing for
amounts as compensation, Though, the medical practitioners who are guilty or who ha
been negligent or inactive should be punished severely yet, the attitude of making complain
should not become a common trend.

In the recent past many cases have been filed in consumer courts for redres
grievances against medical practitioners. Though, it is the duty of the Governmer
ensure best health care to the citizens of the country and to ensure that medical pract
follow professionalism and ethics in their profession, yet it is the duty of the Govern
also to see that the medical practitioners are not harassed unnecessarily on petty ground
Though, it is understandable that the consumer movement has gained momentum in
country and cases are disposed of quickly as never before, yet cases relating to
profession should not be filed in consumer courts because the Judges of the cons
courts, it is often found, do not possess even basic knowledge in medicine or do
understand the problems faced by medical practitioners in their profession.

Therefore, it is essential to set up a machinery for the redressal of grievaiices age
medical practitioners possessing adequate knowledge and experience in medicine so th
the merits and circumstances of each case can be gone into deiail and a fair and ju
judgement can be given. It is also proposed to make provision for punishment to
making frivolous complaints in order to reduce the piling up of cases against
practitioners.

The Bill seeks to regulate the medical profession in such a way so as to enable
medical practitioners to cater to the needs of the public at large in the best way.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; ५. SARO
June 24, 1998.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of the Indian Health Care Council
consisting of a Chairman and four other members. They are entitled to such salaries and
allowances as may be prescribed. Clause 4 enables the Council to set up a branch in every
State and Union Territory. Clause,5 provides for the constitution of Arbitrary Authorities
‘inevery district for hearing the cases filed against medical professionals. Clause 13 provides
award of compensation. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is likely
to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure of about
es twenty five thousand is also likely to be involved.



MEMORANDUM REGARD!NG DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 2] of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
out the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will regulate the matters of detail only,
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to regulate medical profession with a view to provide best available; health care
citizens of the country.

(Dr. ४ Saroja, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1485LS—16-7-98