10K SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
TEE ALIGARHMUSLIM UNIVERSITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1978 , 
L-To "je/As introduced in )..ok $abba I 
1 • Page 2, line 28,-
for "Utter Prade sh " ~ "Uttar Prade sh" , 
2. Fage 4, line 10,-
"word" ~ "words". 
3. Page 4, line 12,-
for "substtiuted" read "Substituted" 
4. Page 4,' line 33,-
after "such authority" om!t "of the" 
5. Page 4, line 34,-
(i) omit "Uni ver si ty" 
(ii) after "opinion" inse~t "in writing" 
6. Page 4, line 35,-· 
Q1!!il. "shall bt:J in writing and" 
7. Page 5, ~lne 2,-
fgr "sanction., disallow" 
~ "sanction or disallow it, It 
8. Page 9, line 16,-
t:21:. II Alumini" ~ "Alumni" 
9. Page 11, line 36,-
( i ) a.f te r "ye ar " in se r t "0 r " 
(ii) after II~O be" insert "the" 
P.:I'.o. 
• 

2 
10. . P age 11 , line 37,-
omi t "continue to be" 
11. Page 14, line 23,-
al'ter "of the" insert ".Aligarh Muslim" 
12. Page 14, line 27,-
for "au thori ty" read "Court, the Executive 
Councilor the Finance 
Commi ttee " 
13. Page 14, line 29,-
after "Act," ID.,sert "as" 
14. Page 14, line 37,-
after "Departments" 
in~ert "of the .AJ..igarh Muslim University" 
15. Page 15, line 2,-
aiter ''by the" in~~rt "Aligarh Muslini" 
16. Page 19, line 12,-
for "benefation" read ''benefac tion 11 
17. Page 19, line 14, -
tQr. "te samentary" read "te stamentary" 
18. Page 22, line 8,-
, " ~ 
I ; 
. ~, 
, 
'1'~ '." 
:"" ,. 
for "Student's jdvisory" ~ "Students I Advisory" 
19. Page· 26, line 22,-
~ "( xviii) " ~. "(xxiii)" 
20. Page 27, in the marginal beading to Statute No. 15,-
for "Mee ting " ~ . "Mee ting s" 
21. Page 29, line 12, -
·vI !:Ql:. " r "course" ~ "cour se s" 
22. Page 30, line 17,-
"membe r s" 
Vaisakha 1:, 1900 (Saka) . ' 

40af !flO. 
· 1f>.' As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA 6N 
Bill He. 85 Of 1978. 
niE ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIVERSI1Y (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1978 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the AUgarh Muslim University Act, 1920. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-nimh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Aligarh Muslim University (Amend-
ment) Act, 1978. 
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Ceotral Government may, by 
to 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In the Aligarh Muslim University Act 1920, (hereinafter referred to as 
the principal Act), in the long title and in the preamble, the words "establish 
and" shall be omitted. 
r. In section 2 of the principal Act,-
Short title 
and com-
mence-
ment. 
Amend· 
ment ot 
lon, Uti. 
and pre. 
,.mDle. 
Amend. 
ment of 
(i) aft(Jf clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- .ection Ji 
'(hh) "non-teaching-staff" means the employees of the Univenity 
bther tban the teachers;'; 
(ii) clause (j) shall be omitted; 

Amend-
ment of 
section 5. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 8. 
Amend-
ment of 
aection 13. 
Substitu-
tion of 
new lee-
tion for 
aection 
lB. 
Rector. 
Amena-
ment of 
aecUon 16. 
Substitu-
tion of 
new 
section for 
section 17. 
The Chan-
cellor. 
(iii) for clause (l), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:""':' 
'(I) "University" means the educational institution, which origi-
nated as the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College, Aligarh, established 
by the Muslims of India, and which was incorporated in 1920 by this 
Act.'. 
4. In seetion 5 of the principal Act,-
(i) in clause (2), after sub-clause (b), the following sub-clause shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"(c) to promote especially the educational and cultural advance-
ment of the Muslims of India;"; 
s 
(ii) in clause (7), the words "and determine their conditions of service" 10 
shall be added at the end; 
(iii) for clause (9), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
"(9) to institute and maintain halls for thc students of the 
University;"; 
(iv) in clause (11B), the words "and determine their conditions of 
service" shall be added at the end; IS 
(v) in clause (11E), the word "and" shall be added at the end; 
(vi) clause (l1F) shall be omitted. 
5. In section 8 of the principal Act, in the opening paragraph, the words, 
brackets and figures "before the commencement of the Aligarh Muslim Univer-
sity (Amendment) Act, 1972," shall be omitted. 
20 
6. In sub-seelion (2B) of section 13 of the principal Act, after the words 
"the Visitor may", the words ", if he considers it necessary," shall be inserted. 
7. For section 15 of the principal Act, and the heading to that section, the 
following heading and section shall be substituted, namely:-
"Rector 25 
is. The Governor of the State of Utter Pradesh shall be the Rector of 
the University.". 
8.· In SeCtlob 16 of the principal Act,-
(i) after clause (3A), the following clause shall be inserted, ~amely:- 30 
"(3B) The Honorary Treasurer;"; 
(ii) existing clauses (3B), (3C) and (3D) shall be te-numbered as 
clauses (3C), (3D) and (3E) thereof respectively. 
•. For section 17 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substi-
tuted, namcly:- 35 
"17. (1) The Otancellor of the University shall be elected by the 
Court in such manner and for such term as may be prescribed by the 
Statutes. 

8 
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the Head of the 
University. 
(3) The Chancellor shall exercise such powers as may be prescribed 
by the Statutes.". 
10. For section 18 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Substitu-
5 substituted, namely:- tion of new sec-
"18. (1) The Pro-Chancellor shall be elected by the Court in such 
10 manner and for such term as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
(2) The Pro-Chancellor shall exercise such powers as may be pres. 
cribed by the Statutes.". 
11. In section 19 of the principal Act, for sub-sections (2), (3) and (4), 
the following sub-section shan be substituted, namely:- . 
"(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such powers and perform such 
IS functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes and the Ordinances.". 
12. Sections 20A and 20B of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as 
sections 20B nnd 20C respectively, and before section 20B as so re-
numbered, the following section shall be inserted, namely:-
"20A. (1) The Honorary Treasurer shall be elected by the Court in 
such manner and for such term as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
20 (2) The Honorary Treasurer shalt exercise such powers and perform 
such functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.". 
13. In section 21 of the principal Act, after the words "the Pro-Vice Chancel-
lor,",the words "the Honorary Treasurer," shall be inserted. 
U. In section 22 of the principal Act,-
.\fi~ , '" , 
'. "~::(~,after clause (?), the ,fo~owin~ dause sh~ be inserted, namely:-
f .,. 
"(3A) The Finance Committee:"; 
(Ii) in clause (3B), the word "and" shan be inserted at the end: 
(iii) clause (3C) shall be Dmitted. 
15. In section 23 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-
30 "ections shall be substituted. naAlely:- ' 
35 
"(2) The Court shall be the ~mreme 1!0vemin,I! body of the University 
and shalt exet'cise all the power!! of the Univemty. not otherwise provided 
for by this Act. the Stat1Jtc~, the Ordinances and the Re~lations. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act. the Court shall also have 
the followin~ powers and functions, namely:-
(0) to review sucl! actions taken by the 'Executive Council and 
the Academic C'..ouncil 8S are not in accordance 'with the powen 
conferred on them by or under this Act, the Statute1l or the Ordinances: 
, • , r 
(b) to make new or additional Stntutes or amend or repeal the 
Statutes; 
(c) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report, the 
annual accounts of the University and the financial estimates; 
tion for 
section 
18. 
The Pro-
Chancel-
lor, 
Amend-
ment of 
sectiQn 19. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
20A. 
The Hono-
rary 
Treuurer. 
Amend. 
mental 
section 21. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
22. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 23. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 26. 
Amend-
ment of 
sectittn 27. 
, 
(d) to elect such officers of the University and such members of 
the authorities of the University, as are required to be elected by the 
Court under the provisions of this Act and the Statutes; and 
(e) to exercise such other powers and perform such other func-
tions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.". 5 
16. In section 26 of the principal Act, for the words "and functions of the 
Faculties and of the Students' Council", the words "and functions of the Finance 
Committee and the Faculties" shall be substituted. 
17. In section 27 of the principal Act.-
(i) in clause (a), the word ", the Finance Committee" shall be 
omitted; 10 
(Ii) for clause (c), the following clause shall be subattiuted, namely:-
"(e) the manner of appointment or election, as the case may be, 
of the Chancellor, the Pro-Chancellor, the Vice-Ch~n~ellor and other 
officers of the University;". 
Subetltu- 18. For section 28 of the principal Act, the following section shall be subs- IS 
tion of tituted, naQlely:-
neW sec-
tion 
for secUon 
28, 
Statutes. "28. (1) On the commencement of the Aligarh Muslim University 20 
(Amendment) Act 1978, the Statutes in force immediately before such 
commencement shan be the Statutes of the University: 
Provided that where any such Statute is amended by the Act aforesaid, 
the concerned Statute as amended by that Act shall be a Statute of the 
University. 25 
(2) After the commepcernent of the AJigarh MuslilJl University 
(Amendment) Act, 1978. the Court may, notwithstanding anythin~ contained 
in sub-section (1). make new or additional Statutes or may amend or repeal 
the Statutes referred to in sub-section (1). 
(3) The Executive Council mav propose to the Court the draft of any 
Statute for its consideration and such draft shall be considered by the ('.ourt 30 
at its next meeting: 
Provided that the Executive Council shall not propose a draft of 
any Statute or of any amendmeJ1t of a Statute affecting the statQs, powers 
or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority of the 
University. has been ~ven an opportunity of expressin~ an opinion upon the 3S 
proposal and anv opinion so expressed shalt be in writin~ and shatt be 
col)si4er~ by the Court. 
(4) The Court may approve any such draft 8S is referred to in sub-
section (S) Or reioet it or return it to the Executive Council for re-conaide-
rRtion either in whole or in part together with any I'Imendments which the 40 
Court may susgest. 
(5) A member of the Court may propose to the Court. a draft of any 
Statute and the Court mav reiect the nroposal or refer such draft for consl-
dt'..ration to the Executive Council. which ma1y' either reiect the proposal or 
submit the draft to the Court in such form as tbe Executive Council may 4$ 
~pl"mve. and the provis:ons of this section shAH applv in the case of any 
draft so submitted as they apply in the case of a draft propmed by the 
Executive Councn. 
(6) Every new Statute or addition to tl1e .Statutes or any amendment 
, j 

or repeal of any Statute, sh~l require the previous approval of the Visitor 
who may sanction, disallow or remit it for further consideration.". 
It. In section 29 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1),-
S '(a.) in clause (m), after the words "Examination Commit-
10 
IS 
20 
25 
tee,", the words "Library Committee," shall be inserted; 
(b) after clause (m), the following clause ehall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(mm) the recognition of degrees, diplomas or certifi-
cates of other institutions and bodies for purposes of admis-
sion to a course of study in the University and the with-
drawal ot such recognition;"; 
(e) in clause (p), after the word "teachers", the words "ar.d 
other employees" shall be inserted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the proviso, the follOwing proviSO 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"Provided that in making the Ordinanees in respect of the 
matters enumerated in sub-section (1), other than those enume-
rated in clauses (10) and (p). the Executive 'Council shall act on 
the recommendation of the Academic Council.". 
20. In sub-section (3) of section 31 of the principel Act, after the words 
"this section", the words ", other than any Regulation made by the 
Court," shall be in'!erted. 
21. For section 35 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"35. (1) The annual accounts and balance sheet of the Univer-
sity shall be prepared under the direction of the Executive Council 
and shall, once at least every year and at intervals of not more than 
flfteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India or by !luch person or persons as he may authorise in this 
30 behalf. 
(2) A coPy of the annual accounts together with the audit report 
thereon shall be ~ubmitted to thp. Court and the Visitor alon~ with the 
observations of th~ Executive Council. 
(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual 
35 accounts shall be broullht to the notice of the Court and the obser-
vations of the Court, if any, shall, after beinll! considered by the 
hecutiVft Council, be submitted to the Visitor. 
(4) A coPy of the annual accounts, together with the audit 
report as submitted tb the Visitor, Rhall also be submitted to the 
Central Government, which shall, as soon 8!; may be, cause the same 
40 to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament. 
(St) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before 
both the Houses of Parliament, shall be published in the Gazette of 
India.". 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
29. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
section 
31, 
Substitu-
tion of 
new sec-
tion 'for 
section 
35. 
Annual 
accounts. 
t: . 

Amend-
ment of 
Statutes. 
The 
Chan-
cellor. 
The Pro-
Chancel-
lor. 
6 
22. Notwithstanding anything contained in the principal Act, the 
Statutes of the University shall be amended as follows:-
(i) throughout the Statutes, for the words "Head of Depart-
ment", wherever they occur, the words "Chairman of Department" 
shall be substituted, and such consequential amendments as the s 
rules of grammar may require shall also be made; 
(ii) for Statutes I and lA, the following Statutes shall be subs-
tituted, namely : -
"I. (1) The Chancellor shall be elected by the Court by a 
simple majority in accordance with the Regulations made by the 10 
Court. 
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of three years 
and shall be eligible for re-election. 
(3) The Chancellor shall, if present, preside over the convo-
cations of the University held for conferring degrees and the 15 
meetings of the Court. 
(4) Every proposal for the conferment of an honorary deg-
ree shall be subject to confirmation by the Chancellor. 
IA. (1) The Pro-Chancellor shall be elected by the Court 
by a simple majority in accordance with the Regulations made 20 
by the Court. 
(2) The Pro-Chancellor shall hold office for a term of three 
years and shall be eliJtible for re-election. 
(3) Any casual vacancy in the office of the Pro~hancellor 
shall be filled by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the 25 
Executive Council and the person so appointed shall hold office 
until the next annual meeting of the Court. 
(4) The Pro-Chancellor shall, in the absence of the Chan-
cellor, pl"rform the functions of the Chancellor."; 
(iii) in Statute ?r-
(a) for clauses (1) and (2), the follOwing clause shaH be sub-
stitut.ed, namely:-
30 
"(1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the 
Visitor from a panel of at least three persons recommended 
by the Court from a panel of five persons recommended by 3S 
the Executive Council: 
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of 
the persons so recommended, he may call for fresh recom-
mendations and if the Court recommends another panel, the 
Visitor shall not have any right to call for fresh recom- 40 
mendations."; 
(b) in clause (4), the words "and shall not be eligible for re-
appointment" shall be added at the ~d; 
,~ T 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
35 
4S 
It 
liv) in Statute 3-
(a) clause (l)j shall be renumbered as clause (lA) and before 
clause (LA) as so re-numbered, the following clause shall be in-
serted, namely:-
"(1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the princil1a1 executive 
and academic officer of the University, and shall exercise gene-
ral supervision and control over the affairs of the University and 
give effect to the decisions of all the authorities of the Univer-
&i.ty."; 
(b) after clause (3), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(4) The Vice-Chancellor may, if he is of opinion that 
immediate action should be taken on any matter,-he shall take 
such action as he deems necessary and report the same for con-
firmation at the next meeting of the authority which in the ordi-
nary; course would have dealt with the matter:. 
Provided that if the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor is 
not approved by the authority concerned, it may modify or 
reverse such action by a resolution passed by a majority of two-
thirds of its total membership."; 
(v) after Statute 4, the following Statute shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"4A. (1~ The Honorary Treasurer shall be elected by the 
Court by a, simple majority in accordance with the Regulations 
made by the Court from a panel of names recommended by the 
Executive Council . 
.(2) The Honorary Treasurer shall hold office for a term of 
three years and shaH be eligible for re-electioDl for another term. 
(3) The Honorary Treasurer shall hold office on such terms 
and ctmditions as may be prescribed by the Ordinances. 
(4) The Honorary Treasurer shall be a member ot the 
Finance Committee and shall exercise general supervision over 
the funds of the University."j 
.< vi) in Statute 6, for clause .(4), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(4) The Finance Officer shall advise the University as re-
gards its financial policy and perform such other financial func-
tions as may be assigned to him by the Executive Council or as 
may be prescribed by: these Statutes or the Ordinances: 
Provided that the ~~inance Officer shall not inCUl' any expen-
diture or make any investment exceeding ten thousand rupees 
without the previous approval of the Executive Council."; 
(vii) in Statute 7-
(a) for clause (2), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(2) If at any time, there is Db Professor 10 a Facul~y, a 
Reader shall, by rotation according to seniority, be appOlDted 
as the Dean of the Faculty."j 
Hono-
rary 
Treasurer. 

Chairmen 
of Depkrt-
menta. 
court. 
(b) in clause (5), after the words "8 Professor", the words 'lot 
Reader" shall be inserted; 
(c) in clause (6)-
(1) for the words "by such person as the Vice--Chancel-
lor may appoint for the purpose", the words "by; 8 Professor S 
if there is one, or if there is no Professor, by a Reader, by 
rotation according to seniority" shall be substituted; 
--.------ '~{2) the folTOwIOi proviso'7hailbe aaded, --namely: - ",' 
"Provided that no such Professor or Reader shall per-
form such duties for a continuous period of more than 10 
three years."; 
(viii) for Statute 8, the following Statute shall be substituted, 
~:--
"8. (1) Each Department shall have a Chairman, who shall 
be appointed by the Executive Council tram amongst the Pro- IS 
fessors in the Department by rotation according to seniority and 
he shall hold such otlice for a period of three years: 
Provided that in a Department where there is no Professor, 
the Chairman of the Department shall be appolllted from 
amongst the Readers in that Department and in a Department 
where there is no Professor or .H.eader, the Chairman of the 20 
Department shall be appointed from amongst the Lecturers 1D 
that Department who have completed ten years of service. 
,(Z) A Professor. Reader or Lecturer may decline the offer 
of appointment as the Chairman of a Department. 25 
(3) Where the Chairman of a Department resigns his office 
or is b)'j reason 9f illness, absence or any" other cawe. unable to 
perform the duties of his ollice, the duties of the office shall be 
performed by the next senior-most person in the Department 
until a new t:hairman, or the existing Chairman. as the case may 30 
be, assumes office."; 
(ix) Statute 9 shall be omitted; 
.(x) in Statute 13, for clause (2). the following clauses shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(2) The Librarian shall be a member of the Board of Studies 
. f LOb S . 35 of the Department 0 1 rary clence. 
(3) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform 
such duties as may be assigned to him by the Executive Council."i 
(ri) for Statute 14. the following Statu~ shall De aubstituted, 
namelyt- 40 
"14. (I) The Court shall consist of the lo11owiDl member&, 
namely:-
Ex-ojficio members 
(i) Chaneellor; 
(ii) Pro-Chaneellori 
(iii) Vice-Chancellorj 
.(il') Pro-Vice-Chance11ot; • 
4S 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
30 
35 
9 
(v) Honorary Treasurer; 
(vi) All Ex-Vice-Chancellors; 
(vii) Librarian; 
(viii) Provosts; 
(ix) Proctor; 
Representatives of the Departments and Colleges 
(x) Chairmen of Departments; 
(xi) ,rrincipals of Colleges; 
(xii) Professors who are not Chairmen of Departments; 
RepresentativeS' of teachers other than Chairmen of Departments, 
Principals of Colleges and Professors 
(xiii) Two Readers. by rotation according to senioi'ity; 
(xiv-) Three Lecturers, by rotation according to' seniority; 
Representatives of ex-students 
(xv) Ten representatives of ex-students to be elected 
by, the Alumini (Old Boys') Association; 
Representativee of donors 
-r • 
(X"IJi) Ten representatives of. donors who have donated 
at least a sum of ten thousand rupees or transferred property 
worth at least ten thousand rupees to be elected from amongst 
th~selves; 
Representatives of learned professions, industry and commerce 
(xvii) Ten persons representing the learned professions 
to be elected by the Court, of whom at least five shall be 
persons residing outside the State of Uttar Pradesh; 
(xviii) Five persons representing industry and commerce, 
to be elected by the Court; 
Representatives Of the AU-India Muslim Edu.cational Conference 
... . 
(xi.:r) Three representatives of the All-India Muslim Edu-
cational Conference; 
Representatives of Parliament 
(xx) Five members of Parliament, three to be elected by 
the House of the People (Lbk Sabha) from amongst its mem-
bers and two to be elected by the Council of States (Rajya 
Sabha) from amongst its members; . 
Representatives of Mu.slim culture and learning 
(xxi) Five persons representing Muslim 'culture and 
learning, to be elected by the Court; 
. , ... 
' .. 
Nominated persons 
(uii) Not more than five perSODS to be nqminated by the 
Visitor; 

Execu- ~ 
tive 
CounelL 
10 
(xxiii) Not more than two persons to be nominated by the 
Rector; 
(xxiv) Not more than three persons to be nominated by the 
ChanceDor: 
Provided that is making Dominations uDder items (xxii) to S 
(xxiv) due regard shall be had to the representation of the 
different areas of the country in view of the all-India character 
of the Uilliversity: 
Provided further that no employee of the University shall be 
eligible to be a member under items (xv) to (xxiv). 10 
(2) All the members of the Court, other than ex-o/ficio members, 
shall hold office for a term of three years and an ex-officio member shall 
cease to be a member of the Court as soon as he vacates the office by 
virtue of which he is such a member."; 
(xii) in Statute 15- IS 
(a) for clause (3), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"( 3) One-third of the members of the Court shall form a 
quorum for a meeting of the Court. "; 
(b) in the proviso to clause (4), for the words "thirty-five mem- 20 
bers", the words "one-third of the members" shall be substituted; 
(xiii) for Statute ] 6, the following Statute shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"16. (l) The Executive Council shall consist of the following 2S 
members, namely:-
(i) Vice-Chancellor; 
(il) Pro- Vice-Chancellor; 
(iii) Honorary Treasurer; 
(iv) Three Deans of Faculties. by rotation according to 30 
seniority; 
(v) Two Principals of Colleges, other than the Principal of the 
Women's College, by rotation according to seniority; 
(vi) Principal of the Women's College; 
(vii) One Provost, by rotation according to seniority; 
(viii) Proctor; 
(ix) Five members of the Court, none of whom shall be an 
employee of the University to be. elected by it, of whom at least 
three shall be persons residing outside the State of Uttar Pradesh: 
3S 
Provided that until such persons are elected by the Court, 40 
the Visitor shall nominate such members; 
(x) Three representatives of teachers at least one of whom 
shall be a Reader, to be elected from amongst themselves; 
(xi) Two persons to be nominated by the Visitor; 
(xii) One person to be nominated by the Rector; 
(xiii) One person to be nominated by the Chancellor: 
Provided that no employee of the University shall be eligible 
for nomination under items (xi) to (xi~i). 
,~ I 
45 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
(2) All the members of the Executive Council other than ex-of/icio 
members shall hold office for a term of three years. 
(3) Thirteen members of the Executive Council shall form a 
quorum for a meeting of the Executive Council. "; 
(xiv) in Statute 18-
{a) in clause (1)-
(1) in item (iv), for the word "Heads", the word "Chair-
men" shall be substituted; 
(2) item (vii) shall be omitted; 
(3) for item (ix), the following item shall be substituted, 
namely:-
" (ix ) Fifteen teachers consisting of two Professors, five 
Readers and eight Lecturers, to be elected by the teachers 
from amongst themselves;"; 
(4) after item (xU), the following item shall be inserted, namely:-
"(xiii) Five studerrts of whom three shall be the President, 
Vice-President and the Honorary Secretary of the Students' Union 
and two shall be elected by the students from amongst themselves, 
in accordance with the rules to be 'laid down by the Students' 
Union: 
Provided that no· st~dent who has passed the High School or 
any equivalent examination more than eight years earlier or the 
Pre-University Or equivalent examination more than seven years 
earlier, or has taken more than one year in excess of the period 
prescribed for the course for which he is 11 student, shall be eligible 
for election as a member of the Academic Council: 
Provided further that no student member of the Academic 
Council shan participate in the discussions in respect of matters 
relating to examinations, Selection Committees, appointment and 
conditions of service of the teaching staff."; 
(b) in clause (2), after the words "ex-otJicio members", the words 
"and student members" shall be inserted; 
(c) after clause (2), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
35 "(2A) The student members shall hold office for a 
period of one year so long as they continue to be office bearers 
of the Students' Union or, as the case may be, ~ntinue to be 
students of the University whichever is earlier."; 
(xv) in Statute 2~ 
(a) in sub-clause (e) of clause (2), for the word "Head", the 
40 word "Chairman" shall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (3),-
(1 ) after item ( viii) and before the proviSOS, the following 
items and proviso shan be inserted, namely:-
"Ox) Principal, A. K, Tibbja College shall be a mem· 
.';' ber of the Fa~1ty of Me~icim~; 

12 
(x) two students, to be elected from ~ch Facu1ty-
(a) by the post-graduatestudetrtsin all the Facul-
ties,other than the Faculties of Engineering and Tech-
Dology and Medicine from amongst themselves; and 
(b) by the final year and post-graduate students in S 
the Faculties of Engineering and Technology and Medi-
cine lrorn amongst themselves: 
--Provided that no student member of a Faculty shall 
participate in the dis.::ussions in respect of matters relating 
to-- 10 
(,) the appointment of examiners; 
(ii) the creation, abolition or upgradation of 
teaching posts; 
(iii) the field of study of each post at the time of 
its creation; IS 
(iv) the appointment of Supervisors of Research; 
I 
I or 
( v ) the allocation of teaching work amongst the 
teachers."; 
(2) in the first proviso, for the words "Provided that", the 20 
words "Provided further that" shall be substitufed; 
(]) in the second proviso, for the words "Provided further 
that" the words "Provided also that" shall be substituted; 
(c) in clause (5), after the words "ex-officio members", 
words "and student members" shall be inserted; 
the 
(d) after clause (5), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"( 5A) The student members shall hold office for a period of 
one year or so long as they continue to be students of the Univer-
2S 
sity whichever is earlier."; 30 
(xvi) in Statute 22-
(a) in clause (1), after item (v), the following item shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(ui) Two students to be elected by the post-graduate 
and research students of the Department from amongst 3S 
themselves."; 
(b) after clause (2), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
.. (2A) The members referred to in item (vi) shall hold 
office for a period of one year or so long as they continue 40 
to be students of the University whichever is earlier."; 

5 
10 
!.r 
13 
(c) in clause (3)-
(1) in item (a).-
(A) in sub-item (ii) , for the words £I, but excluding 
research degrees", the words "and research degrees" 
shall be substituted; 
(B) in sub-item (v), the words ", including alloca-
tion and utilisation of funds" shall be added at the end; 
(2) before the proviso, the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"Provided that no student member' shall participate 
in the functions referred to in sub-items (ii) , (iii), (iv) 
and (vii) of item (a): Of; 
(3) in the existing proviso, for the words "Provided 
that", the words "Provided further that" shall be substituted; 
IS (xvii) Statutes 24 and 25 shall be omitted; 
20 
30 
35 
(xviii) ion Statute 26. for c1ause (1), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(1) The Finance Committee shall cons.:st of the following 
members, namely:-
(i) Vice-Chancellor; 
(ii) Pro-Vice-Chancellor; 
(iii) Honorary Treasurer; 
(iv) Three persons to be nominated by the Visitor; 
(v) Two persons who are not employees of the University 
out of whom at least one shall be a person who is not a mem-
ber of the Executive Council, to be elected by the Court."; 
(m) in Statute 28, the words "standing or" shall be omitted; , 
(xx) in clause (1) of Statute 30-
(a) the words "and, in accordance with such other principles 
as the Executive Council may from time to time prescribe" 
shall be omitted; 
(b) the following Explanation shall be. added at the end, 
namely:--
"E.rplanatlion.-For the purpose of determining the 
continuous service of a person in a grade or post, the period 
for which such person has held a post in that grade or post 
in an officiating or temporary capacity immediately before 

Students' 
Union. 
Teachers' 
Associa_ 
hon. 
Other 
Associa-
tiOll8. 
Transi-
tional 
provi-
sions. 
14 
the, date on which he is appointed 1.0 it substantively, shall 
be taken into account."; 
(x.xi) after Statute 31, the following Statutes shall be inserted, 
namelY.;:-
"32. "(1) There shall be a Students' Union for the University. 5 
(2) Every student of the University shall be deemed to be 
,... . 
a member of the Students' Union. 
(3) The constitution, powers alld functions of the Students' 
Union shall be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances. 
33. :(1) There shall be a Teachers' Association for the 10 
University. 
(2) The constitution of the Teachers' Association shall be 
such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances. 
34. (1) There shall be staff associations for the following 15 
categories of staff of the University, namely:-
(i) Administrative and ministerial; 
(ii) Technical; 
(iii) Class IV; 
(iv) School teachers. 
(2) The constitution of the staff associations referred to in 
clause (1) shall be ~uch as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.". 
23. (1) 'The Court, the Executive Council and the Finance Committee 
20 
of the University shall, as soon no; may be, after the commencement of 
this Act, be constituted in accordance with the provisions of the princi- 25 
pal 'Act and of the Statutes, as amended by this Act, and until the Court, 
the Executive Council or the Finance Committee is so constituted, the 
authority functioning immediately before such commencement, shall con-
tinue to exercise all the poweI'5 and perform all the fUnctions under the 
principal Act, so amended. 30 
(2) The Chancellor and the Pro-Chancellor shall, as soon as may be, 
after the .commencement of this Act, be elected in accordance with the 
provisions of the principal Act and of the Statutes, as amended by this 
Act, and the person holding any such office immediately before such 
commencement, shall continue to hold that office until his successor en- 3S 
ters upon his office. 
:. ! .':' , 
(3) The Vice-Chancellor and the Pro-Vice-Chancellor and the Heads 
of Departments holding office immediately before the commencement of 
this Act sbaU, on and from such comtpencement. hold their respective 
offices by the same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions as they 40 
held it immediately before such commencement. ' 

24. Anything done, any action taken or any degree or other academic Saving. 
distinction conferred by the Univers~ty before the commencement o~ 
this Act shall, notwithstanding any change made by this Act in the 
constitution of the Court or the Executive Council, be valid as if such 
S thing was done, action waS! taken, or degree or academic distinction 
was conferred under the provisions of the principal Act, as amended 
by this Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Ever since the Aligarh Muslim University Act was amended in 1965 
and 1972, there had been a controversy amongst a large section of the 
Muslims about the changes brought about by these amending Acts. It 
had been represented that these amending Acts affected the basic 
character of the University and abridged its autonomy. 
2. There had also been persistent demands both inside and outside 
Parliament for the restoration of the basic chancter of the University 
and its democratic functioning. The Executive Council of the University 
itsel~ appointed a Committee, consisting of representatives of varied 
interests to make suggestions in this regard. The report of the Com-
mittee was submitted to the Government in April, 1977. 
3. In the light of the recommendations of the aforesaid Committee 
and also of a Committee appointed before the enactment of the amend-
ing Act of 1972 (known as the Beg Committee), and having regard to 
the strong feelings among a large section of the Muslims of India and 
the staff and students of the University, the amendments made by the 
amending Acts of 1965 and 1972 have been reviewed and it has been 
decided that the position which obtained in the University as a result 
of the Aligarh Muslim University (Amendment) Act, 1951 (62 of 1951) 
should be substantially restored, with such modifications as have be-
come necessary on account of passage of time. 
4. The main features of this Bill are as follows:-
(i) Omission of the words "establish and" ftrom the preamble 
to the Act; 
(ii) Amendment of the definition of the expression "University" 
occurring in the Act so as to indicate that the educational institution 
which originated as the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College, 
Aligarh, established by the Muslims of India, was incorporated as 
a University by the Act in 1920; 
(iii) Empowering the University to promote especialiJ.y the 
educatiional and cultural advancement of the Muslims of India; 
(iv) Restdration of the statUs of the supreme governing body 
of the University to the Court with power to make Statutes of the 
University; 
(v) Restoration of the position that obtained immediately after 
the amending Act of 1951 with respeCt to the composition of the 
Court, the Executive Council and the Finance Committee of tlie 
University; 
(vi) Restoration of the offiCe of the Honorary Treasurer; 
(vii) Change in the procedure of appointment of the Vice-
Chancellor of the University; 
(viii) Participation of the students in the academic bodies of 
the University. 
Nzw DELHI; PRATAP CHANDRA CHUNDER. 
The 6th May, 1978. 

MEMORANDUM ttEGARDING D:tLEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 18 of the Bill which proposes to substitute a new section for 
section 28 of the Aligarh Muslim University Act, 1920, enables the Court 
of the University to make new or additional Statutes of, the University or 
to amend or repeal such Statutes. The matters in respect of which the 
Court llUly exercise thds power relate to the consfitution, powers . and 
functions of the authorities of the University, the manner of appoint-
ment or election, of the Chancellor, the Pro-Chancellor, the Vice-
Chancellor and other officers of the University, the manner of appoint-
ment of teachers and other employees of the University and other matters. 
2. The above matters pertain to matters of proceaure or detail and 
as such the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
17 

Defini-
tions. 
Powers ot 
the Uni-
versity. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIVERSITY ACT, 19.20 
t.; 
(40 OF 1920) 
An Act to establish and incorporate a teaching and residential MUslim University 
at Aligarh. 
WHIWw it is elq)Cdient to establish, and incorporate a teac::hin&'and reaidtDtlaJ:' 
Muslim University at AliJarh, and to dissolve the Societies regiaterW amJer· ftle 
Societies' Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860), which fte respectively kDbwn as 
the, Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College, Aligarh, and the Muslim UDiveuity 
~on, and to trBnlfer to and vest in the said University all protIertles ana· 
rights of the said Societies and of the Muslim University Foundation Committee; 
• • • • .' 
2. In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless the context other-
wise requires--
• • • .. • 
(j) "Students' Council" means the Students' Council of the University; 
• • • • • 
(I) "University" means the Aligarh Muslim University. 
~. 
• • • • • 
S. The University shall have the following IX>wers, namely:-
• • • • • 
(2) (a) to promote Oriental and Islamic studies and give instruction 
in Muslim theology and religion and to impart moral and physical training; 
• • • • • 
(7) to institute Professorships, Readerships, Lectureships, and other 
teaching or academic posts required by the UDivemity and to appoint 
persons to such Professorships, Readerships, Lectureships and other posts; 
• • • • • 
(9) to institute and maintain, wi~ a radius of twenty-five kilometres 
of the University Mosque, Halls and hOS'tels and to recognise places of 
residence for the students of the University within the said limits and to with-
draw such recognition accorded to any such place of residence; 
• • • • • 
(liB) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make 
appointments thereto; 
• • • • • 
18 

19 
(lIE) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Govel'llDlellt, Oft the 
lilecuity of the property of the University, money for the purposes' of the 
Uaive:nity; 
(11 F) to declare a Department of Studies to be an autonomous 
department; and 
e e • e • 'If 
8. the Un~ve~ity shall be open to persons of either sex and of ..yhatev~ 
hce, cr~d, caste or class. and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt 
or Impose on any pers(;m, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in 
prd~r to entitle him to be ,admitted th~rein, as a teacher or student, Or to 'bpld 
any Qfke .therein., or to graduate threat, or to enjoy or exercis~ any priJlUeBC 
thereof, except in respect of any particular benefation accepted by the Univer-
sity ~e the commencement of the Aligarh Muslim University (Amendmen,) 
Act, 1972, where such test is made a condition thereof by any tesamentllry or 
other instrument creating such benefaction: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent religious 
i~struCtion being given in the manner prescn"bed by the Ordinances to' those who 
have consented to receive it. ' 
• • • • • 
13. (1) e • • • e 
(2B) After considering the representation, if any, made by the University, the 
Visitor may cause to be made such inspection or inquiry 8S is referred ·to in sub-
section (2). 
• • • • • 
Chief Rect()f 
'j 
15. The Governor of the State of Uttar Pra~h shall be Chief Ret;tOf,.d 
th~ ~~ersity. , 
e' • • • • 
17. (1) 1]te ~Il~cellor of the University shall be appointed by,tJte Visitor 
in such manner.as D;l.8y, be prescribed by the Statutes. 
. '(~) The. ~Uor shall, by virtu~ of his oOlce, qe tbe l!e.d of the 
University . 
. • '(3) ~ Chancellor shall! if present, preside at the convoca~ons of the 
U'rlivmity held 'for conferring degrees. 
18. (1) .. The Pro-Chancellor shall-be appointed by the . Visitor in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
(2) The ~anceJlor shall, in the absence of the Chailb~nor, p~i4C'over 
~e ~~nvocatioDs of the University held for conferring degrees. ' . 
19. (1) • e • • 
"'(2) '.L'IleVi~hancellor shall be the principal ~xecutlve and aca~mic 
officer of the University, and shall exercise general supervision and con-
trol over the. affairs of tpe UniverSity and give .effect to ~ decisions of 
aU the a\lthorities of the University. 
Unlvenity 
opp.n to 
all classes, 
castes 
and 
creeds. 
The Vlat-'tor. ' " 
I." 
Chief 
Rector. 
The 
Chancel-
lor. 
The Pro-
Chancel-
lor. 
The Vice-
~~ 
lor. 

Powen of 
other 
OfIlcen. 
Author!-
tl. althe 
Univer-
lity. 
The Court. 
Other 
authori-
tiel of Out 
Univer-
lity. 
Powerato 
111a1£, 
Statu •. 
20 
'(3) The Vice-Chancellor may, if he is of opinion that immediate actiol1 
is necessary on any: matter, exercise any power confen-ed on any autho-
rity of the University by or under this Act and shall report to such 
authority the action taken by him on such matter: 
Provided that if the authority concerned is of opinion that such action 
ought not to have been taken, it may refer the matter to the Visitor 
whOle decision thereon shall be final: 
-::':'-:;.-, 
Provided further tbat any person in the service of the University, who 
is aggrieved by the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor under tbis sub-
section shall have the right to appeal against such action to the Executive 
Council within three months from the date on which decision on such 
action is communicated to him and thereupon the Executive Council may 
confirm, modtty or reverse the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor. 
'(4) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers 8I1d per-
form such other functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes or 
Ordinances. 
• • • • • 
21. The powers of Officers other than the Chancellor, the Pro-Chancel-
lor, the Vice-Chancellor, the Pro-Vice-Chancellor, the Registrar and the 
Finance Officer shall be prescrioed by the Statutes. 
22. The following shall be the authorities of the University:: 
• • • • • 
(3B) The Faculties, 
l3C) The Students' Council; and 
• • • • • 
23. (1) • • • • 
(2) Subject to the provisions ef this Act, the Court shall have the 
following powers and functions, namely:-
(a) to review from time to time, the broad policies and pro.. 
grBmmes of the UniverSity and to suggest measures for the improve-
ment and development of the University; 
(b) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report, annual 
accounts of the University and the audit report thereon; 
(c) to advise the Visitor in respect ot any matter which may ~ 
referred to it for advice; and 
(d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the 
Statutes. 
• • • • • 
26. The constitution, powers and functions of the Facultiet and of 
the Students' Council and of such other authorities as may be declared 
by the Statutes to be authorities of the University, shall be prescribed 
by the Statutes. 
,.,.Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may ,provide 
for all or any o~ the following matters, namely:-
• • • • • 

21 
(0) the manner of appointment of the Chancellor, Vice-Chancellor, 
and other officers of the University; 
• • • • • 
28. (1) On and from the commencement of the Aligarh Muslim Univer- Statutes. 
sUy (Amendment) Act 1972, the Statutes, as set out in the Schedule, shall 
be the Statutes of the University: 
, 
Provided that the provisions of Statutes 29 to 45, both inclusive, of the 
University (re~ating to provident fund, pension and gratuity for the em-
ployees of the University), as in force immediately before such commence-
ment, shall be deemed to be included in the Statutes set out in the Schedule 
and shall, until new Statutes are made under sub-section (2)" continue in 
force subject to such modifications [being modifications necessary for 
bringing them into accord with the provisions of this Act as amended by 
the Aligarh Muslim University (Amendment) Act, 1972] as tt e 
Executive Council may, with the approwl of the Visitor:, make. 
(2) After the commencement of the Aligarh Muslim University 
(Amendment) Act, 1972, the Executive Council may. notwithstanding 
anything contained in sub-section (1), make new or additional Statutes or 
may amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub-section '(1): 
Provided that the Executive Council shall not make, amend or repeal 
any Statute affecting the status, powers or constitution Of any authority 
of the University until such authority of the University has been given 
an opportunity of expressing the opinion on the proposed changes 
which shalt be in writing and shall be considered by the Executive Council. 
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment 
or repeal of a Statute shall require the previous approval of the Visitor 
who may sanction or disallow it or return it to the Executive Council for 
further consideration, 
29, '(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the, Statutes, the Power to 
Ordinances may provide for all or any of the following matters, make Ordi-
namely: - nances . 
• • • • • 
'em) the establishment of Centres of Stud v, Boards of Study, Inter-
Disciplinary Committees, Special Centres, Specialised Laboratories, 
Committees on Advanced Study and Research. Committees of Depart-
ment and Centres, Admission Committees. Examination Committee. 
Boards of! Residence and Halls, Discipline Committee, Cultural Com-
mittee, Soeial Service Committee, Games Committee and .studfnts' 
Advisor:v Committees; 
• • • • • 
(p) such other terms and conditions of teachers as are not pres-
cribed by the Statutes; and 
• • • • • 
,(2) The' Ordinances In fo~ immediately before the commencement of 
the Aligarh Muslim University (Amendment\ Act, 1972, may be amended, 

Regula_ 
tions. 
Annual 
Accoun'ts. 
The Chan-
cellor. 
The Pro-
Chan-
cellor. 
The VIce. 
Chancel-
lor. 
~ 
.repealed or added to a~any time by the Executive Council, provided 
that-
(;,) in making the Ordinances in respect of the matters enumerated 
in sub-section (1) other than those enumerated in clauses (k) and (p), 
the Executive Council shall act on the recommendation of the Aca-
demic Council; 
(ii) before proposing the draft of the Ordinance in respect of the 
constitution of the Students' Union, St~dent's Advisory Committees, 
Cultural Committee, Social Service Committee and Games Commit-
tee and in respect of matters contained in clauses (a), (e), (h) and <i) 
of sub-section (1), the Academic Council shall consult the Students' 
Council. 
• • • • 
31. (1) • • • • • 
(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment, in such tn.an-
ner as it may specify, of any Regulation made under this section Or the 
annulment of any such Regulation . 
• • • • • 
35. (1) The Annual Accounts and Balance Sheet of the Uni'lersity 
shall be prepared under the direction of the Executive COWlcil and 
shall once at least every year and at intervals of not more than fifteen 
months be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
(2) The annual accounts when audited shall be published in the Ofti-
cialGazette and a copy of the Accounts together with the report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India shall be submitted to the 
Court, the Visitor and the Chancellor alongwith tlie observations of the 
Executive Council. 
(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall 
be brought to the notice of the Court and of the Chancellor and the ob-
servations of the Court, if any, shall, after being considered by the 
Executive Oouncil, be submitted to the Visitor. 
• • • • 
THE STATl1TES OF THE UNIVEaS1TY 
1. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor on the re-
commendation of the Court. 
(2) The Chancellor shall hold! office for a term of three years and 
shall be eligible for re-appointment. 
1A. (1) 'l'he Pro-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor on the 
recoII)lllendation of the Court. 
(2) The Pro-Chancellor shall hold office for a tenn of three yean and 
.hall be eligible for re-appointment. 
2. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the V1sitor from 
.• paDel of not leiS 1:ban three penolll seleoted bJ .& ~88 cona-

23 
tituted under'clauSe '(2) and'the panel shall be prepared in the alphilbe-
tieal order and will not indicate any order of preference: 
Provided! that if the Visitor does nbt approve of any of the persons 
included in the panel, he may call for a fresh panel. 
(2) The Committee referred to in clause (1) shall consist of three 
persons, none of whom shall be an employee of the University or a mem· 
ber of the Court, Executive Council or Academic Council. Out of the 
three persons, two shall be nominated by the Executive Council and one 
by the Visitor. The nominee of the Visitor shall be the Convener . 
• • • • • 
. :(~) The Vice.Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from 
the date on which he enters upon his office: 
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of five 
years, he shall continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters 
upon his office:, 
Provided further that the Visitor may direct that a Vice-Chancellor, 
whose term of office has expired, shall continue in office for such period, 
not exceeding a total period of one year, as may be specified in the 
d~ctioD. 
• • • • • 
6. (1) • • • • • 
(4) The Finance Officer shal1-
(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University 
and shall advise it as regards its finanCial policy; and 
(b) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to 
him by the Executive Council or as may be prescribecl, by these 
Statutes or the Ordinances: 
Provided that the Finance Officer shall not incur any expenditure or 
make any Investment exceeding Rs. 10,000 without the previous approval 
of the Executive Council. 
• • • • • 
7. (1) • • • • • 
(2) It at any time, there are no Professors in 8i Faculty the Vice-
Chancellor, or if so, designated by him, the Pro-Vice-Chancellor, shall 
exercise the powers of the Dean of the Faculty concerned. 
• .. • • 
(5) A Dean of Faculty may resign his office at any time c:luring his 
tenure, and a Professor may decline the offer of appointment as the 
Dean of a Faculty. 
Finanee 
Offi.cer. 
Deans of 
Facultlu. 

Heads of 
Depart. 
ments. 
Chairman, 
Students' 
Council. 
Librarian. 
Court. 
~4 
(6) When the oftlce of the Dean is vacant or when ~ Dean is, bt 
reason of illness, absence or any other, cause, unable to perform the dutiel 
of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such person as 
the Vice-Chancellor may appoint for the purpose. . 
• • • • • 
8. (1) Each Department shall have a Head who shall be a Professor 
and whose duties and functions and terms and conditions of appointment 
shall be prescribed by the Ordinances: 
Provided that if there are more Professors than one in any Department, 
the Head of the Department shall be appointed in accordance with the 
provisions made in respect thereof by the Ordinances: 
Provided further that in a Department where there is no Professor, a 
Reader may be appointed as Head of the Department in accordance with 
the provisions made in respect thereof by the Ordinances: 
Provided also that if there is no Professor or Reader in a Department 
the Dean of the Faculty concerned shall act as the Head of the Depart-
ment,: 
Provided also that, until the Ordinances as prescribed above are passed 
and appointments made accordingly, the persons who were appointed on 
17-7-1972 or thereafter, shall continue as Heads of the Departmen1ls and 
perform the same functions. 
(2) A Head of: the Department may resign his office at any time during 
his tenure and a Professor or Reader may decline the offer of appoint-
ment as the Head of a Department. 
9. (1) The Chairman, Students' Council shall be appointed by the 
Vice-Chancellor from amongst the teachers of the UniverSity. 
,(2) The Chainnan SO appointed under clause (1) shall hold of8.ce for 
such term as the Vice-Chancellor may specify, He shall be paid such 
honorarium and provided with such facilities as the Executive 1 Council 
mayde~ 
• .• • • • 
13. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The Librarian shall be the Head. of the Department of Library 
Science and "shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may 
be assigned to him by the Executive Council. 
14. (1) The Court shall consist of the following members, ~~y::-
E~-OtJicio members 
(i) Vice-Chancellor, 
Ui) All ex-Viee-Chancellors, 
(iii) ~Vice-Chancel1or, 
. . 

25 
(iv) All Deans of Faeultles, 
. (y.) Chairqlan, Students' COWlcil, 
(vi) Dean 'Of Students' Welfare . ' 
(vii) Librarian, 
(viii) Registrar, 
(ix) 50 per cent. Provosts, by rotation according to seniority, 
(x) Praetor; 
Representatives oj Departments and Colleg~s 
(xi) All Principals of Colleges and Polytechnic . 
. (xii) Rea.ds of Departments of Studies by rotation according TO 
semority. in each Faculty as shown below-
Faculty:cjf Arts 4 
Faculty of Engineering and Technology . 1 
Faculty of Medicine 5 
Faculty of Science £i 
'acuIty of Social Sciences 4 
ltepresentatives of University TeacMrs othe-r than Hea.ds of Departments 
and Principals 
(xiii) (a) Five Professors to be elected from amon~st them-
selves, 
(b) Five Readers to be elected from amtmgst themselves, 
(c) .Five tecturers to be elected from amongst them~@l\'ts; 
Reptf'sent(ltivft of Student! 
(xiv) (a) President. Vice-President, Secretary and one n'ottifhi!e 
crf the Executive Committee of the Students' Union, 
(b) Secretary, Students' Council. 
- ,--r;. (c) ~ persons to be elected by the StudeMs' COUncil' frt)m its 
own members, provided thafone of. them sWall b'e a Sieel'~1!fty tJt the 
Students' Advisory Committee of a Faculty, . 
(d) Four members to be eleeted by an ele~toral coll. ~t­
trtg-of Students who have shown their academic merit in the manner 
prescribed by the Ordinances, . 
. (e) Four members to be elected by an electoral con. or col-
~ eonsi~r of the ~udem members of theCulturaf Committee, 
Social SeM~ Cornrnit'fee anI(! the Garnett Committee ill .the manner 
-pteIGl'ibed by. the Ordinances; 
Re]Yf'esentatives of ex-,tudent" 
(xv) Jl'fftM! ~r8tfHtlftfvlI to be el~ by the' AJwnDl (Old 
Boys') Associa'tnm: 

Representatives of ParLiamt1lt 
(zvi) Ten representatives of Parliament, six to be nominated by 
the Speaker of tht" Lok Sabha from among the members thereof and 
four to be nominated by the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha from 
amq the members thereof; 
Per,ons representing learned p-rofessicms and special interests 
(xvii) Ten members from learned professions and special inte· 
rests including representatives of Industry, Commerce, Trade Unions, 
Banking and Agric\11ture to be nomiNlted by the Visitor; 
Nominated Members 
(xviii) A person nominated by the Chief Rector; 
(xix) Three persons nominated by the Chancellor; 
Remaining members of the Executive Coun.cit 
(xx) The members of the Executive Council not specified above; 
Representatives of Non-Teaching Staff 
(xxi) Ten representatives of the non-teaching staff to be elected 
!rom amongst themselves; 
RepTesentcmves of Muslim Cutture .a.nd LU?"ning 
(xxii) Five persons representing Muslim Culture and Learnin, 
to be elected by the Court; 
Reprelt-entatives of DonOTS 
(zviii) Representatives of persons making to the University R 
donation of Rs. 5,000 or more or transferring property of like value 
to be elected from amongst themselves. There shall be one repre-
aentative for every fifty such donors subj~t to a maximum ot ten 
representatives i 
Donors 
(Div) Every perean .who has made to the University. a donation 
of «me lakh of rupees or more or transferred property of the like 
value; 
Representatives of AU-India Muslim EducatiOn. C01tIjerence 
(xxv) Two representatives to be· elected by the All India 
MuaUm Education Conference: 
Provided that the election under items (~ii), (at». (~). (ui). 
(ali) cmd (~riii) shall be in accordance with the system of prapor-
tiODal representation by means of single transferable vote. 
(2) (i) All the members of the Court other than =-offlcio members 
and members representing the students, shall hold oftlce for a term of 
three yean. 
(u) An ex-Dflcio membersball cease to be a member of the Court 
U IOOD U he vacates the ofllce by virtue of which he is such member. 

27 
(iii) Members representmg students will hold office for a period of 
one year or till such time as they continue to be students, wb1chever is 
earlier. 
(3) No student, who has passed the High School or an equivalent 
examination more than eight years earlier or the Pre-University or an 
equivalent examination more than seven years earlier or has taken more 
than one year in excess o£ th~ period prescribed for the course for which 
he is a student shan be eligible to become a member under item (%'iv): 
Provided that no student shall be eligible to become a member ot the 
Court unless he has been on the rolls of the University for at least one 
year before he enters upon his office as such member. 
(4) No employee of the University or of a recognised institution shall 
be eligible to be a member of the Cour't under any of the items (zt7) 
tc. (zviii). 
15. (1) * * * . * • • 
(3) Thirty-five members of the Court shall form a quorum. 
(4) Special meetings of the Court may be convened by the Executive 
Council or the ¥ice-Chancellor, or, If there is no Vice-Chancellor, by the 
Pro-Vice-Chancellor, or if there is no Pro-Vice-Chancellor. by the 
Registrar: 
Provided that a special meeting of the Court shall also be called if 
thirty-five members of the Court make a requisition in writin, in this 
behalf. 
• • * • 
16. (1) The Executive Council shan consist of the following members. 
namely:- • 
(1) Vice-Chancellor, 1 
(ii) Pro- Vice-Chancellor; 
(iii) (a) Dean, Faculty of Arts; 
(b) Dean, Faculty of Social Sciences; 
(c, Dean, Faculty of Science; 
1 
(d) One Dean, by rotation from among the Deans of the Facul-
ties of Medicine and Engineering: 
(e) One Dean, by rotation from among the Deans of the Facul-
ties of Law, Commerce and Theology; 5 
(iv) One Principal from the Principals of Women'l Colle,e. Zakir 
Husain Engineering College and J awaharlal Nehru Medical College 
by rotation according to seniority as PrinCipal; I 
(v) One Professor, other than a Deaa or a Principal by rotation 
according to seniority; 1 
(vi) Three teachers to be elected by the teachers of the Uni-
venit)' from amonast themIelves in accordance with the IYltem 
of proportional representation by mean. of linlle trauf •• ble 
a veW; 
MeetiDI 
otthe 
Court 
EucutiYe 
Coun-
cil . 

Academic 
Co\~neil. 
Faculties 
and 
Depart-
menta .. 
., 
28 
(vii) Five persons to be elected' by the Court tron'l imiong its 
members by a system of proportional representatidn by means of 
a single transferable vote none of whom shall be an employee or' a 
student of the University or a college maintained by the University 
of whom at least three shall be persons normally res~,<:ting outsiqe ~e 
State of Uttar Pradesh; . 5 
(viii) Four persons to be nominated by the- Viii·tor: 4 
21 
Provided that until we members ref-erred to in sub-c}ause{vli)"are 
duly elected, the ~ecutive Council shall consist of the members specified 
in sub~lauses (i) to (vi), both inclusive, and sub-clause (viii). 
(2) All the members of the Executive Council other than e~icio 
members shall hold office for a term of three years. 
(3) No employee of the University" shall be eligible to be a member 
Wlder sub-clause (viii) of clause 1. 
(4) Seven members of the Executive Council shall form the quorum. 
(&) When an elected member of the Executive Council becomes alSo 
an ex-Ojficio member thereof, he shall cease to be an elected member 
thereof and continue as such ex-offir:io member . 
>II • • • 
18. (1) The Academic Council shall consist of the ~ol1owing members, 
namely:-
• '" '" '" '" ... 
(iv) Heads of Departments of Studies: 
>II >II ... '" '" 
(vii) Chairman, Students' Council; 
. . . '" 
(ix) Three Professors; five Readtrs; and seven Lec'uters to be 
elected from each category by the teachers in that category in ac-
cordance with the system of proportional representation by means of 
a single transferable vote; 
>II • • • .. 
(2) The members of the Academic Council, other than ex-officio 
members shall hold office f.or a term of two years. 
20 (1) '" • >II 
(2) (a) • ... • • ... 
(e) Bach Department shall have a Head who shall be appointed 
in accordance with tliaele Statutes ~ shall pedot:m .sUM. fUllctions 
as may be prescribed by the Ordinasces. 
{~ Every hculty, otller than the FaC.'Ulty of EngiDeeriug and Tech-
nololY. may comprise the following members, namely:...-
. . ... . . 
Ptovided that the Prlncipal, Women '8 CoUege shall be on 'be Facul-
ties of the sut:ijeets for which instl·uction· is, provided m ~ut College : 

~9 
~tovi~' furtJier' that' the Readers and Leetuters of Cat~t:irift (v) and 
(vi) shall serve on the Faculties by rotation; according to seni«tty . 
.. .. .. .. .. 
22. (1) Each Department shall have a Board of Studies' which shall 
('onsi!o;t of:-
.. .. .. .. .. 
(3) The functiol18 of Board of Studies shall be: 
(a) to recommend to the Faculty in the manner prescribed in tbe 
Ordinances: 
• • • .. • 
(ii) appoi.ntment of examiners for under-gn~-.aad POit-
graduate course, but excluding research degrees; 
'" .. • • • 
(1') measures for improvement of staAdurd. of • ..chine·-and 
re.arch; 
• .. .. '" 
Provided that a Department for reasons of its size or otherwise shall, 
in the interest of efficient discharge of its functions, constitute Commit ten 
and assign them I'e:;ponsibilitiE's in specified areas as pTe-!\cribed in thf' 
Ordinances. 
'" '" .. '" '" 
24: (1) The composition of the Stu.cJl?nts' Council may Bf'a,,'follows:-
(i) Chairman; 
(ii) All the student members of the Court; 
(iii) Fifteen students be elected by the students in aec;c!"dance 
with the system of proportional representation and by mean.s of single 
transferable vote on the basis of allocation of seats to difterent Facul-
ties according to their strength as may be prescribed in the 
Ordinances: 
Provided that no student who bas pjlSsed. the Hi&h Sc:la.oQl or aD· ~i­
valent examination more than eight years earlier 0( the Pre·UniJ,lenity 
or an equivalent examinat.;.OQ more than seven yea.rs e8ll~er GI' bas 
taken more than one year in excess 01 the period prescribed. for the 
course for which he is a student, shall be eligible to become a member 
of the Students' Council. 
(2) The SecretaJ'Y of the Students' Council shall be electeq.by it from 
amongst its members through the system of proportional; r~pr~ta1joD 
by. means of siagl~ transferable vote. 
25. (1) The powers and functions of the Students' Council shall be .s 
follows:-
(i) to make recommendations to the Executive and Academic 
Councils in matters affecting the academic work of the students such 
&I the atructure of cOursfII, pattern of instruction. foocl. the corper.te 
Board,; of 
StucUt"S. 
Student,' 
COW)Cil 
... 
Power. 
IU\d 
tuncUons 
otStu-
deny' 
Council. 

30 
life of the University in 90 far as it lCC)JlCerns the students, and the 
co-curricular and extra-curricular activities in the University; 
(ii) all rules affecting discipline, welfere, sport'S, literary and 
departmental societies,. management of hostels, student homes, non· 
residelnt student centres, extension work, social work, students health. 
National Service Scheme, National Cadet Corps, etc., shall ordiBarily 
be placed before the Students' Council for obtaining its views, which 
will then be communicated to the Academic and Executive Councils 
for decision; 
(iii) the Council shall have the right to communicate its views, 
observations and recommendations to the Vice-Chancellor or any 
authority of the University, in respect of any matter whicjt concerns 
the students. 
(2) The meetings of the Students' Council shall be held at least three 
times every year, and not more than six months shall elapse between 
two meetings. Extraordinary meetings may be held either at the instance 
of the Chairman, or at the request of not less than half of the meber~ 
of the Council. Ten members of the Council shall form the quorum for 
a meeting of the Students' Council. 
26. (1) The Finance Committeeilhall consist of the follOWing mem-
bers, namely:-
(i) Vice-Chancellor; 
(ii) Pro- Vice-Chancellor; 
(iii) .Two Deans of the Faculties, to be nominated by the Execu-
tive Council; 
(iv) One person nominated by the Executive Council from 
amongst its members other than those in the service of the Univer-
sity; 
(v) Three persons nominated by the Vis;tor. 
'" '" '" '" • 
Commit- 28. Any authority of the University may appoint as many standing 
tMS. or special committees as it may deem fit, and may appoint to such com-
mittees persons who are not members of such authority. Any such 
committee may deal with any subject delegated to it subject to subse-
quent confumation by the authority appo:nting It. 
'" '" '" '" 
30. (1) Whenever, in accordance wjth these Statutes, any person is 
to hold an office or be a member of an authority of the University by 
rotation according to seniority, such seniority shall be determined 
according to the length of continuous service ot such person in hiB grade, 
and, in accordance with such other principles as the Executive Council 
may from time to time prescribe. 
'" • '" • • 

LOK SABHA 
It. 
BILL 
further to amend the Aligarh Muslim University Act, 1920 
(Sh"ip,.dtap Chandra Chunm, 
MiNner of Education, 
Social WeljaTe and Culture) 