1
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI V.K. SREEKANDAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 299 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, for the words "doing an
act", the words "doing an act including lynching" shall be substituted.
Bill No. 85 of  2022
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
5
45 of 1860 Amendment of
section 299.

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The word lynching was unknown to many of Indians until some seven or eight
years ago. However, it invaded like a storm and it became so acquainted and even
turned into a talking point among even the ordinary citizens of our country .
Incidents of lynching started a few years ago from many parts of the country and
since then these incidents are continuing unabated. To prevent this heinous crime
legislations have been passed by many State Governments, but the same could not
be implemented as the bills passed by the State Governments have been reserved
by the respective Governors for consideration of the President. The President has
to go with the advice given by the Council of Ministers, in the case of such
legislation, represented by the Union Government. Union Government is of the
view that lynching is not defined as a crime under the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and
the bills are still being examined by them.
Lynching is a crime which is different from other crimes, and therefore, it has
to be defined as a crime in the Indian Penal Code, so that proper steps can be taken
up to deal with such crimes and to curtail the growing number of such crimes in the
country. Such crimes cannot be simply left out or altogether treating it as a crime
together with other crimes, stating that it has not been defined as a crime in the
Indian Penal Code, 1860.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Indian Penal Code 1860, with a view
to include act of lynching with an intent of causing death or bodily injuries under the
offence of culpable homicide.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;   V.K. SREEKANDAN
28 February, 2022

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN P ENAL CODE, 1860
[45 of 1860]
* * * * *
CHAPTER XVI
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY
Of OFFENCES AFFECTING LIFE
299. Whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention of causing
death, or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death,
or with the knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the
offence of culpable homicide.
* * * * *
Culpable
homicide.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
_______
(Shri V.K. Sreekandan, M.P.)