1
THE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR GIRL CHILD BORN TO
PARENTS LIVING BELOW POVERTY LINE BILL, 2016
By
SHRIMATI RANJEET RANJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for financial protection and security to girl child born to parents
living below poverty line and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Financial Assistance to Girl Child Born to Parents
Living Below Poverty Line Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 85 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "girl child" means any female child born to parents living below poverty
line and who has not attained the age of twenty years;
(c) "parents living below poverty line" means such parents whose income
from all sources does not exceed rupees one lakh per annum; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a Fund to be known
as the Girl Child Development Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the
Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) The appropriate Government shall deposit a sum of one lakh rupees in the bank
account of every girl child born to parents living below poverty line within one month of
her birth.
(4) The deposit shall mature when the girl child attains the age of eighteen years
or such after the expiry of period as may be fixed by the appropriate Government and
such proceeds may be used by the girl child for education and other welfare measures.
4. The appropriate Government shall within six months of the coming into force of
this Act, issue directions to the nationalised and private sector banks and insurance
companies, to formulate suitable schemes which provide benefits of fixed or term deposit
and insurance benefits to the girl child.
5. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force but save as aforesaid the
provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the
time being in force giving benefits to the girl child.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Definitions.
Constitution
of Girl Child
Development
Fund.
Schemes to be
formulated by
banks and
insurance
companies.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Even after the completion of sixty-eight years of Independence, no clear-cut policy
for the overall development of girl child belonging to Below Poverty Line (BPL) family has
been formulated in our country so far. Today, a girl child of a poor family has to face
problems at every stage. This includes, problems relating to poverty, upbringing,
malnutrition, education, employment, vocational training, healthcare and problems faced
at the time of her marriage. There is no institutional mechanism to harness the potential
and channelize the energy of girl child of BPL family for the betterment of the country.
There is no proper planning for comprehensive development of girl child. The plight of girl
child belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes is
even worse. Apart from all the problems as mentioned above, they also have to face social
ostracisation. Birth of a girl child is still considered to be a curse.
There is a need to instill a sense of belongingness among the female children by
providing them all opportunities for their development so that they can contribute to the
progress of the country to their full potential. The facilities should be provided to them as
a matter of right and not as a privilege. The steps taken in this direction will not only uplift
the conditions of girl child but will also create a better society leading to a civilized and
stronger nation. The Government should take responsibility of depositing one lakh rupees
or as may be prescribed in financial institutions like banks and insurance companies in the
name of new born girl child of BPL family, which will become a handsome amount after
eighteen years or so which can be used for the purpose of higher education, skill
development, training etc. of the girl child.
In this way, financial protection and security to girl child of BPL family must be
ensured.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; RANJEET  RANJAN
February 12, 2016.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Girl Child Development Fund. It
also provide for deposit of sum of one lakh rupees in the bank account of every girl child
of parents living below poverty line. The expenditure relating to State shall be borne out
of the Consolidated Fund of States concerned. The expenditure relating to Union Territories
shall be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an
annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand five hundred crore is
also likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for financial protection and security to girl child born to
parents living below poverty line and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Ranjeet Ranjan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—5315LS(S3)—19.04.2016.