1
THE INSURANCE AGENTS WELFARE BILL, 2007
By
SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA, M.P.
A
BILL
to make provisions for the welfare of insurance agents and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Insurance Agents Welfare Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  85  of 2007
5

2
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "fund" means the Insurance Agents Welfare Fund constituted under
section 3 of this Act;
(ii) the expression "insurance agent" shall have the same meaning as is assigned
to it in the Insurance Act, 1938; and
(iii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a fund to be known as the Insurance
Agents Welfare Fund.
(2) The Fund shall consist of contributions from Central Government, the insurance
companies and the insurance agents in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by a Board, consisting of—
(a) the union finance minister, who shall be its ex-officio Chairperson;
(b) two members who shall be representatives of the Insurance Regulatory
and Development Authority; and
(c) two members representing the insurance agents who shall be nominated
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The fund shall be utilized for the following purposes:—
(i) payment of compensation to next of kin of insurance agents in case of death
in harness;
(ii) payment of old age pension after an insurance agent has attained the age of
sixty-five years;
(iii) payment of family pension to the dependents of the deceased insurance
agents;
(iv) payment of premium for the medical insurance of the insurance agent and
his family; and
(v) such other purposes as the Board may deem necessary for the welfare of
insurance agents.
5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Definitions.
Insurance
Agents
Welfare Fund.
Utilisation of
the Fund.
Power to
make rules.
4 of 1938.5
10
15
25
20
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The insurance agents play a major role in procuring business and in the growth of the
Insurance Sector. More than a million people are engaged as insurance agents in the public
sector life insurance corporation alone. Majority of them have opted this profession as full
time job. The work requires a lot of time, energy and dedication. The competition amongst
insurance companies for business has tremendously increased after the opening up of this
sector to private players both at national and international levels.
It is estimated that seventy-five percent. of the insurance agents earn less than rupees
sixty thousand per annum which is not sufficient to meet even minimum requirements of a
family. Their contribution to insurance sector is immense in creating assets and increasing
profit of the companies, at the same time providing benefits of insurance to the general
public. In the absence of any welfare scheme by the Government or social security, these
insurance agents live in pathetic conditions. A portion of profit earned by the insurance
companies through hard work of such agents needs to be devoted for the welfare of insurance
agents and their families. It is the responsibility of the Government in a welfare state to
provide proper medical care, old age pension, family pension, etc. to every citizen of the
country. Therefore, a suitable legislation is urgently required to provide for general welfare
of persons working as agents in the insurance sector.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BASUDEB ACHARIA
November 6, 2007.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a Insurance Agents Welfare Fund and for
constitution of a Board to administer the fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure
of about rupees fifty crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to make provisions for the welfare of insurance agents and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Basudeb Acharia, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4493LS(S-5)—16-11-2007.