AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 85 of 2023
THE CRIMINAL LAW (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
By
SHRI ABDUL KHALEQUE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called as the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2023.
    (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5

CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
2. In section 99 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, hereinafter referred to as the Penal
Code, after para 3, the following para shall be inserted, namely:—
“There is no right of private defence for a police officer or other person
authorized in this behalf making an arrest of a person in an unprovoked situation
which does not reasonably cause the apprehension of death or injury.”.
3. After section 308 of the Penal Code, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“308A. If a police officer or such other person while making an arrest of a
person causes death of the person to be arrested without any reason sufficient
to cause death, such police officer or other person shall be guilty of offence of
extra-judicial killing and tried accordingly and shall be punished with death or
imprisonment for life.”.
CHAPTER III
AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
4. In section 46 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973,—
(a) in sub-section (2), for the words “use all means necessary to effect the
arrest”, the words “use all means except causing death of the person to effect the
arrest” shall be substituted;
(b) after sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that if the police officer or other person causes death of
the person to be arrested, such police officer or other person shall be tried
accordingly.”; and
(c) sub-section (3) shall be omitted.
Amendment of
section 99.
Insertion of new
section 308A.
2
5
10
45 of 1860.
Extra -Judicial
killing.
Amendment of
section 46.
15
20
25
2 of 1974.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The menace of extra-judicial killings has taken a brutal turn over the last few
decades. The extra-judicial killings, what is also known commonly as fake encounters
has become a mean for the security forces to eliminate alleged criminals even before
judgement is delivered by the judiciary. Police encounters are the violation of the
human rights of the person who is actually until not proven guilty cannot be called as
offender or criminal. India is not a rogue State. Nor it is ruled by any kind of dictatorship.
These kinds of killings existed centuries back primarily during the times of Kings and
Emperors. However, such a system cannot prevail in a democracy like ours where rule
of law exists.
These extra-judicial killings have become means of settling, at times personal
rivalry and more so in today’s date it has become a tool to silence political opponents.
We are experiencing the situation across many States in India. Under the garb of
section 46 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 and section 96 of Indian Penal Code,
1860 security forces indulge in such acts of fake encounters. Many a times, even
unarmed person, women and child became victims of extra-judicial killings and the
persons responsible for such killings walked away. So, it is time that the law be
tweaked so that Human Rights of people are not violated.
All encounter killings must be investigated with the utmost diligence as such
killings affect the credibility of the rule of law. Rule of law must be ensured at all costs
in every case across the country. It is the duty of the State Government to adhere to
the rule of law and work in accordance with the rule of law. There is a need to train the
police officials in such a way that they are able to handle every unforeseen situation
and protect the accused in police custody. As encounter killings are increasing day
by day, resulting in human rights violations. Thus, there is a need to instill the
importance of human rights in the minds of the police officers executing these unlawful
killings.
Hence this Bill.
     NEW DELHI;          ABDUL KHALEQUE
March 14, 2023.
3

4
ANNEXURE
[EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860]
(45 OF 1860)
[EXTRACT FROM THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE, 1973]
(2 OF 1974)
 *   *  * *
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
96. Nothing is an offence which is done in the exercise of the right of private
defence.
 *   *  * *
99. There is no right of private defence against an act which does not reasonably
cause the apprehension of death or of grievous hurt, if done, or attempted to be done,
by a public servant acting in good faith under colour of his office, though that act,
may not be strictly justifiable by law.
There is no right of private defence against an act which does not reasonably
cause the apprehension of death or of grievous hurt, if done, or attempted to be done,
by the direction of a public servant acting in good faith under colour of his office,
though that direction may not be strictly justifiable by law. There is no right of private
defence in cases in which there is time to have recourse to protection of the public
authorities.
The right of private defence in no case extends to the inflicting of more harm than
it is necessary to inflict for the purpose of defence.
Explanation 1.—A person is not deprived of the right of private defence against
an act done, or attempted to be done, by a public servant, as such, unless he knows
or has reason to believe, that the person doing the act is such public servant.
Explanation 2.—A person is not deprived of the right of private defence against
an act done, or attempted to be done, by the direction of a public servant, unless he
knows, or has reason to believe, that the person doing the act is acting by such
direction, or unless such person states the authority under which he acts, or if he has
authority in writing, unless he produces such authority, if demanded.
 *   *  * *
THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE, 1973
46. (1) In making an arrest the police officer or other person making the same
shall actually touch or confine the body of the person to be arrested, unless there be
a submission to the custody by word or action:
Provided that where a woman is to be arrested, unless the circumstances indicate
to the contrary, her submission to custody on an oral intimation of arrest shall be
presumed and, unless the circumstances otherwise require or unless the police officer
is a female, the police officer shall not touch the person of the woman for making her
arrest.
(2) If such person forcibly resists the endeavour to arrest him, or attempts to
evade the arrest, such police officer or other person may use all means necessary to
effect the arrest.
(3) Nothing in this section gives a right to cause the death of a person who is not
accused of an offence punishable with death or with imprisonment for life.
Things done in
private defence.
Acts against
which there is
no right of
private defence.
Extent to which
the right may be
exercised.
Arrest how
made.

5
(4) Save in exceptional circumstances, no woman shall be arrested after sunset
and before sunrise, and where such exceptional circumstances exist, the woman police
officer shall, by making a written report, obtain the prior permission of the Judicial
Magistrate of the first class within whose local jurisdiction the offence is committed
or the arrest is to be made.
 *   *  * *

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
 further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
————
(Shri Abdul Khaleque, M.P.)