1
Bill No. 85 of   2011
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE SLUMS AND JHUGGI-JHOPRI  AREAS CLEARANCE BILL, 2011
By
SHRI OM PRAKASH YADAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for clearance of Jhuggi-Jhopri clusters and slum areas
and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Slums and Jhuggi-Jhopri Areas Clearance Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to Union territories only.
(3) It shall come into  force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "building" includes any structure or erection or any part of a building but
does not include a plant or machinery comprised in a building;
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "competent authority" means such officer or authority as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint as the competent
authority for the purpose of this Act;
(c) "jhuggi-jhopri" means a small roughly built house or shelter usually made of
mud, wood or metal having thatched or tin sheet roof covering;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) "slum" means an  area  consisting of jhuggi-jhopri clusters, badly built and
over-crowded houses and buildings; and
(f) "slum clearance" means the clearance of any slum area by, demolition and
removal of buildings therefrom.
3. The competent authority may, from time to time by notification in the Official Gazette,
declare any area to be a slum area within the meaning of this Act.
4. The competent authority shall give adequate notice to inhabitants of slums and
jhuggi-jhopri clusters before their demolition.
5. (1) All the residents of slum clearance areas shall be evacuated and accommodated
at convenient locations till alternate houses are built by the Central Government.
(2) The houses build under sub-section (1) shall have all necessary basic facilities.
6. As soon as may be after competent authority has declared any slum area to be a
clearance area, the Central Government shall cause such slum area to be cleared of all jhuggi-
jhopri clusters and other buildings removed from that area.
7. On and from the date of commencement of the Act, no person shall be allowed to set
up any jhuggi-jhopri in any area.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Competent
authority to
declare slum
areas.
Competent
authority to
give adequate
notice to
inhabitants of
slums and
jhuggi-jhopri
clusters.
Alternate
accommodation
to residents of
slum clearance
areas.
Removal of
jhuggi-jhopri
areas.
Ban on setting
up of jhuggi-
jhopri areas.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Crores of people in our country are at present living in slums and jhuggi-jhopri clusters
under inhuman conditions. There are no basic facilities of potable water, electricity, sanitation
and health services in these areas. However, people have no other option but to live in such
slums and jhuggi-jhopri clusters. The problem is more appalling in Metropolitan cities and
other big cities where people migrate in large numbers in search of employment. Poverty
forces them to find shelter in slums and jhuggi-jhopri clusters.
It is duty of the Government to provide alternate houses with basic facilities to persons
who are living in slum areas. The Government should also see that slum areas do not come up
and those which are already there should be demolished.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; OM PRAKASH YADA V
September 8, 2011.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide alternate houses
with all basic facilities to those who are living in slum areas. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees
one thousand five hundred crore will be involved as a recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees four hundred crore will also be involved as a non-recurring expenditure.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for clearance of jhuggi-jhopri clusters and slum areas and
for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Om Prakash Yadav, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2283LS(S3)—14-11-2011.