1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
By
SHRI J.P. AGARWAL, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2012.
2. In article 214 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall be inserted at the end,
namely:—
“Provided that the Parliament may by law establish such number of permanent
Benches of a High Court at such places in a State or a Union territory, as it may deem
necessary, on the basis of area and population of that State or Union territory and the
number of cases pending in the principal seat of the High Court concerned.’’
Short title.
Bill No. 85 of  2012
Amendment
of article
214.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our Constitution makes right to legal remedies a fundamental right of the citizens. But
the huge number of cases pending in various courts especially High Courts is a matter of
serious concern. Considering the huge geographical expanse of our country and the prevailing
poverty, seeking legal remedy has become an expensive exercise. Time has come to deliver
justice in an easy, quick and cost effective manner to the people. Providing speedy justice at
low cost is all the more important for the people who live in remote areas lying far away from
State capitals where principal seats of the most of the High Courts are located. Such a
situation literally results in denial of justice to the poor persons who cannot afford to travel
frequently to far off places in search of justice. The large volume of cases pending in the
High Courts has resulted in delayed delivery of justice which amounts to denial of justice.
Moreover, since most of the High Courts are located at State capitals, the advocates of a
particular place create a monopoly for themselves charging exorbitant fees which are not
within the means of poor persons and they are obliged to sell off their property in their quest
of justice. If more benches of High Courts are established, it will serve many purposes
including convenience and saving for the common man, less pendency of cases and speed
delivery of justice at low cost. This will help to mitigate the sufferings of the masses.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; J.P .  AGARWAL.
July 27, 2012.
2

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
CHAPTER V
THE  HIGH  COURTS  IN  THE  STATES
214. There shall be a High Court for each State.
* * * * *

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri J.P . Agarwal, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2324LS(S3)—23.08.2012