Short title and
commence-
ment.
THE FOREST (CONSERV ATION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2009
BY
SHRI SATPAL MAHARAJ, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Forest (Conservation) Amendment Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.   After section 3B of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, the following sections shall
be inserted, namely:—
"3C. (1) Nothing in this Act or in any other law, for the time being in force, in any
part or whole of the territory of India shall be deemed to prohibit the inhabitants of hill
areas, living in the vicinity of reserved forests or protected forests or in the vicinity of
any other forest land, by whatever name called, from felling, cutting, sawing off or
removing trees including green trees or from taking timber and fodder or  fetching
water or using any other forest produce or from grazing rights or from stripping the
bark or leaves from any tree or from quarrying of stones or from any other right or
Bill No.  85 of  2009
Insertion of
new  sections
3C and 3D.
Protection of
rights of
inhabitants of
hill areas over
forests.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
concession which they had been traditionally enjoying or which is recognised and
settled as a right by the State Government, in such forest or forest land for their own
bonafide use for the purpose of collecting fuel or for agriculture or for other domestic
and non-commercial purposes.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the State Government shall grant licenses
to the bonafide users in such form and manner as it may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify.
(3) Nothing in this section shall prohibit the State from imposing such conditions
or making such regulations, including quantities of forest produce which the bonafide
users may be entitled to, as are necessary, for conservation and development of  forests
for public good.
(4) The provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstanding any judgment
or order or decree of any court or tribunal or any authority contrary to the provisions
of this section.
3D. (1)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 2 and 3, the approval of
the Central Government shall not be required for deforestation in the following cases,
namely:—
(i) any work relating to building new houses for tribal and non-tribal
families living in the vicinity of forest land;
(ii) construction of,—
(a) roads or helipads or ropeways to give connectivity to important
places;
(b) primary health centres;
(c) anganwadis; and
(d) water tanks;
(iii) laying of,—
(a) pipelines for sewer/drinking water connections; and
(b) telecommunication lines;
(iv) erection of electric poles for transmission and distribution of electricity
for exclusive benefits to tribal and non-tribal settlements in the vicinity of forests;
(v) any work relating or ancillary to mining; and
(vi) any other development work to be carried out under any developmental
scheme launched by the Central Government or State Government, as the case
may be.
(2) Every State Government shall forward a list of all cases of deforestation
under sub-section (1) to the Union Ministry of Environment and Forests.
(3) If the Central Government, on the basis of information received under sub-
section (2) or otherwise, is satisfied that due to development works specified in sub-
section (1), the forest cover in a State has depleted more than ten per cent. during any
previous year and that the State Government has not undertaken any effective steps
to maintain the forest cover, it may, by notification, suspend the application of the
provisions of this Act, in relation to that State till such time as it may deem necessary.".
Approval of
Central
Government
not required
for
deforestation
in certain
cases.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 was enacted with a view to checking increasing
deforestation and consequent degradation of environment. The Act made prior approval of
the Central Government obligatory for de-reservation of reserved forests and also for use of
forest lands for non-forest purposes. Though no one disputes the purpose for which the
Act was enacted yet, it cannot be denied that the forests are inseparably linked with day to
day life of the hill people. People of the hill regions of Uttarakhand enjoyed the right to graze
cattle, take fuel wood, grass, stones, etc. from the reserved forests for their bonafide use.
Repeated attempts were made to curtail the rights of hills people from time to time. In the
past, there was a Forest Grievance Committee appointed by the British Government which
submitted its report in 1921. Thereafter, a report submitted by Mr. V .A. Stowell, I.C.S. on land
management system, which is accepted as law, recognised all the aforesaid traditional rights
of the hill people. However, by an order dated 12 December 1996, the Supreme Court directed
that in hill areas, felling of trees will not be permitted in any forest, whether  public or private.
However, this ban was not to apply to permits granted to right holders for their bonafide
personal use in Himachal Pradesh.
In the hill regions of Uttarakhand, approximately 40 thousand cu. mt. of  timber per
year was granted to the people as rights and concessions of forest produce at the time of
settlement under the Indian Forests Act. Depriving people  of hill regions of their customary
rights as recognised by the Government has created hardships and discontent amongst
them. There is no fuel wood available in cremation grounds and for other bona fide customary
uses of the people of hill regions of Uttarakhand.
Similarly, tribal and non-tribal people living in the vicinity of the forest land are facing
problems in construction of their new houses, anganwadi centres, public health centres in
and around their settlements. There is no provision in the Act to provide relaxation for utility
services like construction of public roads, laying sewer lines, building water tanks, erecting
electric poles for transmission and distribution of electricity supply and laying telephone
lines, etc.
The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest
Rights) Act, 2006 recently enacted by Parliament, recognizes and confers certain rights on
Scheduled tribes and other traditional forest dwellers. However, these rights can be enjoyed
only by those other traditional forest dwellers who have at least for three generations (i.e.
seventy-five years in all) prior to 13 December 2005 primarily resided in and who depend on
the forest lands for their bonafide livelihood needs. This Act, therefore, does not adequately
address the problems of the people of hill regions of Uttarakhand. Even after the enactment
of this Act, the people of hill regions are not able to enjoy their customary rights for their
bonafide use.
Further, development works like building new houses, roads, helipads, ropeways
primary health centres, water tanks, etc. still require approval of the Central Government.
This results in avoidable delay in the delivery of services to the people living in these areas.
This Act, therefore, does not adequately address the problems of the people living in the
vicinity of forest lands and especially of hilly regions of Uttarakhand.
People living in the vicinity of forest lands have not seen any developmental work in
their area as the existing Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 provides for a cumbersome procedure
to be followed for approval of any project for development of basic amenities in the area. It
is necessary to serve the interests of the tribals and other non-tribal people living in the
vicinity of forest lands by amending the existing Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 with a view
to facilitate carrying out of necessary construction and other development related works to
meet the demands of their growing population for housing, health centres, etc. in the vicinity
of their existing settlements.
3

4
The proposed Bill is, therefore, an attempt towards restoring such customary rights as
are enjoyed by the people of hill regions with forests, while, at the same time, allowing the
State Government to regulate such rights for the conservation of forests and also to enable
them to implement the schemes aimed at the overall development of hilly regions.
N
EW DELHI; SATPAL MAHARAJ
July 30, 2009.

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.
————
(Shri Satpal Maharaj, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3995LS(S-5)—04.11.2009.