As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2 9 JUL 2005

Bill No. 85 of 2005

_ THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
By
SHRI HANNAN MOL aH, M.P.
A
BILL |
further to amend the Constitution of India

a Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:— —

Be. 1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2005

x 2. In article 200 of the Constitution,—

(i) the words "or that he reserves the Bill for the consideration of the
eS President" shall be omitted; and

_ (ii) the second proviso shall be omitted.

‘3. Article 201 of the Constitution shall be omitted.

Short title.

Amendment
of article 200.

' Omission of

article 201.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS TS AND REASONS

People generally look towards the State Governments for carrying out the most of
_ developmental activities in the social and economic areas as well for day-to-day administrati
activities. Very often it is experienced that legislative measures, containing social and economic
measures, passed by the State Legislatures in pursuance of the assurances given to elector
or otherwise, get delayed whenever the Governor of the State chooses to reserve the Bills fo
consideration of the President. As many as 93 Bills passed by different State Legislatures
during 1999 and 2000 were reserved by the respective Governors for consideration of the
President and about one-third of those Bills, mostly containing economic measures, are
pending clearance by the Union Government. In such a situation “‘politics” instead of "merit"
_ Is feared to creep in. It is said that the Union Government examines such Bills from three
_ angles viz., (i) conflict with any Central Law; (ii) deviation from National or Central Policy;
and (iii) legal and constitutional validity. After all, State Legislatures themselves could be
expected to be responsible and accountable enough to keep these matters in view while
passing a Bill. Further these aspects could better be left to the ever-vigilant eye of the media,
the people and the constitutionally empowered judiciary to decide

In order to enable the States to discharge their responsibilities it is necessary that this —
delaying, and sometimes negative provision be done away with

Hence the Bill

New Dew; : HANNAN MOLLAH _
May 9, 2005. 7


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

हि * * * * के

200. When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State or, in the case

of a State having a Legislative Council, has been passed by both Houses of the Legislature
_ of the State, it shall be presented to the Governor and the Governor shall declare either that
he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom or that he reserves the Bill for the
consideration of the President.

Provided that the Governor may, as soon as possible after the presentation to him of
the Bill for assent, return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill together with a message requesting
that the House or Houses will reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions thereof and, in
particular, will consider the desirability of introducing any such amendments as he may
recommend in his message and, when a Bill is so returned, the House or Houses shall
- reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by the House or Houses with
or without amendment and presented to the Governor for assent, the Governor shall not
withhold assent therefrom.

Provided further that the Governor shall not assent to but shall reserve for the ;

consideration of the President, any Bill which in the opinion of the Governor would, if it
became law, so derogate from the powers of the High Court as to endanger the position
which that Court is by this Constitution designed to fill.

~ 201. When a Bill is reserved by a Governor for the consideration of the President, the
President shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom.

Provided that, where the Bill is not a Money Bill, the President may direct the Governor
to return the Bill to the House or, as the case may be, the Houses of the Legislature of the
State together with such a message as is mentioned in the first proviso to article 200 and,
when a Bill is so returned, the House or Houses shall reconsider it accordingly within a
period of six months from the date of receipt of such message and, if it is again passed by the
House or Houses with or without amendment, it shall be presented again to the President for
his consideration. > |

* के । x & is . *

Assent to
Bills.

Bills reserved
for
consideration.


as
in
Bg
=

A

BILL ह
further to amend the Constitution of India.

है

(Shri Hannan Mollah, 22.72):

_MGIPMRND—1278LS(S-1)—28-06-2005.