THE  MICRO,  SMALL  AND  MEDIUM  ENTERPRISES
DEVELOPMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
A
BILL
to amend the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development
(Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in section 7,—
(a) in sub-section (1),–
Short title and
commencement.
27 of 2006.
Bill No.  85 of  2015
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of section 7.
5

2
(i) in clause (a),—
(A) in sub-clause (i), for the words “twenty-five lakh  rupees”, the
words “fifty lakh rupees” shall be substituted;
(B) for sub-clauses (ii) and (iii), the following sub-clauses shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(ii) a small enterprise, where the investment in plant and
machinery is more than fifty lakh rupees but does not exceed ten
crore rupees;
(iii) a medium enterprise, where the investment in plant and
machinery is more than ten crore rupees but does not exceed thirty
crore rupees;”;
(ii) in clause (b),—
(A) in sub-clause (i), for the words “ten lakh rupees”, the words
“twenty lakh rupees” shall be substituted;
(B) for sub-clauses (ii) and (iii), the following sub-clauses shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(ii) a small enterprise, where the investment in equipment is
more than twenty lakh rupees but does not exceed five crore
rupees;
(iii) a medium enterprise, where the investment in equipment
is more than five crore rupees but does not exceed fifteen crore
rupees;”;
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be  inserted, namely:—
“(1A) The Central Government may, by notification, vary the investment
limits, which shall not exceed thrice the limits, specified in clauses (a) and (b) of
sub-section (1) for the purposes of development of micro, small and medium
enterprises.”;
(c) in sub-section (9),—
(i) for the words “criterion of investment”, the words “criterion of higher
investment” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words “as part of small enterprises”, the words “as part of small
and medium enterprises” shall be substituted.
3. In the principal Act, in section 29, in sub-section (3), for the words and figure “under
section 9”, the words, brackets, figures and letter “under sub-section ( 1A) of section 7,
section 9” shall be substituted.
Amendment of
section 29.
5
10
15
25
20
30
35

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development (MSMED) Act, 2006 was
enacted to address policy issues affecting MSMEs as well as to classify the enterprises as
micro, small or medium based on their investments in plant and machinery/equipments. The
existing limits under the MSMED Act were fixed in 2006. Since then, there has been a
significant increase in the price index and cost of inputs. There has also been a change in the
business environment with many MSMEs becoming part of the domestic and global value
chains. Hence, it is proposed to amend the MSMED Act to enhance the existing limit for
investment in plant and machinery considering changes in price index and cost of inputs
consistent with the emerging role of the MSMEs in various global value chains.
2. The MSMED Act, at present, states that the Central Government may, while
classifying any class or classes of enterprises, vary, from time to time, the criterion of investment
and also consider criteria or standards in respect of employment or turnover of the enterprises.
These provisions enable the Central Government to classify micro or tiny enterprises or the
village enterprises as part of small enterprises. The current proposal is to enable Central
Government to classify micro or tiny enterprises or the village enterprises not only as small
enterprises but also as medium enterprises. This may also be based on criteria of higher
investment and also on consideration of criteria or standard in respect of employment or
turnover of the enterprises. It will open the doors of growth to MSMEs and will enable them
to go to next level of value chain.
3. Since the MSMEs are defined in the Act, any variation could be done only by way
of an amendment. Considering the inflation and dynamic market situation, there is a need to
periodically revise the criterion of investment. Revising the investment limits by way of
notification will facilitate timely action. Hence, it is proposed to amend the MSMED Act to
empower  Central Government to vary by way of a notification, the investment limits,
which shall not exceed thrice the limits, specified in clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1) of
section 7 for the purposes of development of micro, small and medium enterprises.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; KALRAJ  MISHRA
The 18th   March, 2015.
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (b) of clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert sub-section (1A) in section 7 of the
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006, so as to empower the Central
Government to vary the investment limits relating to the classification of micro, small and
medium enterprises by way of notification.
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made under the proposed legislature
are matters of procedure or administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them
in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES DEVELOPMENT ACT, 2006
(27 OF 2006)
*****
CHAPTER III
CLASSIFICA TION OF ENTERPRISES, ADVISORY COMMITTEE AND MEMORANDUM OF MICRO, SMALL AND
MEDIUM ENTERPRISES
7. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 11B of the Industries
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, the Central Government may, for the purposes of
this Act, by notification and having regard to the provisions of sub-sections ( 4) and ( 5),
classify any class or classes of enterprises, whether proprietorship, Hindu undivided family,
association of persons, co-operative society, partnership firm, company or undertaking, by
whatever name called,—
(a) in the case of the enterprises engaged in the manufacture or production of
goods pertaining to any industry specified in the First Schedule to the Industries
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951,  as—
(i) a micro enterprise, where the investment in plant and machinery does
not exceed twenty-five lakh rupees;
(ii) a small enterprise, where the investment in plant and machinery is more
than twenty-five lakh rupees but does not exceed five crore rupees; or
(iii) a medium enterprise, where the investment in plant and machinery is
more than five crore rupees but does not exceed ten crore rupees;
(b) in the case of the enterprises engaged in providing or rendering of services,
as—
(i) a micro enterprise, where the investment in equipment does not exceed
ten lakh rupees;
(ii) a small enterprise, where the investment in equipment is more than ten
lakh rupees but does not exceed two crore rupees; or
(iii) a medium enterprise, where the investment in equipment is more than
two crore rupees but does not exceed five crore rupees.
Explanation 1.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that in calculating the
investment in plant and machinery, the cost of pollution control, research and development,
industrial safety devices and such other items as may be specified, by notification, shall be
excluded.
Explanation 2.— It is clarified that the provisions of section 29B of the Industries
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, shall be applicable to the enterprises specified in
sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (I) of this section.
*****
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 11B of the Industries (Development
and Regulation) Act, 1951  and clause (h) of section 2 of the Khadi  and Village Industries
Commission Act, 1956, the Central Government may, while classifying any class or classes  of
enterprises under sub-section (1), vary, from time to time, the criterion of investment and also
Classification
of enterprises.
5
65 of 1951.
65 of 1951.
61 of 1956.
65 of 1951.
65 of 1951.

6
consider criteria or standards in respect of employment or turnover of the enterprises and
include in such classification the micro or tiny enterprises or the village enterprises, as part
of small enterprises.
* * * * *
29. (1)* * * * *
(3) Every notification issued under section 9 and every rule  made by the Central
Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before  each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the notification or rule or both Houses agree that
the notification or rule should not be made, the notification or rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that notification or rule.
* * * * *
Power to make
rules.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006.
————
(Shri Kalraj Mishra, Minister of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises)
GMGIPMRND—5601LS(E)—27-03-2015.