1
THE  REGULATION OF PRIVATE HOSTELS AND PAYING GUEST
ACCOMMODATION CENTRES BILL, 2017
By
SHRI MAHEISH GIRRI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for regulation of private hostels and paying
guest accommodation centres and for matter connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1 .  (1) This Act may be called the Regulation of Private Hostels and Paying  Guest
Accommodation Centres Act, 2017.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 85 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(1) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(2) “Board” means the Private Hostels and Paying Guest Accommodation Centres
Regulatory Board constituted under section 3;
(3) “paying guest” means—
(a) a student staying in a private hostel or paying guest accommodation
centre and enrolled,—
(i) in a course in an institute recognized by the University Grants
Commission; or
(ii) in a pre-examination coaching centre for admission into any
medical, engineering or any other professional course or for securing
Government or private job through written or oral examination conducted
by any agency of the Government or a private establishment; or
(b) a working professional, either government or private, who is allowed to
use a part of a residential premises, either individually or jointly, by its owner or
occupier for a certain period of time, on a payment basis;
(4) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(5) “private hostel” means a residential premise or centre set up by any household,
private entity or individual to accommodate paying guest on rental basis for a fixed
duration.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Board to be known as the Private Hostels and Paying Guest Accommodation Centres
Regulatory Board for the purpose of regulating the operation of private hostels and paying
guest accommodation centres.
(2) The Board shall consist of a Chairperson and such other members to be appointed
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Board shall have its headquarter in New Delhi and office in every State and
Union territory.
(4) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and employees as
it considers necessary for the efficient functioning of the Board.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson, members, officers and employees of the Board shall be such as may be
prescribed.
4. (1) The Board shall—
(a) carry out detailed survey of all the private hostels and paying guest
accommodation centres currently operational in the country;
(b) frame mandatory minimum criteria of operations and basic services to be
provided by private hostels and paying guest accommodation centres;
(c) in consultation with the State Governments, and taking into consideration
the social and economic conditions of the State concerned, frame mode rules and
Definitions.
Constitution
of Private
Hostels and
Paying Guest
Accommodation
Centres
Regulatory
Board.
Functions of
the  Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
regulations for operation of private hostels and paying guest accommodation centres;
and
(d) undertake any other function as it may deem necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of provisions contained in sub-section (1), the
model rules and regulations for private hostels and paying guest accommodation centres
may include—
(a) types of accommodation to be provided, either shared accommodation, single
room or common hall;
(b) limit on the number of occupants per room in case of shared accommodation;
(c) minimum number of rooms, minimum size of each room and a minimum
threshold area per paying guest in case of shared accommodation;
(d) provision of separate accommodation facilities for male and female paying
guests;
(e) provision of basic facilities such as water, electricity, cupboard, bed, kitchen
and security provisions such as Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) cameras, especially
for the safety of female paying guests;
(f) minimum number of supporting staff for each private hostel and paying guest
accommodation centre;
(g) fixing of responsibility of owners and management of private hostels and
paying guest accommodation centers for safety and security of paying guests and
liability in case of any accident or incident taking place at such private hostel or paying
guest accommodation center;
(h) verification of paying guest;
(i) provision of First Aid (Medical), fire safety and other emergency services at
private hostels and paying guest accommodation centers;
(j) mechanism for monitoring and vigilance for private hostels and paying guest
accommodation centers;
(k) establishment of Grievance Redressal Mechanism for paying guests; and
(l) provision of penalty to owners of private hostels and paying guest
accommodation centres for non-compliance of any of the model rules or regulations.
5. Every private hostel and paying guest accommodation centre shall be registered
with the appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules of carrying out purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the House agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
Registration
of Private
Hostels and
Paying Guest
Accommodation
Centres.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our country has witnessed large migration from rural parts of the country to urban
cities. Students and working professionals who migrate from small towns and rural areas of
the country to pursue higher educational or prepare for entrance examinations of various
professional and educational courses or recruitment examinations, face a very basic but
critical problem of finding adequate living space for themselves. Such people have two
choices either to live in rented flats or look for hostel or paying guest accommodation. Latter
option being more economically viable, a very high percentage of students and working
professionals especially women opt for private hostels or paying guest accommodation.
Henceforth, in last decade or so, this problem of accommodation has been exploited very
well by the large number of private entities and individuals by setting up private hostels and
paying guest accommodation centers for these students and working-professionals. But
most of these centers fail to provide basic minimum services and proper living conditions to
the occupants. This sector is also highly unregulated in our country, which has led to non-
compliance and poor services and is purely being treated for business purpose to gain
maximum profit. In most of the cases, occupants are forced to live in congested rooms with
many sharing a single room. Food in their mess has hardly any quality control mechanism
and the owners prefer to buy low quality grains and vegetables to save money. Poor
infrastructure of private hostels and private accommodation does not guarantee safety of
girls and we have come across many incidents in the recent past, where security was a major
concern that led to unsavory incidents.
This Bill seeks to provide for basic regulatory mechanism to safeguard basic interests
of the students and working professionals, especially females, to provide them with basic
living conditions and regulate the business of private hostels and paying guest
accommodation centres.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MAHEISH GIRRI
November 21, 2016.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that Central Government shall constitute the Private
Hostels and Paying Guest Accommodation Centres Regulatory Board to regulate the operation
of private hostels and paying guest accommodation centres in the country. It also provide
for appointment of officers and employees to the Board. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would
involve expenditure from Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure
of about rupees ten crore would be involved per annum from Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about five crore rupees is also likely to be incurred.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 to provide for the constitution of a Board for regulation of private hostels and paying guest
accommodation centres and for matter connected therewith.
————
(Shri Maheish Girri, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4150LS(S3)—21-06-2017.