 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 85 of 2021
THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN)
 AMENDMENT BILL, 2021
By
SHRI K ODIKUNNIL S URESH, MP
A
BILL
further to amend the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Act, 2015
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Amendment Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
5

2. In section 75 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, 2015, for the words “Whoever, having the actual charge of,
or control over, a child, assaults, abandons, abuses, exposes or wilfully
neglects the child or causes or procures the child to be assaulted, abandoned,
abused, exposed or neglected in a manner likely to cause such child
unnecessary mental or physical suffering, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine of
one lakh rupees or with both:”, the words  “Whoever, having the actual
charge of, or control over, or responsibility of, a child, assaults, abandons,
abuses, exposes or wilfully neglects the child or causes or procures the
child to be assaulted, abandoned, abused, exposed or neglected in any
manner likely to cause such child any psychological or physical trauma or
suffering, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to seven years or with fine of ten lakh rupees or with both:” shall
be substituted.
5
10
2
2 of 2016
15
Amendment
of section 75.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act 2015, is an
important gatekeeper legislation that protects the rights of children. It is designed
to consolidate and amend the law relating to children alleged and found to be in
conflict with law and children in need of care and protection by catering to their
basic needs through proper care, protection, development, treatment, social
re-integration, by adopting a child-friendly approach in the adjudication and
disposal of matters in the best interest of children and for their rehabilitation
through processes provided, and institutions and bodies established under the Act.
Despite the above law, there is alarming rise in cases of child abuse. It is,
therefore, necessary to amend this Act.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection
of Children) Act 2015, with a view to bring causing of psychological and physical
trauma to a child within the meaning of cruelty to child and to enhance the
quantum of term of imprisonment and time for offence of cruelty to child.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;  KODIKUNNIL SURESH
January 23, 2021
3

ANNEXURE
[EXTRACT FROM THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN)
ACT, 2015]
[ACT NO. 2 OF 2016]
* * * * *
75. Whoever, having the actual charge of, or control over, a child, assaults,
abandons, abuses, exposes or wilfully neglects the child or causes or procures the
child to be assaulted, abandoned, abused, exposed or neglected in a manner likely
to cause such child unnecessary mental or physical suffering, shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine of one
lakh rupees or with both:
* * * * *
Punishment
for
cruelty
to child.
4

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
furthe r to a m end  the  Juvenile Jus tice  (Care  a nd P rotection of Childre n) Act, 2015————
(Shri Kodikunnil Suresh, M.P.)