IOK SABRa 
co RRIGI] NDU l'·f 
to 
TIS TE":' DI~'TRICTS lU1lGRkJ.-ll' UJ30tJR (REPE:..L) BILL, 1967 
(';tq _b.~j.~I?_~i~Qd~~ce(L.i;1. ~ Sabhaj, 
1. Page 2, line 27,-
!9_~ "thr(:e years the latter, where period" 
r.Et~ "three years, where the latter period" 
tW.<I DELHI; 
sI.unU2. 1 9,2,7 A-s-a-d ..... ha--1, 1889 (Saka) 
...... &!IJ3. Lebour Act 1932, bi seetiOll-2, aDd notwithatADdiDc __ to 
the eon~ contained :In the aid Ad.,. 

As nn'RODt1CID IN LoB: SURA OK 
BlII No. If 01 It!' 
THE TEA DISTRICTS EMIGRANT LABOUR 
(REPEAL) BILL, 1967 
A 
BILL 
to prof'ide fotr the repeal of the Tea. Diltrictl Em.fQrczft.t lAbour Act, 
1932, and fOT matte" COft.Mcted therewith.. 
BE it. enacted 'by Parliament in the Eighteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Tea Di8triets Emill'Ult Labour SIaort 
(Repeal) Act, 1967. tide. 
S Z. The Tea Distrk:ts Emigrant Labour Act, 1932, is hereby r .. --. of 
pealed. ltd as or IfJI. 
3. NotW'itbstanding the repeal of the Tea Di8tr.lctB ~ ... 
lAbour Act, 1932, by secttOll 2, and notwithetandtnc lDytbm, to 
the contrary eontatned in the aid Ad.,-

2 
(a) every emigrant labourer in whose case, on the 3rd day of 
Auguat, 1960, a period of three years from the date of his entry 
into Assam had not expired, 
(b) every emigrant labourer entering Asaam on or after tJ:ae 
3rd day of August, 1960, being the date of the Agreement arrived S: 
at at the Ninth Session of the Industrial Committee on Planta-
tions, and before the commencement of this Act, and 
(c) every emigrant labourer who is in Assam immediately 
before the commencement of this Act and whose right of re-
patriation has not be<!D waived or forfeited by agreement or 10, 
otherwise under any provisions of the said Act, 
shall, as from the date of expiry of a period of three years from the 
date of his entry into Assam, whether such expiry occurs before or 
after the commencement of this Act, have the right to be repatriated, 
and may be repatriated, under the said Act, as if it had not been IS 
repealed and the provisions of the said Act in so far as they relate to 
the enforcement of the right of repatriation of emigrant la~s 
shall continue to apply as if for the references theredn to the Con-
troller, references to the State Government of Assam or 'an officer 
authorised by that Government in this behalf had been substituted: 20' 
Provided that no such emigrant labourer shall have the right to 
be so repatriated unless he makes an application in this behalf-
(a) within a period of six months from the commencement 
of this Act, where the aforesaid periOd of three years has eX-
pired before such commeri.cement, or 25, 
(b) within a period of six months from the date of expiry 
of the aforesaid period of t~ee y~s the latter, where period 
expires after such commencem&\t. 

STATEMENT OF 'o&J!ICPs t.:Nf) ftI!W)ONs 
. The Tea. 'Districts Emigrant Labour Act, 1982 regul8tes recruit-
ment of workers for tea gardens in Assam from outside the 8tIrte 
and their repatriation. Experience gadned in the wol'ldng afthe Act 
far the past "few years has shown that it is no lqernecessary to 
continue in existence the pattern of as.isted emigrant labour, for tea 
gardens in Assam, as conditiOll8 which justlfted the introductd.on d.f. 
the scheme about thirly years ago, have greatly altered during the 
intervening period. It is, "therefore, propoaed to repeal this Act. 
Any residual functions after the repeal of the Act that may -be left 
over are proposed to be entrusted to the Government ejl Assam by 
making an express provision to that eiffect in the repealing Act. 
NEW DELHI; JAISUKHLAL HATH!. 
The 3rd June, 1967. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 6(15)65-PL/Fac. I, dated the 13th June, 196'1 
from Shri Lalit Narayan Mishra, Minister of State in the Ministry 
of Labour, Employment & Rehabilitation to the Secretary, Lok 
Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the au:bject matter of the 
proposed Bill to provide for the repeal of the Tea DWrict8 Em1gnmt 
Labour Act, 1932, and for matters tormected therewith has, in pur-
suance of olause (1) of article 117 of the Constitution of India re-
commended the introduction of the Bill in the Lok Sabha. 
3 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM: 
The repeal of the Tea Districts Emigrant Labour Act, 1932, will 
entail abolition of a cess known as Emigrant Labour Cess leviable 
. under section 5 of that Act. The cess is payable in respect of the 
entry into .Assam of each assisted emigrant as defined in section 2 (f) 
of that Act by the employing linterest on whose behalf he is recruit-
ed. The proceeds of the cess are credited. to a fund called the Emi-
grant Labour Fund which is utilised for meeting expenditure on the 
Organisation of Controller of Emigrant Labour and for admindstering 
the Act. With the repeal of the Tea Districts Emigrant Labour Act, 
the Organdsation of the Controller of Emigrant Labour will be 
wound up and so there will be no need for the levy of the Emigrant 
Labour 'Cess. After the repeal of the Act, any residual functions 
that may be left over will be entrusted to the Government of Assam. 
but this will not entail any expenddture from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. 

LOK SAEHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the repeal of the Tea Districts Emigrant La1:our 
Act, 1932, and for matters connected tt~erewith. 
(Shri Jai Sukh LaI Hathi, 
Mirrister of Labour & 
RlIuIbi1itatitm) 