As INTRODUCED IN LaK SABRA ON 
Bi! No. 86 of 1976 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE TO THE CONSTITtrrION 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1976 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-seventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution Short 
(Amendment) Act, 1976. title. 
S Z. In the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution, in paragraph 6, in sub- Amend-
mentof 
the Fifth 
Schedule. 
10 
paragraph (2),-
(I) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
II (00) increase the area of any Scheduled Area in a State 
after consultation with the Governor of that State;"; 
(2) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
II (d) rescind, in relation to any State or States, any order 
or orders made under this paragraph, and in consultation with 
the Governor of the State concerned, make fresh orders re-
defining the are~ which at'e to be Scheduled Areasi". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
With a view to intensify tribal development effort in the Fifth Plai., 
all areas with more than 50 per cent. tribal concentration, besides the 
existing Scheduled Areas, have been delineated in various States and 
Union territories. Special programmes have been prepared for these 
areas under Tribal Sub-Plans. Each State has quantified the level of 
investment in the Sub-Plan areas from the State Plan. In addition, 
special Central assistance of Rs. 200 crores has been set apart for tribal 
development during the Fifth Five Year Plan period. 
2. According to the new approach, specific programmes are to be 
prepared for each project area keeping in view its special problems. 
The Sub-Plan also accords highest priority to elimination of exploitation 
including tackling the problem of land alienation, bonded labour, 
indebtedness, etc. The Fifth Schedule to the Constitution makes 
special provision for the administration of tribal areas and provides a 
broad and flexible frame for effective legal and administrative action' 
The powers under the Fifth Schedule can be used for effective imple-
mentation of developmental programmes and promptly tackling the 
problem of exploitation in various forms. A review of the Sub-Plan 
area in States having Scheduled Areas shows that while bulk of the 
Sub-Plan area is covered under the Fifth Schedule some areas are out-
side. This presents an anomalous situation since effective simultaneous 
action cannot be taken throughout the Sub-Plan area. It is, therefore, 
considered desirable that the area presently covered under the Fifth 
Schedule may be rationalised 90 that the Scheduled Area may cover the 
entire Sub-Plan area in these States. 
3. Under paragraph 6 (1) of the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution 
the President may by order declare any area as a Scheduled Area, and 
under paragraph 6 (2) he may alter the existing boundaries of the Schedul-
ed Areas but by way of rectification alone. In order that the Sub...plan 
areas may be declared as Scheduled Areas it is necessary to emPower 
the President to increase the area of any Scheduled Areas in any State. 
The present Bill seeks to achieve this purpose. 
K. BRAHMANANDA REnDI. 
NEW'DELHI; 
The 19th August, 1976. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Paragraph 6 of the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution .. alr~dy 
authorises the President to make orders declaring any area to be a 
Scheduled Area. It is considered necessary to rationalise the Scheduled 
Areas so as to cover the entire Sub-Plan area of the various States. 
This involves the increasing of the Scheduled Areas and re-defining 
them by rescinding the existing orders and issuing orders afresh in 
relation to the States. 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks therefore to amend paragraph 6 of the Fifth 
Schedule to the Constitution so as to empower the President to make 
orders to-
(a) increase the area of any Scheduled Area in a State·after 
consultation ~ith the Governor of that State; 
(b) rescind, in relation to any State or States, any order or 
orders made under paragraph 6 and in consultation with the 
Governor of the State concerned, make fresh orders re-deftning the 
areas which are to be Scheduled Areas. 
These pertain to matters already envisaged in the Constitution and 
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character . 
• 

. ANNEXURE Clh-I .... r.- r,"\. r.-
• "V ''4 ~ II I \01 J I ~ 
EX'I'RACT nOM TID FIFTH SCHEDULE TO THE QOJn "I'uaoN 01' IHDlA 
• • • • 
FIFTH SCHEDULE 
[Article 244(1)] 
• 
Provisions as to the Administration and Control of Scheduled Areu 
and Scheduled Tribel 
• • • • • 
6. Scheduled Areas.-(I) • • • 
(2) The President may at any time by order-
(a) direct that the whole or any apecified part of a Scheduled 
Area shall cease to be a Scheduled Area or a part of such an area; 
(b) alter, but only by way of rectification 01 boundariel, any 
Scheduled Area; 
(c) on any alteration of the boundaries of a State or on the ad-
mission into the Union or the establishment of a new· State, declare 
any territory not previously included in any State to be, or to form 
part of, a Scheduled Area; 
and any such order may contain such incidental and consequential pro-
visions as appear to the President to be necessary and proper. but save as 
aforesaid, the order made under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph Ihall 
not be varied by any subsequent order . 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
& 
BILL 
further to amend the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution of India. 
(Shri K. Brahma714ndCI 
Reddy, Minister of 
Home Affairs.) 