Bin No. 86 of 1957 
THE CENTRAL EXCISES AND SALT 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

LOK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
The Central Excises and Salt (Amendment) 
Bill, 1957. 
(To be introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 1, line 9,-
after "shall" insert "be" 
2. Page 5, line 11,-
for "wef" read "weft" 
NEW DELHT, 
The 27th November, 1957. 

1 of 1944. 
Bill No. 86 of 1957 
THE CENTRAL EXCISES AND SALT (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1957 . 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA) 
BILL 
further to amend the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as Iollows:-
1. This Act may be called .the Central Excises and Salt (Amend- Short title. 
ment) Act, 1957. 
S 2. In sub-section (2) of section 37 of'the Central Excises and Tcnd~ent 
Salt Act, 1944 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in clause ~7. lectlon 
(xvi), the proviso shall be omitted. 
3. In Item No. 12 of the First Schedule to the principal Act, in Am~eDt 
Explanation II, after rule (b), the following rule shall inserted, ~~he~~~~ 
IO namely:-
co (bb) In the case of fabrics manufactured from cotton and 
other yarns, the other yarns shall, for the aforesaid purpose, be 
deemed to be cotton yam,", 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of the Bill is to amend clause (xvi) of sub-section (2) 
of section 37, and item No. 12 of the First Schedule of the Central 
Excises and Salt Act, 1944. 
2. Clause (xvi) referred to above specifically lays down the 
amounts of rebate to be granted of the duty paid on steel ingots or 
articles of iron or steel manufactured from such ingots, on export out 
of India. These amounts are related to the excise duty which was 
levied in 1944 when the Central Excises and Salt Act was passed, 
namely, Rs. 4/- per ton. In the Finance (No.2) Act, 1957, the excise 
duty on steel ingots has been raised to Rs. 40/- per ton. It will, there-
fore, be necessary to raise the amounts of rebate. In respect of all 
other excisable goods, the amounts of rebate have not been specified 
in the Act but are regulated by the rules framed under the Act. 
There being no special advantage in regulating the quantum of re-
bates by the Act when the rules provide for the same and with a 
view to eliminate the necessity of amending the clause every time the 
rate of duty is altered, it is proposed to delete the proviso in the 
clause. 
3. The amendment to Explanation II of item No. 12 of the First 
Schedule seeks to remove doubts regarding the basis for determining 
the average count in respect of yarn other than cotton yarn used in 
the manufacture of mixed cotton fabrics and to provide fQr an 
uniform basis. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 19th November, 1957. 
2 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CENTRAL EXCISES AND SALT ACT, 1944 (1 OF 1944) 
• • • • 
CHAPTER VII 
SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS 
37. (1) 
• • • • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may-
• • • • 
(xvi) provide for the grant of a rebate of the duty paid on 
goods which are exported out of India or shipped for consump-
tion on a voyage to any port outside India: 
Provided that rules made under this clause shall provide that 
when steel ingots on which the duty of excise imposed by this Act 
has been paid, or articles of iron or steel manufactured in India 
from such ingots, are exported out of India, there shall be payable 
to the exporter of such ingots or articles subject to such conditions 
as may be prescribed, a refund at the following rates, namely:-
on ingots, blooms and billets-
(a) refund at the rate of four rupees per ton, on other 
manufactures of iron or steel-
(a) not fabricated-a refund at the rate of five and 
one-third rupees per ton; 
(b) fabricated-a refund at the rate of six rupees per 
ton; 
• • • • 
3 
Power of 
Central 
Government 
to make 
rules. 

4 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 3] 
Item No. Description of goods Rate of duty 
• • • • 
12. COTTON FABRICS-
"Cotton fabrics" mean all varieties of fabrics manufactured 
either wholly or partly from cotton, and include dhoties, sarees, 
chadars, bed-sheets, bed-spreads, counter-panes, and table-
cloths, but do not include any such fabric-
(a) if it contains 40 per cent. or more by weight of 
wool; 
(b) if it contains 60 per cent. or more by weight of 
rayon or artificial silk; or 
(c) if manufactured on a handloom. 
(1) Cotton fabrics, superfine-
that is to say, fabrics in which 
the average count of yarn is 48s or 
more. 
(2) Cotton fabrics, fine-
that is to say, fabrics in which 
the average count of yarn is 35s or 
mo~~ but.is 1ess -thaD48e. 
(3) Cotton fabrics, med.ium-
that is to say, fabrics in which the 
Six annas per square yard. 
Six annas per square yard. 
average count of yarn is 17s or Four annas per square yard. 
more but is less than .35s. 
(4) Cotton fabrics, coarse-
that is to say, fal>rics in which the 
average count of yarn is less than Four annas per square yard. 
17s~ 
Explanation 1.-"Count" means count of grey yarn. 

. 5 
Explanation II.-For tne purpose of determining the average 
count of yarn, the following rules shall apply, namely:-
(a) Yarn used in the borders or selvedges shall be ignored. 
(b) For multiple-fold yarn, the count of the basic single 
yarn shall be taken and the number of ends per inch in the reed 
or the number of picks per inch, as the case may be, shall be 
multiplied by the number of plies in the yarn. 
(c) The average count shall be obtained by applying the 
following formula, namely:-
( Count of warp x number of ends per inch in the reed)+'(C0Wlt of 
weft x number of picks per inch) 
(Number of ends per inch in the reed) +(Number of picks per 
inch), 
the result being rounded off, wherever necessary, by treating any 
fraction which is one-half or more as one, and disregarding any 
fraction which is less than one-half. 
• • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Central Excises and Salt Act, I944. 
The' President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article II7 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha 
the introduction of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, 
Minister of Finance.) 