BW No.8' of 1,620 
THE CONSTITUTION (FOURTEENTH 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 30TH AUGUST, 1962) 
• 
"RLIAMENT UlftAll .- ..... . . ~ . . .., .. , 
. N"~·············"·"7.~ :-,. ..' 01)' Jl . of, 2---, 
v~~,~ .:"",jJ"JP"'-

I", • 
Bill No. 86 of 196Z. 
THE CONSTITUTION (FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT), 
BILL,Ig62 
(As INTRODUCED IN' LOK SABKA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution 01 India. 
BE it en~cted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Fourteenth Amend- Short title. 
ment) Act, 1962. 
S 2. In artIele 81 of the CoiIdtUtton, hisaklause (b) of elause' (1), Mr en,dtnerit,'8 . o art C c J. 
for the words "twenty members", the wonts "twenty-five members" 
shall be substituted. 
3. In the' First Schedule to the Constitution, under the heading Amend~ent 
"II. THE UNION TERRITORIES", after entry 8, the following entry ~~~~dur~~t 
.to shall be inserted, namely:-
"9. Pondicheny., The territomes which immediately before 
the sixteenth day of August, 196Z, weR 
comprised in the Prench Establishments 
in India known as Pondicherry, Karika', 
IS Mahe and Yanam.". 
( 
4. After article 239 of the Constitution, the following article Insertion of 
h new article s all be inserte~, namely: - Z39A. 
"Z39A. (1) Parliament may by law create for any of the Creation 01 
Union territories of Himachal Pradesh Manipur Tripora Goa local Legis-• , " latures or 
zo Daman and Diu, and Pondicherry- Council or 
Ministers or (a) a body, whether nominated or elected or partly both for 
nominated and partly elected, to function !lS a Legislature cu~ajn . nlOn terrl-for the Union territory, or toriea. 

Amendnleat 
ofartic:le 
~. 
AmeadllleBt 
of the 
Pourth 
Schedule. 
rtetrospec-
ti". opera-
tion or 
certaill 
provisions. 
I 
(b) a couaeU of MiDlsters, 
or both with such constitution, powers and fuBCtioDS, in each 
ease, a. may be lpecified in the law. 
(Z) Azly such law as is referred to in clause (1) shall not be 
deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the 5 
purposes of ;lrticle 368 notwithstanding that it contains any 
provision which amends or has the' effect of amending this 
Constitution .... 
I. In article 240, in clause (1),-
(a) after entry (d), the following entry shall be inserted, 10 
namely:-
"(e) Pondicherry.:"; 
'(b) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:-
"Provided that when any body is created under article 15 
239A to function as a Legislature for the Union territory of 
Goa, Daman and Diu or Pondicherry, the President shall not 
make any regulation for the peace, progress and good 
government of that Union territory with effect from the date 
appointed for the first meeting of the Legislature.". 20 
6. In the Fourth Schedule, in the' Table,-
(a) after entry 20, the entry 
"21. Pondicherry ... 1" shall be inserted; 
(b) for the figures "225", the figures "226" shall be substi-
tuted. 2S 
,. Section 3 and clau~e (a) of section 5 shall be' deemed to have 
come into force on the 16th day of August, 1962. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
With the ratification of the Treaty of Cession by the Govern-
ments of India and France, on the 16th August, 1962, the French 
establishments of Pondicherry, Karikal, Mahe and Yanam became 
territories of the Indian Union with effect from that date. This 
Bill provides for these territories being specified in the Constitution 
itself as a Union territory called 'Pondicherry'. Under article 
81 (1) (b) of the Constitution, not more than twenty members are 
to repr~nt the Union territories in the House of the People. This 
maximum. has already been reached. The Bill accordingly seeks 
to increase this number to twenty."tive to enable representation 
being given immediately to Pondicherry in the House of the People 
and to provide for future contingencies. The Bill also provides 
for representation of the territory in the Council of States . 
. . 
It is proposed to create Legislatures and Councils of Ministers 
in the Union territories of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Tripura, 
Goa, Daman and Diu and Pondicherry broadly on the pattern of 
the scheme which was in force in some of the Part C States before 
the reorganisation of the States. The Bill seeks to confer necessary 
legislative power on Parliament to enact laws for this purpose 
through a new article 239A which follows generally the provisionl 
of article 240 as it stood before the reorganisation of the States. 
LAL BAHADUR. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 25th August, 1962. 

rINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
~he Bill provides for-
(a) the maximum number of sea,ts in the House of the 
People for members representing the Union territories being 
raised from twenty to twenty-five (clause 2); 
(b) the French establishments in India known as Pond!-
cherry, Karikal, Mahe and Yanam being specified in the Con-
stitution itself as a Union territory (clause S); 
(c) pawers being conferred on Parliament to CPeate by 
.law legislatures and Councils of Ministers for the Union terri-
torie. (clause 4) ; and 
'. 
(d) allocation of one seat in the Rajya Sabha to the Union 
territory of Pondicherry (claUie 6). 
2. The provision at (a), when it is fully utilised, and the pro-
Vision at (d) will altogether involve an expenditure of Rs. 60,000 
per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India on account of 
I8laries and allowances of Members of Parliament. 
3. Consequent on the agreement reached between the Govern·· 
ments of India and France regarding de facto transfer of former 
French Establishments of Pondicherry, Karikal, Mahe and Yanam, 
the administration of these territories was vested in the Govern-
ment of India with effect from 1st November, 1954. Since that 
date all expenditure connected with the administration of these 
territories is being met out of the Consolidated Fund of India. 
4. During the current budget year, the revenue of the' former 
French establishments has been estimated at Rs. 2,31,05,500 and 
expenditure at about Rs. 4,45,32,000, showing a deficit of 
Rs. 2,14,26,500. With the integration of these areas into the Indian 
Union as a Union territory, the financial administration of the terrI-
tory will undergo some changes. It is not, however, pos.ible at th1a 
stage to estimate the result of such possible changes. Generally, It 
is estimated that a substantial part of the expenditure on the terri-
tory will continue to be met by he Union Government from the 
Central revenues for some years to come. " ' 
.1 1 •. _ 

1. ,. 
5. Some expenditure will be incurred as and when legislatures 
and Councils of Ministers are created for the five Union territories in 
pursuance of the provisionsofolause 4: of the Bill. It is not possi-
ble to estimate precisely this amount but it is likely to be of the 
order of about Rs. 20 ·lakhs per annum. This expenditure will in-
itially be met from the Consolidated Fund of the territory concern-
ed. However, it will have to be taken into account in determining 
the ftnancial assistance which may be given to these territories by 
'way of grants from the Consolidated Fund of' India. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION or INDIA 
• * • 
81. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 331, the House of the Composition 
People shall consist of- of the Houle oft he 
(a) not more than five hundred members chosen by direct People. 
election from territorial constituencies in the States, and 
(b) not more than twenty members to represent the Union 
territories, chosen in such manner as Parliament may be law 
provide. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (1),-
(a) there $hall be allotted to each State a number of seats 
in the House of the People in such manner that the ratio between 
that number and the population of the State is, so far as practi-
cable, the same for all States; and 
(b) each State shall be divided into territorial constituencies 
in such manner that the ratio between the popUlation of each 
cohstituency and the nwnber of seats allotted to it is, so far a~ 
practicable, the same throughout the' State. 
(3) In this article, the expression "population" means the Popu-
lation as ascertained at the last preceding census ot which the 
relevant figures have be'en published. 
• • • 
240. (1) The President may make regulations for the 
progress and good government of the Union territory of-
(a) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands; 
(b) the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands; 
(c)'Dadra and Nagar Haveli; 
(d) Goa, Daman and Diu. 
peace, Power of 
Prcsidentto 
mate repl .. 
tiODI for 
certain 
UDiaD terri-
tories. 
(2) Any regulation so made may repeal or amend any, Act made 
by Parliament or any existing law which is for the time beine 
applicable t,) the Union territory and, when promulgated by the 
President, shall have the' same force and effect as an Act of Parlia-
ment which applies to that territory . 
• • 

FIRST SCHEDULE 
• • • • • • • 
II. THE UNION TERRITORIES 
Name 
I. Delhi 
2. Himachal Pradesh 
3. Manipur' 
4. Tripura 
s· The Andaman and Nico-
bar Islands. 
6. The La~dive, Minicoy 
and Amindivi Islands. 
7· Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
... 
8. Goa. Daman and Diu . 
Extent 
'Ilte territory which immediately before 
the commencement of this Constitution 
was comprised in the Chief Commis-
sioner's Province of Delhi. 
The territories which immediately before 
the commencement of this Constitution 
were being administered as if they were 
Chief Commissioners' Provinces under the 
names of Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur. 
The territory which immediately before 
the commenCement of this Constitution 
was being administered as if it were a 
Chief Commissioner's Province under the 
name of Manipur. . 
The territory which immediately before 
the commencement of this Constitution 
was being administered as if it were a 
Chief Commissioner's Province under 
the.,name of Tripura. 
The territory which immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution was 
comprised iri the Chid" Commissioner's 
Province of the Andaman and, Nicobar 
Islands. 
The territory specified in section 6 of the 
States Reorganisation Act, 1956. 
The territory which immediately before the 
eleventh day of August, 1961 wa.c; com-
prised in Free Dadra and Nagar Haveli . 
The territories which immediately before 
tbe'l,!.wentieth day of December, 1961 
were 1. comprised in Goa, Daman and 
Diu. 

• • • 
FOURTH SCHBDULB 
[Artidcs 4(1) and 8o(2.)J 
• 
AlloctJlion-of sealS in the Courrcil of States 
• 
To each State or Union territory specified in the first colUllll1 of the 
following table, there shall be- allotted the number of seats specified in the 
second colUlllR thereof opposite to that State or that Union territory, u the 
case may. 
TABLE 
I. Andh.ra Pradesh IS 
2. Assam 7 
3. Bihar 22 
4. Gujarat II 
,. Kcrala 9 
6. Madhya Pradesh 16 
7. Madras . IS 
S. Maharubtra 19 
9. Mysore 12 
10. Orissa 10 
u. Punjab II 
12. Raiasthan 10 
J 3. Uttar Pradesh . 3~ 
14. West Bengal 16 
15. Jammu and Kuhmir .. 
16. Delhi 3 
17. Himachal Pradcsb 2' 
IS. Maaipur I 
19. Triplra . I 
----
TOTAL 224 
--.. --~-

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
funher to amend the Constitution of India. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the 
consideration of the Bill. 
M.N.KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri, 
Minister of Home Affairs.) 