CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE NENT.AJ HE.ALTH BILL, 1978 
. (To be/As introduced in· Lok Sabha) ,. 
1. Page 3, line 21,-
.,.fg£ ''Psrsons'' read "persons" 
Page 4t line 2'1-," ' 
ill "makwe " ~ "make" 
3. Page 6, line 21,-
.fQ£ "setion" read "section" 
4. Page'11, line 8,-
for "is" ~ "in" 
5. Page 11, line 34,-
fer ''me dial " ~ "me dical " 
6. Page 12, line 43,-
for "in" ~ "ill " 
7. Page 13, line 45, ~ 
for "III" read ''ill'' 
8. Page 14, line 13,-
:':'or "Mal gstrate" r' ae:. ''Magi. stratt:.::" 
Page 15, line 32,- , 
for "in-patient tI ~ "inpatient It 
10. Page 16, line 9,-
for "in-patient" ~ "inpatient" 
11 • Page 16,-
against line 12, in the marginal citation,-
ill "30 0 f 1900" !£~ "3 of 19 Q)" 
P. T. o. 

- 2 -
12. Page 16, in the marginal heading to clause 32,-
for ''psychiartic- hospital )or psychiartic" 
~ ''psych1a~ric hospital or psychiatric" 
13. Page 20, line 2, .... 
for "of the" read "of their" 
14. Page 20, in the marginal heading to clause 42,-
after "mentally" insert ''ill'' 
15. Page 23, in the marginal heading to clause 50,-
£2! ''psych1aJ.ric hospital" ~­
"psychiatric hospit al" 
16. Page 23, line SJ,-
for "i s " re ad ''i t " 
17. Page 24, line 10,-
for 'Magi st arate " read "l'1agistrate" 
18. Page 25,-
against line 2, for the existing marginal citation,-
read "5 of /900 It 
19. Page 26, lffie17,- f2.!:. "Cour" read 
19A. Page 26, line 35,-
"Court" 
f2.£. "the re sponsi ble II ~ "be re sponsi ble" 
20. Page 27, line 2,-
ill "rele ase" ~ad "re alise" 
21. Page 31, in the marginal. heading to clause 85,-
for ''Psychatric nursing" read --
"p sychiatric rrursing" 
22. Page 38, line 1,-
.fQr "Notes of clauses" read "Notes on clauses" 
23. Page 39, line 4,-
for "0 f discharge" 
24. Page 41, line 14, - !Ql:. 
~ "or discharge" 
"friend s" ~ "friend" 
NEW DELHI; 
Nax- ~ 19Z3 

• l HAY i518 
Bill No. II of 1.71 'Ai' 
THE MENTAL HEAL TH BIL~) 1,978 
CLAUS. 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES' 
--CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITALS AND PSYCHIATRIC NtmSINCI HOMU 
3. Establishment or maintenance of peycbiatrie boIIpfta.1s a.acI 
psychiatric nursing homes. 
4. Establishment or maintenance of psychiatric hospital" or p~. 
chiatric nursing homes only with licence. 
5. Application for licence. 
6. Grant or refusal of licence. 
7. Licence not transferable or heritable. 
8, Duration of licence. 
9. Renewal of licence. 
10. Licensee to maintain psychiatric hospital and psychiatric nurwtna 
hom~ in accordance with prelCl'ibed eonditions. 
11. Revocation of licence. 
12. Appeal 
13. Inspection of psychiatric hospitals and p.ychiatricnursi", hOIMl 
and visiting of patients. 
14. Treatment of outpatients. 
CHAPTER III 
t\DM1S8ION ANI) DITBNTlON IN rSYCHIA'MUC HOSPITAL Oil psrCHI,6lftUC Nl1Jt8IjIIIRI 
ROME 
PART r 
Admilrien em vol1m..". bN1t 
15. Application for admission as voh.tntary patient. 
18. Cost of maintenance of voluntary patient.. 
1'7; V()lunta.y paUents toabidehy l'eKldattons atlpayehWrie"~'* 
orpsyehiatric nursing homes. 
18. Leave of absence, or discharge of voluntary PI.tienti. 
PART n 
Admission under,,~ eil"cumo:tjt,rn-e, 'I': 
'YO. Admlsslon of rnetttan~ ill personS undftr eert.in ~lpeHaJ dr-
cumstancea. 

I.~" .• ,' .... _.": "I 
u 
PART III 
Temporary trreatment orders 
20. Temporary treatment orders. 
.... .. 
21. Discharge of persons detained in psychiatric hoapital or psychia-
tric nursing home under temporary treatment orliers. 
PART IV 
Reception order/! 
A.-Reception orders on applications 
21. Application for reception order. 
23. Form and contents of medical certificates. 
24. Procedure upon application for reception order. 
B.-ReceJ*on order/! on production of m~ntan'Y ill persons before 
Magistrate 
25. Powers and duties of police officers in respect of certain mentally 
ill persoas. 
28. Procedure on production of. mentally ill person. 
27. Order in case of mentally ill person cruelly treated or not under 
proper care and control. 
C.-Admission in ~ergencies 
21. Application for admission of mentaUy ill persons in erner,en('y. 
D.-Further provisions regarding ad.mission a.nd detention Of ~f!rtain. 
~nta.lly ill persons 
29. Admission as inpatient after inquisition. 
30. Admission and detention of mentally ill offender. 
31. Detention of alleged mentally ill person pending report by medi-
cal oftlcer. . 
32. Detention of mentally ill person pending his removal to psychia-
tric hospital or psychiatriC nursing home . 
• -MitceUaMOUB P"Ovis~ in re14tion to orde-rs under thia ChApter 
88. Time aDd manner of medical e](amination of mentally ill pel"SOM. 
34. Authority for reception order or for temporary treatment oreier. 
IS. Copy of temporary treatment order or reception order to be sent 
to medical offteer in charge. 
.. Restriction as to' psychiatric hospitals and psychiatric nursinl 
homeI iJlto which temporary treatment ortler or reeeption 
order may direct 8'\tmhllion. 
$ 

tLAUIIS 
37. Amenc:lment of order or documents. 
38. Power to appoint substitute for person upon whose applic:atieD 
reception order has been made. . • 
39. Ofticers competent to exercise powers and diseharll tuDctions .f 
Magistrate under certain sections. 
CHAPTER IV 
INSPECTION, DISCHARGE, LEAVE OF ABSENCE AND RDdOVAL OF .1I4i!N1AU.Y JU. 
PERSONS 
PART I 
Inspection 
40. Appointment of Visitors. 
41. MQnthly in'Spection by Visitors. 
42. Inspection of mentally ill offenders. 
PART II 
DWchargt 
43. Order of discharge by Visitors. 
44. Discharge of mentally ill person on applicatioR. 
45. Order of discharge on the undertaking of relativea or fria." 
etc., foOr due care of mentally ill person. 
46. Discharge of person on his request. 
47. Discharge of person subsequently found on inqw.ition not te be 
of unsound mind. 
48. Leave of absence. 
PART III 
Leave of abse-net 
49. Grant of leave of absence by Maiistrate. 
t t PART IV 
RemGVGl 
. 
I 
SO. :Removal of mentally ill person from one psychiatric hospital 
or psychiatric m,lfsing home to another. 
51. Admission, detention and 'retaking in certain casn. 
52. Appeal from orders of. Magiltrate. 
CHAPTER V 
JUDICIAL tNQUISlTION REGARDING ALLEGED MINTALLY ILL PItII8C»r PCl8lllMlJIIG 
PItOPDlTY, CUSTODY 0 .. -HIS PERSON AND MANAGD.aNT 01' lUI PR~ 
53. Application for judicial inquisition. 
54. Issues on which findjng should be given by Di9trict Court alter 
inquisition. 
55. Provision for appointing guardian of mentally ill person aad t_ 
. manager of property. . 
18. Appointment of cuardian of mentally ill per .... 

It 
:. 
57. 
sa. 
~9. 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
M. 
65. 
66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 
70. 
71. 
72. 
73. 
74-
75. 
76. 
.77. 
78. 
79. 
80. 
Of _.. ~ 
-,- " - .. -~ .... ;......... -. 
Appointment ef manaaer for manaaement of pro~rty of mental!, ill ., . 
. ~ 
Appo'intment of manager by Collector. 
Mana~ of ~roperty to execute bond. 
Remuneration of manaseri and guardiaxa. 
Duties of guardian. 
Powers of manager. 
Manager to furnish inventory and annual accountS. 
Manager's power to execute conveyances under orders of Di'Strict 
Court. 
Manager to perform contracts directed by District Court. 
Disposal of business premises. 
Manager may dispose of leases. 
Power to make order concerning any matter connected with 
mentally ill person. 
Proceeding if accuracy o£ inventory or accounts is impugned. 
Payment into public treasury and investment of proceed. of 
estate. 
Relative may sue for accounts. 
Removal of managers and guardians. 
Dissolution and disposal of property of partnership on a member 
becoming mentally ill. 
Power to apply property for maintenance of mentally ill person 
without appointing manager in certain cases. 
Power to order transfer of stock belonging to mentally ill person 
in certain cases. 
Power to Older transf~r of stock of mentany ill person residin. 
out of India. 
Power to apply property for mentally ill person's maintena~ 
in case of temporary mental illness. 
Action taken in respec't of mentally ill person to be set aside if 
District Court finds that his mental illness has ceased. 
Appeals. 
Power of District Court to make regulations. 
CHAPTER VI 
I....uBILITY TO MDT COST OF MAINTENANCE OF MENTALLY ILL PERsONS DETAlNa) 
IN PSYCHIA'l1UC HOSPITAL OR PSYCHIATBIC NURSING HOME 
. ·81. Coat of maintenance to be borne by Government in certail'l CUeto 
a2. Application of property in possession of mentally ill person found 
wandering. 
sa. App~ation to l;)istrict Court for payment ~ cost of ~aintenance 
out of estate of mentally ill person or from a person leaally 
bound to maintain him. 
N. Persons legally bound to maintain mentally ill person not absolved 
from s~ch liabiUty. 
\ 
\ 
~ 

. ,; 
... . 
ClA.ve. 
t 
CHAPTER VD 
PENALTIES AND PRocEDUU 
.. ...• 
85. Penalty for establishment or maintenance of psychiatric ~ 
or psychiatric nursing home in contravention of Chapter n. 
•. Penalty for improper reception of mentally ill person. 
87. Penalty for contravention of sections 63 and 72. 
88. General provision for punishment of other offences. 
89. Offences by companies. 
to. Sanction for prosecutions. 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
91. Provision as to bonds. 
4111 
92. Half yearly report by medical officer. 
93. Pension, etc., of mentally ill person payable by Government.. 
94. Legal aid to mentally ill person at State expense in certain 
cases. 
95. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
96· Construction of references to Jaws not in force in Jammu .... 
Kashmir. 
97. Power to State Government to make rules. 
98. Effect of Act on other laws. 
99. Power to remove diftlculty. 
100. Repeal and saving. 

BW No. II of 1171 
THE MENTAL HEALTH BILL, 1978 
BILL 
to consoLidate and amend t1U! Law reLating to tn.e treatmen.t aM care 01 
mentaLly in pergons, to make better provision with rapect to their 
property and affairs and for matters connected t~th or in.ei· 
dental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year o' the Republic 
of India a'S follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PuUMINAIlT 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mental Health M, 1m. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification, appoint and different dates may be. alWOinted for 
different states and for different provisions of this Act, ancl any reference 
10 In any provision to the commencement of this Act iD • State shall be 
15 
constru~d. a'S a reference to the coming into tOIlet! of &hat provision in 
that State. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requirea,-
(a) "cO$t of maintenance", in relation to a mentally: ill person 
adfllit~ in a pt;yehlaqie hospital or psychiatric nu.nling bMne. shall 
mean the cost of s~h items as the State Government may, by gene-
Short title, 
extent 
an4 com-
mence-
ment. 
Deftn'· 
tion •. 

· ........... ... 
1'81 or special order, specify in this behalf, and shall, unless the State 
Government otherwise directs, include-
(i) the cost of lodging. boarding, clothing, medicine or any 
other amenity provided to such person in any psychiatric hoapltal 
or psychiatric nursing home and the expenditure for his treat- s 
nwnt and care therein: and 
(H) the expenditure incurred for removing such person to, 
or from, any psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home; 
(b) "District Court" means, in any area for which there is a city 
civil court, that court, and in any other area the principal civil court 10 
of original jurisdiction, and includes any other civil court' which the 
State Government may. by notification. specify as the court compe-
tent to deal with all or any of the matters specified in this XCt: 
(c) "Inspecting Officer" means a person authorised by the State 
Government or by the licensing authority to inspect any psychiatric 1 ~ 
hcrspital or psychiatric nursing home; 
(d) ·'lie-encl·" mearls a licence grantt·d under section 6: 
(e) "licensee" means the holder of a licence; 
(f) "licenst'd psychiatric hospital" Or "licensed psychiatric 
nursing home" means a p~y('hlatric hospital Or psychiatric nursing 10 
home, as the case mav be, licenSt"d, or deemed to be licensed, under 
.,: I)~is ~A'¢ti.· ' 
(g) "licensing authority" means such omcer or authority al 
may be specified by the State. Government to be the 1leena1ni 
authority for the purposes of this Act; ~S 
(h) "Magistrate" means,-
(1)' in relation to a metropolitan area within the meanil'lg of 
clause (k) o(section 2 of the Codt> of Criminal Procedure, 1973, 
a Metropolitan Ma~istrElte: 
(2) in relation to any 9ther area, the Chief Judicial Magis- 30 
frate, Sub-Divisional Magistrate or such other Magistrate of 
the first class as the State Government may, by nottftcatiori, em-
power to perform the functions of a Magistrate under this Act; 
(i) "medical officer" means a gazetted medical officer in the aer-
vice of Government and includes a medical practitioner declared, by 35 
a general 'o"r s~ial order of the State Gdvt!Tnment, to be a medJtal 
ofBcer for the purposes of this Act; 
. (j) "medical officer in charge". in relation to any psychlatric 
hospital or psychiatri~ nursing home, means the medical ofticer who, 
fOr the' time bErin&.is in charge of that hospital or nursin, heme; ",0 
·tk) "rdeclioal prac~ner" M'eans Il perIJOllWhOpe_MSH a 
ltiCIOiJ'IIit;et'Rttdteal 'qualiftdation as deAned in clause (h)otteetion 
2 of 1174, 
2 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, and whose name bas been 102 of 1151. 
entered in a St,te Medical Register in accordance with, taeprovt-
sions of that Act or a person whose name, has been registered in .4. 
-8iateMlJclfcil'Jtegider m'1l'CcOrdance with fh:e provfaiOftl of any 
other Ja\v'Jiel'atlftg to ~ regiMTatioriof nvwdtcal praetitionersfQrthe 
·1ti1ne 'betnf::in 1ort!'ej'" . ' 

IOJ of llae. 
m "menta~y ill offender" m.eans a me~t,al.ly m, pe&:son for 
whose detention in, or removal to, a psychiatric .pospUal, psy~. 
tric nursing home, jail or other place of safe custody, ~n order 
rei~ to in section 30 has beenn\ade; ,I, ,f 
S (m)"mentally ill persoriJ • means a person who is 'i~ need of 
'psychtatric treatment by reason of mental dIsorder or mental" deft-
eiency or of any disturbance 'in his behftviour or m~ntaJl ~tate and 
in~udes a person who has all.of any ~f the clinical conditions \mqwn 
as py~es,psychoneuroses, Pl'ycJwpathic state, addition, mental 
10 sul>-normelity or psychosomatic disorder, or such other condition of 
the like nature as may be prescribed; 
(n) "minor" means a person who. has nqt complcted 'h~ age of' 
eighteen years; 
(0) "notification" means a notificauonpublished in the Olkial 
IS Gazette; 
20 
(p) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules mllde under this 
~ct; . ~ I 
(q) "psychiatric hospital" or psychiatric nursing h<?me" means 
a hospital or, as the caS(' may be, a nursing home established 'or, main-
tained by the Government or any other person for the treatment and 
('are of mentnlIy ill psrsons and includes a convalescent home estab-
Ushed or maintained by the Government Or any other person for 
such mentally ill persons; 
(r) "psychiatrist" means a medical practition~r poJsesslDg a 
post-graduate degree or diploma in psychiatry, recognised by the 
Medical Council of India, constituted under the Indian Medical 
Council Act, 1956, and include!;, in relation to any State, any other 
person wh" having regard to his knowlcdge and experience in 
psychiatry, has been declared by the Government of that State to 
be a psychiatrist for the .puq~oses of this Act; 
(8) "reception order" means an order made under the provi-
sions of this Act for the admission and detention of a mentally fl1 
person in a psychiatric hospita.l or psychiatric ntlrsin,g horne; 
(t) "relative" includes any person related to the mentally m 
3S person by blood, marriage or adoption; . 
(,u) "State Government" in relation to a Union territory means 
the Administrator thereof; 
. (1) '''temporary treatml'mt ord.er" means a temporary treatmeat 
order passed by a Magistrate under section 20 or section 21. 
,.( 
CHAPTER·IT 
PSYCIUATRIC HOSPITALS AND PSYCHIATRDC NURSING HOMES 
. il. 0) '!be 'Cattral Govenuneiltmay, In any part' of"lndla, or the 
StMe·GeYeraaeat .... y, wttIlIn ·tIle Umlts of tts Jurlsdlctlon,establlsh or 
__ wn psytDiatrit!hespttals or psyehiatrit nursing homeS 'for the ad-
.s .... Ien,treatment .... are of 'mentally III penons at mclt ~ J)laees .as It 
IhBIksftt; IIld separate )J8yeldatrlc' ilospltals and psyehlati:le nursing 
homes may be estabU ..... or maln&abie4 '101",-
<-) ,~,,: w.IIo are, under the age ,of eighteen yeat'l; 
(b) tbosewho have been Convicted of all)' ~~ .• nd 
. ,'" 
EstabliSh-
ment 
or 
,main-
tenance 
of pay chi-
atrie 
h08J)ltals 
and plyehi 
atricnu .... 
~ boJJW 

BItUllIh· 
ment or 
~te-\ 
nanceof 
psychiatric 
'''boapltall 
orplYchia-
trie nul'll-
inl homes 
only wIth 
llceUoe. 
A;w.Uea~ 
tionfor 
Uc-.. 
Qrator 
retualof 
lkleDce. 
(c) thOle belODIine to such other class or caterory of penon. 
as may be prescribed. 
(2) Where a psychiatric hospltal or psychiatric nursing home is 
eetablished or maintained by the Central Government, any reference in 
thls Act to the State Government shall, In relation to such hospital or 5 
nunba. home, be construed as a reference to the Central Government. 
4. (1) On and after the commencement of this Act, no person shall 
estabUsh or maintain a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home 
unless he holds a valid licence granted to him under this Act: 
Provided that an asylum, li~ensed by the Central Government or any 10 
State Government and maintained as such immediately before the com-
mencement of this Act, may continue to be maintained, and shall be deem-
ed to be a licensed psychiatric hospital or licensed psychiatric nursing 
home, as the case may be, under this Act,--
(4) for a period of three months from such commencement, or IS 
(b) if an application made in accordance with section 5 for a 
licence is pending on the expir:v of the period specified in clause (a), 
till the disposal of such application. 
(2) Nothing containt>d in sub-section (1) shall apply to ::t psychiatric 
hospital or psychiatric nursing home established or maintained b-y the 20 
Central Government or State Government. 
5. (1) Every person. who holds, at the commencement of this Act. :-\ valid 
licence authorising him to establish or maintain any psychiatric hospital 
or psychiatric nursing home, shall, if he intends to establish or continue 
the maintenance of such hospital or nursing home after the expiry of the 25 
period referred to in clause (a) of the proviso to sub-section (1) of 
section 4, makwe. at lea~t one month before the expiry of such period. an 
application to the licensing authority for the grant of a fresh licence for 
the establishment or maintenance of such hospital or nursing home, as 
the case may be. 
(.2) A person, who intends to establish or maintain, after the com-
meneement of this Act. a psychiatriC hospital or psychiatric nursing 
home, shall, unless he already holds a valid licence, make an appUeation 
to the' 'lice'l'lsingauthnTity for the grant of a licence. 
30 
(3) Every applic3tion undeor sub-section (1) or under sub-section (Z) 3' 
shall be in such form and be accompanied by such fee as may be pres-
cribed. 
t. On receipt of an application under section 5. the licensing autho-
rity shall make such inquiries as it may deem ftt and where it i'l satisfted 
that-
(4) the efrtablishment Or maintenance of the psychiatric hospital 45 
or psychiatric· nursing home or the continuance of the maintenance of 
any such hospital or nursing home estabUshed before the commence-
ment of this Act is necessary, havin~ regard to the needs of the lITeR 
in whtch such hm:pital or nursinJ( homt> is proposed to hE' established 
or maintained or continued to be maintained; So 
(b) the applicant is in a position to provide the minimum faci-
lities prescribed for the aJmis~ion. treatment and care of mentallv 
tl1 per8()ns; and . I . I .,. v 

5 
(c) the psychiatric hospital or the psychiatric nursfng home, 
will be under the charge of a medical officer who is a psychiatrist, 
it shall grant a licence to the applicant in the prescribed form, mel, 
where it is not 8:> satisfied, the licensing authority shall, by order, refun 
S to grant the licence applied for: 
Provided that, before making any order refusing to grant a licenoe, 
the licensing authority shall give to the applicant a reasonable oppor-
tunity of being heard and every order of refusal to grant a licence shall 
~et out therein the rt"asons for such refusal and such reasons shall be 
10 communicated to the applicant in such manner as may be prescribed. 
'7. A licence shall not be transferable or heritable. 
8. Every licence shall, unless revoked earlier under section 11, be 
valid for a period of five years from the date on which it is grmtecL 
9. A licence may be renewed, from time to time, on an application 
IS made in that behalf to the licensing authority, in such form and accom-
panied by such fee, as may be prescribed, and every such application 
shall, as far as possible, be made one year, before the date on which the 
period of validity of the licence is due to expire:' 
Provided that the renewal of a licence shall not be refused unless the 
20 licenaing authority is satisfied that-
(i) having regard to the needs of the area, renewal of the licence 
is not necessary; or 
(ii) the licensee is not in a position to provide in a psychiatric 
hospital or psychiatric nursing home, the minimum facilities pree-
25 crlbed for the admission, treatment and care therein of mentally ill 
persons; or 
30 
(iii) the licensee is not in a position to provide a medical ofllcer , 
who is a psychiatrist to take charge of the psychiatric hospital or the 
psychiatric nursing home; or 
(iv) the licensee has contravened any of the provisions 01 this 
Act or any rule made thereunder. 
10. Every licensee shall maintain the psychiatric hospital or psy-
chiatric nursing home in such manner and subject to such conditions as 
may be prescribed. 
Licenee 
not traM-
ferableor 
heritable. 
Duration 
of licence. 
Renewal 
ofl1eence. 
Licenaee 
to main-
tain paychl-
artie 
hospital 
ad pqcJri 
atrlc nur-
an. home 
In accord-
ancewftlt 
p,... 
crfbed 
eoDdl-
..... 

"D 
,":f--.-..", . 
a\evoca • 
t1oI1 or 
Ucence. 
,,"il. ~)) ~he licensin& authority may, Without prejudice to aDY ciibel' 
penalty that may be imposed on the licensee, by order in writiDl, revoke 
the licence if it is satisfied that-
Ap~ 
Ins~tioD 
ofpS1Chl-
atrld 
110spltalii ! 
and PIYi!tif .. 
atric 
num~' 
horn •. 
aria 
viitttna ofpatteDtAt. 
, ..•. £! 
(a) the psychiatric hospital or the psychiatric nursing hoQle 15 
not being mamtained by the licensee in accordance with the provi- S 
sions of this Act or the rules made thereunder. • 
(b) the maintenance of the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric 
nursjng home is being canied on in a manner detrimental to the 
;moral and physical well-being of the j,npatients thereof. 
ProvIded that no such order shall be made except after Slvmg the 10·, 
licensee a reasonable opportunity of being heard, and every such order 
shall set out thelein tile gJ.'Ounds lor the revocation of the licenc,e and 
such grounds shall be communicated to the licensee in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall contain a direction IS 
tbat the inpatients of the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home 
shaY. be transferred to such other psychiatric hospital or psychiatric 
uUI'sing home as may be specitied in that order. 
(3) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall take ettect~-
(a} where '1\0 appeal has been preferred against such order 30 
under setion 12, immediately on the expiry of the period prescribed, 
for such appeal; and 
(b) where sucb ilppeal has been preferred and the same has 
been dismissed, from the date of the order of such d.i.sm.issal. 
12. (1) Any person, aggrieved by an order of the licensing authority 25 
refusing LO grant or renew a licence, or revoking a licence, may, in 
such manner and within such period as may be prescribed, prefer an 
appeal to the State Government: 
Provided that the State Government may entertain an appeal pre-
ferred after the expiry of the prescribed period if it is satisfied that 30 
the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from prefeITing the 
appeal in time. ' 
(2) Every appeal under $ub-section (1) shall be made in such form 
and be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed. 
13. (1) An Inspecting Officer may, at any time, enter aadinapectany 35 
p~ychiatric h:>spital or psychiatric nUrsing home and require the produc-
tion of any records, which are required to be kept in accordance with 
the rules made in this behalf, for inspection: 
Provided that such inspection shall be carried out in the presence of 
the medical officer in charge or of· any other person authorised by him. 40 
(2) The Inspecting Omcer may interview in private any patient 
receiving treatment and care thereil1-
(a) for the purpose of inquiring into any complaint made by or 
on behalf of such patient as to the treatment and care, or 

1 
(b) m any case, where the Inspecting OfBcer has reason to be-
lieV'e that any inpatient is nat receiving proper treatment and care, 
and where the Inspecting OfBeer is a meciical pr.actitioDel', be may 
also examine the patient in private and may require the production 
of any medical records relating to the treatment and care of the 
patient in the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home and 
inspect the same. 
(3) Where the Inspecting Officer is satisfied that any inpatient in a 
psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home is not receiving proper 
10 treatment and care, he may report the matter to the licensing authority 
aIld thereupon the licensing authority may issue such directions as it may 
dE.'em fit to the licensee of the psychiatric hospital, or, as the case may be, 
the psychiatric nursing home and every such licensee shall be bound to 
comply with such directions. 
15 14. Provision shall be made in every licensed psychiatric hospital "r 
licensed psychiatric nursing home for ~uch facilities as may be prescribed 
for the treatment of. every mentally ill person, whose condition does not 
warrant rus admission as an inpAtient or who, for the time being, is not 
und<'fgoing treatment as inpatient. 
CHAPTER III 
ADMISSION AND DETENTION IN PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITAL OR PSYCHlATRt.:: 
NURSING HOME 
PART I 
Admission on voluntary basi8 
as ]5. (J) Any person (not being a minor), who considers himBelf to be 
a mentally ill person and desires to be admitted to any psychiatrlc hOIl-
pital or psychiatric nursing home for treatment, may make an applicatioll 
in that behal:f to the medical officer in charge for being admitted· b 
a voluntary patient. 
30 (2) Where the guardian of a minor considers his ward to be a men· 
tally ill person and desires the ward to be admitted to any psychiatric 
hospital or psychiatrie nursing home for treatment,he may make an 
"pplication in that behalf to the medical officer in charge for admitting 
the ward as a voluntary patient. 
35 (3) On receipt of an application ullder sub-section (1) or sub-section 
(2), the medical Qfficer in charge shall make such inquiries as he may 
deem fit and if satisfied that the applicant or, as the ease may be, the 
minor requires treatment as an inpatient in the psychiatric hospital or 
psychiatric nursing home, he may admit therein such applicant or, as the 
40 case may be, the minor as a voluntary patient. 
11. (1) Save as otherwise prOVided in sub-section (2), every volWlt8ry 
patient, who is admitted to any licensed psychiatric hospital or licensed 
psychiatric nursing home, shall be liable to pay the east of maintenance 
to the licensee of the hospital or nursing home; and, in the case of • 
4f voluntary patient. who is a minor, such cost sbaU be paid by his guardian. 
Treat-
ment 
of out-
patient •. 
Applica-
tion for 
admission 
as volun-
tary pa-
tient. 
Cost of 
mainte-
nanceot 
voluntal'J 
patient., 

Voluntary 
patients 
to abide 
by regula-
tions or 
psychiatric 
hospital!! 
orpsychi-
atric nurs-
inghomes. 
Leave of 
absence 
or dis-
charge Of 
voluntary 
patients. 
Admission 
of mentally 
ill persons 
under 
certain 
spectal 
eircum-
.tances . 
..... ~ 
I· 
(~) 'the State Government may, having regard to the nature of ., 
licensed psychia.tric hospital established or maintained by that Govern-
ment and the means of the voluntary pati4mta, provide, by notification, 
that any class or category of voluntary patients admitted to any such 
licensed psychiatric hospital or class of such hospitals, shall not be liable !I 
ito pay the cost of maintenance, and, in every such case, the cost of 
maintenance of the voluntary patients shall be borne by the State Gov-
ernment. 
17. Every voluntary patient who is admitted to a licensed psychiatric 
hospc Lalor licensed psychiatric nursing home shall be bound to abide by 10 
such regulations as may be made by the licensee of the psychiatric 
hospital or psychiatric nursing home wherein he is an inpatient. 
18. (1) The medical officer in charge of a psychiatric hospital or 
psychiatric nursing home shall, on an application made in that behalf by 
any voluntary patient, and, in the case of a minor voluntary patient, by IS 
the guardian of the patient, grant (unless such medical officer initiates 
action under sub-section (3) of section 20), within twenty-four hours of 
the receipt of such application, leave of absence to the patient for a period 
not exceeding thirty days at a time and not exceeding one hundred and 
eighty days in the aggregate or discharge the patient from the psychiatric 20 
hospital or psychiatric nursing home. 
(2) Where a minor voluntary patient, who is admitted as an inpatient 
in any psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home, attains majority, 
the medical officer in charge shall, as soon as may be, intimate the patient 
that he has attained majority and that, unless an application for his:aS 
continuance as an inpatient is made by him wi-thin a period of one month 
of such intimation, he shall, subject to the provisions contained in section 
.19, be discharged, and if before the expiry of the said period., no applica-
tion is made to the medical officer in charge for his continuance as an 
inpatient, he shall, on the expiry of the said period, be discharged, 3c 
PART II 
Admission unde?' special circumsta.nces 
19. (1) Any mentally ill person who does not, or is unable to express 
his willingness for admission as a voluntary patient, may be admitted 
and kept as an inpatient in a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing 35 
home on an application made in that behalf by a rela't.ive of the mental~y 
ill person i-f the medical officer in charge is satisfied that in the interests 
of the mentally ill person it is necessary 80 to do: 
Provided that no person so admitted as an inpatient shall be kept in 
the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home as an inpatient for a 40 
period exceeding ninety d.aysi except in accordance With the other pro-
visions of this Act. 
(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be in the prescribed 
form and be- accompanied by two medical certificates, from two medical-
practitioners (incl",dine a psychiatrist) of whom one shall be a medical 4~ 

9 
practitioner in the service of Government, to the effect that the eondition 
of such mentally ill person is such that he should be kept under observa-
tion and treatment as an inpatient in a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric 
nursing home. 
S (3) Any mentally il~ person admi":.ted under sub-section (1) or his 
relative may apply to the Magistrate for hif; discharg~ and the Magistrate 
may, after giving no~ice to the person at whose instance he was admitted 
to the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home and after making 
'Such inquiry as he may deem fit either allow or dismiss the application. 
10 (4) The provisions of the for~going sub-sections shall be without pre-
judice to the powers exercisable by a Magistrate before whom the case 
of a mentally ill person is brought, whether under this section or under 
any other provision of this Act, to pass a temporary treatment order or 
a reception order, as the case may be, if he is satisfied that it is neces-
IS aary !PO to do in accordance with the relevant provisions of this Act. 
PABT III 
Temporary treatment orders 
ZOo (1) Any relative or friend of a mentally ill person may make an 
application to the Magistrate within the local limits of whose jurisdiction 
:ao mIch mentally ill p~on ordinarily resides for the admission of the men-
tally ill person to any psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home 
for treatment for a temporaJry period. 
(2) Every application under sttb-sec<:ion (1) shall be in the pr~('ribed 
form and be accompanied by two medical certificates, from two medical 
2S practitioners (including a ps .... chiatrist) of whom one shall be a medical 
practitioner in the service of Government to the effect that the condition 
of such mentally ill person is sllch that h~ should be kept under observa-
tion and treatment as an inpatient in a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric 
nursing home. 
30 (3) Where, before ~anting leave of absence or discharging a volun-
tary patient under section 18, the medical of'ftcer in charRe of any psv-
chiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home is of opinion that the 
voluntary patient is likely to act in a manner which will be injuI10us to 
his health or will endanger his own life or the life of othE'TS, the meciical 
35 officer in charge may make an application to the Mal!istrate within the 
local limits of. whose jurisdiction the psychiatric h~tal or thE' psychia-
tric nursing home is situate, for the detention of the patient in the psy-
chi~tric hospital or, as the case may be, psychiatric nursing home for 
further treatment. 
40 (4) Where the medical officer in chnrge of any psychiatric hospital or 
psychiatric nursing home is of amnion that any mentally il1 person 
underl{Oing treatment as an outl)8t i ent in that hospital or nursing home 
is likely to set in a manner which win bf! Inhtrinus to his health or will 
endanger his own Iifeor the life of others, the mf!dical officer in charRe 
45 may make an application to the Ma~strate within the local limits of 
~ose jurisdtction tht> psyehiatric hospital or the psychiatric nursfn~ 
bome i!l situate, for the detention of the pattent in any psyrhint.ri~ ho<;pital 
• ps~hiatrfl; nursing home for treatment FlS Rn Inpatient. 
Temporal'J 
treat-
ment 
orden. 

Discharge 
of persona 
detained 
in psychi-
atric hos-
pitalor 
psychiatric 
nursin, 
home 
under 
temporary 
treatment 
orders. 
Applica-
tion for 
reception 
Grder. 
(5) On receipt of an application under. sub-section (1) or sub.secUWt 
(3) or sub-section (4) I the Magistrate may, after making su$ inquiritlS 
as he may deem. fit, if satisfied that in the interests of the health and 
personal safety of the mentally ill person or for the protection of ot~rs, 
he should be detained as an inpatient in a psychiatric hospital or psychia- 5 
tric nursing home, pass a temporary treatment Girder for the detention 
for treatment of such person in such psychiatric hospital or psychIatric 
nursing horne and for such period not exceeding six mon'tflS from the 
date of the order, as may be specified therein. 
Zl. (1) Every mentally ill person detained for treatment in any psy- 10 
ehiatric hospital or psvchhtric nursing home under a temporary' tTeat-
ment rmer shall. on the expiry of the period of detention spectfted 
in the order, be dischaT~ed from 'Such hospital or, as the case may be, 
nursing home: 
Provided that where the period of detention SJDecified in the tem- 15 
porary treatment order is less than six months and the medical officer 
in charge is of opinion that the treatment of such person a'S an inpatient 
should be continued beyond the period specified in that order, he may 
before the expiry of the said period, make an application for the exten-
sion of the period to the Magistrate within the local limits of .whose 20 
jurisdiction the psychiatric hospital or, as the case may be, psychiatric 
nursing home is situate. 
(2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the M$gis-
trate shall deal with it in the manner specified in sub-section (5) of 
section 20; so, however. that the period of further detention together ~S 
with the period specified in the temporary treatment 'order made under 
the. said sub-section (5). shall not exceed, in the aggregate, six months. 
PART IV 
Reception orders 
A.-Reception orders on applicatioru 
22. (1) An application for a reception o~der may be made by-
(a) the medical otDcer in charge of .a pSYChiatric ha.pital or 
pSYChiatric nurSing home, or 
(b) by the husband, wife or any other relative of the mentally 
30 
illp~on. ~ 
(2) Where a medical offtcer in charge of a psychiatric hospital or 
psychiatric nursing home in which a mentally ill perlJOn is undei'goinl 
treatment under a temporary treatment order is satisfted that,-
{a) the mentally ill person is. ,uftering from men~ disorder of 
SUQb a nature and detree that his treatment in the psycbiatric h()l- 40 
pital . or, as the case may be, psychiatric; D1.l~ing home is .required 
to be cont.U:wed for more than six months, or 
(h) it is necessary in the in~rests of the health and pel'lOlial 
,atety ot the mentally ill person or for the prou:ctton of othera that 

II 
such person shall be detained in a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric 
DUI'sklg bom.e, or 
(c) a temporary treatment order would not be adequate in the 
circumstances of the case, 
S M may make an application tOo the Magistrate within the local limits of 
whose jurisdiction the psychiatric hospital or, as the case may be, 
psychiatric nursing home is situate, for the detention of such mentally 
ill person under a reception order is such psychiatric hospital or psychia-
tric nursing home, as the case may be. 
10 (3) Subject to the prcwisions of sub-section (5), the husband or wife 
of a person who is alleged to be mentally ill or, where there is no hus-
band or wife, or where the husband or wife is prevented by reason of 
any illness or absence from India or otherwise from making the applica-
tion, any other relative ()rf such person may make an application to the 
15 Maldstrate within the local limits of WhClse jurisdiction the said person 
<mdin&r.iolYDe6ides, for the deten'tion of the alleged mentally ill person 
under a reception order in a psychiatric hospital or psycniatrlc nursing 
home. 
(4) Where the husband or wife of the alleged mentally ill person 
20 is not the &J!)plicant, the application shall contain the reasons for the 
application not bein~ made by the husband or wife and shall indicate 
the relationship 'of the applicant with the alleged mentally ill person 
and the circumstances under which the application is being made. 
,(5.) No person,-
25 (i) who is a minor, or 
(ii) who, within fourteen days before the date of the applica-
tion, has not seen the alleged mentally ill person, 
shall make an application undP.r this section. 
(6.) .Everv application under sub-section (3) shan be mlKie in the 
30 pl'elCribed form and shall be signed and verified in the prescribed 
manner and 'shall state whether any previnus application had been mllde 
for inQuiry into the mental connition of the alIe~en mentally ill person 
. and shall be accomnanied bv two medical certificates from two medical 
practitioners (includin~ a psychiatrist) of whom one shall be a medial 
3S praetitioner in the service {"if Government. 
D. Everv medica1 certificate referred to in sub-section (6) of section 
22 'lhall contain a statement,-
(a) that each of the medical practiti1"lJ'lers referred to in that 
sub-section has personally examined the alle~ed mentally ill person; 
40 (b) that in the opinion of each Ruch mf'dica1 practitionrTS the 
al1e~ed mentally i11 person is suft'erinf! firom mental disorder of !Inch 
a nature and de!!'f'ee as to warrant the detention of such person in It 
nsvchiatr;c hO'ln;t'll or l*lvchillt.r;,. nnrsinq home and that such deten-
tion is necessary in the inter$ts of the hf'a]th Rnd persona] safety of 
4,5 that person or for the protection of others; and 
Form and 
content. 
ofmedleaJ 
certltl-
catet. 

t'rocedure 
upon 
applica-
tion for 
reception 
oreler. 
(~) that each such medical practitioner ~ forme(l, ,his opinion 
on the basis of his observations and the obserVations of. any other 
medical practitioner and from the particulars j~lhmliluea'ted 'to him 
by other persons. 
U. (1) On receipt of an application under sub-section (2) of section S 
22, the Magistrate may make a Il"eception order, if he is satisfied that-;; 
(i) the mentally ill person is suffering from mental disord,er 
of such a nature and degree that it is necessary to detain him in a 
psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home for 'treatment;,' or 
(ii) it is necessary in the interests of, the health and personal 10 
safety of the mentally ill person or for the protection of others that 
he should be so -detained, and a temporary treatment order would 
not be adequate in the circumsbnces of the caSe and it is ~cessary 
to make a reception order. 
(2) On receipt of an application under SUb-section (3) of section 22, IS 
the Magistrate shall consider the allegations made in the application 
and the evidence of mental illness as disclosed by the medical certlftcates. 
(3) If the Magistrate considers that there are suffiCient ~ounds for 
proceeding further, he shall personally examine the alleged mentally ill 
person unless, for reasons to be recorded in writing, he think!! that it is ao 
not necessary or expedient to do so. 
(4) If the Magistrate is satisfted that a reception OI'der may properly 
be made forthwith. he may make such order, and if the Magistrate is 
not so satisfied, he shall fix a date for further consideration of the appli-
cation and may make such inquiries concerning the alleged mentally 25 
ill person as he thinks fit. 
(5) The notice of the date fixed under sub-section (4) shall be given 
to the applicant and to any other person to whom, in the opinion of 
the Magist.ratc, such notice shall be given. 
(6) If the Magistrate fixes a date under sub-section (4) for further 30 
ronsideration of the application, he may innke such order' as he thinks 
fit, for the proper care and custody of the alleged mentally ill person 
pending disposal 'of the application. 
(7) On the date fixed unqer sub-section (4). or 'On such fur:ther, da~ 
as may be. fixed by the Magistrate, he shall proceed to consider tbe 35 
npplication in came1'a, in the presence of-
(i) the applicant; "t-
(ii) the alleged mentally ill person (unless the Magistrate in his 
discretion otherwise directs); 
(Ui) the person who may he appointert by the alleged mentally 40 
ill perlion to represent him; and 
(iv) such other pe,rson as the Magistrate thinks fit. 
Rnd ,if the Magistrate is satisfted that the all~~ed ment~lly i~. person in 
relation to whom the application is made, is ~q mentally ill that in the 
• 

ti 
intereSts otthe health ana persdnal safety of that' person or tar the 
proteCtion of others it is necessary to detain him in a PSychiatric 
hbspital or psychiatric nursing home for treatment, he may pass a 
reception 'order for that purpose and if he is not so s4tisfied he shall 
dismiss the application and any such order may provi~ for the 
payment of the costs of the inquiry by the applicant personally or 
from ~t of the estate of the mentally ill person, as the Magistrate 
may deem appropriate. 
(8) !f any application is dismissed under sub-section (7), the Magis-
io trate shall record the, reasons for such dismissal and a copy of the order 
shall b,e furnished to the applicant. 
20 
B.-Reception orders on produC'tion of menULlly ill persons hefore 
Magistrate 
%5. (1) EVery ofticer in charge of a police station,-
(a) may arrest or caUse to be arrested any persort found 
wandering at large within the limits of his station whom he has rea-
son to believe to be so mentally ill as to be incapable of taking care 
of himself, and 
(b) shall arrest or cause to be arrested any person within the 
,limits ,of his station whom he has reaSOn t'o believe to be dangerous 
by reason of mental illness. 
(2) No person arrested under sub-section (1) shall be detained in 
police custody without being informed, as soon as may be, 'of the grounds 
for such arrest, or where, in the opinion of the arresting omcer, such 
2S person is not capable of understanding tbose grounds, without his rela~ 
tives or friends, if any, being informed of such grounds. 
,(3). Every person, who is arrested and detained in custody under this 
section, shall be produced before the nearest Magistrate within a period 
of twenty-four hours of such arrest excluding the time necessary for 
30 the journey from the place of arrest to the Court of the Magistrate and 
shall not be detained in custody beyond the said period without the 
author:ty of the Magistrate. 
Z8~ (1'~ If a person is produeed before a Magistrate under sub-section 
(3)' \ 6f section 25, and if, in his opinion, there are sufficient grounds for 
3S prOceeding :turth~, the Magistrate shall,-
(4) examine the person to assess his capacity to understand, 
(b) cause him to be examined by a medical ofticer, and 
(c) make such inquiries in relation to such perltOn as he may 
',,,:;; 'I 
, 9-~ElDl n~essary. , ' 
40 ; ;(2) , 'After.- ',~ compl~tion of the proceedings under sub-aectio~ (1); 
tIM M1Jgfstrate may pass a reception order 8utliorising the detention of 
th~!"saJd p~rson as an inpatient in 8 psychiatric hospital or psychiatric 
''Ilurilhg bome;- . .; I,'" 
(~) if the medical ofticer certifies such ~son to be a mentally 
4S m person, and 
Powers 
and 
duties ot 
police 
officers In 
re~ct 
of cer~ 
taln men· 
tally ill 
persons. 
Procedure 
Ol! pro-
duction or 
mentally 
ill 
person. 

Older In 
ca .. 
of mentally 
tnperson 
cruell7 
treated 
or not 
under 
proper 
care and 
control. 
• 14 
(b) if the l\4a&istrate is satisfied that the SJUd petson is a __ 
tally ill person and that in the interests of the heBlth and personal 
safety of that person or ,for the protection of others, it is necessary 
to pass such order: 
Provided that if any friend or relative of the mentally ill persdh ~ 
desires that the mentally ill person be sent tb any patticular licensed 
psychiatric hospital or licensed psychiatric nursing home for treatment 
therein and undertakes in writing to the satisfaction of the Magistrate 
to pay the cost of maintenance of the mentally ill person in such hospital 
or nursing home, the Magistrate shall. if the medical officer in charge ,of to 
such hospital or nursing home consents, make a reception otder for thE! 
admission of the mentally ill person into that hospital or nursing home 
and detention therein: 
Provided further that if any friend or relative of the mentally ill 
person enters into a bond, with Or without sureties for such amount as 15 
the Magistrate may determine, undertaking that such mentally ill per-
son will be properly taken care of and shall be prevented from doing 
any injury to himself or to others. the Maigstrate may. instead of making 
a reception order. hand him over to the care of such friend or relative. 
27. (1) Every officer in charge of a police station, who has reason to 20 
believe that any person within the limits of. his station is mentally m 
and is not under proper care and control, or is ill-treated or neglected 
by any relative or other person having charge of such mentally ill per-
son, shall forthwith report the fact to the Magistrate wIthin the local 
limits of whose jurisdiction the mentally ill person resides. 2S 
(2) If it appears to the Magistrate, on the report of a police omcer 
or on information derived from any other person, or otherwise, that any 
mentally ill person within the local limits 'Of his jurisdiction is not under 
proper care and control, or is ill-treated or neglected. by any relative or 
other person having the charge of such mentally ill person, the Magla- 30 
trate may cause the mentally ill person to be produced before him, and 
summon such relative or other person who is, or who ought to be in 
charge of, such mentally ill person. 
(3) If such relative or any other person is legaDy bound to mafntaln 
the mentally ill person, the Magistrate may, by order, require the reJa.. J5 
tive or the other person to take proper care of such mentally ill person 
and where such relative or other person wilfully neglects to comply 
with the said 'order, he shall be punishable with fine which may extencf 
to one thousand rupees. 
(4) If there is no person legally bound to maintain the mentaDy m 
person, or if the person legally bound to maintain the mentally m per_ 40 
son refuses or neglects to maintain such person, or if. for any other r •• -
SOft, the Magistrate thinks fit 80 to do, he may cause the mentany m 
person to be produced before him and, without prejudice to any acuon 
that may be taken under sub-sectlon (3), proceed in the mannerpro- .. , 
vlded in section 26 as if such perSOn had been produced before hlm Unitei' 
BUD-section (3) of section 215. 

C.~~mi.B.icm in. e~!.Wnci«s 
•• (1) Where any medical officer or medical practitioner or any 
friend or relative of a mentally ill person is of opinion that unless such 
mentally ill iperaon is immediately admitted to any psychiatric hospital 
S or psychiatric nursing home Ior treatment, the health and personal 
safety of such person or of others will be in imminent danger, he may 
make an application to the medical officer in charge of any psychiatric 
hospital Gr psychiatric nursing home for admission forthwith of such 
mentally ill per90n to the psychiatric hospital or, as the case may be, 
to psychiatric nursing home under his charge. 
(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be in the pres. 
tribed form containing a statement that unless the mentally ill person 
is forthwith admitted to any psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing 
home, there is imminent danger to the health and personal safety of 
I~ such person or of others, and shall be supported by a certificate to that 
effect in the prescribed form Drom a medical practitioner, and, wherever 
pos.il~le, from a medical practitioner who is acquainted with the condi .. 
tion of the mentally ill person. 
ExpZanation.-For the remc;val of doubts it is hereby declared that 
20 where an application under sub-section (l) is made by a medical officer 
or medical practitioner such application shall be accompanied by a 
certificate referred to in this sub-section from another medical practi-
tioner. 
(3) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the medical 
2S ofB~er in charge shall admit the mentally ill person to the psychiatric 
hospital or the psychiatric nursing home under his charge subject to 
the conditions that such mentally ill person shall be produced before 
a nearest Magistrate within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such 
hospital Or nursing home h situate, within a period of seventy-two hours 
3u of such admission, excluding the time necessary for the journey from 
the place of admission to the court of the Magistrate and if it is neces-
sary to continue treatment of the person as an in-patient beyond the 
period aforesaid, the authority of the Magistrate shall be obtained for 
such detention. 
3S (4) Where due to the condition of the patient it is not possible to 
produce the mentally ill person before a Magistrate within the time set 
Qut under sub-section (3), the medical officer in charge shall request 
the Magistrate to visit the psychiatric hospital, Or psychiatric nursing 
home, as the case may be, so as Ito enable him to comply with the provi-
40 siQQ.5.,of sub-&eeiion (3) and the Magistrate shall comply with the request. 
(5) The Magistrate may, if satisfied, on the basis of the medical cer-
tifi.cate filed in su'pport of an .application under sub-section (1) and on 
the basis of SUCh other inquiry as he may deem nec~ary, pass an 
orderfo~ the detention of the person for such period as may be speciB.ed 
45 in the order. 
(6) Where the Magistrate is of Jpinion that it is necessary so to do, 
be may treat the application under sub-section (1), or any subsequent 
application that may be made fOIl" continuing the detention as if It were 
Application 
'for admis-
sion of 
mentally 
ill persollJ 
in emer· 
lency. 

I~ 
an application for reception order under this Act and proceed to deal 
with it accordin&ly. 
D...-FurthelJ' provi.s'j.ons regarding admission and detention of cert4l'B 
mentally ill persons 
as 
in-patient 
aftar 
1nquls1-
tion. 
29. If any District Court holding an inquisition Under Chapter V S 
regarding any person who is found to be mentally ill is, of opinion 
that it is necessary so to do in the interests of such person, it may, 
Admission 
and deten_ 
tion of 
mentally 
ill offen-
der. 
Detention 
of alleged 
ment.llly 
ill per-
son pend-
ing report 
by medical 
officer. 
Detention 
otmentaU, 
11l person 
pending 
his remov-
al to 
PlYchl-
artie 
hOlPltal 
by order, direct that such person shall be admitted and kept as an 
in-patient in a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home and every 
such order may be varied from time to time or revoked by the District 10 
Court. 
30. An order under section 30 of the Prisoners Act, 1900, or under 30 of 1900. 
section 144 of the Air Force Act, 1950, or under section 145 of the Army 45 of 1950. 
Act, 1950, or under section 143 or section 144 of the Navy Act, 1'957, or 4fl of 1950. 
under section 330 or secti/o 335 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, IS 62 of 1957. 
directing the reception of a mentally ill offender into any psychiatric 2 of 197 •. 
hospital or psychiatric nursing home, shall be sufficient authority for the 
admission of such person in such hospital vr, as the case may be, such 
nursing home or any other psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing 
home to which such p~r:;on may be lawfully transferred for detention ~o 
therein. 
31. (1) When any person alleged to be a mentally ill person appears 
or is brwght before a Magistrate under section 25 or section 27, the 
Magistrate may, by order in writing, authorise the detention of the 
alleged mentally ill person in slJitable custody for such period not 2.5 
exceeding ten days as the Mag.istrate may consider neceSsary for enabling 
any medical officer to determine whether a medical certificate in respect 
of that alleged mentally ill perscill may properly be given under clause 
(a) of sub-section (2) of section 26. 
(2) The Magistrate may, from time to time, for the purpose men- 30 
tioned in sub-section (1), by order in writing, authorise such further 
detention of the alleged mentally ill person for periods not exceeding 
ten days at a time as he may deem necessary: 
Provided that no person shall be authorised to be detained under 
this sub-section for a continuous period exceeding thirt)' days in ~e 35 
aggregate. 
32. Whenever any reception order is made by a Magistrate under 
section 24, section 26 or secti,on 27, he may, for reasons to be recorded 
in writing, direct that the mentally ill person in respect of whdm'the 
order is made may be detained in such place as he may deem· appro- ",0 
priate, pending the removal of such person to a psychiatric hospital.' 
psychiatric nursing home. 
I' 
or 
plychiartic 
Dunln, 
liome. 

i1 
E.-MiBcellAneous p1'O'Vlisions in reZation to orders under this Chapter 
83. Where any Grder under this Chapter is required to be made on the 
,balisof a medical certificate, such order shall not be made unless the 
person who has signed the medical certificate, or wnere such order is 
5 ,required to be made on the basis of two medical certificates, the signa-
wry of the r~spective certificates, has certified that he has personally 
examined the alleged mentally ill person,-
10 
(i) in the case of an order made on application, not earlier than 
ten clear days immediately before the date on which such application 
is made; and 
(ii) in any other case, not earlier than ten clear days immediately 
before the date of such order: . 
Provided that where a reception order is required to be made on the 
ba!lis of two medical certificates such order shall not be made unless the 
IS certificates show that the signatory of each certificate examined the 
alleged mentally ill person independently c,f the signatory of the other 
cM"tificate. 
20 
34. A temporary treatment order or a reception order made under 
this Chapter shall be sufficient authority-
(i.) for the applicant or any person authorised by him, or 
(ii) in the case of a reception order made otherwise than on an 
application. for the person anthOlI'ised so to do by the authority 
making the order,. 
to take the mentally ill person to the place mentioned in such order or 
25 for his admission and treatment as an inpatient in the psychiatric hos-
pital or psvchi.ab·ic nursing hom("' specified in the clrder. or, as the case 
may be, for his admission and detentiJil therein. or in any psychiatric 
hospital or psychiatric nursing home to which he m1Y be removed in 
accordance with the provisions of this Art. and the medical officer in 
30 charge shall be bound to comp'v with 5uc-h order: 
Providerl th1t in Ilny case where the medical officer in charge finds 
accommodation in the psychiatric ho~pital or psychiatric nursing home 
Inadequate. he shall. after according admission, intimate that fact to 
the Ma1Zistrate or the O')urt which passed the order and thereupon 
3S the Mllgistrate or the Court, as the case may be, shall pass such order 
as he or it may deem fit: 
Provided further that every temporary treatment order or recep-
tion order shall cease to have et!eet.--o 
(a) on the expiry of thirty days from the date on which it was 
made .. unless within that period, the mentally ill prrson has been 
admitted to the place mentioned therein, and 
(b) on the discharge, in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act; of the mentally ill person. 
Tim. and 
manner 
ofmedi-
calexaml-
nation of 
mentally 
ill 
person. 
Authority 
for recep-
tion order 
or for 
temporary 
treatment 
order. 

Copy Of 
temporary 
treatment 
order 
orrecep-
tion order 
to be sent 
to medical 
oftlcer 
incbarge. 
Restriction 
.88 to 
psychiatric 
hospitals 
and 
psychiatric 
nursing 
homes into 
which 
temporary 
treatment 
order or 
reception 
order 
may direct 
admiasion. 
Amend-
mentol 
order 
or docu-
ments. 
Power 
to appoint 
substitute 
for per_ 
son upon 
whose 
lIpplication 
reception 
order 
has been 
made. 
35. Every Magistrate or Gourt making a temporary treatment order 
or reception order shall forthwith send a certifled copy thereof toge-
ther with copies of the requisite medical certificates and the statement 
of particulars to the medical officer in charge of the psychiatric hospi-
tal OIl' psychiatric nursing home to which the mentally ill person is te S 
'be admitted 
36. No Magistrate or Court shall pass a temporary treatment order 
or a reception oIrder for the admission as an inpatient to, or for the 
detention of any mentally ill person in, any psychiatric hospital or 
psychiatric nursing home outside the State in which the Magistrate 10 
or the Court exercises jurisdiction: 
Provided that an order foJI' admission or detention into or in a psychia-
tric hospital or psychiatric nursing home situated in any other State may 
be passed if the State Government has, by general or special order and 
after obtaining the consent of the Government of such other State autho- IS 
rised the Magistrate or the Court in that behalf. 
37. If, after the admission of any mentally ill person to any psychia-
tric hospital or psychiatric nursing home under a temporary treatment 
order or a reception order, it appears that the order under which he 
war. admitted or detained:!r any of the documents on the basis of 20 
which such order was made is defective or incorrect, the same may, at 
any time thereafter, be amended with the permission of the Magistrate 
or the Court. by the person or persons who signed the same and upon such 
amendment being made. the order shall have ef'fect and shall be deemed 
always t('oo have had effect as if it had been originally made as so amended, 2S 
or, as the case may be, the documents upon which it was made had been 
originally furnished as so amended. 
38. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section'the Magistrate may, 
by order in writing (hereinaflter refe·rred to as the order of substitution), 
transfer the duties and responsibilities under this Act, of the perscm on 
whose application a reception order was made. to any other person who 30 
is willing to undertake the same and such other person shall thereupon 
be deemed for the purp"ses of this Act to be the person on whose appli-
cation the receptio·n order was made and al1 references in this Aet to 
the latter person shall be construed aceordingly: 
Provided that no such order of substitution shall absolve the person 
upon whose application the reception order was made or, if he is dead, 
his legal representatives, from any liability incurred before the -date 
of the order of substitution. 
3S 
(2) Before making any order. of substituti.on, the Magistrate shall 40 
send a notice to the person on whose application the reception order 
was made, if he is alive, and to any relative of the mentally.ill person 
who, in the opinion of the Magistrate, shall have notice. 
(") The notice under sub-section (2) shall specify the name of the 
person in whose favour it is proposed to make the order of substitution 4S 
, 

19 
... 1he-date (which shall be not leu than twenty days from the date 
nfdllllle of the notice) on which objections, if any, to the making of 
IUch order shall be considered. 
(~) On the date specified under aub-section (3), or on any subse-
quent date to which the proceedings may be adjourned, the Magistrate 
5 shall consider any objection made by any person to whom notice was 
'eDt, or by any other relative of the mentally ill person, and shall 
receive all such evidence as may be produced by or on behalf of any 
sueh person '01' relative and after making such inquiry as the Magistrate 
may deemftt, make or refrain from making the order of substitution: 
10 
Provided that, if t1:1e person on whose application the reception 
order was made is dead and any other person is willing and is, in the 
opinion of the Magistrate, fit to undertake the duties and responsi-
bilities under this Act of the former person, the Magistrate shall, sub-
ject to the provisions contained in the proviso to sub-section (1), make 
IS an order to that effect. 
(5) In making any substitution order under this section, the Magis-
trate shall give preference to the person who is the nearest relative 
of the mentally ill person, unless, for reasons to be recorded in writing, 
the Magistrate considers that giving such preference will not be in the 
20 interests of the mentally ill person. 
(6) The Magistrate may make such order fOlf the payment of the 
costs of an inquiry under this section by any person or from out of the 
estate of the mentally ill person as he thinks fit. 
(7) Any notice under sub-section (2) may be sent by post to the 
25 last known address of the .person for whom it is intended. 
. 39. In any area where a Commissioner of Police has been appointed, 
all the powers and functions of the Magistrate under sectIons 25, 26, 27, 
28 and 31 may be exercised or discharged by the Commissioner of Police 
and all the functions of an officer in charge of a police station under 
30 this Act may be discharged by any police officer not below the rank of 
an Inspector. i 
35 
CHAPTER IV 
INSPECTION~ DIScHARGE, LEAVE OF ABSENCE AND REMOVAL OF MENTALLY ILL 
PERSONS 
PART I 
Inspection 
Officers 
competent 
to exerclae 
powerS 
and dis-
charge 
functions 
of Malis-
trate 
under 
certain 
sections. 
40. (1) The State Govemment shall appoint for every psychiatric Appoint-
hospital and every psychiatric DUI'Iing home in the -state, not less than ment of 
five Visitors, of whem at least one shall be a mec1leal oftleer, preifl'ably Visitol'l. 
40 a psychlatrlst. 
(Z) The InspeotGr"General of Prisons and the head of the Medical 
Services of the state shall be ex-officio Vislton of all the psychiatric 
hospitals _d pS1chlatrtc nunln.- hnm-..in, the State. 

Monthly 
Inspection 
byVi.i~ 
ton. 
Inspection 
ofmen~ 
tally 
offenders. 
ao 
(3) The qualifications of persons to be appointed as Visitors under aub-
seqtion (1) and the terms and condd.tions of the appointment shali be such 
as may be prescribed. 
41. Not less than three Visitors shall, at least once in every month, 
make a joint inspection of 'every part of th'~ psychiatric hospital or 5 
psychiatric nursing home in respect of which they have been appointed 
and examine, as far as circumstances will permit, every mentally 
ill person admitted therein and the order for the admission of, and the 
medical certificates relating to, every mentally ill person admitted subse-
quent to. the joint inspection immediately preceding, and shall enter in a 10 
book~kept for that purpose such remarks as they deem appropriate in 
regard to the management and condition of such hospital or nursing 
home and of the inpatients thereof: 
Provided that the Visitors sha~l not be entitled to inspect any personal 
records of an inpatient which in the opinion of the medical omcer in IS 
charge 8II'e confidential in nature. 
4.2. (1) NotwithstandinJ! anything contained in section 41, where any 
person is detained under the provisions of section 144 of the Air Force 45 of 1960. 480t 1950. 
Act, 1950, or section 145 of the Army Act, 1950, or section 143 or section 62 of 1957. 
144 of the Navy Act, 1957, or section 330 or section 335 of the Code "01 20 2 of 1974. 
Criminal Proc~dure, 1973,-
(i) the Inspector-General of Prisons, where such person Is 
detained in a jail; or 
(ii) the Inspector-Gener:ll of Prisons and all (lII' anv three of 
the Visitors appointed under sub-section (1) of section 40, where such 25 
person is detained in a p~ychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing 
home, 
shall, once in every six months, viflit such person at the place where he 
is detainen. in order to assess the state of mind of such pp.rson and make 
a report thereon to the authority under whose order such person is S<1 30 
detained. 
(2) The State Government mav empower any of its officers to dis-
charge an or any of the functions of the Inspector-General of Prisons 
under sub~section (1). 
(3) The medical officer in charge of a psychiatric hospital or psychia- 3S 
tric nursing home wherein any person referred to in sub-section (1) is 
detained, shall once in every six months, make a special report regarding 
the mental and physical condition of. such person to the authority under 
whose order such person is detained. 
(4) Every person referred to in sub-section (1) who is detained in 40 
jail, shall be visited at least once in every six months by a psychiatrist, 
or, where a psychiatrist is not :\vailable, by a medical officer empowered 
by the State Government in this b .... half and such psychioatrist or, as the 
case may be, such medical officer r-hall make a special report re~ardinp 4S 
the mental and physical condition '1f such person to the authority un<'er 
whose order such person is detained. 

PART II 
Discharge 
Q. ll) Notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter In, any three 
of the Visitors of a psychiatric hospHal or psychiatric nursing home may, 
5 on the recommendation of the mewcal officer in charge, by order in 
writing, direct the discharge of any person, other than a voluntary patient 
detained or undergoing treatment therein as an inpatient, and such person 
shall thereupon be discharged from the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric 
nursing home: 
10 Provided that no order under this sub-section shall be made in respect 
ot. a mentally III offender otherwise than as provided in section 30 of the 
3 of 1900. Prisoners Act, 1900 or in any other relevant law. 
(2) Where any order of discharge is made under sub-section (1) in 
respect o£ a person who has been detained or is undergoing treatment as 
15 inpatient in pursuance of an order of any authority, a copy of such order 
shall be immediately forwarded to that authority by the medical officer 
in charge. 
44. Any person detained in a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing 
home under an order made in pursuance of an application made under 
20 this Act, shall be discharged on an application made in that behalf to the 
medical officer in charge by the person on whose application the order 
Was made: 
Provided that no person shall be discharged under this section if the 
medical officer in charge certifies in writing that the person i'S dangerous 
2S and unfit to be at large. 
46. (1) Where any relative or fri<!nd of a mentally ill person detained 
in a psychiatric hOSpItal or psychiatric nursing home under section 24, 
section 26, section 27 or section 28 desn-es that such person shall be 
delivered over to his care and custody, he may make an application to 
30 the medical officer in charge who, shall forward it together with his 
remarks thereon to the authority under whose orders the mentally ill 
person is detained. 
(2) Where an application is received under sub-section (1), the 
authority shall, on such relative or friend furnishing a bond, with or 
35 without sureties, for such amount as such authority may 'Specify in this 
behalf, undertaking to take proper care of such mentally ill person, and 
ensuring that the mentally ill person shall be prevented from causing 
injury to himself or to others, make an order of discharge and thereupon 
the mentally ill person shall be discharged. 
40 48. (1) Any person (not being a mentally ill offender) detained in 
pursuance of an order made under this Act, who feels that he has re-
covered from his mental illness, may make an application to the Magis-
trate for his discharge from the psychiatric hospital or the psychiatric 
nUl"Bing home. 
45 (2) An application made under sub-section (1), shall be support'l!a 
by a certificate either from the medical officer in charge of the psychiatric 
hoSpital or the psychiatric nursing home where the applicant is under-
going treatment or from a psychiatrist. 
. (3) The Magistrate may, after makiong such inquiry as he may deem 
50 ftt, pass an order discharging the person or dismissing the application. 
Orderot 
discharee 
by Visi-
tora. 
Dischar,e 
otmen-
tally ill 
person on 
application. 
Orderot 
disehar,. 
on the 
undertak-
ing ot. 
relatives 
or frienda. 
etc., for d_ 
care of 
mentally 
ill 
person. 
Discharge 
otperson 
on his 
request. 

Discharge 
tit person 
lubsequen-
t17found 
oninquw-
tion Dot 
to be . 
efunsound 
mind. 
Leave ot 
.blence. 
&\. If any person detained in: a psychiatric hospital or PBychiatric 
nursing home in pursuance of a reception order made under this Act is 
subsequently found, on an inquisition held in accordance with the pro-
¥iaiona of Chapter V. to be of sound mind or ~apable of takiag care of 
himself. and managing his affairs, the medical oftiQer in eharge shall 5 
forthwith. on the production of a copy of .such finding duly certifted· bY' 
the District Court, dicharge such per$On from such hospital orlWl"Sing 
home. 
PART III 
Leave of absence 
48. An application for leave of absence on behalf of any mentally ill 
person (not being a mentally ill offender) undergoing treatment as an 
inpatient in any psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home may 
be made to the medical officer in charge,-
10 
(<<) in the oa'Se of a person who was admitted on the apptrcatian 15 
of the husband or wife, by the husband or wife of such mentany ill 
person, or where by reaSOn of mental or physical illness, absence 
from India or otherwise, the husband or wife is not in a position 
to make such application, by any other relative of the mentally ill 
person duly authorised by the husband or wife, or 20 
(b) in the case of any other person, by the person on whose 
application the mentally ill person was admitted: 
Provided that no application under this sub-section shall be made by 
a person who has no.t attained the age of majority. 
(2) Every application under sub-section (1) 'Shall be accompanied 25 
by a bond, with or without RUreties for such amount as the medical 
oftieer in charge may specify, undertaking-
(i) to take proper care of the mentally -ill person, 
(ii) to prevent the mentally ill person £rom causing injury to 
himself or to others, and 30 
(iii) to bring back the mentally ill person to the psychiatric 
hospital or. 8'S the case may be, ps.ychiatric nursing home, on the 
expiry of the period of leave. 
(3) On receipt of an application under sub--section (1) the medical 
officer in charge may grant leave of absence to the mentally ill PtN"SOn 35 
for such period (not exceeding thirty ·days at a time and not exceetijQ.g 
Qne hundred and eighty days in the aggregate) and sQ.pject to ,udi 
conditions as may, in the interests of the health and per_ona! safe\y of 
the mentally ill person or for the protection of others, be speoifieclin the 
order. 40 
. (4) Where the mentally ill person is not brought back t9 the psy-
chiatric hospital or psychiatric nursmg home on the expiry of the leave 
granted to him under this section, the medical officer i1) charge $hall 
forthwith report that fact to the Magl!;trate within the local limite qf 

.23 
wlw.liej,urisdictiQn such hospital or nursing home is situate and the 
~t.rate may, after making such inquiry as he may deem fit, make an 
OIlier, directing him to be brought back to the psychiatric hO$pital or 
psycmatnc nUl'silli home, as the case may be. 
S (.:I) Nothing contamed ill thi'S st!c~ion suall ap1J1Y LO a volun~ary 
patlellL l't!lerrt!ci to In sectlOn .I.;) anu tnt; prov • .:ilOllb or St!CL10ll Ib shaH 
apply to him. 
49. (1) Where the medical officer in charge refuses to grant leavt: 
of absence to a mentally ill person under section 48, the applicant -may 
10 apply to the Magistrate WIthin the local limits of whose jurisdiction the 
psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home wherein the mentally 
ill person is detained is situate, for the grant of leave of absence to the 
mentally ill person and the Magistrate may, if he is satisfied that it is 
necessary so to do, and on the applicant entering into a bond in accOl'-
IS dance with the provisions of sub-section (2), by order, grant leave of 
absence to the mentally ill person for such period and subject to such 
conditions as may be specified in the order. 
(2) Every bond referred to in sub-section (1) shall be with or withOlUt 
sureti€s and for such amount as the Magistrate may decide and shall 
20 contain the undertaking referred to in sub-section (2) of section 48. 
(3) 'The Magistrate shall forward a copy of h:s order to: the medical 
officer in chalI"ge and on receipt of such order, the medical officer in 
charge shall entrust the mentally ill person to the person on whose 
application the leave of absence was granted under this section. 
PART IV 
.Removal 
50. (1) Any mentally ill person other than a voluntary patient referred 
to in section 15 may, subject to any general or special order of the State 
Government, be removed from any psychiatric hospital or psychiattic 
30 nursing home to any other psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing 
home within the State, or to any other psychiatric hospital or psychiatric 
n~sing home in any other State with the consent of the Government of 
that other State: 
Provided that no mentally ill person admitted to a psyChiatric hospital 
35 or psychioatric nursing home under an order made in pursuance of an 
application made under this Act shall be so lI'emoved unless intimation 
ther~f has been given to the applicant. 
(2) The State, Government may make such general or special order as 
is thinks fit directing the removal of any mentally ill offender from the 
place where he is for the time being detained, to any psychiatric hospital, 
40 psychiatric nursing home, jailor other place of safe cusWdy in the State 
or . to any psychiatric hospital, psychiatric nursing home, jail or other 
place of safe custody in any other state with the consent of the Govern-
ment of that other, State. . 
4S 51. Every person brought into a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric 
nursing home under any order made under this Act, may be detained or, 
as the ease may be admitted as an inpatient therein until he is removed 
or is discharged under any law, and in case of his escape from such 
hnapltal or nursing home be may, by virtue of such order, be retaken by 
Grant of 
leave of 
absence 
by MagiS-
tralt'!. 
Removal 
of mentally 
ill person 
from 
one 
psychiatric 
hospital 
Or 
psychiatric 
nursln, 
home to 
another. 
Admission. 
detention 
and 
retaJdng 
In certain 
ell ... 

Appeal 
from 
orders 
of Magi-
atrate. 
Applica-
tion fOr 
judicial 
inquisi-
tion. 
any police officeI' or by the medical officer in charge or arty officer 61' 
servant of such hospital or nursing home, or by any other person authoris-
ed in that behalf by the medical officer in charge, and conveyed to, and 
received and detained or, as the case may be, kept as an inpatient in 
such hospital or nursing home: 5 
Provided that in the case of a mentally ill person (not being a mentally 
ill offender) the power to retake as aforesaid under this section shall 
nOlt be exercisable after the expiry of a period of one month from tile 
date of his escape. 
52. Any person aggrieved by any order of a Magistarate, passed under 10 
any of the foregoing provisions may, within thirty days from the date 
of the order, appeal against that order to the District Court within the 
local limits of whose jurisdiction the Magistrate exercised the powers, 
and the decision of the District Court on such appeal shall be final. 
CHAPTER V 
JUDICIAL INQUISITION REGARDING ALLEGED MENTALLY ILL PERSON POSSESSING 
PROPERTY, CUSTODY OF HIS PERSON AND MANAGEMENT OF HIS PROPERTy 
53. (1) Where an alleged mentally ill person is possessed of property, 
an application for holding an inquiHition into the mental condition of 
such person may be made either- 20 
(a) by any of his !relatives, or 
(b) by a public curator appointed under the Indian Succession 
Act, 1925, or 
(c) by the Advocate-General of the State in which the alleged 
mentally ill person resides, OIl' 25 
(d) where the property of the all~ged mentally ill person com-
prises land or interest in land, or where the property or part thereof 
is of such a nature as can lawfully be entrusted for management to 
a court of wards established under any law for the time being in 
force in the State, by the Collector of the District in which such land 30 
is situate, 
to the District Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the 
alleged mentally ill person resides. 
(2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the District 
Court shall, by personal service or by such other mode of service as it 35 
may deem fit, serve a notice on the alleged mentally ill person to attend 
at such place and at such time as may b,e speCified in the notice or shall, 
in like manner, serve a not..ce on the person having the custody of the 
alleged mentally ill person to produce such person at the laid plaCe and 
at the said time, fOO' being examined by the District Court or by any 40 
other person from whom the District Court may call for a report con. 
cerning the mentally ill person: 
Provided that, if the alleged mentally ill person is a woman, who 
according to the custom prevailing in the area where she resides or 
according to the religion to which she belongs, ought not to be compelled 4S 
to appe8lf in pubUc, the District Court may cause her to be examined 
39 of 1925, 

I of 1108. 
by iasulna a commisaioo as provided in the Code of Civil Procedure. 
1908. 
(3) A copy cd the notice under sub-section (2) shall also be served 
upon the applicant and upon any relative of the alleged mentally ill 
s persOn or other person who, in the opinion of the District Court, shall 
have notice of judicial inquisitir-n to be held by it. 
(4) For the purpose of holding the inquisition applied for, the 
District Court may appoint two or more persons to act as assessors. 
54. On completion of the inquisition, the District Court shall record 
10 its findings on,-
(i) whether the alleged mentally ill person is in fact mentally 
ill OIl' not, and 
(ii) where such person is mentally ill, whether he is incapable 
of taking care of himself and o~ managing his property, or incapable 
IS of managing his property only. 
55. (7) Where the District Court records a finding that the a])eged 
mentally U1 person is in fact mentally ill and is incapable of taking care 
of himself and of managing his property, it shall make an OI'der for the 
appointment of a guardian under 9CC1;ion 56 to take care of his person 
20 and of a manager under section 57 for the management of his property. 
(2) Whe"p the District Court records a finding that the alleged 
mentally ill person is in fact mentally ill and is incapable of managi.ng his 
property but capable of taking care of himself, it shall make an order 
under section 57 regarding the management of his property. 
25 (3) Where the District Court records a finding that the alleged 
mentally ill person is not mentally ill, it shall dismiss the application. 
(4) Where the District Court deems fit, it may appoint under su~ 
section (1) the same person to be the guardian and manager. 
56. (1) Where the mentally ill person is incapable of taking care of 
30 himself, the District Court or, where a direction has been issued under 
sub-section (2) ot section 57, the Collector of the District, may appoint 
any suitable person to be his guardian: 
Plrovided that, no person, who is the legal heir of the mentally m 
person, shall be appointed to be the guardian unless the Diatrict Coort 
3S or, as the case may be, the Collector, for reasons to be recorded in writ. 
ing, considers that such appointment is for the benefit of the mentally 
ill person. 
(2) In the discharge of his funetions under sub-section (1), the 
Collector shall be subject to the supervision and control of the State 
40 Government or of any authority appodnted by it in that behalf, 
Issue. 
on which 
ftndlnl 
should 
be eiven 
by District 
Court 
after inqui_ 
sition. 
Provision 
tor 
appoin-
tingguar-
dian of 
mentally 
ill person 
and for 
manager 
of pro-
perty. 
Appoint-
mentot 
guardian 
of men-
tally 
ill 
person. 

Appoint-
mentof 
manager 
for mana-
gement 
of pro-
pertyor 
mentally 
ill person. 
Appoint.. 
ment of 
manager 
by 
Collector. 
Manager 
of pro-
pertyto 
eD!Cute 
bond. 
Remunera-
tion of 
managers 
and 
guardians. 
Duties 
of guar-
dian. 
26 
57. (1) Where the property of the mentally ill person who is in~ 
capable of managing it is such as can be taken charge of by a Court af 
Wards under any law for the time being in force, the District Court shall 
authorise the Court of Wards to take charge of such property, and there-
upon, notwithstanding anything contained in such law, the Court of 5 
Wards shall assume the management of such property in accordanceW'Jth 
that law. 
(2) Where the property of the mentally ill person consists in whole 
or in part of land or of any interest in land which cannot betaken 
charge of by the CQurt of Wards, the District Court may, after obtain .. 10 
ing the consent of the Collector of the District in which the land is 
situate, direct the Collector to take chaige of such part of the properly 
or interest the~ein of the mentally ill person as cannot be taken charge of 
by the Court of Wards. 
(3) Where the management of the property of the mentally ill person 15 
cannot be entrusted to the Court of Wards or to the Collector under 
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), as the caf:e may be, the District Cour 
shall appoint any suitable per'3on to be the manager of such property. 
58. Where the property of a mentally ill person has been entrusted 
to the Collect.or by the District Court under sub-section (2) of section 
57, he may, subiect to the control of the State Government or of any 20 
authcuity appointed by it in that behalf, appoint any suitable person 
fori fhe management of the property of the mentally ill person. 
59. Every person who is appointed as the manager of the property 
of a mentally ill person by the District Court or by the Collector shall, 25 
if so required by the appointin'g authority, enter into a bond for such 
sum, in such form and with such sureties as that authority may specify, 
to account foir' all Il'eceipts from the property of the mentally ill person. 
60. The guardian of a mentally ill person and the manager of his 
property. appointed under thi~ Art. shall be paid,from out of the pro' 0 
perly of the men tall v ill person, such allowance as the appronting 3 
authority may determine. 
61. (1) Every person appointed as guardian of a mentally ill person 
Or manager of his property, Or of both, under this Act shall have the care 
of the mentally ill person 01' his property, or of both and the responsible 
for the maintenance of the Jl".E'ntally ill person and of such members 0" 35 
his family as are dependent on him. 
(2) Where the person appointed as 'guardian of a mentally ill peMIOn 
is different from the person appointed as the manager of his property, 
the mana1ter of his rropE'rty shall pay to the ~ardian of the m~tally 
ttl per.::on such allowance as may he fheed by the authority aippOinting 40 
the guardian for the maintenance of the mentallv ill person and of 'such 
members of his famDy as ar.e dependent on him. 
Powera of 82. (1) Every manager appointed under this Act shall, subject to the 
manapr. provisions of. this Act, exercise the same powers in regard to the manage. 
met of the ,property of the mentally ill person in respect of which be Ii 45 
• 

S 
IIfPOblted 18 manager ,as the mental1y ru penon would h'ave' exercise4 
as owner of the ·property had he not been mentally ill, and shall release 
liD cl.aIms due to the estate of the mentally ill person and pay all debts 
and discharge all liabilities legally due from that estate: 
Provided that, the manager shall not mortgage, create any charge on, 
or, transfer by sale, gift, exchange or otherwise, any immovable property 
of the mentally ill person or lease out any such property for a per.iod 
exceeding five years unless he obtains the permission of the District Court 
in that behalf. 
10 (2) The District Court may, on an appllcation made by the manager, 
grant him permission to mortgage, create a charge on, or, transfer by aale, 
gift, exchange or otherwise, any imm{)vable property of the mentally ill 
person or to lease out any such property for a period. exceedmg five years, 
subject to such conditions or restrictions as that Court may think fit to 
15 impose. \ 
(3) The District Court shall cause notice of every application for per-
mIiaion to be served on any relative or friend of the mentally ill person 
and a1ite.r considering objections, if any, received from the r·elalive or 
jjriend and after making such inquiries as it may deem necessary, grant 
20 or refuse permission having regard to the interests of the mentally ill 
person. 
63. (1) Every manager appointed under this Act shall, within a period 
of six months flrom the date of his appointment, deliver to the authority, 
which appointed him, an inventory of the immovable property belonging 
liS to the mentally ill person and of all assets and other movable property re-
ceived on behalf of the mentally ill person, together with a statement of 
all claims due to, and all debts and liabilities due by, such mentally ill 
person. 
(2) Every such manager shall also furnish to the sai.d appoiJlting 
30 authority within a period of three months of the close of every financial 
years, an account of the property and assets in his charge, the sums reo 
ceived and disbursed on account of the mentally iJi person and the balance 
remaining with him. 
64. Every manager appointed under this Act may, in the name and on 
35 behalf of the mentally ill person,-
(el) execute all such conveyances and instruments of transfers 
by way of sale, mortgage or othettwise of property of the mentally 
ill person as may be permitted by the District Court; and 
(b) sul1ject to the orders of the Distridt Court, exercise an 
powers vested in that behalf in the mentally m per9On, in his indivi-
dual capacity or in his capacity ItS a trustee or as a guardian. 
85. Where the mentally ill person had, before his mental illness, con-
tracted to sell or otherwise dispose of his property or any portion there-
or,and if such contract is, in the opinion of the District Co.urt, of such 
4S 8i natW'le as ought to be performed, the District Court may direct the 
manager appointed under 'this Act to perform such contract and to do 
such other acts in fulfilment of the contract as the Court considers neces-
881"y and thereupon the manager shall be boulld to act accordingly . 
. 18. Where a mentally ill person had been engaged in business before 
So he' bef;ame mentally ill, ·the District Co\u't may, if it appeart to be for 
M,-pager 
to furnish 
inventory 
and 
annual 
accounts. 
Manager's 
power to 
execute 
conve-
yances 
under 
orders 
of District 
Court. 
Manager 
to 
perform 
contracts 
directed 
by District 
Court. 
Disposal 
of busi-
ness 
pretnf •• 

Manager 
may dis-
pose of 
leases. 
Power to 
make 
order 
concern-
ing any 
matter 
connected 
with 
mentally 
ill person. 
ProceedinR 
if accu-
raeyof 
inventory 
or 
accounts 
is impug-
ned. 
Payment 
into 
public 
treasury 
and invest-
mentof 
proceeds 
at estate. 
Relative 
may 
sue tor 
accounts. 
Removal 
of 
managers 
and 
IWU'cIlaDa. 
the beneftt of the mentally ill person to dispose of his business premisea, 
direct the manager appointed under this Act in relatioa to the property 
of such person to sell and dispose of such premises and to apply the sale 
proceeds thereof in such manner as the District Court may direct and 
thereupon the manager shall be bound to act accordingly. S 
67. Where a mentally ill person is entitled to a lease or underlease, 
and it appears to the manager appointed under this Act in relation to the 
property of such person that it would be for the benefit of the mentally 
ill person to dispose of such lease or underlease, such manager may, 
after obta:ning the orders of the District Court, surrender, assign or 10 
otherwise dispose of such Ilease or underlease to such person for such 
consideration and upon such terms and conditions as the Court may ciirect. 
68. The District Court may, on an application made to it by any 
person concerning any matler whatsoever connected with the mentally 
ill person or his property make such order, subject to the provisions of, 15 
this Chapter, in relation to tha,t matter as in the circumstances it thinks 
fit. 
69. If any l'Ialative of the mentally ~11 person or the Collector im-
pugns, by a petition to the District Court, the accuracy of the inventory 
or statement referred to in sub-section (1), or, as the case may be, any 20 
annual account referred to in sub-section (2), of section 63, the Court 
may summon the manager and summarily inquire into the matter IUld 
make such order thereon as it thinks fit: 
Provided that the District Court may, in its discl"etion, refer sIlch 
petition to any Court subordinate to it, or to the Collector in any case 25 
where the manager was appointed by the Colleot..or and the petition is 
not presented by the Collector, 
70. All sums received by a manager on account of any estate in excess 
of what may be required for the current expenses of the mentally ill 
pemon or for the management of his prope1'1ty, shall be paid into the 30 
public treasury on account of the estate, and shaLl be inv,ested from time 
to time 'in any of the securities specified in section 20 of the Indian 
Trust~ Act, 1882, Unless the authority which appointed him, for rea!sons Z at IBn. 
to be recordal in writing, directs that, in the interests of the mentaIIy 
ill person such sums be otherwise ~vested or applied. 35 
71. Any relative of a mentally ill person m8ly, with 'the leave. of the 
Di~rict Court, sue for an account from any manager appointed under 
this Act, or from any sUch person after his removal from office or trust, 
or from his legal representative in the case of his death, in respect of any 
property then or formerly under his management or of any sums of 40 
money or other property received by him on account of such property. 
72. (1) The manager of the property of a mentally ill person may, for 
!Iklfftclent cause and for reasons to be recorded in writing, be removed 
by !the authority which appointtrihim and such authority-may appolD~ 
a new manager in his place. 4S , 

· (!) Any manager removed under ~ub-seetion (1) shall be botinc1 to 
dfillver the eh81 ge of 811 property of the mentally ill Person· to the neW 
manager, and to account for all moneys received or disbursed by hini. 
(3) The District Court may, for sufficient cause, remove any guardian 
5 Of a mentally ill person and appoint in his plaoe a new guardian. 
73. (1) Where a person, being a member of a partnership finn, is 
found 10 be mentally ill, the District Court may, on the application of 
any other partner for the dissolution of partnership or on the applica-
tion of any petrson who appears to that Court to be entitled to seek such 
10 dissolution, dissolve the paIltnership. 
(2) Upon the dissolution under sub-s'ection (1), or otherwise, in due 
cour,;e of 18lW, of a partnership fi\t'm to which that sub-section applies, 
the manager appointed under this Act may, in the name and on behalf 
bf the mentally ill person, join with the other partners in disposing of 
I S the partnership property upon such terms, and shall do all such acts for 
carrying into effect the dissolution of the partnership, as the District 
Court may direct. 
74. (1) Notwithstcmding anything contained in the foregoing provi-
s~ons, the District Court may, instead of appointing a manager of the 
20 estate, order that in the case of cash, the cash and in the case of any 
other property the produce thereof, shaLl be realised and paid or deliver-
ed to such person as may be appointed by the District Court in this be-
half, to be applied for the maintenance of the mentally ill person and at 
such members of his family as are dependent on him. 
(~) A receipt given by the person appointed under sub-section (1) 
2S shall be valid discharge to any person who pays money or delivers any 
property of the mentally ill person to the person so appo:nted. 
75. Where any stock or Government securities or any share in a 
company (transferable within India or the dividends of which are pay-
30 able therein) is or are standing in the name of, or vested in, a mentally 
ill person beneficially entitLed thereto, or in the manager appointed 
under this Act or in a trustee for him, and the manager dies intestate, 
or himself becomes mentally ill, or is out of the jurisdiction of the Dis-
trict Court, or it is uncertain whether the manager is living or dead, or 
3S he neglects or refuses to transfer the stock, securities or shares, or to re-
ceive and pay over thereof the dividends to a new manager appointed 
in his place, within fourteen days a£ter being required by the Court to 
do so, then the Distriet Court may direct the Company or Government 
concerned to make such transier, or to transfer the same, and ,to receive 
and pay over the dividends in such manner as it may direct. 
40 
76. Where any stock or Government securities or share in a company 
is or ~ standing in the name of, or vested in, any person residing out 
of India, the DiStrict Court upon being satisfied that such person has 
been declaNd to be mentally ill and that hiJ personal estate has been 
4S vested in a person appointed for the management thereof, according to 
the law of the place where he is residing, may direct the Company or 
Government concerned to make such transfer of the stock, securities or 
Dissolu-
tion and 
disposal 
of 
property 
of part-
nership 
on a 
member 
becomin, 
mentally 
ill. 
Power to 
apply 
property 
for main-
tenance 
of mental-
ly ill 
person 
without 
appoint-
in, 
manager 
in certain 
cases. 
Power to 
order 
transfer 
of stock 
belonl-
in, to 
mentally 
ill person 
in certain 
cas .. 
Power to 
order 
transfer 
of stock C1f 
mentally 
ill person 
residing 
out of 
India. 

power tel 
apply 
property 
for 
mentally 
ill person's 
main-
tenance in 
case of 
temporary 
mental 
illness. 
Action 
taken in 
respect of 
mentally 
ill person 
to be set 
aside if 
District 
Court 
finds 
that his 
mental 
linea 
baa 
ceased. 
Appeals. 
Power of 
District 
Court to 
make 
regula-
tions. 
Cost of 
mainte-
nance to 
be borne 
by Gov-
ernment 
in cenain 
cases. 
~ or of any part thereof, to or into the name of the person so ap-
pointed or othel"Wise, and also to receive and pay over the dividulds and 
proceeds, as the District Court thinks fit. 
77. If it appears to the District Court that the mental illness ofa 
mentally ill person is in its nature temporary, and that it is expedient S 
Ito make provision for a temporary period, for his main'tenance or for 
the maintenance of such members of his family as are dependemt on 
him, the District Court may, in like manner as under seeticm 74, direct 
his property or a sufficient part theroof to be applied for the purpose 
ifi· ed th . 10 spec eorem. 
78. (1) Where the District Court has reason to believe that any pet-
son who was found to be mentally nr nfter inquisition under this Chapter 
has ceased to be mentally ill, it may direct any court subordinate to it 
Ito inquire whether such person has ceased ,to be mentally ill. 
(2) An inquiry under sub-section (1) shall, so far as may be, be con- IS 
ducted in the same mann.e!I' as an inquisition conducted under this 
Chapter. 
(3) If aofter an inquiry under 'this section, it is found that the mental 
illness of a penIOn has ceased, the District Court shall order all aritons 
taken in respect of the mentally ill person under this Act to be set aside 20 
on such terms and conditions as that Court thinks fit to impose. 
79. An appeal ~al1 lie to the High Court from every order made by 
a District Court under this Chapter. 
SO. The District Court may, from time to time, make I'Iegulations for 
the purpose of carrYing into effect the provisions of this Chapter. 2S 
CHAPTER VI 
LIAB1LITY -TO MEET COST OF MAINTENANCE OF MENTALLY ILL PERSORS 
DftAINa> IN PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITAL OR PSYCInATRIC NURSING HOMB 
81. The cost of maintenanee o£ a mentally ill person detained as 
an inpatient in any psychiatric hospital 01' psychiatric nursing home 30 
shall, unless otherwise provided for by any law for the time being in 
force, be borne by the Government of the State wherein the authority 
which passed the order in relation to the mentally ill person is subordi-
nate, U-
(4) that authority which made the order has not taken an 35 
undertaking from any person to bear the cost of maintenance o~ such 
mentally ill person, and 
(b-) no provision for bearing the (!Ostof maintenance of 111Gb 
person has been made in the said order. 

',t 
tI. Whare an alleged mentllly ill penon is uresied on being found 
wandering at large, any eash or other article found in the poaaesaion 
of lU'eh person shall be produced by the arrestin! authority before the 
.agisa-ate before whom the said person is produced, and. thereupon, 
S the Magistrate shall direct the artiele found in the possession of such 
person t~ be sold and the sale proceeds thereof and the cash found with 
such person be applied for the cost of maintenance of such person in any 
paychiatric hospital or psychiakic nursing home. 
83. (1) Where any mentally ill person detaiDed in a psychiatric 
IO hospital or psychiatric nursing home has an estate or where any person 
legally bound to maintain such person has the means to maintain such 
person, the Government liable to pay the cost of maintenance of such 
person under section 81 or any local authority liable to bear the cost 
of ~inteDance of such mentally ill person under any law for the time 
15 being in force, may make an application to the District Court within 
whose jurisdiction the estate of the mentally ill person is situate or t~e 
person legally bound to maintain the mentally ill person and having the 
means therefor resides, for an order authorising it to apply the estate 
of the mentally ill person to the cost of maintenance or, as the case may 
20 be, directing the person legally bound to maintain the mentally ill 
person and having the means therefor to bear the cost of maintenance 
of such mentally ill person. 
(2) An order made by the District Court under sub-section (1) shall 
be enforced in the same manner, shall have the same force and effect 
25 and be subject to appeal, as a decree made by such Court in a suit in 
respect of the property or person mentioned therein: 
Provided that, if the District Court so directs, any sum payable in 
pursuance of an order made under sub-section (1) shall be recoverable 
as an arrear of land revenue. 
3') 84. Nothing contained in the foregoing provisions shall be deemed to 
absolve a person legally bound to maintain a mentally ill person from 
maintaining such mentaHy ill person. 
CHAPTER VII 
PENALTIIlS AND PROCEDURE 
35 85. (1) Any person who establishes or maintains a psychiatric 
hospital or psychiatric nUrling home in contravention of the provisions 
of Chapter II shall, on conviction, be punisltable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to thlree months, or with fine 
which may extend to two hundTed rupees, OT with both, and in the case 
40 of a second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to six months, or with fihe which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both. 
(2) Whoever, after conviction under sub-section (1), continues to 
maintain a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home in contra-
45 vention of the provisions ot Chapter II, shall, on conviction, be punish-
able with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day 
after the first day during which the contravention is continued. 
ApplicA-
tion of 
propertY' 
in p0sses-
sion of 
mentally 
ill persOR 
found 
wander-
ing. 
Applica-
tion to 
Di&trict 
Court tor 
payment 
of cost 
of main-
tenance 
out of 
estate of 
mentally 
ill person 
or from 
a person 
legally 
bound to 
maintain 
him. 
Persons 
legally 
bound to 
maintain 
mentally 
ill person 
not 
absolved 
trom 
such 
liability. 
Penalty 
for estab-
lishment 
or main-
tenance 
of psych-
Iatric 
hospital 
of pBych-
atric 
nursing 
home in 
contraveQ-
tion ot 
Chaptern 

Penalty 
for 
improper 
reception 
Of .men-
taUy ill 
person. 
Penalty 
for con-
travention 
of Bections 
63 and 
'12. 
General 
provision 
for 
punish-
mentof 
other 
offences. 
Offences 
by com-
panies. 
Sanction 
for pro-
MCgtlonl. 
3S 
86. Any person who receives or detaina or keeps a mentally nl 
person in a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home otherwise 
than in accordance with the provisions of this Act, shaU, on conviction, 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years. or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with 5 
b:>th. 
87. Any manager appointed under this Act to manage the property 
of a mentally ill person, who contravenes the provisions of section 63 
or sub-section (2) of section 72, shall, on conviction, be punishable with 
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and may be detained in 10 
a civil prison till he complies with the said provisions. 
88. Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or 
of any rule or regulation made thereunder, for the contravention of 
which no penalty is expressly provided, in this Act, shall, on conviction, 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 15 
months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with 
both. 
89. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a com-
pany, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was 
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of 20 
the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was 2S 
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all dUI! 
diUgence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) NotWithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or con- 30 
nivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, 
manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. 35 
ExpLanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means a body corporate and includes a firm or 
other association of individuals; and 
(b) '''director'', in relation to a firm, means a partner in 
firm. 
the 
40 
90. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1973, no COUll't shall take cognizance of any offence punishable 
under section 85, except with the previous sanction of the licensing 
authority. 
2 of 19'74. 

2 of 1974. 
33 
CHAPTER Vln 
MISCELLANEOUS 
81. The provIsIons of Chapter XXXIII of the Code of Cririlinal Pro~ 
eedure, 1973, shall, as fer as may be, apply to bonds taken under this 
5 Act. 
92. The medical officer in charge of a psychiatric hospital or psychiat-
ric nursing home wherein any mentally ill person is detained under the 
provisions of this Act, shall, once in ~very six months, make a special 
report regarding the ment.al and physical condition of every such person 
IO to the authority under whose orders the person is so detained. 
93. (1) Where any sum is payable in respect of pay, pension, gratuity 
01' any allowance to any person by any Government and the person to 
whom the sum is payable is certified by a Magistrate under this Act to 
be a mentally ill person, the officer under whose authority such sum 
J 5 would be payable, may pay to the person having charge of the mentally 
ilI" person so much of the said sum, as he thinks fit, having regard to the 
cost of maintenance of such person and may pay to such members of 
the family of the mentally ill person as are dependent on him for main-
tenance, the surplus, if any, or ~uch part thereof. as he thinks fit hat'ing 
20 regard to the cost of :naintenanrc of such members. 
25 
30 
35 
(2) Where there is any further surplus amount available out of the 
funds specified in sub-section (1) after making payments as provided in 
that sub-section, the Government shall hold the same to be dealt with 
as follows, namely:-
(a) where the mentally ill person is certified to have ceased to 
be mentally ill by the District Court within the local limits of 
whose jurisdiction such person resides or is kept or detained, the 
whole of the surplus amount shall be paid back to that person; 
(b) where the mentally ill person dies before payment. the 
whole of the surplus amount shall be paid over to those of his heirs 
who are legally entitled to receive the same; 
(e) where the mentally ill person dies during his mental illness 
without leaving any person legally entitled to succeed to his estate. 
the whole of the surplus amount shall. with the prior permission of 
the District Court. be utilised for such charitable purpose as may 
be approved by the District Court. 
(3) The Central Government or the State Government as the case 
may be, shall be discharged of all liability in respect of any amounts 
paid in accordance with this section. 
40 M. (1) Where, in any proceeding before a Magistrate, the mentally 
ill person is not represented by a legal praetitioner and where It appears 
to the Magistrate that the penon has not sufticient means to eng ... e a 
legal practttioner, the Magistrate shall assip a legal practitioner to 
represent him at the expense of the State. 
45 (2) The High Court may, with the previous approval of the State 
Government, make rules providing for-
Provision 
as to 
bonds. 
Half 
yearly 
report by 
medlcal 
officer. 
Pension, 
etc.,ot 
mentally 
ill person 
payable 
by Gov-
ernment. 
Legal 
aid to 
mentally 
ill person 
at State 
expense 
in certain 
cueto 

Protec-
tion of 
action 
taken in 
good 
faith. 
Construc-
tion of 
references 
to laws 
not in 
IIorcein 
Jammu 
and 
Kashmir. 
Power to 
state 
Govern-
ment to 
make 
rules 
:34 
(a) the mode of seteettng legal lH'aetitioners for the purpose of 
sUb-sedion (1); 
(l? ) the facilities. to be allowed to such legal practitioD.el'8; .. 
(c) the fees payable to such legal practitioners by the Govera-
ment and generally for carrying out the purpose of sub-section (1). S 
(3) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that tbe provi-
IiMs of this section slaaU not apply to any proceeding for inquisition 
uader Chapter V of this Ad. 
E.Tplanation.-IIl this section "legal practitioner" shall have the 
meabing assigned te it in dause (i) of sec:tion Z of the Anocates Act, 10 25 of 1961 
1961. 
95. (1) No suit, prosecuthn or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done in pursuance of this Act or any rules, regulations or orders made 15 thereunder. 
(2) No 8uit or other legal prooeeding shall lie against the 
Government for any damage caused or lik-ely to be caused for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of 
this Act or any rules, regulations or orders made thereunder. 
M. Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in the 20 
State of Jammu and Kashmir shall, in relation to that State. be 
construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any. in force in 
,that State. 
97. (1) The State Government may. by notification in the Oftlcial 
G~zette. make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 25 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
(a) the clinical conditions referred to in clause (m) of section 2; 
(b) the class or category of persons for whom separa~e p~)'chiat- 30 
ric hospitals and psychiatric nursing homes may be established and 
maintained under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 3; 
(c) the form in which,-
(iI) an application shaU he made for grant or renewal of a 
licence and the fee payable in respect thereof under sect.ion 5- or~ as 35 
the caSE; may be, section 9; 
(ii) a lice,nce shall be granted for the establlshment or 
m"intenance of a psychiatrIc hospital or a psychiatric nurs~ 
home under section 6; 
(iii) an applieation shall be made by any relative or 
friend of a mentally ill person for a temporary treatfnen.t order 40 
under section 20; 
. (it,) an application shall be made for a reception, order 
under section 22; 

35 
(v) a medical certificate, referred to in sub-section (6) of 
section 22 shall be granted; 
(vi) an application shall be made for the admission of a men-
tally ill person in an emergency under sub-section (1) of sec-
:' tion 28; 
(vii) a certificate shall be given by a medical practitioner 
for the admission of a mentally ill person in an emerg~ 
under sub-section (2) of section 28; 
(d) the manner in which appliC8ltion for a reception order shall 
10 be signed and verified under sub-section (6) of section 22; 
(e) the minimwn facilities referred to in the proviso to section 
9 to be prOvided in a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nusing home 
for the treatment and care of mentally ill persons; 
(f) the manner in which an order refusing to grant, Or I e\'ok;n~ 
15 a licence shall be communicated under section 6 or, as the case may 
be, section 11; 
20 
30 
(g) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which a 
licensee shall maintain a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing 
home under section 10; 
(h) the manner in which licensees shall maintain records under 
sub-section (1) of sEllCtion 13; 
(i) the manner in which and the form in which and the period 
within which an appeal against any order refusing to grant or renew 
a licence or revoking a licence shall be preferred and the fee payable 
in respect thereof under section 12; 
(j) the facilities to be provided under section 14 for the treat-
ment of a mentally ill person; 
(k) the qualifications of persons to be appointed as visitors and 
the terms and conditions on which they may be appointed, under sec-
tion 40; 
(l) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, 
prescribed. 
(3) Any rule made under this section may provide that a contraven-
tion thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five 
35 hundred rupees. 
98. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force and to the extent of such inconsistency that other law 
shall be deemed to have no effect. 
40 91. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the proVISIOns of this 
Act in any State, the State Government may, by order do anything not 
inconsistent with such provisions which appears to it to be necessary or 
expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section in relation 
45 to any State aUer the expiry of two years from the date on which thl. 
Act comes into force in that State. 
Effect 
of Act on 
other 
laws. 
Power to 
remove 
difficult)'. 

36 
100. (1) The Indian Lunacy Act, 1912 and the Lunacy Act, 1977, are 
hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
taken under either of the said Acts shall, in so far as such thing 
or action is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed 5 
to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this 
Act and shall continue in force until superseded by anything done or 
any action taken under this Act. 
4 of 1912. 
Jammu 
and 
Kashmir 
Act 215 of 
1977 (19Z0 
A.D.) 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The attitude of the society towards persons afflicted with mental 
illness has changed considerably and it is now realised that no stigma 
should be attached to such illness as it is curable, particularly, when 
diagnosed at an early stage. Thus the mentally ill persons are to be 
treated like any other sick persons and the environment around them 
should be made as normal as possible. 
2: The experience of the wOIl'king of the Indian Lunacy Act, 1912 has 
revealed that it has become out-moded. With the npid advance of 
medical science and the understanding of the nature of the malady, it 
has become necessary to have fresh legislation with proviSions for treat-
ment of mentally ill persons in accordance with the new approach. 
3. It 1S considered necessary-
(i) to regulate admission to psychiatric hospitals or psychilltric 
nUil'sing homes of mentally ill persons who do not have sufficient 
understanding to seek treatment on a voluntary basis, and to protect 
the rights of sl,Jch persons while being detained; 
(ii) to protect society from the presence of mentally ill persons 
who have become or might become a danger Or nuisance to others; 
(iii) to protect citizens from being detained in psychiatriC 
hospitals Cr psychiatric nursing homes without sufficient cause; 
(iv) to regulate responsibility for maintenance charges of 
mentally ill persons who are admitted to psychiatric hospitals or 
psychiatric nursing homes; 
(v) to provide facilities for establishing guardianship or custody 
of mentally ill persons who are incapable of mana~ng their ~ 
affairs; 
(vi) to regulate the powers of State Governments for establish-
ing, licensing and oontrollins p~chiatric hospitals and psychiatric 
nursing homes for mentally ill penIOns; 
(vii) to provide for legal aid to mentally ill persons at State 
expense in certain cases. 
4. The main object of the Bill is to implement the aforesaid proposals. 
The Notes on clauses appended to the Bill explain in detail the various 
provisions thereof. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 25th April, 1978. JAGDAMBI PRASAD YADAV. 
PllESIP~IT'S RECOMMENDATIQN UNDER AllTICLE 117 OF 
'mE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. H. 1101R/1/78--PMS', dated the Mq May, 1978 from 
Shri Jagdambi Prasad Yadav, Minister of State in the MiniStry of Health 
and Family Welfare to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of "The 
Mental Health Bill, 1978", recommends under Clauses (1) and (3) of 
Article 117 at t~e ConstitutiQn, the introduction of the said Bill and its 
copsideratjon by th~ l,.ok Sablul. 
37 .~,_ 

~otes of claU8es 
Clause 2.-This clause, corresponding to section 3 of the Indian Lunacy 
Act, 1912 (hereinafter refel'lI'ed to as the old Act), contains the definitions. 
In view of the change in the attit~de of the society towards persons 
afflicted with mental illness, the out-moded expressions like "asylum", 
"criminal lunatic" and "lunatic" have been substituted by suitable 
alternative expressions such as "psychIatric hospital or psychiatric 
nursing home", "mentally ill offender" and "mentally ill person". The 
definition of the expression "mental illness" has been suitably modified 
t.) make it comprehensive. Expressions like "medical practitioner", 
"psychiatrist" and "temporary treatment order" have also been defined 
in accordance with the scheme of the Bill. 
Cla1L8e 3.-This clause corresponds to section 84 of the old Act. It 
empowers the Central Government in any part of India or the State 
Government within the limits of its jUlI'isdiction to establish or maintain 
psyChiatric hospitals or psychiatric nursing homes for the admission, 
treatment and care of mentally ill persons. 
Clauses 4 to ll.-Clause 4 provides tnat no person shall establish or 
maintain a psychiatric hospital or psyChiatric nursing home unless he 
holds a valid licence in that behalf. 
Clauses 5 to 10 relate to the application for licence, grant or re-
fusal of licence, duration of licence, renewal and reVocation of licence, 
etc. These are self-explanatory. 
Clause l2.-'l'his clause provides an opportunity to an aggrieved 
person to appeal against an order of the licensing authority refusing to 
grant O'I'renew a licence or revoking a licence. 
Clause l3.-This clause provides for the inspection of psycniatric 
hospitals and psychiatric nursing homes by Inspecting Officers for the 
purpose of inquiring into any complaints made by or on behalf of patients 
as to the treatment and c.;are therein. Such Inspecting Officers can also 
requia'e the productiOn of any records which are required to be kept in 
such hospitals or nursing homes. 
Clause 14.-This clauae provides for the facilities to be provided in a 
licensed psychiatric hospital or licensed psychiatric nursing home fur the 
treatment of mentally ill persons whose condition do not warrant for 
their admission as in-patients. 
Clauses 15 to 17.-These clauses provide fOIl' admission of mentally 
ill perscm.s to any psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home for 
treatment as volWltary patients. 
clause 16 (2) also provides that the State Government may in 
certain cases bear the cost of mainterialice of the volWltary patients. 
38 , 

39 
Clause 17 provides that all voluntary patients shall be bound to 
. abide by regulations of the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing 
home wherein they are in-patients. 
Clause lB.-This clause provides for the leave of absence of ditichal'ge 
of voluntary patients. . .. _. ~ w. •. ,;~ 
.Clause 19.-Th.is clause provides that any mentally ill person who does 
Do~or is unable to, express his willingness for admission as a voluntary 
patient may be admitted and kept as an in-patient in a psychiatric hospital 
or psychiatric nUrsing home on an application made by a relative of the 
mentally ill person for a period not exceedmg ninety days if the medlcal 
olicer in charge of su.ch hospital or nursing home is satisfied that in the 
interests of the mentally ill person it is! necessary so to do. 
Cla:u.se 20.-This clause provides fur temporary treatment order of 
the mentally ill person on an application made to the Magistrate by a 
relative ()jl" friend of a mentally ill person. Sub-claUSe (2) of this claUSe 
provides that every such application should be accompanied by two 
medical certificates from two medical practitioners (including a psychia-
trist) of whom one shall be a medical practitioner in the service Qf the 
Government to the effect that the condition of such mentally ill person is 
such that he should be kept under observation as an in-patient in psy-
chiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home. 
Clause 21.-This clause provides for discharge of persons detained in 
psychiatric hospitals or psychiatric nursing homes under tempol"ary 
treatment order. . 
C1.auses 22 to 26.-These clauses correspond to sections 5 to 7 of the 
old Act. Clause 22 provides that a medical officer in charge or the hUSband, 
wife Or anx o.tlier. relative of the mentally ill person may make an applica-
tion for a reception order where such mentally ill person is suffering from 
a mental disorder of such a nature and degree that his treatment is requir-
ed to be continued for more than six months. Every such application should 
be accompanied by two medical certificates from two medical practi-
tioners (mcluding a psychiatrist) of whom one sliall be a medical practi-
tioner in the service of the Government. . 
. , 
Clause 23 provides for the form and contents of medical certi-
ficates. -
Clause 24 provides for the procedure to be followed on receipt of 
an applicati9D under clause 22. 
Clause 25 provides for the powers and duties of police oftlcers in 
respect of certain mmta11y ill persons. It empowers the officer in 
charge of a police station to arrest or to cause to be
4 
arrested any 
person found wandering at large within the limits of his station 
whom he has reason to believe to be so mentally ill as to be incapa-
ble of taking care of himself and any person within the limits of his 
station whom he has rreason to believe to' be dangerous by reason-of 
mental illness. 
Clause 26 provides for the procedure to be followed on prodUC-
tion of mentally ill person before a Magistrate. 
Clause 27.-This clause corresponds to sections 13 and 15 of the old 
Act. It empowers every officer in charge of a police statton who has 

40 
reason to believe that any person within the limits of his station is 
mentally ill and is not under proper care and control.qr is ill"-treated. or 
neglected by any relative or other person having'charge,afsuch mentally 
ill person to report forthwith such fact to the Magistrate within the local 
limits of whose jurisdiction such mentally illperSbn: resides. 
Clause 28.-This clause provides for admission of mentally ill person 
;'in'emergency on an' applieation made by any'medreal offieer or'medical 
-practitioner or any :friend (,r relative of a mentally ill person where he 
is of opinion that unless such mentally ill 'person' -i~fliWm'edfately' ilamitted 
to' 'any psychiatric Fiospital or psychiatric nursing home fOIl' t/r~atment.' the 
health Bnd personal safety of such ~rsOn 'or'of'-others)wAJ: be! in iIruni~ 
'nent danger. Every such applicaticn shall be'-supported by s-d!t'tMcate 
to that effect from a medical practitioner. 
ClaUoBe 29.-This clause corresponds to section 25 bf the old Act. It 
provides for the admission of a mentally ill "lIerSOn as 'an -inwpatient itter 
inquisition held by any District Court. 
Clause 3O.-This clause corresponds to section 24 of the old Act and 
, deals with the admission and detention of mentally ill offenders. 
Clause 31.-This clause corresponds to section 16 of the old Act and 
tletl'ls with the detention of alleged mentally ill person periding report" by 
medical officer. 
-Clause 32.-This clause provides for the detention of mentally il1 
person pending his removal to psychiatric hospi~al or psychiatric nursing 
home. 
Cw..use 33.-This clause corresponds to section'19 bfthe old Act. It 
provides for the time and maimer of medical':elftmimltion:'of mentally 
ill persons. 
Clause 34.-This clause deals with the authority for reception order 
or for temporaaoy treatment order. In so far as it relates to the reception 
order it corresponds to section 20 of the old Act. 
Clause 35.-Tbis clause provides for a copy of the tem~tary .. tl'fiat-
ment order or reception order to be sent to the medical officer in charge. 
In so far as it relates to the reception order, it corresponds to section 21 
of the old Act. 
Clause 36.-This clause provides for the ' restiriotion"as'rtO'~iatric 
hospitals or psychiatric nursing homes into which temporary treatment 
otaer or reception order may direct adm:ission. In so far as it relates 
to reception order it COIl'i'esporids to seetion 22 of the .old Act. 
Clause 37,-This clause corresponds to Se'Ctlori'!7 of'ttie tsld'ACt and 
'Beals with the ilm~ridment of any order or doctimetits. 
Clcuse 38.-This clause correSl>onds to section HA of the ,tUdA.-ct and 
empowers the Magistrate to appoint substitute for perstin ,upon whose 
application reception order has been maae. 
Clause 39.-This clauliecorre!ipondshi'sectibn 17 'O'ft11C! dlcPllet and 
6lumerates ofticers competent to exercise powers and aischarge funetiolll 
of .glstrate under certain provisions of··this -Bill. 

41 
Clav.aea 40 to 47.-These, clauses correspOiDd tG,~~s I~ i,q];3i pi the 
old ,Act. 
Clause 40 provides for the appointment of Visitors for every 
psycJli~,~ric 'hospital and PSychiatric nursing home. 
Clause 41 provides for the monthly inapecti"D. of P8f~hiatric 
hospitals or psychiatric nursing homes by Visitors. 
Chluse 42 provides fOA the inspection .of meptally)ll o~e~ders 'by 
the Inspector-General of Prisons. 
Clause 43 deals with the ,order of disCharge by. V:isitona on the 
recommendation of the medical officer in charge. 
Clause 44 provides for the discharge of mentally ill penon on 
application. 
Clause 45 provides for the order of discharge of mentally iII 
person on: the undertaking of relative or friends, etc., for due care of 
such mentally ill ,per1WJl. -
Clause 47 provides for the discharg.e of persons. ,suDlequently 
found OQ inguisition not to be of unsou,nd mind. 
CJauses 48 and. 49.-Clause 48 provides ,for l~ve ot,ap.fiepce on beh.alf 
of any mentally ill person (not being mentlllly ill o.ff~nde:c}. Ulld~rgoing 
tre~mePyt a~ a~ in-patie,nt in any psychiatric hospital Oil' psychiatric 
nu,r~i,r;tE. h,QJl1eJo be r'rat:lteri by thp.·medical officer in charge. 
Clause 49 provides for such leave. to b,C, gr~,t;1,t~d, b"Y, a.;~~istrate 
where the medical officer in chail"ge refuses to grant ,such Ieav.e. 
Clause 50.-This clause provides for th,e reD1ovlil,l,of roe~l1y iT;lperson, 
other than a voluntary patient. from one,psychiatric hospital.or p,~.y.cJ:\ia-
tric nursing home to another. ' 
Clause 61.-This clause corresponds to se.ction 36 of th~ old Ac~. It 
provides for the admission, detention and re~~k,i.~g,of ",.l)tally iIlpersons , 
in certain cases. 
CZIJU8e 52.- This clause gives an opportuo.ity to th~ agw,-i.eve,tl person 
to appeal against an order passed by a Magistrate to ,the D~sJric,t Court. 
Clauses 53 to 79.-These clauses, mOire or less, correspond to sections 
37 to 83 of the old Act: 
These clauses provide for applicatic.n for ;urHcial inquiSition: issues 
on which finding should be given bv District Court after inquisi.tion; 
appointment of guM"dian of mentally ill person; appointment of man~. 
for mana'g,ement of property ()·f mentallv ill pliU'son; appo~' of-
manager by Collector; manager of prOMI"ty to execute bonds, to accoJ,J.nt, 
for all receipts from the property of mentallv ill person; remuneratiQl!.. 
of. manager and gut-1TCiinn: duties of J!l1qrdian; pawers of manager to 
execute conveyances under orders of District Court and other powers 
and functions of the mana ~er to furnish inventory and annual account.· 
and to perform contracts directed by District Court; disposal of business 
premises or, leases bv the m:'ln!lgl'!r under the direction of the District 
Court'; power of District Court to make orders concerning 'any other 
matter connected with the mentally ill person; proceedtn~ if accuracy 
of-iny,e~tQry or a~o\.lnts is impugned; pa)"me~t in!o rpublic tr~9.surv ~d 
investment of proceeds of estates; right of a relative of a men~aI1y m 

person to SUe for accounts; removal of managers and guardians;· dialOlu-
tion and disposal of partnership on a member becoming mentally fi}; 
power to apply property for majntenance of mentally m person without 
appointing manager in certain cases; power to order .transfer of stock 
belonging to mentally PI p~rsl')n i!1 r,ertain C';>'3es; power to order transfer 
of stock of mentally ill person residing out of India; power to apply 
property for mentally ill pe~on's maintenance in case of. temporary 
mental illness; action taken in respect of mentally ill persons to be '*:t 
aside if District Court finds that his mental illness has ceased, etc. . '. 
Clause 79 provides for an appeal to lie to the High Court from any 
order made by a District Court. 
CltlU6e 80.-This clause, empowers the District Court to make regu-
lations for the purposp. of cnrryin'S into effect the aforesaid provisiOIllJ. 
Clauses 61 to M,·-These clauses correspond to sections 86 to 90 of the 
old Act. .. . 
Clause 81 pr(wides for the cost of maintenance to be borne by 
Government in certain cases. 
Clause 82 provides for the application of the property found on a 
mentally ill person who is arrested on being found wandering at large 
for the cost of his maintenance. 
Clause 83 provides for an application to be made to th~ Di-;-irlcl 
Court for payment of cC'st of maintenanCe of a mM'ltally ill person 
out of his estate nr from such person who is le~~l1y bound to main-
tain the mentally ill person. - .,. 
Clause 84 provides that nothin~ contained in the aforesaid pro-
visions shall absolve a person who is lel!ally bourid to maintain a 
mentally ill peI"Sf)n from mainta;ning sUl~n niental1v ill person. 
Clauses 85 to 89.-These clauses deal with t"he penalties and proce-
dure. They are self-explanatory_ 
C7au.<:e 9O.-This clause provides fot' the previous sanction of the 
licen~ing authority before any of the off('nces is taken cognizance of by 
auy Court Oil' Magistrate. . . 
Clause 91.-'rhi~ clause corresponns tr:> section 94 of the old Act and 
rl~al!" with bonds. 
Clau."e 92.-Thi::; clRuse reouires the medieal officer in charge of a· 
psychiatric hOSpital or nsychiatrlc nursing home to make a special report 
once in every six months regal'ding the. mental and physical condition of 
every mentally ill person detained therein to the authority unaer whose 
order the person is so detained. . . 
Clause 93.-This claUse corresponds to section 95 of the old Act. It 
provides for the pay. pension. ~J\tuitv or Any allowance to be pard to 
any mentally ill person by Government; , 
Clause 94.-Thi!t clause provides for le!1,al aid to mentally ill persons. 
at State e'Ypen!'!e in certain cases. 'I' r. -
Cla\C8e 95.-Thi$ clause provides fOf the pro~tion of actlon taken in 
good faith. 

43 
. 
ClatLBe 96.-This clause provides for the construction of rderences to 
laws not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
Clause 97.-This clause empowers the State Government to make rules 
for carrying out the provisions of this Bill. 
Clause 98.-This clause provides that provisions of this Bill shall have 
effect notwithstanding anything inoonsistent therewith in any othel" 
law .fOlI' the time being in force and to the extent of such inconsistency 
that other law shall be deemed to have no effect. 
Clause 99.-This clause empowers the State Government to remove 
any difficulty which may arise in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Bill within a period of two years from the date on which tbis law comes 
intO force ill the State concerned. 
Clause l00.-This clause contains provisions regarding repeal and 
savings. Since this Bill, when enacted, extends to the whole of Indi; •• 
the Indian Lunacy Act, 1912 (4 of 1912) and the Lunacy Act, 1977 
(Jammu and Kashmir Act 25 of 1977) are being repealed. 

Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to establish 
psy~tric hospitals 01' psychiatric nursing homes. It is not possiD1eto 
vi,,{~~ ,~, this stage as !to how many such hospitals or nUl"liJ:l.g 'oomas: 
wouU~,~tabUsbed.· !tria, therefore, not possible 1;0 ·glve. precilede.Wls 
of the expenditure involved; 
2 •. CJ.a~ 40 of·the Bill provides for the appointment of -Visitors for 
pel:~. ,m,pection of psychiatric hospitals and psychiatric nursing 
.hOQlt$. At presenti there is only one such hospital, namely, the Centrai 
Institute of Psychi~try, Ranchi, under the Government :af' Ind'ia..~· Apart 
from this, there are two more such hospitals in the Un~ terri~o~~s .of 
Delhi and Goa, Daman and Diu Jo:lown as the H;9\Spit~ for. M;e~t~l 
Djteaaes Shahda1'8 and the Men.ta~ Hospital Panaji, respectively. Th.e 
eXPenditure in ~ of the maint~a!l<:eof.the afores~~~~J>tt~s. .. a,J,1.C\ 
'the appoin1ment of Visitors in relation Itbereto is being made from out 
of the normal budgetary grants. Hence, no additional expenditure of a 
recurring or non-recurring nature over and above the said budgetary 
grants will be incurred on account of the said clause. 
3. Clause 94 provides for legal aid to mentally ill persons at State 
expense in certnin cases. The fees and th.e facilities to the legal practi-
tionen: in such cases are to be prescribed by rules made by the High 
Court. It is, therefore, not possible to give precise details of the expendi-
ture involved. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 97 of the Bill empowers the State Government to make rules 
for carrying out the provisions of the Act. The matters in respect of 
which rule. may; be made have been enumerated in detail under various 
items; of sub-clause (2) of that clause and relate mainly to licensing 
and maintenance of psychiatric hospitals and psychiatric nursing homes; 
procedure fDr admisSion oj! mentally ill persons in psychiatric hospitals 
and psychiatric nursing homes and facilities to be provided for the treat-
men t of mentally ill persons. 
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are of admi-
nistrative detail and procedure, and as such, the delegation of legislative 
power is of normal character. 
,) 
4S 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law relating to the treatment and care of 
mentally ill persons, to make better provision with respect to their 
property and affairs and for matters connected therewith or inciden-
tal thereto. 
(Shri Jagdamhi PTasad Yadav, 
MinisteT of State in the 
Ministry of Health and 
Familiy Welfare.) 