BID No. 16 or ItS' 
THE KERALA STATE LEGISLATURE 
(DELEGATION OF POWERS) 
BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOlt SABRA) 

.ua No • • , .f 1'5'-
THE KERALA STATE LEGISLATURE (DELEGATION 
OF POWERS) BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOB: SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to confer on the President the power of the Legislature of the State 
of KeraZa to make laws. 
B. it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic 
~f India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Kerala State Legislature (Delega- Short title. 
tion of Powers) Act, 1956. 
5 2. In this Act, "Proclamation" mMIlI the Proclamation issued on Definition. 
the 1st day of November, 1956, by the President under clause (1) of 
article 356 of the Constitution. 
3. (1) The power of the Legislature of the State of Kerala to Conferment 
make laws, which has been declared by the Proclamation to be ~i~!~~ !tilie 
10 exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament, is hereby con- power of the 
ferred on the President State Legis· • lature~ 
(2) In the exercise of the said power, the President may, from 
time to time, whether Parliament is or is not in session, eIlflct as a 
President's Act a Bill containing such provisions as he cOililiders 
IS necessary: 
Provided that before enacting any such Act, the President shall, 
whenever he considers it practicable to do so, consult a Committee 
constituted for the purpose consisting of all the Members of the 
House of the People and the Council of States who for the time being 
20 fill the seats allotted to the State of Kerala in the two Houses. 

z 
(3) Every Act enacted by the President under sub-section (2) 
shall, as soon as may be after enactment, be laid before each House 
of Parliament. 
(4) Either House of Parliament may, by resolution passed within 
seven days from the date on which the Act has be~n laid before it .! 
under sub-section (3), direct any modifications to be made in the Act 
and if the modifications are agreed to by the other House of Parlia-
ment during the session in which the Act has been so laid before it 
,or the. session sw:ceeding, such modifications shall be given effect 
to by the President by enacting an amending Act under sub- 10 
section (2):' 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall affect the validity 
of the Act or of any action taken thereunder before it is so amended. 

\, \ ~." ~ . , .... ' 3 
STATEMENT OF ·OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the Proclamation of the President dated the 1st November, 
1956, the powers of the Legislature of the Kerala State are now 
exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament. Such legislative 
measures as may be necessary for the State can be taken up by Par-
liament only by postponing its business and even then, it is likely 
that Parliament may not have the time to deal with all legislative 
measures for the State. It is therefore proposed that Parliament 
should, in accordance with the provisions of article 357 (1) of the 
Constitution, confer by law on the President the power of the legis-
lature of the State of Kerala to make laws for the State. 
The present Bill is intended to give effect to this proposal. 
G. B. PANT. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 10th Decem-G8T~ 1956. 
, 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to confer on the President the power of the Legislature of the 
State of Kerala to make laws. 
(Shri Govind Ballabh Pant, 
Minister of Home Affairs) 