As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

i GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORY OF LAKSHADWEEP BILL, 1999
By
‘Suri Basupes Acnaria, M.P.
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES:

PARTI
PRELIMINARY
title and Commencement.
Definitions.
PART IL

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
islative Assembly and its composition.
alifications for membership of Legislative Assembly.

ion of Legislative Assembly, prorogation and dissolution,
cer and Deputy Speaker of Legislative Assembly.

or Deputy Speaker not to preside while a resolution for his removal from
९ is under consideration,

of Lieutenant Governor to address and send message to Legislative Assembly.
_ Special address by the Lieutenant Governor.
Rights of Ministers as respects Legislative Assembly.

3. Voting in Legislative Assembly, Power of Assembly to act notwithstanding vacancies
and quorum.

Vacation of seats.
5. Disqualifications for membership.
6. Disqualification on ground of defection.

Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation or when not qualified
or when disqualified.

TS, privileges, etc. of members.

Salaries and allowances of members
0. Examption of property of the Union from taxation.
M. Restrictions on laws passed by Legislative Assembly with respect to certain matters.
2. Special provisions as to financial Bills.
3. Procedure as to lapsing of Bills.
}. Assent to Bills.
. Bills reserved for consideration.

Requirements as to sanction, etc.

}, Annual financial statement.

. Procedure in Legislative Assembly with respect to estimates.



6)

29. Appropriation Bills.

30. Supplementary, additional or excess grants.

31. Votes on accounts.

32. Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by Legislative |
33. Rules of procedure.

34, Official language or languages of the Union Territory and language or lan;
to be used in Legislative Assembly.

35, Language to be used for Bills, Act, etc.
36. Restriction on discussion in the Legislative Assembly.
37. Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Legislative Assembly.

PART III

DeLIMrration oF ConstrTuENt

38. Election Commission to delimit constituencies.
39. Power of Election Commission to maintain delimitation orders upto date.
40. Elections to the Legislative Assembly.

PART IV

Certain Provisions RELATING To LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR AND MINISTERS

41. Matters in which Lieutenant Governor to act in his discretion.
42. Advice by Ministers.

43, Other provisions as to Ministers,

44, Conduct of business,

45, Duties of Chief Minister as respects the furnishing of information, etc. to the
Lieutenant Governor.

a

PARTV
MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
46, Consolidated Fund of the Union territory.
47. Contingency Fund of the Union territory.
48. Audit reports.
49, Relation of Lieutenant Governor and his Ministers to President.
50. Period of order made under article and approval thereof by Parliament.
51. Authorisation of expenditure by President.
"52. Contract and suits.
53. Power of President to remove difficulties.
54. Laying of Rules before Legislative Assembly.
55. Amendments to the Constitution.
56. Amendment of section 27A of Act 43 of 1950.
THE SCHEDULE


Bill No. 86 of 1999

THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORY OF
LAKSHADWEEP BILL, 1999

By
Suri Basupes AcHARIA, M.P.
A
BILL

provide for the creation of a Legislative Assembly for the Union Territory of
Lakshadweep and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —

PARTI
PRELIMINARY
1, (J) This Act may be called the Government of Union Territory of Lakshadweep — Shorttitle and
1999. sommence-

‘ment.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
ition in the Official Gazette, appoint:

Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of the Act
reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed
Teference to the coming into force of that provision.


Definitions.

Legislative
Assembly and
its composi-
tion,

(Qualifications
for member-
ship of
Legislative
Assembly,

Duration of
Legislative
Assembly,

Session of
Legislative
Assembly,
prorogation
and dissolu-
tion,

2

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) article means an article of the Constitution;

(b) “assembly constituency” means a constituency provided under this
the purpose of election to the Legislative Assembly;

(c) Election Commission means the election commission referred to in an
324;

(d) “Legislative Assembly” means the Legislative Assembly of the
territory of Lakshadweep;

(०) “Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes” in relation to the Union terri
means such castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within such castes,
tribes as are deemed under articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution to be Schedul
Caste or Scheduled Tribe in relation to that Union territory; and

(0 "Union territory” means the Union territory of Lakshadweep.
PART I
Lectstarive ASSEMBLY

3. (J) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly to be filled by,
chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies shall be forty.

(2) For the purposes of election to the Legislative Assembly, the Union te1
shall be divided into single-member assembly constituencies in accordance with th
provisions of Part III in such manner that the population of each of the constitu
shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the Union territory.

(3) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in

Legislative Assembly, and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, 4
may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats in the Assembly as th
population of the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes in the Union territory be
to the total population of the Union territory.

4, Aperson shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the Legislative
unless he,—

(a) is acitizen of India and makes and subscribes before some person autho
in that behalf by the Election Commission an oath or affirmation according to|
form set out for the purpose in the Schedule;

(8) is not less than twenty-five years of age; and

(०) possess such other qualifications as may be prescribed in that behalf by
under any law made by Parliament,

5. The Legislative Assembly unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for five
from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer and the expiration of the sé
period of five yers shail operate as a dissolution of the Assembly:

Provided that the said period may be extended as while a proclamation of emerg
issued under clause (1) of article 352 is in operation, by the President by order for a per
not exceeding one year at a time and not extending it in any case beyond a period of si
months after the proclamation has ceased to operate.

6. (1) The Lieutenant Governor shall, from time to time, summon the Legisl
Assembly to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not int
between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the
session


3
(2) he Lieutenant Governor may, from time to time,—
(a) prorogue the Assembly;
(b) dissolve the Assembly.

7. (1) The Legislative Assembly shall, as soon as may be, choose two members of
he Assembly to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof and, so often as the
ffice of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes vacant, the Assembly shall choose
other member to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.

(2) A member holding office as Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the Legislative
mbly—

(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Assembly;

(0) may at any time by writing under his hand addressed, if such member is
the Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker, and if such member is the Deputy Speaker to
the Speaker resign his office; and

(©) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Assembly passed by
majority of all the then members of the Assembly;

Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved unless at
st fourteen days’ notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution;

Provided further that whenever the Assembly is dissolved, the Speaker shall not
te his office until immediately before the first meeting of the Assembly after the
issolution.

(3) While the office of Speaker is vacant, the duties of the office shall be performed
the Deputy Speaker, if the office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such member of
Assembly as may be determined by the rules of procedure of the Assembly.

(4) During the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the Assembly, by the

‘Speaker, or if he is also absent, such person as may be determined by the rules of
focedure of the Assembly, or if no such person is present, such other person as may be
ermined by the Assembly, shall act as Speaker.

(5) There shall be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative
mbly such salaries and allowances as may be respectively fixed by the Legislative
sembly by law and until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries and

nces as the Lieutenant Governor may, with the approval of the President, by
determine.

8. (/) At any sitting of the Legislative Assembly while any resolution for the removal
he Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Speaker, or while any resolutiort
'the removal of the Deputy Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Deputy
aker, shall not, though he is present, preside and the provisions of sub-section (4) of
tion 7 shall apply in relation to every such sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting

n which the Speaker or, as the case may be the Deputy Speaker is absent.

(2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak in and otherwise to take part in the
ceedings of the Legislative Assembly while any resolution for his removal from office
consideration in the Assembly and shall, notwithstanding anything in section 13,
itled to vote only in the first instance on such resolution or on any other matter
such proceedings but not in the case of an equality of votes.

9. (7) The Lieutenant Governor may address the legislative Assembly and for that
require the attendance of members.

(2) The Lieutenant Governor may send message to the legislative Assembly whether

espect to a Bill then pending in the Assembly or otherwise and when a message is 50

nt, the Assembly shall with all convenient despatch consider any matter required by the
to be taken into consideration.

Speaker and
Deputy
Speaker of
Legislative
Assembly.

Speaker or
Deputy
Speaker not to
preside while a
resolution for
his removal
from office is
under
consideration,

Right of
Lieutenant
Govemor to
address and
send message
10 Legislative
Assembly.


Special

address by the

Lieutenant
Governor.

Rights of
Ministers as
respects,
Legislative
Assembly.

Oath or
affirmation by
member,

Voting in
Legislative
‘Assembly and
Power of
Assembly 10
act notwith-
standing
vacancies and
quorum.

4

10. (/) At the commencement of the first session after each general election to th
Legislative Assembly at the commencement of the first session of each year, the Lieuten
Governor shall address the Legislative Assembly and inform it of the causes of its su

(2) Provision shall be made by rules to be made by the Assembly regulating it
procedure for the allotment of time for discussion of the matters referred to in such ad

Il. Every Minister who is not a member of the Legislative Assembly shall have th
right to speak in and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of the Legislative Assemb]}
and to speak in and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of any committee of
Legislative Assembly which he may be named a member, but shall not by virtue of thi
section be entitled to vote.

12. Every member of the Legislative Assembly shall, before taking his seat,
and subscribe before the Lieutenant Governor or some person appointed in that behalf|
him, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Sct

13. (1) Save as otherwise provided in the Act, question at any sitting of the Legis
Assembly shall be determined by a majority of votes of the members present and
other than the Speaker or person acting as such.

(2) The Speaker or person acting as such shall not vote in the first instance, but shall
have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes.

(3) The Legislative Assembly shall have power to act notwithstanding any vacan
in the membership thereof, and any proceedings in the Legislative Assembly shall
valid notwithstanding that it is discovered subsequently that some person who was nd
entitled so to do, sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings.

(4) The quorum to constitute a meeting of the Assembly shall be one-third
total number of members of the Assembly.

(5) If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly there is no quo
it shall be the duty of the Speaker, or person acting as such, either to adjourn the As
or to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.

Assembly and if a person is chosen a member both of Parliament and of such

then at the expiration of such period as is specified in or under the Representation 0
People Act, 1951, and the rules made by the President under clause (2) of article 190, th
person's seat in Parliament shall become vacant, unless he had previously resigned hi
seat in the Legislative Assembly.

(2) If a member of the Legislative Assembly—

(a) becomes subject to any disqualification mentioned in section 15 or secti
16 for membership of the Assembly; or

(6) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the Speaker and
resignation is accepted by the Speaker,

his seat shall thercupon become vacant:

Provided that in the case of any resignation referred to in clause (b), if from th
information received or otherwise and after making such inquiry as he thinks
Speaker is satisfied that such resignation is not voluntary or genuine he shall not ac
such resignation.

(3) If for a period of sixty days a member of the Legislative Assembly is with
permission of the Assembly absent from all meetings thereof, the Assembly may d
his seat vacant:

Provided that in computing the said period of sixty days no account shall be ta
any period during which the Assembly is prorogued or is adjourned for more than fo
consecutive days.


5

15. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member
6 Legislative Assembly—

(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the
Government of any State or the Government of any Union territory other than an
office declared by law made by Parliament or by the Legislature of any State or by
the Legislative Assembly of any other Union territory not to disqualify its holder; or

(6) if he is for the time being chosen as, and for being, a member of either
House of Parliament under thesprovisions of sub-clause (b) or sub-clause (c) of sub-
clause (1) of article 102 or of any law made in pursuance of that article.

(2) For the purpose of the section, a person shall not be deemed to hold an office of

inder the Government of India or the Government of any State or the Government
Union territory by reason only that he is a Minister either for the Union or for such
fe or Union territory.

(3) If any question arises as to whether a member of the Legislative Assembly has
me disqualified for being such a member under the provisions of sub-section (1), the
shall be referred for the decision of the President and his decision shall be final.

(@) Before giving any decision on any such question, the President shall obtain the
on of the Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion.

16. The provisions of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution shall, subject to the
modifications (including modifications for construing references therein to the
lative Assembly of a State, article 188, article 194 and article 212 as references,
ctively, to the Legislative Assembly, section 12, section 18 and section 37 of this
ply to and in relation to the members of the Legislative Assembly of a State and
sordingly:—

(a) the said Tenth Schedule as so modified shall be deemed to form part of this
Act; and

(6) a person shall be disqualified for being a member of the Legislative
Assembly if he is so disqualified under the said Tenth Schedule as so modified.

17. If a person sits or votes as a member of the Legislative Assembly before he has
plied with requirements of section 12 or when he knows that he is not qualified or that
isqualified for membership thereof, he shall be liable in respect of each day on

hhe so sits or votes to a penalty of five hundred rupees to be recovered as a debt due
6 Union.

(Z) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules and standing orders
lating the procedure of the Legislative Assembly, there shall be freedom of speech in
gislative Assembly.

(2) No member of the Legislative Assembly shall be liable to any proceedings in
*0urt in respect of anything said or any vote given by him in the Legislative Assembly
y committee thereof and no person shall be so liable in respect of the publication by
nder the authority of such Assembly of any report, paper, votes or proceedings.

In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of the Legislative
and of the members and the committees thereof shall be such as are for the time
by the House of the People and its members and committees.

‘The provisions of sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) shall apply in relation to persons

virtue of this Act have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the
edings, of the Legislative Assembly or any committee thereof as they apply, in relation
bers of that Assembly.

Disqualifica-
tion for
membership.

Disqualifica-
tion on ground
of defection.

Penalty for sit-
ting and voting
before making
‘oath or affirma-
tion or when
not qualified or
when disquali-
fied.

Powers,
Privileges, etc.,
of members.


Salaries and
allowances of
‘members.

Exemption of
property of the
Union from
taxation.

Restrictions on
jaws passed by
Legislative
Assembly with
respect 10
seriain

matters,

Special
provisions as
to Financial
Bills.

Procedure as

to lapsing of
Bills.

6

19. Members of the Legislative Assembly shall be entitled to receive such sal
and allowances as may from time to time determine by the Legislative Ass
129 and until provision in that behalf if so made, such salaries and allowances
Lieutenant Governor may, with the approval of the President, by order di

20. The property of the Union shall, save in so far as Parliament may by law otherw
provide, be exempted from all taxes imposed by or under any law made by the Legislat
Assembly or by under any other law in force in the Union territory:

Provided that nothing in this section shall, until Parliament by law otherwise provi
prevent any authority within the Union territory from levying any tax on any proper
the Union to which such property was immediately before the commencement 0
Constitution liable or treated as liable, so long as the tax continues to be levied in
Union territory.

21. (1) The provisions of articles 286, 287 and 288 shall apply in relation to any
passed by the Legislative Assembly with respect to any of the matters referred to in th
articles as they apply ‘in relation to any law passed by the Legislature of a State
Tespect to those matters. 4

(2) The provisions of article 304 shall, with the necessary modifications,
relation to any law passed by the Legislative Assembly with respect to any of the matt
referred to in that article as they apply in relation to any Jaw passed by the Legislatu
a State with respect to those matters. 1

22. (1) A Bill or amendment shall not be introduced into, or moved in, the
Assembly except on the recommendation of the Lieutenant Governor if such B
amendment makes provision for any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any te

(0) the amendment of the law with respect to any financial obligatio

undertaken or to be undertaken by the Government of the Union territory;

(©) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the
territory;

(a) the declaring of any expenditure to the expenditure charged on
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory or the increasing of the amount
such expenditure;

(०) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of the U
territory or the custody of such money:

Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this sub-section fc
moving of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax,

(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of t
matters aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or 0
pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for license or fees for servie
rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alter
or regulation of any tax by any Jocal authority or body for local purposes.

(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve exper
from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory shall not be passed by the Legislz
Assembly unless the Lieutenant Governor has recommended to that Assembl
consideration of the Bill.

23. (J) A Bill pending in the Legislative Assembly shall not lapse by reason
prorogation of the Assembly.

(2) ABill which is pending in the Legislative Assembly shall lapse on a dissol
of the Assembly,



7

When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly it shall be presented
tenant Governor and he shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that

ded that the Lieutenant Governor may, as soon as possible after the presentation

the Bill for his assent, return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill together with a
essage requesting that the Assembly will reconsider the Bill or any specified
ions thereof, and, in particular, will consider the desirability of introducing
such amendments as he may recommend in his message and, when a Bill is so
ed, the Assembly will reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed
in with or without amendment and presented to the Lieutenant Governor for
nt, he shall declare either that he assents, to the Bill or that he reserves the Bill
for the consideration of the President:

Provided further that the Lieutenant Governor shall not assent to, but shall
reserve for the consideration of the President, any Bill which,—

(a) in the opinion of the Lieutenant Governor would, if it became law, so
ygate from the powers of the High Court as to endanger the position which that
is, by the Constitution, designed to fill; or

(b) the President may, by order, direct to be reserved for his consideration; or

ection 34 or sub-section (3) of section 43.

For the purposes of this section and section 25, a Bill shall be deemed
Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the matters
in sub-section (1) of section 22 or any matter incidental to any of those matters
neither case, there is endorsed thereon the certificate of the Speaker of the Legislative
nbly signed by him that it is a Money Bill.

When a Bill is reserved by the Lieutenant Governor for the consideration of the
the President shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds
from:

Wided that where the Bill is not a Money Bill, the President may direct the
tutenant Governor to return the Bill to the Legislative Assembly together with

returned, the Assembly shall reconsider it accordingly within a period of six
‘months from the date of receipt of such message and, if it is again passed by the
“Assembly with or without amendment it shall be presented again to the President
for his consideration.

6. No Act of the Legislative Assembly, and no provision in any such Act, shall be
id by reason only that some previous sanction or recommendation required by this
not given, if assent to that Act was given by the Lieutenant Governor or, one
erved by the Lieutenant Governor for the consideration of the President, by the

. (1) The Lieutenant Governor shall in respect of every financial year cause to be
the Legislative Assembly, with the previous sanction of the President, a statement
estimated receipts and expenditure of the Union territory for the year, in this part
d to as the "annual financial statement".

(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall
tely—

(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Act as ex, :nditure
ed upon the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory; and

(ले relates to matter referred to in sub-section (5) of section 7 or section 19 or ©

Assent to

Bills reserved
for considera-
tion,

Requirements
as to sanction,
etc

Annual
financial
statement.


8

(6) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made i
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory and shall distinguish expenditure ont
account from other expenditure.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in
following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of th
territory: —

(a) the emoluments and allowances of the Lieutenant Governor and other
ture relating to his office as determined by the President by general or special

(6) the charges payable in respect of loans advanced to the Union te
from the Consolidated Fund of India including interest, sinking fund char
redemption charges and other expenditure connected therewith;

(c) the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker
Legislative Assembly;

(d) any sums required to satisfy any judgement, decree or award of any
or arbitrator or tribunal;

(e) any other expenditure declared by the Constitution or by law mi
Parliament or by the Legislative Assembly to be so charged.

Procedure in
Legislative
Assembly with

respect to
estimates.

28. (1) So much of the estimates as relates to expenditure charged upo
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory shall not be submitted to the vote of the Legis
Assembly but nothing in this sub-section shall be construed as preventing the di

in the Legislative Assembly of any of those estimates.

(2) So much of the said estimates as relates to other expenditure shall be sub
in the form of demands for grants to the Legislative Assembly, and the Legislative Asse
shall have the power to assent or to refuse to assent, to any demand, or to to
demand subject to a reduction of the amount specified therein,

(3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on the recommendation 0
Lieutenant Governor.

Appropriation 29. (1) As soon as may be after the grants under section 28 have been made 0!
Bills, Legislative Assembly, there shall be introduced a Bill to provide for the appropriatio
of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory of all moneys required to meet—

(a) the grants so made by the Assembly; and

(b) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the Union
but not exceeding in any case the amount shown in the statement previ
before the Assembly.

(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in the Legislative
which will have the effect of varying the amount or altering the destination of
made or of varying the amount of any expenditure charged on the Consolidated Ful
the Union territory and the decision of the person presiding as to whether an amendn
is inadmissible under this sub-section shall be final.

(3) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, no money shall be with n
the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory except under appropriation made Ny
passed in accordance with provisions of this section,

Supplemen-
tary, additional
or excess
grants,

30, (/) The Lieutenant Governor shall; —

(2) if the amount authorised by any law made in accordance with provi
section 29 to be expended for a particular service for the current financial
* found to be insufficient for the purposes of that year or when a nced has arisen du

the current financial year for supplementary or additional expenditure upon somen
service not contemplated in the annual financial statement for that year, or


(6) if any money has been spent on any service during a financial year in excess of
the amount granted for that service and for that year, cause to be laid before the Legislative

‘Assembly, with the previous sanction of the President, another Statement showing the

estimated amount of that expenditure or cause to be Presented to the LegislativeAssembly
ith such previous sanction a demand for such excess, as the case may be.

(2) The provisions of sections 27, 28 and 29 shall have effect in relation to any such
hent and expenditure or demand and also to any law to be made authorising the
iation of money out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory to meet such
nditure or the grant in respect of such demand as they have effect in relation to the
financial statement and the expenditure mentioned therein or to a demand for a
d the law to be made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the
d Fund of the Union territory to meet such expenditure or grant.

31.(/) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, the Legislative
ibly shall have power to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated
fora part of any financial year pending the completion of the procedure prescribed
ction 28 for the voting of such grant.and passing of the law in accordance with the
of section 29 in relation to that expenditure and the Legislative Assembly shall

to authorise by law the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of
Union territory for the purposes for which the said grant is made.

») The provisions of sections 28 and 29 shall have effect in relation to the making of
ant under sub-section (/) or to any law to be made under that sub-section 35 they have
tin relation to the making of a grant with regard to any expenditure mentioned in the
financial statement and the law to be made for the authorisation of appropriation of
¥ys, out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory to meet such expenditure.

Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, the Lieutenant

or may authorise such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory
leems necessary for a period of not more than six months beginning from the date of
itution of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory, pending the sanction of
penditure by the Legislative Assembly.

33, (1) The Legislative Assembly may make rules regulating, subject to the provisions
Act, its procedure and the conduct of its business:

vided that the Lieutenant Governor shall, after consultation with the Speaker of
ative Assembly and with the approval of the President make rules

(a) for securing the timely completion of financial business;

(6) for regulating the procedure of, and the conduct of business in, the
gislative Assembly in relation to any financial matter or to any Bill for the
appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory;

(©) for prohibiting the discussion of, or the asking of questions on, any matters
प affects the discharge of the functions of the Lieutenant Governor in so far as
is required by or under this Act or any law to act in his discretion.

Until rules are made under sub-section (/), the rules of procedure and standing
101 respect to the Legislative Assembly of the State of Uttar Pradesh in force
‘ly before the commencement of this Act shall have effect in relation to the
live Assembly subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein
ieutenant Governor.

34, (1) The Legislative Assembly may by law adopt any one or more of the languages
the Union territory or Hindi as the official language or languages to be used for
‘any of the official purposes of the Union territory:

vided that the President may by order direct—

(0 that the official language of the Union shall be adopted for such of the
ial purposes of the Union territory as may be specified in the order.

Votes on
account.

Authorisation
of expenditure
pending its

Official tan-
guage or lan-
guages of the
Union Tertitory
and language
or languages to
be used in Leg-
islative Assem-
bly.


Languages to
be used for
Bills, Acts, etc.

Restrictions on
discussion in
the Legislative
Assembly.
Courts not to
inquire inte
proceedings of
Legislative
Assembly.

Election
Commission to
delimit
constituencies,

10

(ii) that any other language shall also be adopted throughout the Union:
or such part thereof for such of the official purposes of the Union territory asin
specified in the order, if the President is satisfied that a substantial proporti

population of the Union territory desires the use of that other language for all ¢
of such purposes.

(2) The business in the Legislative Assembly shall be transacted in the
language or languages of the Union territory or in Hindi or in English:

Provided that the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly or the person acting as
as the case may be, may permit any member who cannot adequately express him
any of the languages aforesaid, to address the Assembly in his mother-tongue.

35. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 34, until Parliament b
otherwise provides, the authoritative texts—

(a) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be move
Legislative Assémbly;

(b) of all Acts passed by the Legislative Assembly: and

(c) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued under any |
by the Legislative Assembly shall be in English language:

Provided that where the Legislative Assembly has prescribed any langu
than the English language for use in Bills introduced in, or Acts passed by, the Le;
Assembly or in any order, rule, regulation or bye-law issued under any law made
Legislative Assembly, a translation of the same in the English language published
the authority of the Lieutenant Governor in the official Gazette shali be deemed to!
authoritative text thereof in the English language.

36. No discussion shall take place in the Legislative Assembly with respect t¢
conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge
duties.

37. (1) The validity of any proceedings in the Legislative Assembly shall no
called in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure,

(2) No officer or member of the Legislative Assembly in whom powers are
by or under this Act for regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for maint i
order in the Legislative Assembly shall be subject to the jurisdiction of any court in
of the exercise by him of those powers.

PART III
DELIMITATION OF CONSTITUENCIES

38. (1) The Election Commission shall, in the manner herein provided, distrib
the seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly under section 3 to single-mem|
territorial constituencies and delimit them having regard to the following provisi
namely:—

(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be delimited in st
manner that the ratio between the population of each of such constituencies
the total population of the Union territory is the same; and

(0) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled tes
Scheduled Tribes shall, as far as possible, be located in areas where the proport
of the population to the total population is comparatively large.

(2) The Election Commission shall—

(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies in the of
Gazette and also in such other manner as the Commission may consider fit to,


11

with a notice inviting objections and suggestions in relation to the proposals and
specifying a date on or after which their proposals will be further considered by it;

(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by
it before the date so specified;

(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been
received by it before the date so specified, finalise delimitation of constituencies
and cause such order or orders to be published in the official Gazette; and upon such
publication, the order or orders shall have the full force of law and shall not be
called in question in any court.

39. The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notification in the official
ette,—

(a) correct any printing mistakes in any order made under section 38 or any
error arising therein from inadvertent slip or omission; and

(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned in any
such order are or is altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be necessary
or expedient for bringing such order up to date.

40. (1) For the purpose of constituting the Legislative Assembly, a general election
be held as soon as may be after the delimitation of all the assembly constituencies
section 38.

(2) For the purposes of sub-section (/), the Lieutenant Governor shall, by one or

Notifications published in the Official Gazette, call upon all the said assembly
stituencies to elect members in accordance with the provisions of the Representation
fthe People Act, 1951 and of the rules and orders made or issued thereunder as applicable
sub-section (3).

__ (3) The Representation of People Act, 1950, the Representation of the People Act,

‘1 the rules and orders made or issued under the said Acts and all other laws for the

being in force relating to the elections shall apply with necessary modifications

luding modifications for construing references therein to a State, State Government

Governor as including references to the Union territory, Government of the Union

itory and Lieutenant Governor, respectively) to, and in relation to, the general election
to in sub-section (1).

PART IV
CERTAIN PROVISIONS RELATING TO LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR AND MINISTERS
41. (1) The Lieutenant Governor shall act in his discretion in a matter—

(0 which falls outside the purview of the powers conferred on the Legislative
Assembly but in respect of which powers or functions are entrusted or delegated to
him by the President, or

(ii) in which he is required by or under any law to act in his discretion or to
exercise any judicial or quasi-judicial functions.

(2) If any question arises as to whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects
ich the Lieutenant Governor is by or under any law required to act in his discretion, the
ision of the Lieutenant thereon shall be final.

(3) If any question arises as to whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects
tich the Lieutenant Governor is required by any law to exercise any judicial or quasi-
jal functions, the decision of the Lieutenant Governor thereon shall be final.

42. The question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered by Ministers to
Lieutenant Governor shall not be inquired into in any court.

Power of Elec-
tion Commis-
sion to main-
tain delimita-
tion orders up
10 date.

Election to the
Legislative
Assembly.

Matters in
which Lieute-
nant Governor
to actin his dis-
cretion.

Advice by
Ministers.


Other
provisions as
to Ministers.

Conduct of
business,

Duties of
Chief Minister
as respects the
furnishing of
information,
etc. to the
Lieutenant
Governor.

Consolidated
Fund of the
Union
territory.

12

43. (1) Before ब Minister enters upon his office, the Lieutenant Governor
administer to him the oaths of office and of secrecy according to the forms set out for ॥
purpose in the Schedule.

(2) A Minister who, for any period of six months, is not a member of the Legislati
Assembly, at the expiration of that period, shall cease to be a Minister.

(3) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as the Legislative Asse
may from time to time by law determine and until the Legislative Assembly so dete
shall be determined by the Lieutenant Governor with the approval of the President,

44. (/) The President shall make rules—

(a) for the allocation of business to the Ministers in so far as it is business ¥
respect to which the Lieutenant Governor is required to act on the aid and advice 0
his Council of Ministers; and

(b) for the more convenient transaction of business the Ministers, including
the procedure to be adopted in the case of a difference of opinion between
Licutenant Governor and the Council of Ministers or a Minister,

(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all executive actions of the Lieut
Governor whether taken on the advice of his Ministers or otherwise shall be expressed.
be taken in the name of the Lieutenant Governor.

(3) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the Lieutenant
Governor shall be authenticated in such manner as may be specified in rules to be n
by the Lieutenant Governor and the validity of an order or instrument which is
authenticated shall not be called in question on.the ground that it is not an order or instrun
made or executed by the Lieutenant Governor.

45, It shall be the duty of the Chief Minister-—

(a) to communicate to the Lieutenant Governor all decisions of Council
Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union territory
proposals for legislation;

(b) to furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of
the Union territory and proposals for legislation as Lieutenant Governor may call
for, and

(c) if the Lieutenant Governor so requires, to submit for the consideration of
the Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a Minister
but which has not been considered by the Council.

PARTY
MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

46, (1) As from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, all revenues received in the Union territory by 0
Government of India or the Lieutenant Governor in relation to any matter with respect to”
which the Legislative Assembly has power to make laws, and all grants made and
Joans advanced to the Union territory from the Consolidated Fund of India and all mone
received by the Union territory in repayment of loans shall form one Consolidated F
to be entitled "the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory of Lakshadweep" (referred to.
in this Act as the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory).

(2) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory shall b
appropriated except in accordance with and for the purposes and in the manner provided
in the Act.

(3) The custody of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory the payment of
moneys into such fund, the withdrawal of money therefrom and all other matters connected



13

or ancillary to those matters shall be regulated by rules made by the Lieutenant
vernor with the approval of the President.

47. (1) There shall be established a Contingency Fund in the nature of an imprest to
€ entitled “the Contingency Fund of the Union territory of Lakshadweep” into which

be paid from and out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory such sums as
; from time to time be determined by law made by the Legislative Assembly; and the

d Fund shall be held by the Lieutenant Governor to enable advances to be made by him
but of such Fund.

(2) No advances shall be made out of the Contingency Fund referred to in sub-
ion (1) except for the purposes of meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation
such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly under appropriation made by law.

(3) The Lieutenant Governor may make rules regulating all matters connected with
or ancillary to the custody of, the payment of moneys into, and the withdrawal of moneys
m the aforesaid Contingency Fund.

48. The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India relating to the
counts of the Union territory for any period subsequent to the date referred in sub-
ection (1) of section 46 shall be submitted to the Lieutenant Governor who shall cause
1em to be laid before the Legislative Assembly.

49. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Lieutenant Governor and his Council
sters shall be under the general control of, and comply with such particular directions,
‘as may from time to time be given by, the President,

50. (J) Every order made by the President under article 239AB shall expire at the

dof one year from the date of issue of the order and the provisions of clauses (2) and (3)

icle 356 shali, so far may be, apply to such order as they apply to a proclamation
under clasue (/) of article 356.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (J), the President may extend

duration of the aforesaid order for a further period not exceeding two years from the

late of expiry of the order under sub-section (1) subject to the condition that every extension

the said order for any period beyond the expiration of one year shall be approved by
olutions of both Houses of Parliament.

51. Where the Legislative Assembly is dissolved or its functioning as such Assembly
Mains suspended on account of an order made by the President under article 239AB, it

ll be competent for the President to authorise when the House of the People is not in
jon expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory pending the sanction
‘such expenditure by Parliament.

52. For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that—

(a) all contracts in connection with the administration of the Union territory
are contracts made in the exercise of the executive power of the Union; and

(0) all suits and proceedings in connection with the administration of the Union
territory shall be instituted by or against the Government of India.

53. (7) If any difficulty arises in relation to the transaction from the provisions of
law repealed by the Act or in giving effect to the provisions of this Act and in particular
elation to the constitution of the Legislative Assembly, the President may by order to
ything not inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution or of this act which
to him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty:

Provided that no order under the sub-section shall be made after the expiry of three
rs from the date of constitution of the first Legislative Assembly.

Contingency
Fund of the
Union
tertitory.

Audit Reports.

Relation of
Lieutenant
Governor and
his Ministers
to President,

Period of order
made under
article 239AB
and approval
thereof by
Parliament.

Authorisation
of expenditure
by President.

Contracts and
suits.

Power of
President to
remove
difficulties.


14

(2) Every order made under sub-section (/) shall be laid before each Ho

Parliament,

Laying धर 54, Every rule made by the Lieutenant Governor under this Act shall be lai

fore Legis ; salati
retor LEI soon as it made, before the Legislative Assembly.
i 55. On and from the appointed day—
4 5
hanes (a) after article 239 AA, the following article shall be inserted, namely:
Special “239 AAA. (1) As from the date of Commencement of the Gov
provision with of Union territory of Lakshadweep Act, 1998 the administrator of the Ui
ee territory of Lakshadweep appointed under article 239 shall be desig

the Lieutenant Governor.

(2) The provisions of articles 239AA and 239AB shall, so far as may
apply mutatis mutandis in relation to the Union territory of Lakshadi
Lieutenant Governor and the Legislative Assembly, as they apply in relati
to the National Capital Territory of Delhi and its Legislature respectively,’
(6) in article 240, in clause (1), for the existing proviso, the following pro
shall be substituted, namely:—

“Provided that when any body is created under article 239A or 239,
to function as a Legislature for the Union territory of Pondicherry or Us

territory of Lakshadweep, as the case may be, the President shall not m

any regulation for the peace, progress and good government of that Union

territory with effect from the date appointed for the first meeting of the

Legislature:

Provided further that whenever the body functioning as a Legislat
for the Union territory of Pondicherry or Lakshadweep, as the case may
dissolved or the functioning of that body as such legislature remains si

on account of any action taken under any such law as is referred to in cl
(1) of article 239 or 239AB, as the case may be, the Presi

progress and good government of that Union Territory.”
(c) In the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, in the Table,

and before entry 27 as so re-numbered, the following entry shall be it
namely:—
“26. Lakshadweep. |;
(b) for the figures, “233”, the figures “234” shall be substituted.
Amendinent of 56. In section 27A of the Representation of People Act, 1950, after sub-section (
section 27A of the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—

‘Act 43 of 1950,
“(5) The electoral college for the Union territory of Lakshadweep shall con
of the elected members of the Legislative Assembly constituted for that territ
under the Government of Union territory of Lakshadweep Act, 1998.”

THE SCHEDULE
(See sections 4, 12 and 43)
FORMS OF OATH OR AFFIRMATIONS

Form of oath or affirmation to made by a candidate for election to the Legislative
Assembly:— q
“I, AB, having been nominated as a candidate to fill a seat in the Legislative

Assembly, do swear in the name of God, solemnly affirm that I bear true faith an



15

allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I will uphold
the sovereignty and integrity of India.

I
m of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of the Legislative Assembly:—

“I, AB, having been elected a member of the Legislative Assembly, do swear in the
ne of God, solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution
India as by law established, and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I
॥ about to enter.”

॥॥॥ ६
mm of oath of office of a member of the Council of Ministers:—

“I, AB, do swear in the name of God, solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and
egiance to the Constitution of India as by established, that I will uphold the sovereignty
iegrity of India, that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as a

and that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution

e law without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.”
Iv
m of oath of Secrecy for a member of Council of Ministers:—

“I, AB, do swear in the name of God, solemnly affirm that I will not directly or
irectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be
ught under my consideration or shall become known to me as a Minister except as may
equired for the due discharge of any duties as such Minister.”


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Even after 52 years of Independence, the Union territory of Lakshadweep h
been provided with a democratic set-up with a Legislative Assembly for the govern
of the affairs of the Union territory Administration. All powers are vested in the Lieut
Governor and the bureaucracy continues to reign supreme. In the absence of Legis
Assembly with devolution of powers, the people of the islands are not enable to
sense of belonging and involvement in the developmental activities of the islands
not have a say in the utilisation of the funds provided by the Central Governmen
proper perspective.

The type of administration provided to the Union territory is not at all befitting t
democratic set-up and develution of powers. The population of the Union territ
crossed four lakhs mark and the literacy percentage is well over the national ave ९६

is steadily heading towards achieving cent percent. literacy as per norms prescribed
the Government of India.

However, despite of all these favourable points the people of the Union territo
not get administrative set up of their own choice mainly due to unforesighted views
Central Government. They deserve a political set-up in the same line as Delhi an
Pondicherry.

There have been series of demands from the peuple of the Union territor;
providing a Legislative Assembly on the line of the set-up in Delhi-and Pondicherry. 1
people of the island territory are unanimous in this regard. Now, since a three-tier Panchay:
Raj system is also in offing in pursuance with the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendmer
Act, with the idea of devolution of powers at Panchayat, block and district levels,
high time that a Legislative Assembly was provided to set the tone and direction for th
governance of the Union territory Administration on democratic norms.

The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.

New Deni; BASUDEB AC]
October 25, 1999.

16


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

| 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a Legislative Assembly for the Union
itory of Lakshadweep. Clauses 7(5), 19 and 43(3) relate to payment of salaries and
wances to the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly
the Ministers. The expenditure on such salaries and allowances and other expenditure
‘idental nature such as on the additional staff in the Legislative Assembly and Council
iinisters will be met from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory of Lakshadweep.

Clause 38 provides for the delimitation of thirty single member territorial
tituencies for the proposed Assembly of the Union territory of Lakshadweep. Clause
provides that Union territory of Lakshadweep will be represented by one member in
Council of States. For this purpose, a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifteen
is likely to be incurred. This expenditure will be met from the Consolidated Fund of

The Bill does not involve any other expenditure whether of a recurring or non-
ing nature,


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 33 of the Bill empowers the Legislative Assembly of the Union terri
Lakshadweep to make rules, subject to the provisions of this Bill, for regulating its proce
and conduct of its business. It also provides that the Lieutenant Governor shall, af
consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and with the approval
President make rules for securing the completion of the financial business, regulati
procedure and conduct of business in the Legislative Assembly in relation to any financ
matter or to any Bill for appropriation of moncys out of the Consolidated Fund of
Union territory of Lakshadweep and for prohibiting the discussion of or asking any q
which affect the discharge of the functions of the Lieutenant Governor in so far as he
required to act in his discretion.

Clause 44 empowers the President to make rules regarding allocation of busines
Ministers and transactions of such business. It further empowers the Lieutenant Govern
to make rules providing the manner of authenticating the orders issued in his name.

Clause 46(3) and 47(3) provide that the Lieutenant Governor may make ru
regarding the custody, etc. of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory of Laksha
and the Contingency Fund of the Union territory of Lakshadweep.

Clause 53 empowers the President to issue orders for removing any difficulty i
giving effect to the provisions of this Bill and in particular in relation to the constituti
of the Legislative Assembly.

The matters mentioned above are of a procedural nature and it is difficult to provid
for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a nom
character.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * * *

240. Power of President to make regulations for certain Union territories—(1) The
ident may make regulations for the peace, progress and good government of the
ion territory of —

(@) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands;
(b) Lakshadweep;]

(c) Dadra and Nagar Haveli;}

(@) Daman and Diu;]

(० Pondicherry:

Provided that when any body is created under article 239A to function as a. Legislature
for the Union territory of Pondicherry the President shall not make any regulation for the
९, progress and good government of that Union territory with effect from the date
jinted for the first meeting of the Legislature:

Provided further that whenever the body functioning as a Legislature for the Union
of Pondicherry is dissolved, or the functioning of that body as such Legislature
mains suspended on account of any action taken under any such law as is referred to in
6 (1) of article 239A, the President, may, during the period of such dissolution or
ion, make regulations for the peace, progress and good government of that Union

(2) Any regulation so made may repeal or amend any Act made by Parliament or
other law, which is for the time being applicable to the Union territory and, when
gated by the President, shall have the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament
hich applies to that territory.

* * * * * *
FOURTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 4(1) and 80(2)}
Allocation of Seats in the Council of States

To cach State or Union territory specified in the first column of the following table,
shall be allotted the number of seats specified in the second column thereof opposite
that State or that Union territory, as the case may be.

TABLE

मु न * * * .
[25.] Arunachal Pradesh 1
[26.] Delhi 3
[27.] Pondicherry 1
. * * * * .
. * * * . é


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the creation of a Legislative Assembly for the Union territory
Lakshadweep and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Basudeb Acharia, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MAND—1761LS—15-11-99