1
THE AADHAAR (TARGETED DELIVERY OF FINANCIAL AND OTHER
SUBSIDIES, BENEFITS AND SERVICES) AMENDMENT BILL, 2017
By
SHRI BALKA SUMAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits
and Services) Act, 2016.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other
Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Amendment Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies,
Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),—
(a) in clause (g), for the words "Iris scan, or such other biological attributes of
an individual as may be specified by regulations", the words "and Iris scan" shall be
substituted; and
(b) in clause (k), the words ,"as may be specified by regulations" shall be omitted.
Bill No. 86  of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
Section 2.18 of 2016.
5
10

2
3. After section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"3A. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, every  resident shall
have the option to discontinue as a holder of an Aadhaar number:
Provided that if an individual who opts to discontinue as a holder of Aadhaar
number, such individual shall be entitled and permitted to have his Aadhaar number
deleted from the Central Identities Data Repository and on such deletion, all his data
including the demographic and biometric information as well as all his authentication
records shall be destroyed forthwith and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by
the Authority within fifteen days from the making of such request.".
4. In section 7 of the principal Act, in the proviso, after the words "assigned to an
individual", the words "or if an individual chooses not to opt for enrolment or have opted
to discontinue as a holder of an Aadhaar number" shall be inserted.
5. In section 8 of the principal Act, —
(a) in sub-section (2), in clause ( a), the words "in such manner as may be
specified by regulations" shall be omitted; and
(b) in sub-section ( 4), after the words "such identity information", the words
"respecting the privacy of the individual" shall be inserted.
6. In section 23 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 3), in clause ( a), the words "or other agencies" shall be
omitted; and
(b) in sub-section (4), for the words "on such allowances or remuneration and
terms and conditions as may be specified by contract", the words "after a fair tendering
process conducted by the Authority" shall be substituted.
7. In section 28 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), the words "or regulations
made thereunder" shall be omitted.
8. In section 29 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "No core biometric information, collected
or created under this Act,", the words "Notwithstanding anything contained in this
Act or any other law for the time being in force, no core biometric information, collected
or created under this Act," shall be substituted; and
(b) in sub-section (3), for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
"(b) disclosed further for any purpose.".
9. In section 33 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), in the proviso, after the word "Authority", the words
"and permission from the individual whose data is to be disclosed" shall be inserted;
and
(b) in sub-section (2),—
(i) for the words "national security", the words "public emergency or in
the interest of public safety" shall be substituted; and
(ii) in the first proviso, after the words "Oversight Committee consisting
of", the words "the Central Vigilance Commissioner or the Comptroller and
Auditor-General and" shall be inserted.
Insertion of
new section
3A.
Amendment
of section 7.
Amendment
of section 8.
Amendment of
section 23.
Amendment of
section 28.
Amendment of
section 29.
Amendment of
section 33.
Discontinuation
of an Aadhaar
number.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
10. In section 54 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(a) in clause (a), the words ‘‘the biometric information under clause (g) and the
demographic information under clause (k), and" shall be omitted; and
(b) clause (f) shall be omitted.
11. In section 57 of the principal Act, after the first proviso, the following proviso
shall be inserted:—
"Provided further that where the security and confidentiality of identity
information collected under this section is compromised because of a lapse attributable
to the entity requesting such information, such entity shall be liable to be dealt with
in accordance with the provisions of section 37.".
Amendment of
section 54.
Amendment of
section 57.
5
10

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Aadhaar is a twelve digit number that serves as a unique identifier for Indian citizens
and residents. It was introduced in 2010, with the intentions of making subsidy and benefit
deliverance more effective and eliminate leakages in the process. The Aadhaar (Targeted
Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 has been enacted
with a view to provide for, as a good governance, efficient, transparent, and targeted
delivery of subsidies, benefits and services, the expenditure for which is incurred from the
Consolidated Fund of India, to individuals residing in India through assigning of unique
identity numbers.
The recent notification by the Government mandating the possession of an Aadhaar
number for receiving benefits for various schemes covered by the direct benefit transfer
programme has created a furore. Reports from the States of Gujarat, Jharkhand, Andhra
Pradesh and other States describe the exclusion of genuine beneficiaries because of problems
with the Aadhaar records and authentication issues, besides technological and infrastructural
failures.
Aadhaar may involve certain issues, such as security and confidentiality of
information, imposition of obligation of disclosure of information so collected in certain
cases: impersonation by certain individuals at the time of enrolment for issue of Aadhaar;
unauthorised access to the Central Identities Data Repository (CIDR); manipulation of
biometric information; investigation of certain acts constituting offence; and unauthorised
disclosure of the information collected for the purpose of issue of Aadhaar.
In 2012, Justice A. P. Shah Committee enumerated a large number of principles which
the Aadhaar legislation must follow to make it privacy-compatible. The Supreme Court
reaffirmed an earlier ruling from 2013, stating that Aadhaar can only be a voluntary decision
of the individual and that as long as a person is eligible to avail benefits and subsidies, the
Government cannot deny them those benefits and subsidies because on the basis that they
do not have an Aadhaar card. Despite this ruling, the Union Government decided to push
through with these moves.
Aadhaar shall be used voluntarily and not mandatory. Every individual must have the
flexibility to opt out of Aadhaar. The current legislation does not allow the room for manoeuver
to somebody to either opt out of Aadhaar or somebody who does not desire an Aadhaar
number. There are also strong apprehensions on the issue of privacy and national security
relating to misuse and mishandling of information in the Aadhaar number.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BALKA SUMAN
April 11, 2017.

5
ANNEXURE
ABSTRACT FROM THE AADHAAR (TARGETED DELIVERY OF FINANCIAL  AND OTHER SUBSIDIES,
BENEFITS AND SERVICES)  ACT, 2016
(18 OF 2016)
* * * * * *
2. * * * * * *
(g) "biometric information" means photograph, finger print, Iris scan, or such
other biological attributes of an individual as may be specified by regulations;
* * * * * *
(k) "demographic information" includes information relating to the name, date of
birth, address and other relevant information of an individual, as may be specified by
regulations for the purpose of issuing an Aadhaar number, but shall not include race,
religion, caste, tribe, ethnicity, language, records of entitlement, income or medical history;
* * * * * *
3. (1)* * * * * *
(3) On receipt of the demographic information and biometric information under
sub-section (1), the Authority shall, after verifying the information, in such manner as
may be specified by regulations, issue an Aadhaar number to such individual.
* * * * * *
7. The Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government may, for the
purpose of establishing identity of an individual as a condition for receipt of a subsidy,
benefit or service for which the expenditure is incurred from, or the receipt therefrom forms
part of, the Consolidated Fund of India, require that such individual undergo authentication,
or furnish proof of, possession of Aadhaar number or in the case of an individual to whom
no Aadhaar number has been assigned, such individual makes an application for enrolment:
Provided that if an Aadhaar number is not assigned to an individual, the individual
shall be offered alternate and viable means of identification for delivery of the subsidy,
benefit or service.
* * * * * *
8. * * * * * *
(2) A requesting entity shall—
(a) unless otherwise provided in this Act, obtain the consent of an
individual before collecting his identity information for the purposes of
authentication in such manner as may be specified by regulations; and
* * * * * *
(4) The Authority shall respond to an authentication query with a positive,
negative or any other appropriate response sharing such identity information excluding
any core biometric information.
* * * * * *
Definitions.
Aadhaar
number.
Proof of
Aadhaar
number
necessary for
receipt of
certain
subsidies,
benefits and
services, etc.
Authentication
of Aadhaar
number.

23 .* * * * * *
(3) The Authority may,—
(a) enter into Memorandum of Understanding or agreement, as the case
may be, with the Central Government or State Governments or Union territories
or other agencies for the purpose of performing any of the functions in relation
to collecting, storing, securing or processing of information or delivery of
Aadhaar numbers to individuals or performing authentication;
* * * * * *
(4) The Authority may engage such consultants, advisors and other persons
as may be required for efficient discharge of its functions under this Act on such
allowances or remuneration and terms and conditions as may be specified by contract.
28. * * * * * *
(3) The Authority shall take all necessary measures to ensure that the information
in the possession or control of the Authority, including information stored in the
Central Identities Data Repository, is secured and protected against access, use or
disclosure not permitted under this Act or regulations made thereunder, and against
accidental or intentional destruction, loss or damage.
29. (1) No core biometric information, collected or created under this Act, shall be—
* * * * * *
(3) No identity information available with a requesting entity shall be—
(a) * * * * * *
(b) disclosed further, except with the prior consent of the individual to
whom such information relates.
* * * * * *
33. (1) Nothing contained in sub-section (2) or sub-section (5) of section 28 or sub-
section (2) of section 29 shall apply in respect of any disclosure of information, including
identity information or authentication records, made pursuant to an order of a court not
inferior to that of a District Judge:
Provided that no order by the court under this sub-section shall be made without
giving an opportunity of hearing to the Authority.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (2) or sub-section (5) of section 28 and clause (b)
of sub-section (1), sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 29 shall apply in respect of
any disclosure of information, including identity information or authentication records,
made in the interest of national security in pursuance of a direction of an officer not below
the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India specially authorised in this behalf by
an order of the Central Government:
Provided that every direction issued under this sub-section, shall be reviewed by an
Oversight Committee consisting of the Cabinet Secretary and the Secretaries to the
Government of India in the Department of Legal Affairs and the Department of Electronics
and Information Technology, before it takes effect:
Provided further that any direction issued under this sub-section shall be valid for a
period of three months from the date of its issue, which may be extended for a further period
of three months after the review by the Oversight Committee.
* * * * * *
54. (1) * * * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
Security and
confidentiality
of
information.
Restriction
on  sharing
information.
Disclosure of
information
in certain
cases.
Power of
Authority to
make
regulations.
6
Powers and
functions of
Authority.

(a) the biometric information under clause (g) and the demographic information
under clause (k), and the process of collecting demographic information and biometric
information from the individuals by enrolling agencies under clause (m) of section 2;
* * * * * *
(f) the procedure for authentication of the Aadhaar number under section 8;
* * * * * *
57. Nothing contained in this Act shall prevent the use of Aadhaar number for
establishing the identity of an individual for any purpose, whether by the State or any body
corporate or person, pursuant to any law, for the time being in force, or any contract to this
effect:
Provided that the use of Aadhaar number under this section shall be subject to the
procedure and obligations under section 8 and Chapter VI.
* * * * * *
Act not to
prevent use of
Aadhaar
number for
other purposes
under law.
7

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits
and Services) Act, 2016.
————
(Shri Balka Suman, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—625LS(S3)—24-06-2017.