Short title.
As ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 86 of 2024
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
By
Sඁඋං Mൺඇංඌඁ Tൾඐൺඋං, M.P.
ൺ
BILL
further to  amend  the  Constitution of  India.
 B ൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Y ear of the Republic of India as follows:—
 1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2024. 
2. In article 80 of the Constitution, in clause (5), the following proviso shall be added 
at the end, namely:—
“Provided that the representative of the Union territory of Chandigarh in the 
Council of States shall be elected by an electoral college consisting of elected members 
of the Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh constituted under the Punjab Municipal 
Corporation (Extension to Chandigarh) Act, 1994.”.
Amendment of 
article 80.

3. In the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, in the Table—
(a) after entry 31, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
“32. Chandigarh………………... 1”;(b) for the figures “233”, the figures “234” shall be substituted.
Amendment 
of the Fourth 
Schedule.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 79 of the Constitution provides for the Constitution of Parliament. Article 
80 stipulates the Composition of the Council of States. Article 80 (5) states that the 
representatives of the (Union territories) in the Council of States shall be chosen in such 
manner as Parliament may by law prescribe. The words “States specified in Part C of the 
First Schedule” were omitted and replaced by Union territories by section 3 (1) (d) of the 
Constitution (Seventh) Amendment Act 1956 with effect from the 1st day of November, 
1956.
The Union territories of Puducherry, Jammu and Kashmir and the National Capital 
territory of Delhi find representation in the Council of States. While the Union territories 
of Ladakh, Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli – Daman and Diu, Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands and Lakshadweep are unrepresented in the Council of States.
A special law in terms of article 80 (5) of the Constitution therefore needs to be enacted 
to provide representation to the unrepresented Union territories in the Council of States. 
The proposed Bill is however specific to providing representation to the Union territory of 
Chandigarh in the Council of  States.
The Bill provides that one person shall be elected to the Council of States from 
Chandigarh. Just as the Delhi Metropolitan Council served as the electoral college 
for electing three persons to the Council of States from Delhi from 1966 to 1990, 
similarly it is proposed that an electoral college consisting of the elected members of 
the Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh as brought into existence by an Ordinance, 
namely, the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 as extended to Union territory 
Chandigarh by the Punjab Municipal Corporation Law (Extension to Chandigarh) 
Ordinance, 1994 and promulgated by the President of the India with effect from the 
24th day of May, 1994 bringing the said Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh into 
existence, shall for the purposes of providing representation to Chandigarh in the 
Council of States  constitute the electoral college for the same.
The said ordinance was replaced by the Punjab Municipal Corporation Law (Extension 
to Chandigarh) Act, 1994 as further amended by the Punjab Municipal Corporation Law 
(Extension to Chandigarh) Amendment Act, 2017.
The Bill seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to provide one seat to Union 
territory of Chandigarh in the Council of States. The representative would be elected by an 
electoral college consisting of elected members of the Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh 
constituted under the Punjab Municipal Corporation (Extension to Chandigarh) Act, 1994.
Hence this Bill.
Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                    MANISH TEW ARI
July 9, 2024. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for allocation of one seat in the Council of States to the Union territory of Chandigarh. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees two lakhs from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

ANNEXURE
[Eඑඍඋൺർඍ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Cඈඇඌඍංඍඎඍංඈඇ ඈൿ Iඇൽංൺ]
*                                *                              *                                 *                                *
80. (1) The Council of States shall consist of—
(a)*                              *                              *                              *                           *
(b)*                              *                              *                              *                           *
(2)  *                             *                               *                                 *                              *
(3)  *                             *                               *                                 *                              *
(4)  *                             *                               *                                 *                              *
(5) The representatives of the Union territories in the Council of States shall be chosen 
in such manner as Parliament may by law prescribe.
*                               *                              *                                 *                               *
Fඈඎඋඍඁ Sർඁൾൽඎඅൾ
[Aඋඍංർඅൾ 4(1) ൺඇൽ 80(2)] 
Aඅඅඈർൺඍංඈඇ ඈൿ Sൾൺඍඌ ංඇ ඍඁൾ Cඈඎඇർංඅ ඈൿ Sඍൺඍൾඌ
To each State or Union territory specified in the first column of the following table, there shall be allotted the number of seats specified in the second column thereof opposite to that State or that Union territory, as the case may  be:
TABLE
1. Andhra Pradesh ........................................................................................11
*                                *                              *                                 *                                *
31. Jammu and Kashmir …............................................................................... 4
 Total        233
*                                *                              *                                 *                                *
Composition of 
the Council of 
States.

LOK  SABHA
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
(Shri  Manish Tewari, M.P .)