2 9JuL 2006

3 CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
जज sg 3 :
SHRI BRAJESH PATHAK, M.P.
A
BILL
Surther to amend the Constitution of India

Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as

6 called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2005

the following article shall be inserted, namely:—

ery citizen registered with the Employment Exchange, established
shall have a right to employment

Any person who has registered himself with the Employment
but has not been provided with employment shall be entitled to get an

with employment."

As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

4
wine

Bill No. 86 of 2005

it allowance of rupees one thousand per month till such time as he

Short title.

Insertion of

new article —

16A.
Right to

‘employment.

Se en ee SSE ४८.०... कल रे

——— >> >>ग्रज&७ ऋ

eT aE मनन aS a eae

PRR a रे उपर



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

There can be optimum use of capacity and talent of all the youth of our
registered with the Employment Exchanges by providing them with appropriate employ
If we manage to utilize the entire manpower of our country, our country can becor
prosperous

This is the aspiration of the people of our country that every youth shoul
employment. As fifty-eight years have passed since independence, ideally no youth
have been left unemployed. Yet today, the number of unemployed youth registered
Employment Exchanges is very high. With a view to achieving social objective ०
Constitution, right to employment should be made a Fundamental Right and
unemployed youth registered with the Employment Exchanges should be given unemploy:
allowance until they are provided with employment

_ This Bill seeks to achieve this objective.

New DELHI; 7 | 3 BRAJESH P.
March 14, 2005. | 3 ु


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

: Clause 2 of the Bill provides that all the citizens registered with the Employment
_ Exchanges shall have a right to employment. The Bill further provides that all such
__ unemployed youth who are registered with the Employment Exchanges and are yet to be
provided with employment should be given an unemployment allowance at the rate of one
thousand rupees per month

The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. A recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore per annum is likely to be
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India .

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees seven crore is also likely to be involved


er LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Brajesh Pathak, M.P)

MGIPMRND—1252LS—25.06.2005.