1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE  RURAL LABOUR (WELFARE) BILL, 2020
By
DR. RAMAPATI RAM TRIPATHI, M.P.
A
BILL
to  provide for the welfare measures to be undertaken by the State for the rural labour
employed in the agriculture sector and allied activities thereto and other rural
occupations by establishing a Welfare Fund for such labour and for taking
other measures to improve their living and working conditions
and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rural Labour (Welfare) Act, 2020.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
Bill  No. 86 of  2020
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "Committee" means the National Rural Labour Welfare Committee
established under section 3;
(c) "employer" includes cultivator, orchard owner, poultry farm owner, livestock
rearer, agency society, food processing unit, crusher, oil or pulses mill or any such
establishment located in any rural area which employs rural based labour;
(d) "Fund" means the Rural Labour Welfare Fund established under section 5;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) "rural labour" means any person residing in a village and engaged in any
rural vocation such as agriculture, horticulture, sericulture, poultry, rearing of livestock
including piggery, food processing, handicrafts, weaving or any such other
occupation as a wage earner whether in cash or kind, for his livelihood and includes
any person engaged through a contractor or engaged as a self employed person.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish a Committee to be known as the National Rural Labour Welfare
Committee for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The headquarters of the Committee shall be at New Delhi and the Committee may
establish offices at such other places in the country as it may deem necessary for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
(3) The Committee shall consist of—
(a) a Union Minister to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner
as may be prescribed, Chairperson ex-officio;
(b) five Members of Parliament of whom three shall be from the House of the
People and two from the Council of States to be appointed by the presiding officers of
the Houses concerned, members, ex-officio;
(c) six representatives from the Union Ministry of Labour, Planning and
Finance to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be
prescribed, members; and
(d) seven members to be nominated by the Governments of the States to be
rotated amongst the States in alphabetical order.
(4)  The term of the office of Chairperson, members of the Committee and the procedure
to be followed in the discharge of its functions shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Committee shall, as soon as may be, formulate a national policy for the
betterment and welfare of the rural labour.
(2) The national policy so formulated under sub-section (1) shall be uniformly
implemented throughout the country and the policy may incorporate provisions for
uninterrupted work round the year, minimum remunerative wages, healthcare including
maternity facilities, old age pension, compensation in case of accident and such other
facilities as may be deemed necessary.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, with effect from such date as may be specified
by notification in the Official Gazette in this behalf, establish for the purposes of this Act,
a Fund to be called the Rural Labour Welfare Fund which shall be administered by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, credit to the Fund in each financial year such sums of money as it
considers necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(3) The Fund shall also consist of the moneys received from—
(a) the Government of the States as contributions, towards the fund;
5
10
15
20
25
Establishment
of the
National
Rural Labour
Welfare
Committee.
Formulation
of a national
policy for the
welfare of
rural labour.
Establishment
of Rural
Labour
Welfare Fund.
30
35
40
45

3
(b) the body corporates as donations;
(c) financial institutions and other institutions, domestic and foreign ones as
assistance; and
(d) donations from the employers and general public and bodies.
(4) The Fund shall be utilized to promote the welfare measures for the rural labour
which are necessary or expedient to do and in particular to defray the costs towards,—
(i) improving educational facilities for the children of rural based labour;
(ii) improving water supply for drinking and other purposes;
(iii) improving the standard of living and nutrition for families of rural based
labour;
(iv) amelioration of social condition of rural based labour;
(v) providing housing and recreational facilities;
(vi) providing medical facilities to the rural based labour and their families;
(vii) providing financial assistance in case of infirmity or disability due to
accident etc.;
(viii) old age pension to the rural based labour; and
(ix) providing and improving the welfare measures included in the national
policy and such other welfare measures as may be prescribed.
6. The Central Government may require a State Government or Union territory
Administration or a local authority or any employer to furnish for the purposes of this Act,
such information in such form and within such period as may be prescribed.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, it
shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure availability of work round the
year to the rural labour through the employers or in such manner as that Government may
deem expedient or necessary.
8. The Central Government shall, after the inputs provided by the Governments of the
States and Union territory Administrations, submit an annual report, in such form and in
such manner, as may be prescribed, of the administration of the Fund and other welfare
activities carried out under this Act, to the President of India who shall cause the report to
be laid before both the Houses of Parliament along with action taken thereon as soon as it
is received.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Annual
Report.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
State
Government,
etc. to furnish
the requisite
information.
Appropriate
Government
to ensure
availability of
work round
the year to
the rural
labour.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It is rightly said that India lives in villages because nearly eighty per cent. of its
population lives in the villages and mostly depends on agriculture and agro based
occupations. There are farms, orchards, poultry farms, livestock rearing farms where rural
based labour are employed. They work as weavers, small scale entrepreneurs, handicraft
artisans, potters, cobblers, blacksmiths, etc. There are millions of such agricultural, home
based and other workers who are unorganized and remain exploited and poor throughout
their lives and live in distress from generations together. Their wages and income are
meagre and they do not get employment round the year. As a result, they are poverty striken
and remain neglected even by the State. None of the welfare laws like the Minimum Wages
Act, 1948, the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961, the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 and the
Workmen Compensation Act, 1923 applies in case of unorganised rural labour. During old
age, the rural labourers were not provided employment and therefore lacks money for food,
medicines and clothes. The rural labourers do not have round the year employment and in
case of agricultural sector, they get employment which is dependent on monsoon.
In a welfare State, like ours, it is the duty of the State to introduce welfare measures for
the have-nots like the rural based labour who remain unorganized and exploited. Hence, it is
necessary to formulate a national welfare policy for the rural based labour and constitute a
Welfare Fund for them to ameliorate their living conditions. In pursuance of the said Policy,
the Central and State Governments will implement the welfare measures contained in that
policy and defray the costs to the Welfare Fund.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DR. RAMAPATI RAM TRIPATHI
February 27, 2020.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a National Rural Labour Welfare
Committee. Clause 4 provides for formulation of a national policy for the betterment and
welfare of the rural labour. Clause 5 provides for the establishment of Rural Labour Welfare
Fund for which the Central Government shall provide funds in each financial year. The Bill,
if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
a sum of rupees five thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one thousand crore may also
involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of  a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to  provide for the welfare measures to be undertaken by the State for the rural labour
employed in the agriculture sector and allied activities thereto and other rural
occupations by establishing a Welfare Fund for such labour and for taking
other measures to improve their living and working conditions
and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—5548LS(S3)—12-03-2020.