Bill No. 86 of 2023
THE PINGALI VENKAYY A NA TIONAL URBAN
EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE BILL, 2023
By
DR. TALARI RANGAIAH, M.P.
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
  1. Short title and commencement.
  2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
GUARANTEE OF EMPLOYMENT
  3. Guarantee of Employment in Urban Areas.
CHAPTER III
EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE SCHEMES AND UNEMPLOYMENT ALLOWANCE
  4. Employment Guarantee Scheme and Unemployment Allowance.
  5. Conditions for providing guarantee employment.
  6. Wage Rate.
  7. Payment of Unemployment Allowance.
  8. Non-disbursement of unemployment allowance in certain circumstance.
  9. Disentitlement to receive unemployment allowance in certain circumstances.
CHAPTER IV
IMPLEMENTING AND MONITORING AUTHORITIES
 10. Central Urban Employment Guarantee Council.
 11. Functions and Duties of Central Council.
 12. State Urban Employment Guarantee Council.
 13. Principal Authorities for planning and implementation of Schemes.
 14. District Programme Coordinator.
 15. Programme Officer.
 16. Responsibilities of the Urban Local Bodies.

(ii)
17. Social Audit of Work.
18. Responsibilities of State Governments.
19. Grievance Redressal Mechanism.
CHAPTER V
ESTABLISHMENT OF NA TIONAL AND STATE URBAN
EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE FUNDS AND AUDIT
20. National Urban Employment Guarantee Fund.
21. State Urban Employment Guarantee Fund.
22. Funding Pattern.
23. Transparency and Accountability.
24. Audit of Accounts.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
25. Penalty for non-compliance.
26. Power to delegate.
27. Power of Central Government to give directions.
28. Act to have overriding effect.
29. Power to amend Schedules.
30. Protection of action taken in good faith.
31. Power of Central Government to make rules.
32. Power of State Governments to make rules.
33. Laying of rules and schemes.
34. Power to remove difficulties.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
CLAUSES

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 86 of 2023
THE PINGALI VENKAYY A NA TIONAL URBAN
EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE BILL, 2023
By
DR. TALARI RANGAIAH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for enhancement of livelihood security in the urban regions of the
country by providing at least one hundred days of guaranteed wage
employment in every financial year to every household whose
adult members volunteers to do the given work and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Pingali Venkayya National Urban Employment
Guarantee Act, 2023.
Short title and
commencement.
5

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of
this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this
Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) “adult” means a person who has completed eighteen years of age;
(b) “applicant” means the head of a household or any of its other adult
members who has applied for employment under the Scheme;
(c) “Central Council” means the Central Urban Employment Guarantee Council
constituted under sub-section (1) of Section 10;
(d) “household” means the members of a family related to each other by
blood, marriage or adoption and normally residing together and sharing meals or
holding a common ration card;
(e) “implementing agency” includes any department of the Central
Government or a State Government, any urban local authority or Government
undertaking or non-governmental organisation authorised by the Central
Government or the State Government to undertake the implementation of any
work taken up under a Scheme;
(f) “manual work” means any physical work which any adult person is capable
of doing with or without any skill or special training;
(g) “minimum wage” in relation to any area, means the minimum wage fixed
by the State Government in accordance with the section 6 of the Code on Wages,
2019;
(h) “National Urban Fund” means the National Urban Employment Guarantee
Fund established under sub-section (1) of section 20;
(i) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(j) “preferred work” means any work which is taken up for implementation on
a priority basis under a Scheme;
(k) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(l) “Programme Coordinator” means an officer of the State Government
designated as such under sub-section (1) of section 14 for implementation of the
Scheme;
(m) “Programme Officer” means an officer appointed under sub-section (1)
of section 15 for implementing the Scheme;
(n) “project” means any work taken up  under a Scheme for the purpose of
providing employment to the applicants;
(o) “Scheme” means a Scheme notified by the State Government under sub-
section (1) of section 4;
(p) “semi-skilled work” means any physical work which any adult person
may be capable of doing with little training or as specified by Union or State
Government;
 (q) “State Council” means the State Urban Employment Guarantee Council
established under sub-section (1) of section 12;
 (r) “State Urban Fund” means the State Urban Employment Guarantee Fund
established under sub-section (1) of section 21;
15
20
25
35
40
45
5
10
2
Definitions.
29 of 2019.
30

(s) “urban area” means any area in a State as those areas covered by any
urban local body or a Cantonment Board established or constituted under any
law for the time being in force;
(t) “urban local body” means institution of self-Government constituted
under article 243 Q of the Constitution; and
(u) “wage rate” means the wage rate referred to in Section 6;
CHAPTER II
GUARANTEE OF EMPLOYMENT
3. (1) Save as otherwise provided, the State Government shall, in such urban
area in the State as may be notified by the Central Government, provide to every
household whose adult members, by application, volunteer to do manual or semi-
skilled work not less than one hundred days of such work in a financial year in
accordance with the Scheme made under this Act.
(2) Every person who has done the work given to him under the Scheme shall be
entitled to receive wages at the wage rate for each day of work.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the disbursement of daily wages shall
be made on a weekly basis or in any case not later than a fortnight after the date on
which such work was done.
(4) The Central Government or the State Government may, within the limits of its
economic capacity and development, make provisions for securing work to every
adult member of a household under a Scheme for any period beyond the period
guaranteed under sub-section (1), as may be expedient.
CHAPTER III
EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE SCHEMES AND UNEMPLOYMENT ALLOWANCE
4. (1)  For the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of section 3, every
State Government shall, within six months from the date of commencement of this Act,
by notification, make a Scheme for providing one hundred days of guaranteed
employment in a financial year to every household in the urban areas covered under
the Scheme and whose adult members, by application, volunteer to do manual or
semi-skilled work subject to the conditions laid down by or under this Act.
(2) The State Government shall publish a summary of the Scheme made by it in at
least two local newspapers, one of which shall be in a vernacular language circulating
in the area or areas to which such Scheme shall apply.
(3) The Scheme made under sub-section (1) shall provide for the minimum features
specified in Schedule I.
5. (1) The State Government may, without prejudice to the conditions specified in
Schedule II, specify in the Scheme the conditions for providing guaranteed
employment under this Act.
(2) The persons employed under any Scheme made under this Act shall be entitled
to such facilities not less than the minimum facilities specified in Schedule II.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code on Wages, 2019, the State
Government(s) may, by notification, specify the wage rate for the purposes of this
Act:
Provided that the wage rate specified shall not be less than floor wage which
the Central Government may, by notification, specify for the purposes of this
Act.
Provided further that the wage rate specified from, time to time, under any
such notification shall not be at a rate less than one hundred and seventy-six
3
Employment
Guarantee
Scheme and
Unemployment
Allowance.
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
10
Guarantee of
Employment
in Urban
Areas.
Conditions for
providing
guaranteed
employment.
Wage Rate.29 of 2019.

rupees per day for the manual work and two hundred and seventy-six rupees per
day for the semi-skilled work.
7. (1) If an applicant for employment under the Scheme is not provided such
employment within fifteen days of receipt of his application seeking employment or
from the date on which the employment has been sought in the case of advance
application, whichever is later , he shall be entitled to a daily unemployment allowance
in accordance with this section.
(2) Subject to such terms and conditions of eligibility as may be prescribed by
the State Government and subject to the provisions of this Act and the Schemes and
the economic capacity of the State Government, the unemployment allowance payable
under sub-section (1) shall be paid to the applicants of a household subject to the
entitlement of the household at such rate as may be specified by the State Government,
by notification, in consultation with the State Council:
Provided that no such rate shall be less than one-third of the wage rate for
the first thirty days during the financial year and not less than one-half of the
wage rate for the remaining period of the financial year.
(3) The liability of the State Government to pay unemployment allowance to a
household during any financial year shall cease as soon as-
(a) the applicant is directed by the Urban Local Body or the Programme
Officer to report for work either by himself or depute at least one adult member of
his household; or
(b) the period for which employment is sought comes to an end and no
member of the household of the applicant had turned up for employment; or
(c) the adult members of the household of the applicant have received in
total at least one hundred days of work within the financial year; or
(d) the household of the applicant has earned as much from the wages and
unemployment allowance taken together which is equal to the wages for one
hundred days of work during the financial year.
(4) The unemployment allowance payable to the household of an applicant shall
be sanctioned and disbursed by the Programme Officer.
(5) Every payment of unemployment allowance under sub-section (1) shall be
made or offered not later than fifteen days from the date on which it became due for
payment.
(6) The State Government may prescribe the procedure for payment of
unemployment allowance under  this Act.
8. (1) If the Programme Officer is not in a position to disburse the unemployment
allowance in time or at all for any reason beyond his control, he shall report the matter
to the District Programme Coordinator and announce such reasons in a notice to be
displayed on his notice board or website and the notice board or website of the Urban
Local Body and such other conspicuous places as he may deem necessary.
 (2) Every case of non-payment or delayed payment of unemployment allowance
shall be reported in the annual report submitted by the Programme Coordinator to the
State Government along with the reasons for such non-payment or delayed payment.
(3) The State Government shall take all measures to make the payment of
unemployment allowance reported under sub-section (1) to the concerned household
as expeditiously as possible.
9. An applicant who-
(a) does not accept the employment provided to his/her household under a
Scheme; or
4
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
10
Payment of
Unemployment
Allowance.
Non-
disbursement of
unemployment
allowance in
certain
circumstances.
Disentitlement to
receive
unemployment
allowance in certain
circumstances.

(b) does not report for work within fifteen days of being notified by the
Programme Officer or the implementing agency to report for the work; or
(c) continuously remains absent from work, without obtaining a permission
from the concerned implementing agency for a period of more than one week or
remains absent for a total period of more than one week in any month,
shall not be eligible to claim the unemployment allowance payable under this Act
for a period of three months but shall be eligible to seek employment under the
Scheme at any time.
CHAPTER IV
IMPLEMENTING AND MONITORING AUTHORITIES
10. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification
specify, there shall be constituted a Central Council to be called the Central Urban
Employment Guarantee Council to discharge the functions and perform the duties
assigned to it by or under this Act.
(2) The headquarters of the Central Council shall be at Delhi.
(3) The Central Council shall consist of the following members to be appointed
by the Central Government, namely: -
(a)  a Chairperson;
(b) not more than such number of representatives of the Central Ministries
not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India as may be
determined by the Central Government;
(c) not more than such number of representatives of the State Government
as may be determined by the Central Government as may be determined by the
Central Government;
(d) not more than fifteen non-official members representing Urban Local
Bodies, organizations of workers and disadvantaged groups:
Provided that not less than one-third of the non-official members
nominated under this clause shall be women:
Provided further that not less than one-third of the non-official members
shall be belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the Other
Backward Classes and Minorities;
(e) such number of representatives of the States as the Central Government
may, by rules, determine in this behalf;
(f) a Member-Secretary not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the
Government of India.
11. (1) The Central Council shall perform and discharge the following functions
and duties, namely: —
(a) establish a central evaluation and monitoring system;
(b) advise the Central Government on all matters concerning the
implementation of this Act;
(c) review the monitoring and redressal mechanism from time to time and
recommend improvements  required;
(d) promote the widest possible dissemination of information about the
Schemes made under this Act;
(e) monitoring the implementation of this Act;
5
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
10
Central Urban
Employment
Guarantee
Council.
Functions and
Duties of
Central Council.

(f) preparation of annual reports to be laid before Parliament by the Central
Government on the implementation of this Act;
(g) any other duty or function as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government.
(2) The Central Council shall have the power to undertake evaluation of the
various Schemes made under this Act and for that purpose collect or cause to be
collected statistics pertaining to the urban economy and the implementation of the
Schemes.
12. (1) For the purposes of regular monitoring and reviewing the implementation
of this Act at the State level, every State Government shall constitute a State Council
to be known as the (name of the State) State Employment Guarantee Council with a
Chairperson and such number of official members as may be determined by the State
Government and not more than fifteen non- official members nominated by the State
Government from Urban Local Bodies, organisations of workers and disadvantaged
groups:
Provided that not less than one-third of the non-official members nominated
under this clause shall be women:
Provided further that not less than one third of the non-official members
shall be belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the Other
Backward Classes and Minorities.
(2) The terms and conditions subject to which the Chairperson and members of
the State Council may be appointed and the time, place and procedure of the meetings
(including the quorum at such meetings) of the State Council shall be such as may be
prescribed by the State Government.
(3) The duties and functions of the State Council shall include—
(a) advising the State Government on all matters concerning the Scheme and
its implementation in the State;
(b) determining the preferred works;
(c) reviewing the monitoring and redressal mechanisms from time to time and
recommending improvements;
(d) promoting the widest possible dissemination of information about this
Act and the Schemes under  it;
 (e) monitoring the implementation of this Act and the Schemes in the State
and coordinating such implementation with the Central Council;
 (f) preparing the annual report to be laid before the State Legislature by the
State Government;
(g) any other duty or function as may be assigned to it by the Central Council
or the State Government.
(4) The State Council shall have the power to undertake an evaluation of the
Schemes operating in the State and for that purpose to collect or cause to be collected
statistics pertaining to the urban economy and the implementation of the Schemes
and Programmes in the State.
13. (1) The Urban Local Bodies shall be the principal authorities for planning and
implementation of the Schemes made under this Act.
(2) The Urban Local Bodies shall,—
(a) finalize and approve shelf of projects to be taken up under a programme
under the Scheme;
6
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
10
State Urban
Employment
Guarantee
Council.
Principal
Authorities for
planning and
implementation
of Schemes.

(b) supervise and monitor the projects taken up; and
(c) carry out such other functions as may be assigned to it by the State
Council, from time to time.
14. (1) The Collector of the district or any other district level officer of appropriate
rank as the State Government may decide shall be designated as the District Programme
Coordinator for the implementation of the Scheme in the district.
(2) The District Programme Coordinator shall be responsible for the implementation
of the Scheme in the district in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the
rules made thereunder.
(3) The functions of the District Programme Coordinator shall be—
(a) to assist the Urban Local Bodies in discharging its functions under this
Act and any scheme made thereunder;
(b) to accord necessary sanction and administrative clearance wherever
necessary;
(c) to coordinate with the Programme Officers functioning within his
jurisdiction and the implementing agencies to ensure that the applicants are
provided employment as per their entitlements under this Act;
(d) to review, monitor and supervise the performance of the Programme
Officers;
(e) to conduct periodic inspection of the works in progress; and
(f) to redress the grievances of the applicants.
(4) The State Government shall delegate such administrative and financial powers
to the District Programme Coordinator as may be required to enable him to carry out
his functions under this Act.
(5) The Programme Officer appointed under sub-section (1) of section 15 and all
other officers of the State Government and local authorities and bodies functioning
within the district shall be responsible to assist the District Programme Coordinator in
carrying out his functions under this Act and the Schemes made thereunder.
(6) The District Programme Coordinator shall prepare in the month of December
every year a labour budget for the next financial year containing the details of
anticipated demand for manual or semi-skilled work in the district and the plan for
engagement of labourers in the works covered under the Scheme and submit it to the
State Government.
15. (1) For every State, the concerned Government shall appoint a person who is
not below the rank of Joint Secretary with such qualifications and experience as
may be determined by the State Government as Programme Officer.
(2) The Programme Officer shall assist the Urban Local Body in discharging its
functions under this Act and any Scheme made thereunder.
(3) The Programme Officer shall be responsible for matching the demand for
employment with the employment opportunities arising from projects in the area
under his jurisdiction.
(4) The Programme Officer shall prepare a plan for the Urban Local Body under
his jurisdiction by consolidating the project proposals received.
(5) The functions of the Programme Officer shall include—
(a) monitoring of projects taken up by the Urban Local Body and other
implementing agencies  within the Block;
7
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
10
District
Programme
Coordinator.
Programme
Officer.

 (b) sanctioning and ensuring payment of unemployment allowance to the
eligible households;
(c) ensuring prompt and fair payment of wages to all labourers employed
under a programme of the Scheme within the Block;
(d) ensuring that regular social audits of all works within the jurisdiction of
the Urban Local Body are carried out by the Gram Sabha and that prompt action
is taken on the objections raised in the social audit;
(e) dealing promptly with all complaints that may arise in connection with
the implementation of the Scheme within the jurisdiction; and
(f) any other work as may be assigned to him by the District Programme
Coordinator or the State  Government.
(6) The Programme Officers shall function under the direction, control and
superintendence of the District Programme Coordinator.
(7) The State Government may, by order, direct that all or any of the functions of
a Programme Officer shall be discharged by the Urban Local Body.
16. (1) The Urban Local Body shall be responsible for identification of the projects
in the Urban area to be taken up under a Scheme and for executing and supervising
such works.
(2) A Urban Local Body may take up any project under a Scheme within the
Urban area as may be sanctioned by the Programme Officer.
(3) Every Urban Local Body shall, prepare a development plan and maintain a
shelf of possible works to be taken up under the Scheme as and when demand for
work arises.
(4) The Urban Local Body shall forward its proposals for the development projects
including the order of priority between different works to the Programme Officer for
scrutiny and preliminary approval prior to the commencement of the year in which it
is proposed to be executed.
(5) The Programme Officer shall allot at least fifty per cent, of the works in terms
of its cost under a Scheme to be implemented through the Urban Local Body.
(6) The Programme Officer shall supply each Urban Local Body with:
(a) the muster rolls for the works sanctioned to be executed by it; and
(b) a list of employment opportunities available elsewhere to the residents of
the Urban Local Body.
(7) The Urban Local Body shall allocate employment opportunities among the
applicants and ask them to report for work.
(8) The works taken up by an Urban Local Body under a Scheme shall meet the
required technical standards and measurements.
17. (1) The Urban Local Body shall monitor the execution of works within the
Urban area.
(2) The Urban Local Body shall conduct regular social audits of all the projects
under the Scheme taken up within the Urban area.
(3) The Urban Local Body shall make available all relevant documents including
the muster rolls, bills, vouchers, measurement books, copies of sanction orders and
other connected books of account and papers to the Urban area for the purpose of
conducting the social audit.
8
Responsibilities
of the Urban
Local Bodies.
Social Audit of
work.
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
10

18. The State Government shall make available to the District Programme
Coordinator and the Programme Officers necessary staff and technical support as
may be necessary for the effective implementation of the Scheme.
19. The State Government shall, by rules, determine appropriate grievance redressal
mechanisms for dealing with any complaint by any person in respect of implementation
of the Scheme and lay down the procedure for disposal of such complaints.
CHAPTER V
ESTABLISHMENT OF NA TIONAL AND STATE URBAN
EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE FUNDS AND AUDIT
20. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish a National
Urban Fund to be called the National Urban Employment Guarantee Fund for the
purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, credit by way of grants or loans such sums of money as the
Central Government may consider necessary to the National Urban Fund.
(3) The amount standing to the credit of the National Urban Fund shall be utilised
in such manner and subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed
by the Central Government.
21. (1) The State Government may, by notification, establish a State Urban Fund
to be called the State Urban Employment Guarantee Fund for the purposes of
implementation of the Scheme.
(2) The amount standing to the credit of the State Urban Fund shall be expended
in such manner and subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed
by the State Government for the purposes of implementation of this Act and the
Schemes made thereunder and for meeting the administrative expenses in connection
with the implementation of this Act.
(3) The State Urban Fund shall be held and administered on behalf of the State
Government in such manner and by such authority as may be prescribed by the State
Government.
22. (1) Subject to the rules as may be made by the Central Government in this
behalf, the Central Government shall meet the cost of the following, namely:—
(a) the amount required for payment of wages for unskilled manual work
under the Scheme;
 (b) up to three-fourths of the material cost of the Scheme including payment
of wages to skilled and semi-skilled workers subject to the provisions of
Schedule II;
(c) such percentage of the total cost of the Scheme as may be determined by
the Central Government towards the administrative expenses, which may include
the salary and allowances of the Programme Officers and his supporting staff,
the administrative expenses of the Central Council, facilities to be provided
under Schedule II and such other item as may be decided by the Central
Government.
(2) The State Government shall meet the cost of the following, namely:—
(a) the cost of unemployment allowance payable under the Scheme;
(b) one-fourth of the material cost of the Scheme including payment of wages
to skilled and semi-skilled workers subject to the provisions of Schedule II;
(c) the administrative expenses of the State Council.
9
Responsibilities
of State
Governments.
Grievance
Redressal
Mechanism.
National Urban
Employment
Guarantee Fund.
State Urban
Employment
Guarantee Fund.
Funding Pattern.
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
10

23. (1) The District Programme Coordinator and all implementing agencies in the
District shall be responsible for the proper utilisation and management of the funds
placed at their disposal for the purpose of implementing a Scheme.
(2) The State Government may prescribe the manner of maintaining proper books
and accounts of employment of labourers and the expenditure incurred in connection
with the implementation of the provisions of this Act and the Schemes made thereunder.
(3) The State Government may, by rules, determine the arrangements to be made
for the proper execution of Schemes and programmes under the Schemes and to
ensure transparency and accountability at all levels in the implementation of the
Schemes.
(4) All payments of wages in cash and unemployment allowances shall be made
directly to the person concerned and in the presence of independent persons of the
community on pre-announced dates.
(5) If any dispute or complaint arises concerning the implementation of a Scheme
by the Gram Panchayat, the matter shall be referred to the Programme Officer.
(6) The Programme Officer shall enter every complaint in a complaint register
maintained by him and shall dispose of the disputes and complaints within seven
days of its receipt and in case it relates to a matter to be resolved by any other
authority it shall be forwarded to such authority under intimation to the
complainant.
24. (1) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India, prescribe appropriate arrangements for audits of the accounts
of the Schemes at all levels.
(2) The accounts of the Scheme shall be maintained in such form and in such
manner as may be prescribed by the State Government.
CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
25. Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall on conviction be liable
to a fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.
26. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that the powers
exercisable by it (excluding the power to make rules) may, in such circumstances and
subject to such conditions and limitations, be exercisable also by the State Government
or such officer subordinate to the Central Government or the State Government as it
may specify in such notification.
(2) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the powers exercisable
by it (excluding the power to make rules and Schemes) may, in such circumstances
and subject to such conditions and limitations, be exercisable also by such officer
subordinate to it as it may specify in such notification.
27. (1) The Central Government may give such directions as it may consider
necessary to the State Government for the effective implementation of the provisions
of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Central Government
may, on receipt of any complaint regarding the issue or improper utilisation of funds
granted under this Act in respect of any Scheme if prima facie satisfied that there is
a case, cause ·an investigation into the complaint made by any agency designated by
it and if necessary, order stoppage of release of funds to the Scheme and institute
appropriate remedial measures for its proper implementation within a reasonable period
of time.
10
Transparency
and
Accountability.
Audit of
Accounts.
Penalty for non-
compliance.
Power to
delegate.
Power of
Central
Government to
give directions.
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
10

28. The provisions of this Act or the Schemes made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the
time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of such law:
Provided that where a State enactment exists or is enacted to provide
employment guarantee for unskilled manual or semi-skilled work to urban
households consistent with the provisions of this Act under which the entitlement
of the households is not less than and the conditions of employment are not
inferior to what is guaranteed under this Act, the State Government shall have
the option of implementing its own enactment:
Provided further that in such cases the financial assistance shall be paid to
the concerned State Government in such manner as shall be determined by the
Central Government, which shall not exceed what the State would have been
entitled to receive under this Act had a Scheme made under this Act had to be
implemented.
29. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so
to do, it may, by notification, amend Schedule I or Schedule II and thereupon
Schedule I or Schedule II, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have been amended
accordingly;
(2) A copy of every notification made under sub-section (1) shall be laid before
each House of Parliament as soon as may be after it is made.
30. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the District
Programme Coordinator, Programme Officer or any other person who is, or who is
deemed to be, a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done
under this Act or the rules or Schemes made thereunder.
31. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, and subject to the condition
of previous publication, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without the prejudice of the foregoing power, such rules
may provide for all or  any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the number of representatives of the State Governments under clause
(e) of sub-section (3) of section 10;
(b) the terms and conditions subject to which the Chairman and other
members of the Central Council may be appointed, and the time, place and
procedure of the meetings (including the quorum at such meetings) of the
Central Council, under sub-section (4) of section  10;
(c) the manner in which and the conditions and limitations subject to which
the National Fund shall be utilised under sub-section (3) of section 20;
(d) the rules relating to funding pattern to meet the cost of certain items
under sub-section (1) of section 22; or
(e) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of
which provision is to be made by the Central Government by rules.
32. (1) The State Government may, by notification, and subject to the condition
of previous publication, and consistent with this Act and the rules made by the
Central Government, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the terms and conditions upon which eligibility for unemployment
allowance may be determined under sub-section (2) of section 7;
11
Power to amend
Schedules.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Power of
Central
Government to
make rules.
Power of State
Governments to
make rules.
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
10
Act to have
overriding
effect.

(b) the procedure for payment of unemployment allowance under
sub-section (6) of section 7;
(c) the terms and conditions subject to which the Chairperson and members
of the State Council may be appointed, and the time, place and procedure of the
meetings (including the quorum at such meetings) of their appointment to the
State Council, under sub-section (2) of section 12;
(d) the grievance redressal mechanism at the Block level and the District
level and the procedure to be followed in such matter under section 19;
(e) the manner in which and the conditions and limitations subject to which
the State Fund shall be utilised under sub-section (2) of section 21;
(f) the authority who may administer and the manner in which he may hold
the State Fund under sub-section (3) of section 21;
(g) the manner of maintaining books of account of employment of labourers
and the expenditure under sub-section (2) of section 23;
(h) the arrangements required for proper execution of Schemes under sub-
section (j) of section 23;
(i) the form and manner in which the accounts of the Scheme shall be
maintained under sub- section (2) of section 24; or
(j) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in· respect of
which provision is to be made by the State Government by rules.
33.  (1) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not
be made, the rule shall have thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
(2) Every rule or Scheme made by the State Government under this Act shall, as
soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of the State Legislature
where there are two Houses, and where there is one House of the State Legislature,
before that House.
34. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of
three years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament.
12
Laying of rules
and schemes.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
15
20
25
30
35
5
10
40

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See Section 4(3)]
MINIMUM FEATURES OF THE URBAN EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE SCHEME
1. The focus of the Scheme shall be on the following works, with no order of
priority:
(i) Waste Collection, Disposal and Management;
(ii) Water Supply and Harvesting;
(iii) Housing;
(iv) Sewage and Septage Management
(v) Enhancement of Green Spaces;
(vi) Land development;
(vii) Flood control and protection works including drainage in water logged
areas;
(viii) Heritage augmentation; and
(ix) any other work which may be notified by the Central Government in
consultation with the State  Government.
2. Creation of durable assets and strengthening the livelihood resource base of
the urban poor shall be an important objective of the Scheme.
3. The works taken up under the scheme shall be in urban areas.
4. The State Council shall prepare a list of preferred works for different areas
based on their ability  to create durable assets.
5. The Scheme shall be subject to appropriate arrangements as may be laid down
by the State Government under the rules issued by it for proper maintenance of the
public assets created under the Scheme.
6. Under no circumstances shall the labourers be paid less than the minimum
wage rate.
7. When wages are directly linked with the quantity of work, the wages shall be
paid according to the schedule of rates fixed by the State Government for different
types of work every year, in consultation with the State Council.
8. The schedule of rates of wages for unskilled labourers shall be so fixed that a
person working for seven hours would normally earn a wage equal to the wage rate.
9. The cost of material component of projects including the wages of the skilled
and semi-skilled workers taken up under the Scheme shall not exceed forty per cent.
of the total project costs.
10. It shall be open to the Programme Officer or the Urban Local Body to direct
any person who applied for employment under the Scheme to do work of any type
permissible under it.
11. The Scheme shall not permit engaging any contractor for implementation of
the projects under it.
12. As far as practicable, a task funded under the Scheme shall be performed by
using manual labour and not machines except sewage and septage Management.
13. Every Scheme shall contain adequate provisions for ensuring transparency
and accountability at all level of implementation.
13

14. Provisions for regular inspection and supervision of works taken up under
the Scheme shall be made to ensure proper quality of work as well as to ensure that
the total wages paid for the completion of the work is commensurate with the quality
and quantity of work done.
15. The District Programme Coordinator, the Programme Officer and the Urban
Local Body implementing the Scheme shall prepare annually a report containing the
facts and figures and achievements relating to the implementation of the Scheme
within his or its jurisdiction and a copy of the same shall be made available to the
public on demand and on payment of such fee as may be specified in the Scheme.
16. All accounts and records relating to the Scheme shall be made available for
public scrutiny and any person desirous of obtaining a copy or relevant extracts
therefrom may be provided such copies or extracts on demand and after paying such
fee as may be specified in the Scheme.
17. A copy of the muster rolls of each Scheme or project under a Scheme shall be
made available in the offices of the Urban Local Body and the Programme Officer for
inspection by any person interested after paying such fee as may be specified in the
Scheme.
14

THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See Section 5]
CONDITIONS FOR GUARANTEED URBAN EMPLOYMENT UNDER THE SCHEME AND
MINIMUM ENTITLEMENTS OF LABOURERS
1.  The adult members of every household who reside in any urban area; and are
willing to do unskilled manual or semi-skilled work, may submit their names, age and
the address of the household to the Urban Local Body in the jurisdiction of which
they reside for registration of their household for issuance of a job card.
2. It shall be the duty of the Urban Local Body to register the household, after
making such enquiry as it deems fit and issue a job card containing such details of
adult members of the household affixing their photographs, as may be specified by
the State Government in the Scheme.
3. The registration made under paragraph 2 shall be for such period as may be laid
in the Scheme, but in any case, not less than five years, and may be renewed from time
to time.
4. Every adult member of a registered household whose name appears in the job
card shall be entitled to apply for unskilled manual or semi-skilled work under the
Scheme.
5. All registered persons belonging to a household shall be entitled to employment
in accordance with the Scheme made under the provisions of this Act, for as in any
days as each applicant may request, subject to a maximum of one hundred days per
household in a given financial year.
6. The Programme Officer shall ensure that every applicant referred to in
paragraph 5 shall be provided unskilled manual or semi-skilled work in accordance
with the provisions of the Scheme within fifteen days of receipt of an application or
from the date he seeks work in case of advance application, whichever is later:
Provided that priority shall be given to women in such a way that at least
one-third of the beneficiaries shall be women who have registered and requested for
work under this Act.
7. Applications for work must be for at least fourteen days of continuous work.
8. There shall be no limit on the number of days of employment for which a
person may apply, or on the number of days of employment actually provided to him
subject to the aggregate entitlement of the household.
9. Applications for work may be submitted in writing either to the Gram Panchayat
or to the Programme Officer, as may be specified in the Scheme.
10. The Urban Local Body and Programme Officer, as the case may be, shall be
bound to accept valid applications and to issue a dated receipt to the applicant.
Group applications may also be submitted.
11. Applicants who are provided with work shall be so intimated in writing, by
means of a letter sent to him at the address given in the job card and by a public notice
displayed at the office of the Panchayats at the district, intermediate or village level.
12. As far as possible, employment shall be provided within a radius of five
kilometres of the village where the applicant resides at the time of applying.
13. A new work under the Scheme shall be commenced only if—
(a) at least fifty labourers become available for such work; and
(b) the labourers cannot be absorbed in the ongoing works.
15

14. In cases the employment is provided outside such radius, the labourers shall
be paid ten per cent. of the wage rate as extra wages to meet additional transportation
and living expenses.
15. A period of employment shall ordinarily be at least fourteen days continuously
with not more than six days in a week.
16. In all cases where unemployment allowance is paid, or due to be paid, the
Programme Officer shall inform the District Programme Coordinator in writing the
reasons why it was not possible for him to provide employment or cause to provide
employment to the applicants.
17. The District Programme Coordinator shall, in his Annual Report to the State
Council, explain as to why employment could not be provided in cases where payment
of unemployment allowance is involved.
18. Provision shall be made in the Scheme for advance applications, that is, an
application which may be submitted in advance of the date from which employment is
sought.
19. Provision shall be made in the Scheme for submission of multiple applications
by the same person provided that the corresponding periods for which employment
is sought do not overlap.
20. The Urban Local Body shall prepare and maintain or cause to be prepared and
maintained such registers, vouchers and other documents in such form and in such
manner as may be specified in the Scheme containing particulars of job cards and
passbooks issued, name, age and address of the head of the household and the adult
members of the household registered with the Urban Local Body.
21. The Urban Local Body shall send such list or lists of the names and addresses
of households and their adult members registered with it and supply such other
information to the concerned Programme Officer at such periods and in such form as
may be specified in the Scheme.
22. A list of persons who are provided with the work shall be displayed on the
notice board of the Urban Local Body and at the office of the Programme Officer and
at such other places as the Programme Officer may deem necessary and the list shall
be open for inspection by the State Government and any person interested.
23. If the Urban Local Body is satisfied at any time that a person has registered
with it by furnishing false information, it may direct the Programme Officer to direct
his name to be struck off from the register and direct the applicant to return the job
card:
Provided that no such action under this paragraph shall be directed unless the
applicant has been given an opportunity of being heard in the presence of two
independent persons.
24. If any personal injury is caused to any person employed under the Scheme by
accident arising out of and in the course of his employment, he shall be entitled to,
free of charge, such medical treatment as is admissible under the Scheme.
25. Where hospitalization of the injured worker is necessary, the State Government
shall arrange for such hospitalization including accommodation, treatment, medicines
and payment of daily allowance not less than half of the wage rate required to be paid
had the injured been engaged in the work.
26. If a person employed under a Scheme dies or becomes permanently disabled
by accident arising out of and in the course of employment, he shall be paid by the
implementing agency an ex-gratia payment at the rate of twenty-five thousand rupees
or such amount as may be notified by the Central Government, and the amount shall
be paid to the legal heirs of the deceased or the disabled, as the case may be.
16

27. The facilities of safe drinking water, shade for children and periods of rest,
first-aid box with adequate material for emergency treatment for minor injuries and
other health hazards connected with the work being performed shall be provided at
the work site.
28. In case the number of children below the age of six years accompanying the
women working at any site is five or more, provisions shall be made to depute one of
such women workers to look after such children.
29. The person deputed under paragraph 28 shall be paid wage rate.
30. In case the payment of wages is not made within the period specified under
the Scheme, the labourers shall be entitled to receive payment of compensation as per
the provisions of the Code on Wages, 2019.
31. The wages under a Scheme may be paid either wholly in cash or in cash and
kind provided that at least one-fourth of the wages shall be paid in cash only.
32. The State Government may prescribe that a portion of the wages in cash may
be paid to the labourers on a daily basis during the period of employment.
33. If any personal injury is caused by accident to a child accompanying any
person who is employed under a Scheme, such person shall be entitled to, free of
charge, such medical treatment for the child as may be specified in the Scheme and in
case of death or disablement, through an ex-gratia payment as may be determined by
the State Government.
34. In case of every employment under the Scheme, there shall be no discrimination
solely on the ground of gender and the provisions of the Industrial Relations Code,
2019, shall be complied with.
17

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act was enacted in the
year 2005, as one of the largest work guarantee programmes to guarantee one hundred
days of employment in every financial year to adult members of any rural household
willing to do public work-related unskilled manual work, thereby aiming to address
the causes of chronic poverty through a rights-based framework.
However, with the impact of COVID-19 being largely concentrated on urban
centres of the economy, which contribute nearly sixty-five percent to India’s GDP,
urban poverty as a form of poverty that is particularly visible in mega cities,
characterized by poor living circumstances and income has been aggravated.
With seventeen percent of urban households being slum dwellers, increasing
inequalities and urban poverty ratios have a possibility of leading up to ghettoization
of communities and rise in crime rates. In view of the above, it has become necessary
to enact a legislation to ensure Urban Employment Guarantee.
The Bill inter alia, seeks to,—
(a) provide for one hundred days of guaranteed wage employment to every
household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work, or in
addition, semi-skilled work to prepare a scheme to give effect to the guarantee
proposed under the legislation;
(b) ensure that every State Government, within six months from the date of
commencement of this legislation, prepare a scheme to give effect to the guarantee
proposed under the legislation;
(c) provide one-hundred days of employment under the legislation at the
wage rate as specified by the State Governments which shall not be less than the
floor wage as specified by the Central Government in accordance with the Code
on Wages, 2019;
(d) ensure that if an eligible applicant is not provided work as per the
provisions of this legislation within the prescribed time limit, it will be obligatory
on the part of the State Government to pay unemployment allowance at the
prescribed rate;
(e) constitute a Central Urban Employment Guarantee Council at the Central
level and State Urban Employment Guarantee Councils at the State level in all
States where the legislation is made applicable to for review, monitor and effective
implement the legislation in their respective areas;
(f) empower the Central Government to establish a National Urban
Employment Guarantee Fund for the purposes of this legislation and also the
State Governments to constitute National State Employment Guarantee Funds;
(g) make provisions for transparency and accountability, audit, establishment
of grievance and redressal mechanisms and penalty of non-compliance are also
envisaged; and
(h) make provisions for Minimum features of Urban Employment Guarantee
Scheme and conditions for guaranteed Urban Employment under a scheme and
minimum entitlements of labourers have been laid.
 The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
    NEW DELHI;
15 March, 2023.         TALARI RANGAIAH
18

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the State Government shall, in such urban area
in the State and for such period as may be notified by the Central Government,
provide to every poor household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled
manual work not less than one hundred days of such work in a financial year in
accordance with the Scheme.   Clause 7 provides that if an applicant for employment
under the Scheme made under proposed legislation is not provided employment
within fifteen days of receipt of his application, he shall be entitled to a daily
unemployment allowance. Clause 10 provides for constitution of a Central Urban
Employment Guarantee Council and for appointment of its members. Clause 12 provides
for the Constitution of a State Urban Employment Guarantee Council. Clause 15
provides for appointment of Programme Officer for implementing the provisions in
the municipalities. Clause 20 provides for establishment of the National Urban
Employment Guarantee Fund. Clause 21 provides for establishment of the State Urban
Employment Guarantee Fund. Clause 22 provides that the Central Government shall
meet the administrative expenses of the Programme Officers and his supporting staff
and the administrative expenses of the Central Council. The expenditure in relation to
States shall be borne by the State Government concerned. However, the expenditure
in relation to Union Territories shall be borne by the Central Government. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand
crore is likely to be involved per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore will also be involved.
19

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 31 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
20

LOK SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for enhancement of livelihood security in the urban regions of the
country by providing at least one hundred days of guaranteed wage
employment in every financial year to every household whose
adult members  volunteers to do the given work and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Dr. Talari Rangaiah, M.P .)