THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
By
ADV.  P .T. THOMAS, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Payment of Gratuity (Amendment) Act, 2009.
(2) It shall  come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In section 4 of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972,—
(i) in sub-section (1),—
(a) for the words "five years", the words "three years" shall be substituted;
(b) in the first proviso, for the words "five years", the words "three years"
shall be substituted;
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of section 4.
Bill No. 86 of  2009
39 of 1972.
5
10
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

SER5\F\BILL 2009/LS/33942LS
2
(ii) in sub-section (2),—
(a) for the words "fifteen days", the words "thirty days" shall be
substituted;
(b) the Explanation shall be omitted.

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 provides for payment of gratuity to employees
engaged in factories, mines, oilfields, plantations, ports, railway companies, shops or other
establishments and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Section 4 of the said Act inter alia provides that the gratuity shall be payable to an
employee who has rendered continuous service for not less than five years on his
superannuation or retirement or resignation. The completion of continuous service of five
years shall not be necessary where the termination of the employment of any employee is
due to death or disablement. In view of the present economic scenario in our country, an
employee has the opportunity to switch over to other job for getting more monetary and
other benefits rather than to stay in any particular job for five years. Employees are also
sometimes unable to continue in their jobs for five years in an industry due to impact of
global recession. So, reducing the duration of continuous service from five years to three
years for grant of gratuity shall benefit the employees covered by the said Act.
At present, the amount of gratuity for every completed year of service is at the rate of
fifteen days' wages based on the rate of wages last drawn by an employee. Employees shall
get more amount for their welfare and to meet their future liabilities, if the calculation of
gratuity amount is increased to thirty days' wages from the present fifteen days' wages for
every completed year of service.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; P.T. THOMAS
August 6, 2009

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the gratuity shall be payable to an employee on the
termination of his employment after he has rendered continuous service for not less than
three years and that the amount of gratuity payable to an employee for every completed year
of service shall be at the rate of thirty days' wages based on the rate of wages last drawn by
the employee.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India in respect of establishments aided by or under the control of Central Government. It is
likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of rupees 10 crore from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.
(Act No. 39 of 1972)
* * * * * *
4. (1) Gratuity shall be payable to an employee on the termination of his employment
after he has rendered service for not less than five years,—
(a) on his superannuation, or
(b) on his retirement or resignation, or
(c) on his death or disablement due to accident or disease:
Provided that the completion of continuous service of five years shall not be necessary
where the termination of the employment of any employee is due to death or disablement:
* * * * * *
(2) For every completed year of service or part thereof in excess of six months, the
employer shall pay gratuity to an employee at the rate of fifteen days' wages based on the
rate of wages last drawn by the employee concerned:
* * * * * *
Explanation.— In the case of a monthly rated employee, the fifteen days' wages shall
be calculated by dividing the monthly rate of wages last drawn by him by twenty-six and
multiplying the quotient by fifteen.
* * * * * *
Payment of
gratuity.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
————
(Adv. P .T. Thomas, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3942LS(S5)—05-11-2009.