1
THE CONSTITUTION  (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
By
ADV. SURESH KURUP,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2007.
2. In article 73 of the Constitution, in clause (1), after the proviso, the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided further that the executive power of the Union referred to in
sub-clause (b) shall not be exercised before such treaty or agreement has been
approved by Parliament.".
Short title.
Amendment of
article 73.
Bill No.  86  of  2007
TO BE INTRODUCED IN  LOK SABHA
5

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is the largest democracy in the world. Our Constitution describes India as a
sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic republic. Through the vast experience of the freedom
struggle, an independent foreign policy was evolved by our leaders, which was acceptable
to all sections of the people. India's foreign policy has enhanced the prestige of the country
and its people. But the emergence of a unipolar world has influenced the social order and
democratic set up world over.
In the present international scenario, it is possible that undue pressure from powerful
nations, may adversely affect the capacity of the Government to adopt and follow an
independent and fair foreign policy while entering into a treaty or agreement. This may result
in compromising with the sovereignty and integrity of the country. Therefore, it is necessary
to put a check on the unfettered executive powers of the Union Government with regard to
entering into international treaties and agreements. The people, through their representatives
alone, can meet this challenge effectively. The Bill seeks to amend the Constitution with a
view to provide that before the Union Government exercises its powers under any treaty or
agreement, such treaty or agreement should be approved by Parliament.
N
EW DELHI; SURESH  KURUP.
November 6, 2007.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
******
73. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the executive power of the Union
shall extend —
(a) to the matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws; and
(b) to the exercise of such rights, authority and jurisdiction as are exercisable by
the Government of India by virtue of any treaty or agreement:
Provided that the executive power referred to in sub-clause (a) shall not, save as
expressly provided in this Constitution or in any law made by Parliament, extend in any State
to matters with respect to which the Legislature of the State has also power to make laws.
(2) Until otherwise provided by Parliament, a State and any officer or authority of a
State may, notwithstanding anything in this article, continue to exercise in matters with
respect to which Parliament has power to make laws for that State such executive power or
functions as the State or officer or authority thereof could exercise immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution.
*******
Extent of
executive
power of the
Union.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Adv. Suresh Kurup, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4530LS(S5)—19-11-2007.