AS INTRODUCED 1९ LoK SABHA

8 DEC: 2%

Bill No. 86 of 2006

THE WOMEN WELFARE BILL, 2006
By

‘Surimati ARCHANA Nayak, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for welfare measures for women and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Women Welfare Act, 2006. She te
(2) It extends to the whole of India. commencement,
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — Definitions.

(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government: ड़

(6) “destitute woman” includes a woman having been deserted by her husband
or relatives, including children, or a widow or a divorced woman whether having minor
children or not and has no source of income or livelihood;



Women
Welfare Fund.

Facilities for
women at
their work
place.

Thirty-three
percent posts
to be reserved
for women.

Provisions of
Act not to be
in derogation
of any other
law for the
time being in
force.’

Power to make
rules.

2

(c) “employer” means any person by whatever name called, who is incharge or
has absolute control over the affairs of any establishment including any factory,
company or shop; and

(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a fund to be known as the Women
Welfare Fund.

(2) The Fund shall consist of contributions to be made by the Central Government
and the State Governments in such ratio as may be prescribed.

(3) The Fund shall be utilized for:—

(i) setting up of homes for destitute women where they will be provided boarding
and lodging facilities free of cost;

(ii) providing educational facilities free of cost to minor children of destitute
women;

(iii) providing vocational/self- employment training to women;

(iv) providing free health care fa

(v) payment of old age pension to women who have attained the age of fifty-five
years and have no source of livelihood;

ies to women;

(vi) payment of sustenance allowance to destitute women till such time as they
are gainfully employed; and
(vii) such other purposes as the appropriate Government may deem fit.

4. Every employer shall provide such facilities to the women workers at the work
place as may be prescribed within a period of six months from the date of coming into force
of this Act.

5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, rule or order of any court of
law or otherwise for the time being in force, thirty-three percent of posts shall be reserved
for women in all the services, public sector enterprises and establishments under the Central
Government.

6. The provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt
with in this Act.

7. The Central Government may, be notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Women constitute fifty percent population of our country. But even aftersixty years of
independence they remain underprivileged. Regardless of their caste or religion, women are
backward both socially and economically. Inspite of a number of welfare schemes formulated
for their benefit, no real difference has been made in their lives. In our country, reservation 15
extended to certain educationally and socially backward classes but it is denied to women.
who are backward in all respects. Reservation will be a powerful tool of empowerment.
Therefore, it should be provided for women also.

Among women the condition of women who are destitute is even more pathetic. In the
absence of any intervention from the State, they are forced to live a miserable life full of
poverty and exploitation. The Bill proposes to set up a fund for their welfare.

The condition of working women is no different. They work in sub-standard conditions
and are often subjected to harassment from their colleagues and superiors. In view of the
above, legislation is needed to protect them at their workplace and to provide them certain
basic facilities.

Hence this Bill.

New Deu; ARCHANA NAYAK
November 8, 2006.


oe

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a Women Welfare Fund to which the
Central Government will also contribute. The Bill, therefore, ifenacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about
rupees ten thousand crore per annum.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A

BILL
to provide for welfare measures for the women and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shrimati Archana Nayak, M.P)

MGIPMRND—3308LS(S-3)—20. 11.2006.