1
THE ELECTRICITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI RAJIV PRATAP RUDY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Electricity Act, 2003.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. For section 4 of the Electricity Act, 2003 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),
the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
"4. ( 1) The Central Government shall, after consultation with the State
Governments, prepare and notify a national policy, permitting stand alone systems
(including those based on renewable sources of energy and other non-conventional
sources of energy) for rural areas within six months from the date of coming into force
of this Act.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  86 of  2014
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Substitution of
new section for
section 4.
National Policy
on stand alone
systems for rural
areas and non-
conventional
energy systems.
5
10
36 of 2003.

2
(2) The Central Government and the concerned State Governments shall jointly
create necessary infrastructure in rural areas to harness solar power and other
forms of renewable energy to ensure access to electricity to every rural household by
the year 2020.".
3. In section 6 of the principal Act, for the words "electrification of households" the
words "electrification of households by the year 2020" shall be substituted.
4. After section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"6A. ( 1)The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State
Governments, as soon as possible but not later than six months from the date of
coming into force of this Act, prepare and notify a national policy aimed at encouraging
the use of renewable sources of energy to ensure electrification in rural and urban
areas.
(2) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Fund to—
(i) ensure availability of financial resources for the promotion and use of
renewable sources of energy;
(ii) promote research and innovation in the use of renewable sources of
energy;
(iii) provide incentives like subsidies or financial assistance to persons
who opt for use of non-renewable energy; and
(iv) provide incentives for setting up of small scale industry based on
solar energy.
(3) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State Governments
and the Appropriate Commission, set the target to be achieved by the States regarding
use of renewable sources of energy in generation of electricity.".
Amendment of
section 6.
Insertion of
new section
6A.
National
policy on
promotion of
use of
renewable
sources of
energy.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Electricity Act, 2003, seeks to provide, inter alia, for generation, transmission,
distribution, trading and use of electricity to all areas. The Act was further amended in 2007
to give effect to certain changes that were considered necessary.
As per census 2011 figures, close to 45 per cent. of rural India lack access to electricity.
Hence, it becomes essential to formulate a time bound dynamic national policy permitting
stand along systems for the use of renewable sources of energy.
The census further indicates that 43 per cent. of India's rural households continue to
depend on kerosene for lighting. The usage of kerosene for domestic heating and lighting
leads to respiratory diseases and impaired eyesight. Therefore, in order to harness a clean,
cost-effective and safe source of energy,  necessary programmes are required to be framed
and implemented in rural areas by the State Governments concerned.
Section 6 of the parent Act provides that the concerned State Governments and the
Central Government shall jointly endeavour to provide access to electricity to all areas
including villages and hamlets through rural electricity infrastructure and electrification of
households. However, more than 33 per cent. of Indian households are still have no access
to electricity. Moreover, even in cities, households suffer on account of shortage of power.
Therefore, a time-frame to ensure that 400 million people get access to electricity and the
mechanism adopted by the Central and the State Governments to resolve these issues is
vital.
India is already the fourth largest energy consumer in the world. The Indian economy
is fast growing. But, millions of households in the country still lack sufficient energy access.
Increasing dependence on oil imports for meeting the country's rising energy needs is
becoming a major concern for India's energy security. In light of the above factors, equal
stress needs to be put on utilization of the renewable energy sources for generating power in
the country. This requires substantial amount of scaling up of renewable energy systems, in
addition to conventional systems to cater to needs of different economic and social segments.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJIV PRATAP RUDY
June 30, 2014.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for creation of necessary infrastructure to harness solar
power and other sources of renewable energy to ensure electrification to rural households
by the year 2020. Clause 4 provides for preparation of a national policy aimed at encouraging
the use of renewable sources of energy to ensure electrification in rural and urban areas and
constitution of a Fund in this regard.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees  two thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE ELECTRICITY ACT, 2003
(36 OF 2003)
* * * * * *
4. The Central Government shall, after consultation with the State Governments, prepare
and notify a national policy, permitting stand alone systems (including those based on
renewable sources of energy and non-conventional sources of energy) for rural areas.
* * * * * *
6. The concerned State Government and the Central Government shall jointly endeavour
to provide access to electricity to all areas including villages and hamlets through rural
electricity infrastructure and electrification of households.
* * * * * *
5
National policy
on stand alone
systems for
rural areas and
non-conventional
energy systems.
Joint
responsibility
of State
Government
and Central
Government in
rural
electrification.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Electricity Act, 2003.
————
(Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1755LS—31.07.2014.