Bill No. 8z of 1959 
THE INDIAN STATISTICAL INS11TUTE 
BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 30TH NOVEMBER, 1959) 

LOK 
SABhA 
Gorrig'end.::l 
to 
INDIAN 
ST
1-iT1ST1CAL 
1r 
ST1 
TUTE 
BIL!J, 
1959 
(A.s,..1ntroduced 
in 
Ipk 
Sabha) 
1. 
Page 
1, 
-
for 
"Bill 
No. 
87 
of 
195" 
~ 
"Bill 
No. 
87 
of 
1959". 
2. 
Page 
3, 
line 
3, 
-
for 
";" 
~ 
": 
". 
3. 
Page 
6, 
line 
15, 
-
fox: 
IfEanglore" 
~ 
"Ban':elore". 

• ::-
J 
(/) 
+l 
i 
§ 
0 
0 
() 
7=v 
c\' 
§ 
{J) 
.c r't. +l 
\oJ 0 
.t:: ~ 
4-> ,....., 
'0 .0 
(u (!; ,. ,- . 4-> +l \0 
::! 'M rn 
""', '0 '-..J 
or-f 
~ r-i +.l 
U) 0 00 
I:: ~ 0 UJ ... 
() 
e 5:! .. 
~ r.-
ei 
0 en 
fii ~ 
~ 
z (\'I 
.c co ,.. 
'j 
z ~ 

'1 of 186e. 
at .r 1160. 
2t of t86o. 
Bill No. 87 of 19$ 
THE INDIAN STATISTICAL INSTITUTE BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to declare the institution known as the Indian Statistical Institute 
having at present its regisfered office in Calcutta to be an institu-
tion of national importance and to provide for certain matters 
connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Statistical Institute Act, andShort title com-1959. mencement. 
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
10 
IS 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- DefinitioQl. 
(a) "Institute" means the Indian Statistical Institute regis-
tered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860; 
(b) "memorandum" means the memorandum of association of 
the Institute filed with the Registrar of Joint-Stock Companies 
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860; 
(c) "rules and regulations" includes any rule or regulation 
(by . whatever name called) which the Inatitute is competent to 
make in the exercise of the powers conferred on it under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860, but shall not include any bye-
laws or standing orders made under the rules and regulations for 
the conduct of it$ day-to-day administration. . 

" J2 
Dfechlaraltid~ 3. Whereas the objects of the institution known as the Indian 
o ten ian S . . I I . h k" t't t' f Statistical tatIstica nsbtute are suc as to rna e It an InS I U Ion 0 
Jn~titut1.ttuet1~8 national importance, it is hereby declared that the Indian Statistical anms on 
of national Institute is an institution of national importance. 
importance. 
Grant of 4. Notwithstanding anything contained in the University Grants 5 
~'fees ang Commission Act, 1956, or in any other law for the time being in 3 of 1956. 
tla=. Y force, the Institute may hold such examinations and grant such 
Grants, 
loans, etc., 
by Central 
Government 
to the Jnsti-
tute. 
degrees and diplomas in statistics as may be determined by the 
Institute from time to time. 
5. For the purpose of enabling the Institute to discharge em- 10 
ciently its functions, including research, education, training, project 
activities and statistical work relating to planning for national deve. 
lopment, the Central Government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Institute in each 
financial year such sums of money as that Government considers IS 
necessary by way of grant, loan or otherwise. 
Audit of 6. (1) The accounts of the Institute shall be audited by auditors 
~i:~~e. duly qualified to act as auditors of companies under the Companies 
Act, 1956, and the Institute shall appoint such auditors as the Central 
Government may, after consultation with the Comptroller and 20 
Auditor-General of India and the Institute, select. 
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions to the 
auditors in the performance of their duties as it thinks fit. 
(3) Every such auditor in the performance of his duties shall have 
at all reasonable times access to the registers, books of account, 25 
records and other documents of the Institute. 
(4) The auditors shall submit their report to the Institute and shall 
also forward a copy thereof to the Central Government for its 
informatior. .. 
I of 1956. 
Prior appro- 7. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Societies Registra- 30 
~:al Go- tion Act, 1860, or in the memorandum or rules and regulations, the ;lI of 1860. 
vemment Institute shall not, except with the previous approval of the Central 
~~ Government,-
action by 
Institute. (a) alter, extend or abridge any of the purposes for which 
it has been established or for which it is being used 35 
immediately before the commencement of this Act, or 
amalgamate itself either wholly or partially with any other 
institution or society; or 
(b) alter or amend in any manner the memorandum or rules 
and regulations; or 40 
) 

.IS 
(c) sell or otherwise dispose of any property acquired by 
the Institute with money specifically provided for such acqui-
sition by the Central Government; 
Provided that no such approval shall be necessary in the 
case of any such movable property or class of movable property 
6S may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf 
by general or special order; or 
(d) be dissolved, 
8, (1) The Central Government may constitute as many Com- Con8titu~OD 
, d h 't 'd ' t' f h of ComDllt-10 mlttees as an w en 1 consl ers necessary consls mg 0 suc num- tees by 
ber of persons as it thinks fit to appoint thereto and assign to each Central 
such Committee all or any of the following duties, namely:- ~~e::n:~ 
programme 
(a) the preparation and submission to the Central Govern- of work by 
ment as far as possible before the commencement of each finan- ~:. Institute. 
IS cial year, of statements showing programmes of work agreed 
to be undertaken by the Institute during that year for which 
the Central Government may provide funds, as well as general 
financial estimates in respect of such work; and 
(b) the settlement on broad lines of the programme of such 
20 work, 
(2) Where the Institute does not agree to undertake any work 
suggested by any Committee referred to in sub-section (1), it shall 
give to the Central Government its reasons for not so agreeing, 
9, (1) The Central Government may constitute a Committee Review of 
., f h . b f 't th' ks fit t ' t .work done. 2S consIstmg 0 suc num er 0 persons as I m 0 appom inspection of 
thereto for the purpose of- aaaeta. etc. 
(a) reviewing the work done by the Institute and the pro-
gress made by it; 
(b) inspecting its buildings, equipment and other assets; 
(c) evaluating the work done by the Institute; and 
(d) advising Government generally on any matter which 
in the opinion of the Central Government is of importance in 
connection with the work of the Institute; 
and the Committee shall submit its reports thereon in. such manner 
3S as the Central Government may direct, 
(2) Notice shall be given in every case to the Institute of the 
intention to cause a review, inspection or evaluation to be made, 
end the Institute shall be entitled to appoint a representative who 

A 
shall have the right to be present and be heard at such review, 
inspection' or evaluation. 
(3) The Central Government may address the Chairman of the 
Institute with reference to the result of such review, inspection or 
evaluation as disclosed in any report of the Committee referred to S 
in sub-section (1), and the Chairman shall communicate to the Cen-
tral Government the action, if any, taken thereon. 
(4) When the Central Government has, in pursuance of sub-
section (3), addressed the Chairman of the Institute in connection 
with any matter, and the Chairman does not within a reasonable 10 
time take action to the satisfaction of the Central Government in 
respect thereof, the Central Government may, after considering any 
explanations furnished or representations made on behalf of the 
Institute, issue such directions as it considers necessary in respect 
of any of the matters dealt with in the report. IS 
Institute ~. 10. The Institute shall be bound to afford all necessary facilities 
:f!~r~o f~~: to any Committee constituted under section 8 or section 9 for the 
mittee.. purpose of enabling it to carry out its duties. 
Power to 
issue diIec-
tions to 
Inltitute. 
Power of 
Central 
Government 
to luume 
functions of 
control. 
11. (1) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that it is 
necessary so to do in the public interest, issue, for reasons to be 20 
recorded and communicated to the Institute, such directions as it 
thinks fit to the Institute, and such directions may include direc-
tions requiring the Institute-
(a) to amend the memorandum or to make or amend any rule 
or regulation within such period as may be specified in the mrec- as 
tions; 
(b) to give priorities to the work undertaken or to be 
undertaken by the Institute in such manner as the Central GoV-
ernment may think fit to specify in this behalf. 
(2) Any directions issued under this section shall have effect, not- 30 
withstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in 
force or in the memorandum or rules and regulations of the Institute. 
12. (1) If, in the opinion of the Central Government,-
(i) the Institute without just or reasonable cause has made 'I 
default in giving effect to any direction issued under sub-section 3S 
(4) of section 9 or section 11; or 
(ii) the Council of the Institute has exceeded or abused its 
powers in relation to the Institute or any part thereof; 
the Central Government may, by written order, direct the Institute 
within a period to be specified in the order to show cause to the satis- 40 
faction of the Central Government against the making of any appoint.:. 
ment referred to in sub-section (2). 

~ 
(2) If, within the period fixed by any order issued under sub-
section (1), cause is not shown to the satisfaction of the Central 
Government, the Central Government may, by order published in 
the Official Gazette and stating the reasons therefor, appoint one or 
5 more persons to take charge of the Institute or any part thereof for 
such period not exceeding two years as may be specified in the order. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
being in force or in the memorandum or rules and regulations of the 
Institute, on the issue of an order under sub-section (2), during the 
10 period specified in that oroer,-
(a) where the order provides for any person or persons being 
in charge of the Institute--
(i) all persons holding office as Members of the Council, 
including the Chairman, shall be deemed to have vacated their 
15 offices as such; 
(ii) the person or persons appointed under sub-section 
(2) to be in charge of the Institute shall exercise all the 
powers and perform all the duties of the Chairman or Council 
of the Institute, whether at a meeting or otherwise, in respect 
20 of the Institute; 
(b) where the order provides for any person or persons 
being in charge of any part of the Institute, the person or persons 
so appointed shall alone be entitled to exercise all the powers 
and perform all the duties of the Chairman or Council in relation 
25 to that part. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Indian Statistical Institute in Calcutta conducts investiga-
tions and studies in the science of statistics and its application in 
various fields; it also provides facilities for practical and professional 
training in statistics. 
2. There has been steady expansion in the activities of the Insti-
tute which now include-
(1) the work of designing the annual rounds of the 
National Sample Survey and the Sample Survey of Manufac-
turing Industries, processing, tabulating and analysing the field 
data and writing and printing the various N. S. S. and S. S. M. I. 
reports; 
(2) the maintenance of an Operational Research Unit on 
Planning at Calcutta, Statistical Quality Control Units at 
Banglore, Bombay, Delhi and Calcutta and other Units for 
studies in Regional Planning, Biometry and Psychometry; 
(3) advanced research in theoretical statistics and the appli-
cation of statistical methods to problems in various fields includ-
ing demography, economics, planning, agriculture and industry; 
(4) the training of statisticians deputed by the Central and 
State Governments; and 
(5) the running of an International Statistical Education 
Centre. 
3. In view of the importance of the functions of the Institute 
and the large sums of money received by it from the Government, 
it is considered necessary that the Institute should be declared to 
be an institution of national importance under Entry 64 in List I of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. The Bill makes such a 
declaration and provides for the requisite financial assistance to be 
given to the Institute and for suitable powers of control being 
exercised. The Institute is also being empowered to grant degrees 
and diplomas in Statistics. 
NEW DELHI; J. NEHRU. 
The 18th November, 1959. 
6 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill contemplates the declaration of the Indian Statistical 
Institute, Calcutta, as an institution of national importance. Such 
sums of money as the Government considers necessary for the Insti-
tute for the discharge of its functions shall be payable by the Cen-
tral Government in the shape of grants, loans or otherwise each 
year. At this stage, it is not possible to frame an accurate estimate 
of the funds needed by the Institute for its various activitiesj in 
view of the provisions in the Bill for approval of the programme of 
work of the Institute, the payment of funds will be in accordance 
with the proposals accepted by the Government of India and will 
also depend upon the quantum of contract work entrusted by the 
Government to the Institute each year. 
2. The following ~udget provision has been made under Demand 
No. 1/52-Statistics" for the Institute during the year 1959-60. 
(i) Recurring............ Rs. 80,00,000. 
(ii) Non-recurring.......... Rs. 15,00,000. 
3. Funds to be made available in the subsequent years will vary 
and will be determined from time to time. 
4. All moneys placed at the disposal of the Institute will consti-
tute the Fund of the Institute. 

LOK SABKA 
A 
BiLL 
to declare the institution known as the Indjan Statistical Institute 
having at present its registered office in Calcutta to be an 
institution of national importance and to provide for certain ' 
matters connected therewith. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of artiCle 117 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha, the 
consideration of the Bill. 
M.N.KAUL 
Secretary. 
(ShriJawaharlal Nehru, Prime Minister.) 