AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

11 DEC 1999

Bill No. 87 of 1999

‘THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999
By
Suri Ramese CHENNrTHaLA, MLP.
A
BILL
farther to amend the Constitution of Indic.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:~—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1999,
2. In the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution of India, —
(i) in paragraph 1, after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“(e) “unattached member” means an elected member of a House who has
been expelled from the membership of his original political party and declared as
such by the Chairman or the Speaker of a House.”; and

“(i)” in sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2, after Explanation, the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—

“Provided that a member who has been declared as an unattached member by
the Chairman or the Speaker of a House shall not be deemed to belong to the political
party by which he was set up as a candidate for election as such member from the
date he is declared as an unattached member and the provisions of clause (b) of sub-
paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall not apply to such member.”

Short title.

‘Amendment
of Tenth
Schedule.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The Tenth Schedule to the Constitution popularly known as the anti-defection
contains certain ambiguities which have come to light in the course of its applic
since it has come into operation. The main problem that has arisen is with regard
status and rights of a member who has been expelled from the membership of a poli
party by which he was set up as a candidate for election. As per the present provisi
the Tenth Schedule, an expelled member would be disqualified for being a member of th
House if he violates any direction issued by the whip of the party which expelled: him.
first landmark decision on this aspect after the law came into effect, invented the tett
‘Unattached’ in order to get round this problem. But this term is not a part of the las
the result, a different view can be taken in a similar situation in future. It is, there
necessary to amend the law so as to make this term a part of it and put an end to:
ambiguity in this respect. The Bill secks to achieve this object by suitably amending
Tenth Schedule to the Constitution of India.

New Deut,
November 1, 1999


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
9 के * * *
TENTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 102 (2) and 191 (2)}
Wisions as to disqualification on ground of defection.

Tn this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “House” means either House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly
or, as the case may be, either House of the Legislature of a State;

(b) “legislature party”, in relation to a member of a House belonging to any
political party in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 or paragraph 3 or,
as the case may be, paragraph 4, means the ground consisting of all the members of
that House for the time being belonging to that political party in accordance with
the said provisions;

(c) “original political party’, in relation to a member of a House, means the
tical party to which he belongs for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph

(d) “paragraph” means a paragraph of this Schedule.

(1) Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 3, 4, and 5, a member of a House
to any political party shall be disqualified for being a member of the House—

(a) if he has voluntarily given up his membership of such political party; or

(b) if he votes or abstains from voting in such House contrary to any direction
ued by the political party to which he belongs or by any person or authority
thorised by it in this behalf, without obtaining, in cither case, the prior permission
such political party, person or authority and such voting or abstention has not
en condoned by such political party, person or authority within fifteen days from
€ date of such voting or abstention,

lanation— For the purposes of this sub-paragraph,—

(a) an elected member of a House shall be deemed to belong to the political
/, if any, by which he was set up as a candidate for election as such member;

(8) a nominated member of a House shall,—

(i) where he is a member of any political party on the date of his
nomination as such member, be deemed to belong to such political party;

(ii) in any other case, be deemed to belong to the political party of
which he becomes, or, as the case may be, first becomes a member before the
expiry of six months from the date on which he takes his seat after complying
with the requirements of article 99 or, as the case may be, article 188.

* * * * *

Interpretation.

Disqualifics
tion on ground
of defection.


LOK SABHA _

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Ramesh Chennithala, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MAND—1716LS—17.11.1999.