aWNo. .,of •• 
THE CONVERTS' MARRIAGE 
DISSOLUTION BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LaIC SABHA 
ON 4TH SBPTBMBER, 1962) 
,., ARLlAM£NT L..ICS"At4 1 
III ............................. .u 
~.~1.:-.1l-_~~_ 

!iUNO . ., Of "'3 
odE CONVERTS' MARRIAGE DISSOLUTION 
Bn..L, 1962 
(As INTROJ)UCBD IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the dissolution under certain circumstance. of 
marriages of COnt'eTts an.d faT matters conn.ected therewi'Ua. 
Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Re-
public 'of l1ldia llS folloWs:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 t. (I) Tliis°Act may 1>e caned theCcmverts' Mai'riageDiMolutlon ShOrt title 
Act, 1962. aad extcD&. 
°(2) -It 'eXtends to tlie whole otIndia except the·State·Of Jammu 
'8rl4 KaShmir. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherWise :requires,- J)cftnitioDl. 
10 (a) "conversion" means change of 'religion °ahd "inclUdes re-
nuncHafion 'Of 'religion; 
(b) "diatrict court" means, in any area for which there is '. 
city civil court, that court, and in any other area the principal 
civil court of ariginal jurisdiction, and includes any other civil 
15 court which may be specified by the State Government, by 
notification in the ° O!(c!ial Gaietfe, as having jurisdiction in 
respect of the matters dealt with in this Act; 
:(c) 64fntiia"omettfls the territoriC!stb whidl tms"ACtextemis; 
and 
(d) "minor" means a person who has not completed the age 
of eighteen years. ° ° 

ConvenlOll 
by iuelfnot 
to dillOlve 
maniqe. 
CHAPTER II 
EJ'lI'IlCT ar CONVERSION ON MARRIAGES 
A.-Effect of conversion. generally 
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, the conversion of a husband or wife shall not by S 
itself t'perate to dissolve his or her marriage. 
Prohibition .c. Every person who, during the life-time of his or her spouse by ofbipmy. 
a marriage contracted before conversion, contracts any other 
marriage after his or her conversion, shall be subied to the penal-
ties provided in section 494 and section 495 of the Indian Penal Code 10 f 86~ 
for the offence of marrying again dUTin~ the life-time of a wife or I 45 0 I . 
husband, and the marriage so contracted shan be void 
~i=:= 5. No marriage shall be dissolved at the instance of a spouse on 
on pound of the ground of the conversion of that spouse, except as provided in 
CODvcnlo~ this Act IS DOt permlt- . 
ted except 
uacler Mo. 
B.-Dinoluticm of man-iage on refusal to cohabit after conversion 
e. (1) If in consequence of the conversion of a husband or a DillOlution 
of marriage 
OD conver- wife, the other spouse, not being 8 minor, repudiates, or refuses to 
:::, o~~c:c cohabit with, such husband or wife. the marria«e, whether solem-
party refuaes nized before or after the commencement of this Act, may, on a peti- 20 
to cOhabit. tion presented by such husband or wife. be dissolved by a decree 
of divorce on the ground of such repudiation or refusal. 
(2) No petit.ion shall be entertained under this section unless at 
the time of the presentation of the petition a period of not less than 
two years has elapsed since the conversion of the petitioner. 25 
:t'drr::r: 7. Where a decree of dissolution of marriage under this Act has 
penoua. been passed, and the time for appealing has expired without an 
appeal having been presented, or an appeal lias been presented but 
bas been dismissed and the decree of dissolution has become final, 
but not sooner, either party to the marriage may marry again. 30 
CHAPTER m 
JURISDICTION AND PROCEDUU 
8. Every petition under this Act shall be presented to the atstrlct 
eourt within the local limits of whose' ordinary arlglnal civil juris-
dictioD- 35 
(4) the respondent is restdfng 'at the time of the presenta-
tlon of the petition, or 

J of 1~.,8. 
5 
3 
(b) the marriage was solemnized, or 
(c) the husband and wife laJt resided together, or 
(d) the petitioner is residing at the time of presentation df 
the petition, provided the respondent is, at that time, residing 
outside India. 
t. No court shall entertain any petition for the dissolution of an,. JuriJlctioa 
marriage under this Act unless the parties are domiciled in India at of Indian 
the time of the presentation of the petition. ourtI. 
10. (1) Every petition presented under this Act shall state dis- Con~ 
10 Unct1y the facts of the case and shall also state that there is no ~~~ of 
collusion between the petitioner and the other party to the marriage~ peti~ 
(2) The statements contained in every such petition shall be 
verified by the petitioner or some other competent person in the 
manner required by law for the verification of plaints and may, at 
15 the hearing, be refe.rred to as evi&!nee. 
11. Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act and to A,~tiod 
luch rules as the High Court may make in this behalf, all proceed- ~'vil :~ 
1ngs under this Act shall be regulated, as far as may be, by the Code d~re. 
of CivU Procedure, J908. 
20 12. Where in any pl'oceeding under this Act it appears to the MaintCD&DCC 
court that either the wife or the husband, as the case may be, has t""":::d 
no independent income suffic·jent for her or his support and the e~ of 
necessary expenses of the proceeding, it may, on the application of the proccediDp. 
wife or the husband, order the respondent to pay to the petitioner 
25 ~e expenses of the proceeding, and monthly during the proceeding 
such sum as, having regard to the petitioner's own income and the 
.income of the respondent, may seem to the court to be reasonable. 
13. (1) Any court exercising jurisdiction under this Act on the P~rmancnt 
application of any person, may, at the time of passing any decree of ~~te!.a~ 
30 dissolution of marriage or at any time subsequent thereto, order 
that the petitioner shall, while the respondent remains un-married, 
pay to the respondent for her or his maintenance and support such 
gross sum or such monthly or periodical sum for a term not exceed-
ing the life of the respondent as, having regard to the petitioner'. 
35 own income and other property, if any, the income and other pro-
perty of the respondent and the conduct of the parties, may seem to 
the court to be justj and any such payment may be secured, if neces-
tary, by a charge on the immovable property of the petitioner. 
(2) Where a petition for dissolution of a marriage under this Act 
40 has been filed by the husband, the court shall not pass a decree of 

.. 
dissolution of the marriage without passiAg an order under sub-
section (1) unless, fer special reasons to be recorded, the court 
~: ,~~ ,sllCk, o.rd#r i~ WMlee~. 
(3) If the court is satided that there is a change in the circums-
tances of either party at any time after it has made an order under S 
!lulHiection (1), it lOay" althe, in$p,ce, of ~I: pa,rty, vBrf, InP,dify 
or .. Dt8lZiJId MY, such 0J.:d~ ~ sU:CA ll)B.lUler ~ the, court, n;a41 ,'deem just. ' ", , , 
(f) ~ the court Is satisfied that the party in whose favour an 
o~:d~ has been made under this section has re-married' or, if such 10 
party is the wife, that she has not remained chaste, or, if such party 
is the husband, that bee hQ, hac:i se~ intercour:se with any woman 
outside wedlock, it sbe1l r~ the order. ' 
14. (1) In any proce~, under this Act, the co~ ~y m8~e 
such provisions in the decree as it deems just and proper with respec~ IS 
~ any property presented, at, or about the time of,' t~e lllal'riage, 
which may beleng jo1ntlly to both the husbaw;l and the w.ife. 
(2) In any proceeding under this Act in which the c~, pro-
J:lP~,c;es a decr~ for ~lution of marriage, the court may inquire 
h.;Lto ,the, e?,i~ence of an~e-nuptial or post-nuptial settlements made.zo 
on the pa~i~ whoSe maniage'is the subject of the decree, and may 
make such' orders,' With' reference to the application of, the whole or 
iPl.Y. pa~ ,o!- the property ~ settled (whether the seUlementis for 
tile benefit of the children of the marriage or of the parties to ~e 
~iage or both), 'as the court thinks fit. 25 
(3) The court shall not make any order under sub..sectlon (2) 
for ,the benefit of ,the parents or either of them at the expense :>f the 
children. 
of '15: (1) Subject to the provisions at sub-section (Z), many ,pro-
c~ding under this Act, the court may from time to ttm"pasa such 30 
interim orders ad make such prOvisions in the decree as .it, D\BY 
de,em just and proper with respect to the custody, maintenance and 
education of minor children, consistently with their wishes, Wlh~ver 
possible, and may, after the decree, upon application by,petition for 
the purpose, make, from time to time, all such orders andpravislc;ms 3S 
with re~pect !o the custody, maintenance and education of such 
children as might have been made by such decree orinteIim orders 
in. case. tb,e proceecling for obtaining such decree were s~ill pending, 
~the co1P1 may al~o from time to tipte revoke, suspend or vary 
any such orders and provisions previously made. - 4 0 

J 
~) . ~ a..nwriaae is dlsa9lved ~r .this ~ ~ the. ~ioi1 
of any person, the respondent shall ~ enti~d t9 ~ ellstody of the 
minor children of the marriage, unless the court, by reason of the 
special circumstances of the case, deems it just to make an order to 
S the contraq. 
1~. All decrees and orders made by the court in any proceeding EnforcemcDt 
under this Act. shall be enforced in the like manner as the decreeS ~d~~:. 
and orders of the cow;t made in the exercise of its original civil 
jurisdiction for the wn.e being are ~orcecL' . . .. ... . 
10 J7. All decree& and orders made by the court in any procee~ing =:Creea 
un,de:r this Act sball be appealable as decrees of the court made in .Dd orden. 
the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction, and such apPeal shall 
lie to the court to which appeals ordinarily lie from 'the decisions of 
~~ court given in the exercise of its or.iainal civil jurisdiction: . , ". . :.' .' . , ~ . 
IS Provided that there shall be no appeal on the subject of ~ts only. 
CHAPl'ER IV 
MIsCELLANEOUS 
18, The High. Court may, by notification in the Official Gazette, Rul~ ~ 
make such rules consistent with the provisions contained in this Act His 
20 as it may consider expedient for the purpose of carrying into effect 
the provisions of this Act. 
19. In any proceeding under this Act, proof of the respondent's Proof L of 
refusal or voluntary neglect to cohabit with the petitioner, after the refu .. 
petitioner's conversion and after knowledge thereof by the respon-
2S dent, shan be sufficient evidence of such repudiation or refusal being 
in consequence of the petttioner's conversion, unless some other suffi-
cient cause for such repudiation or refusal be proved by the respon-
dent. 
20. The dissolution of a marriage under this Act shall not operate Dil.olu~loll 
30 to deprive the respondent's children (if any) by the petitioner of ~~n:r:c 
their status as legitimate children or of any right or interest which .~tUI ~ 
they would. have had according to the perSlOnal law applicable to =lU. 
them, by way of maintenance, inheritance or otherwise, in case the 
marriage had not been dissolved under this Act. 
35 21. For the purposes of this Act, a person to whom the Hindu PZOVi~~OD 
Marriage Act, 1955, applies, shall not be deemed to have been con- =n~1lI to 
vert~ to another religion if, even after such conversion, the said Act ~nc: ~ ... 
continues to apply to such person. rlail Act 
appliel both 
before aDd 
aftcrcomv-
.... 

Savin .. tot 12. Nothmg in this Act appUes to any marriap 101emni8ed under 
:=r.~ the Special Marriage Act, 19M. 
ander the 
Special Mar. 
riaae Act. 
&epeaI. 23. (1) The Converts' Marriage Dissolution Act, 1866. and ahy 21 of 1866-
enactment corresponding to that Act in force in any area immediately 
before the commencement of this Act, are hereby repealed. 
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall aftect any proceeding 
S 
under the Converts' Marriage Dissolution Act, 1866, or any such 21 of 1866. 
COlTesponding enactment, pending at the commencement of this Act. 
and any such proceeding may be continued and determined as if the 
Converts' Marriage Dissolution Act, 1866 or such colTesponding 10 21 of 1866. 
enactment, as the case may be, had not been repealed. 
(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall be without prejudice 
to the provisiOns contained in section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 
1897, which shall also apply to the repeal of the colTesponcling enaet- 10 of 1891. 
~~ IS 

'TATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Converts' Marriage Dissolution Act, 1866, provides that when 
• husband or wife changes his or her reUgion to· Christianity and if 
In consequence of such change the other party to the marriage deserta 
or repudiates the convert, the convert can move the court for a decree 
dissolving the marriage, and the court may pass such a decree after 
complying with the procedure prescribed therein. During the exami-
nation by the Law Commission of the law relating to marriage and 
divorce among Christians in India, this Act was criticised as being 
discriminative in character in that it applied only to cases of conver-
sion from Hinduism and it gave reUef only in cases of conversion to 
Christianity. In its 18th Report the Law CommJssion has recom-
mended the replacement of this Act by a law applicable to all c0n.-
verts uniformly which would confer on a convert the right to have 
the marriage contracted before conversion dissolved on such terms U 
amght be just and proper. 
This Bill seeks to implement the 18th Report of the Law C0m-
mission. The notes on clauses explain in detaU the sa11ent featurel 
of the Bill. 
A. K. SEN. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 24th AuVU", 1962. 

Note., 'on CIa",", 
,~~ l.-The existiJig ,Act. namely the Converts' Martial. 
b.i~sbl:ution Act, 1866. does not extend to the Union Territory of 
Mmipur. A1J there Is no longer any justiftcatlon for its exclusion. 
tliepropoSed l~wwi11 no\v 'extend to the whole of India exCept 
.t*lmnu and kashmir. 
CZawe 2.-The expresslon "eonversion" h8s been defined to 
include a mere renunciation of religion not followed up by conversion 
to another religion. 
Clause a.-TIle oejeCt of' 'this clause is to provide that the COD-
~ersltm of a spouse wIn not by itself put an end to the marriage. 
~e law at present is that conversion from one monogamous 
r~lig1on to another dOes not 'ipso facto put an end to the marriage. 
Where the conversion is from a monogamous religion to a polygamoua 
religion, the law is equally well-settled that such conversion will 
not operate as a diSsolution 'Of the marriage. Urider'section 4: of the 
Dissolution of MU~im Marriages Act, 1939,' the renunciation of Islam 
by a married Muslim woman or her conversion to anotherfaith 
does not by itself operate to dissolve her marriage. Where a Muslim 
husband changes his religion the law is. however, di1ferent, and this 
clause. while largely declaratory of the existing law, seeks to make 
a slight modification in Muslim law for the sake of uniformity. 
CIawe 4.-The object of this clause is to ensure that merely by 
conversion a person is not enabled to contract a second marriage SO 
long as the marriage contracted before the conversion is not duly 
dissolved. In most cases the personal laws now applicable prohibit 
bigamy and in such cases this clause will be merely of a declaratory 
nature. Where, however, the personal law does not prohibit bigamy, 
this clause will afford tile non-converted spouse a much needed 
relief. 
Clawe 5.-This clause provides that the only method by which a 
convert can get his pre-converslon marriage dissolved would be 
under this law. 
ClaUle 6.-Thls follows sections 4: and 5 of the Converts' Marriage 
Dissolution Act. 1866, but the requirement that the desertion or 
repucJfatiDn must have been for the space of six continuous montha 

9 
has been omitted as unnecessary. Further, the word "desertion" 
has also not been used as it is inappropriate in the context of the 
relief which is based not on any matrimonial offence of the non;. 
converted party but on the ground of conversion not being 
acceptable to that party. Instead, the words "refuses to cohabit" 
have been used. A minimum interval of two years between the 
conversion and the petition is provided for the purpose of diBCourag-' 
ing sham conversions. 
Clause 7.-This clause provides that the parties to a decree ~or 
divorce may re-marry once the decree has become final and is on 
the lines of the c;:orresponding provision in other matrimonial laws. 
Clause 8.-Subject to the restriction contained in clause 9, this 
clause seeks to define the district court which will have jurisdiction' 
In respect of petitions under the proposed law. The respondent's 
residence is the main basis but provision is made to meet other 
cases as in the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, and the Special Marriage 
Act, 1954. 
Clause 9.-Following sections 4 and 5 of the Converts' Marriage 
Dissolution Act, 1866 (read with the definitions of "husband" and 
uwife" in that Act), and in accordance with well-accepted principles 
of private international law, jurisdiction under this law will be 
exercised only if the parties are domiciled in this country. 
Clauses 10, 11 a7f.d 12.-These are modelled mainly on the corx:es,,: 
ponding provisions in the Hindu Marriage Act. 1955, and the Special 
Marriage Act, 1954. 
Clause 13.-This clause deals with permanent alimony and main-
tenance and is modelled, subject to important qualifications. on the 
corresponding provisions in the Special Marriage Act. 1954, and the 
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. It is considered that only the respondent 
in the main proceedings should 'be entitled to relief under this clause. 
So far as the petitioner is concerned, he or she would have instituted 
proceedings on account of his or her own act, and hence it is not 
desirable that the petitioner should be given a right to claim mainten-
ance from the other party. Sub-clause (2) makes a special provisiot:l 
that unless the court decides otherwise, a decree for dissolution 01 
marriage should be passed, where the petitioner is the husband, only 
after suitable orders have been made for the maintenance of the 
wife. the reason being that once a decree for dissolution has been 
passed, the husband will be free to marry again and he might there-
after become indifferent and remiss in carrying out his obUgatinns 
to the divorced wife and it would work great hardship if she were 
to hang on to the court fQr en~orcin~ her rights. 

10 
Cz,\&8e H.-Bub..clause (1) is intended to enable the court to put 
0~4'~s relatini. to the dispoaal of property presented to the parti .. 
~, Ul~ t~e of marriage and belonging to them jointly. It is based 
~ a ~4U: provision in ilie Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. Sub-clauses 
W ~Q. (3) are ~tended to eIUpower the court to deal with proper-
tilt ~Ued before Or after the marriage of the parties, and are based 
on similar prov!sions in the Indian Divorce Act, 1869. 
~ 14.-Sub-clause (1) is intended to enable the court to pass 
qij\er ARts ~.i with dissolution of marriage. makes comprehen-
si-.. p.ro~ w~th l'eapect to custody, maintenanc.e and education. 
o{ ~or chUdren. Sub-clause (2) embodies a special provwon 
~efrini il prefefential right to the c\lS.tpdy of the children on the 
D.9Jl-C,Onverted spo.\lse su.bject to the paramount consideration of the 
weUare of the children. 
ClGUM J6.-Thia clause makes the usual provisions as to execu-
tion of decrees and orders. 
ClcI.'U!It 11.~This provides for appeals &gamst decrees and aMers. 
:U. ~ been modeUed o~ the conef\pOI).diog pt'O¥ia,iDns of oUler Ac$1t 
t.~jDg to marriage aud divorce, with the difference that deCl'eea 
~ ordera are made appealable as "decrees" and Dot as "orders," .lS 
orders are DOt normally appealable under the Civil Procedure C.Q.de. 
Under the Converts' Marriage Dissolution Act, 1866, no provision 
~ been made for any appeal, though a provision has been made 
for a reference of the case to the High Court. It is felt that all 
appeal would be more appropriate and convenient than a reference. 
e'l4uae 19~-This clause, based on SecUon 21· of the CCDftverts' 
Marriage Diuolution Act, 1886. embodies a uaeful presumption. 
Clause 2O.-This clause embodies the substance of section 27 of 
the C~verts' Marriage Dissolution Act, 1866, and is intended to 
~~r~ the status and property rights of the children of the 
~arrl.g,~. . 
Cli1.1J,Je .?~.-Thi$ clause is intended to ensure that c);ijlng~ froll1 
9~ sect. to. another within tbe fold of Hindu Law will nQt be d~emed 
·\0 b,e. co.n:verslon, 
ClaWoN- 22,-This dause excludes me.tI'i~ges solenuJiseci under the 
$teeial Ma~ge Act, 1954, from ~e purview: of the proposed 
~laUon. ·8inoe a difteren.ce of religion doa not CODle in the way 
a.f It naa~riage undertAat Act, any subsequent change . of: I'eligion 
~ not abo have any effect ·on a . marciag.e· eontracted under 
... Act. . 
Clause 23.-Seeks to repeal the Converts' Marriage Di8lO1ution 
Act, 1866, with the necessary saving prOvisions. 

MEMORANDuM REGARDING DELEGATED i..EGISLATlON 
Clause 18 of the Bill, like section 62 of the Indian Divorce Act, 
1869 and section 41 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 authorises the 
High Court to make rules for carrying into effect its provisions. 
Chapter In lays down in detail Ule procedure to be followed by 
that court in matters arising under the proposed legislation, but 
rules may still be necessary to supplement its provisions as for 
example, in respect of matters relating to the form of petitions, the 
particulars to be contained therein, the payment of costs, etc. 
The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character . 
• 
-, . , II 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the dissolution under certain circumstances of 
maniages of converts and for matters connected therewith . 
• 
(Shri Asoke K· Sen, Minister of Law.) 