As I~ODUCED LN LoK: SABRA ON 
II···· 
... AUG 1983 
am No. '7011'13 
THE ARMS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1983 
A 
BILL 
• further to amend the A M1'/.3 Act, 1959. 
B. it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Arms (Amendment) Act, 1983. 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 22nd day of 
5 June, 1983. 
Short 
title 
and com-
mence-
ment. 
If of 1818. I. In section 2 of the Anns Act, 1959 (hereinafter referred to as the Amend-
principal Act), b1 sub-section (1), after clause' (f), the fol1owing clause ment of 
thall be ~nserted, namely:- section~. 
, (ff) "magistrate" means an Executive Magistrate under . the 
2 of 1t'14. 10 Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;'. 
. \ 
3. Section 3 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-section 
(1) thereof and after sub-section (1), as so re-numbeJoed, the following 
sub-ections shall be inserted, namely:-
CI (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no 
r 5 person, other than a person referred to In sub-section (3). shall 
acquire, have in his possession or carry, at any time, more than three 
ftreanns: 
Provided that a penon who has in his possession more tlrearma 
than thr,"'e at the commencement of the Anns (Amendment) Act, 
10 1983, may retain with him any three of such fl.rearrnl and shall 
Amend-
mentor 
ACtion I, 

deposit,. within thirty days from such commencement, the remaining 
firearms with the officer in charge of the nearest police station or, 
subject to the conditions prescribed for the purposes of sub-section 
(1) of section 21, with a licensed dealer or, where such person ia. 
member of the armed forces of the Union, in a unit armoll1'1 5 
referred to in that sub-section. 
(3) Nothing contained in, sub-section (2) shall apply to any 
dealer in firearms pr to any member of a rifle club or rifle associatioD 
licensed or recognised by the Central Government usUig a pc>int D 
bore rtfte or an air rifle for target practice. 10 
(4) The provisions of sub-sections (2) to (6) (both inclusive) 
of section 21 shall apply in relation to any deposit of flrearms 'Ullder 
the proviso to sub-section (2) as they apply in relation to the 
deposit of any arm or ammunition 1lllder sub-section (1) of that 
section.". . 15 
t. Section 5 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as suD-aectlOD 
(1) thereof and-
(a) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the 'proviso shall be 
omitted; 
(b) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following BUb- 110 
section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
a person may, without holding a licence in this behalf, lell or 
transfer any arms or ammunition which he lawfully possesses for 
his own private use to another person who is entitled by virtue of 115 
this Act or any, other law for the time being in force to have, or 
is no~ prohibited by thls Act or su~h other law from having in 
his possession such arms or ammunition: 
Provided that no firearm or ammunition in respect of which 
a licence is required under section 3 and no arms in respect of SO 
which a licence is required under section 4 shall be so sold or 
transferred by any person unless-
(a) he has informed in writing the district magistrate 
having jurisdictirm or the officer in ch~ge of the nearest pollee 
station of his intention to sell OIl' transfer such ftrearms, 55 
ammunition or other arms and the name and address of the 
person to whom he intends to sell or transfer such firearms, 
ammunition or the other arms, and 
(b) a period of ,not less than forty-five days has expired 
after the giving of such ~nformation.". 40 
5. In section 9 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (4) ,-
(a) in sub-elause (i), for the words "sixteen years", the words 
"twenty--one years" shall be substituted; 
'(b) in sub-clause (ii) , for the words lea term of not less thaa 
six months", the words "any term" shall bp substituted; and 45 
(c) in sub-clause (iii), for the words Rnd ftgures "Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898", the words and figures "Code of CrIminal 5 Of 1_ 
Procedure, 1973" shall be substituted, 2 of 1.., .. 

10K SABRA 
CORRIGEN~ 
to 
THE ARMS (AMENDMm'll') BILL, 1983 
(Tg be/As introduced in 10k Sabha) 
1. Page 3, line 22,-
nu: lIof':fiences" ~ "of'fences" 
2. page 7, line 36,-
!c1:. "fir " ~ "1th I" " 
NEW DELHI; 
~Ult"'-AO~ 1983 ravc:ina 5, 19U5 t5akaJ 

g 
t, In section 13 of the principal Act, fer sub-section (2), the foUOwUl' 
Jub-sections shall be substituted, namely:-
"(2) On receipt of. an application, the licensing authority shall 
call for the report of ,the officer in charge of the nearest pollce 
5 station on that application, and such officer shall send his report 
within the prescribed time. 
(2A) The licensing authority, after such inquiry, if any, as it 
may consider necessary, and after considering the report received 
under sub-section (2), shall, subject to the other provisions of this 
10 Chapter, by order in writing either grant the licence or refuse to 
grant the same: 
20 
115 
35 
.... 5 
Provided that where the officer in charge of the nearest pollce 
station does not send his report on the application within the pres-· 
cribed time, the licensing authority may, if it deems fit, make such 
order, after the expiry of the prescribed time, without further 
waiting for that report.". 
7. In .Chapter IV of the prindpal Act, after section 24, the following 
sections shall be inserted, namely:-
'24A. (1) Where the· Central Government is satisfied that there 
iii extensive disturbance of public peace and tranquillity or immi-
nent danger of such disturbance in any area and that for the preven-
tion of offiences involving the use of arms in such area, it is necessary 
or exPedient so to do, it may by notification in the Official Gazette-
(a) specify the limits of such area; 
(b) direct that before the commencement of the period 
specified in the notification (which period shall be a period 
commencing from a date not earlier than the fourth day after 
the date of publication of the notification in the Official Gazette), 
every person' having in his posseSSion in such area any arms of 
such description as may be specified in the notification (the arms 
SO specified being hereafter in this section referred to as notified 
arms), shall deposit the same before such commencement fD. 
accordance with the provisions of section 21 and for this purpose 
the possession by such person of any notified arms shall, not-
withstanding anything contained in any other proviSion of thil 
Act (except section 41) or in any other law for the time being 
in force, as from the date of publication of such notification in 
the Official Gazette be deemed to have ceased to be law:ful; 
(c) declare that as from the commencement of, and until 
the expiry of, the period specified in the notification, . it shall 
not be lawful for any person to have in his possession in such 
area any notified arms; 
(d) authorise any such officer subordinate to the Central 
Government or a State Government as may be specified in the 
notification,-
(i) to search at any time during the period specifled in 
the notification any person in, or passing through, or any 
Insert.ion 
otnew 
sectlons 
24Aand 
24B. 
Prohibi_ 
tion .. 
topoae.-
sionot 
noti1led 
&mlIin 
disturbed 
areas, 
etc, 

Prohibi-
tion a. to 
carryinl 
of 
DOtlfied 
anna in 
or 
throulh 
public 
place. in 
disturbed 
area •• 
etc. 
premises in, or any. animal or vessel 01' vehicle or other 
conveyance of whatever nature in or passing through, or 
any receptacle or other container of whatever nature In. 
such area if such officer has reason to believe that any noti-
fled arms are secreted by s~ch person or in such px:emlse. or 5 
on such animal Or in such vessel, vehicle or other eonve-
yance or in such receptacle or other container; 
(ii) to seize at any time during the period specified in 
the notification any notified c.J'lDS in the possession of any 
person in such area or discovered through a search unckr 10' 
s-ub-clause (i), and detain the same during the period specI-
fied in the notification. 
(2) The period specified in a notification issued under sub-see-
tion (1) in respect of any area shall not, in the fi.rst instance, exceed 
ninety days, but the Central Government may amend such notiflca- 15 
tion to extend such period from time to time by any period not ex-
ceeding ninety days at anyone time if, in the opinion of that Gov-
ernment, there continues to be in such area such disturbance of 
public peace and tranquillity as is referred to in sub-section (1) or 
imminent danger thereof and that for the prevention of offence. gO 
involving the use of arms in such area it is necessary or expedient 
so 'to do. 
(3) The proviSIOns of the Code of Criminal Procedure, lInS, 2 gf 187 •. 
relating to searches and seizures shall, so far as may be, apply to 
any search or seizure made under SUb-section (1), ~5 
(4) For the purposes of this section,-
(/~) "arms" includes ammunition.; 
(b) where the period specified in a notification, as originally 
issued under sub-section (1). is extended under sub-section (2), 
then, in relation to such nOtification, references in 8ub-aection go . 
(1)to "the period specified in the notification" shall be construed 
as references to the period as so extended. 
24B. (1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that there 
is extensive disturbance of public peace and tranquillity or :imminent 
danger of such disturbance in any area and that for the prevention gS 
of offences involving the use of arms in such area it is necessary or 
expedient so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette.-
(a) specify the limits of such area; 
(b) direct that during the period specified in the notlftcaticm 
(which period shall be a period commencing from a date . not 40 
earlier than the second day after the date of publication of the 
notification in the Official Gazette). no person shall carry Ol' 
otherwise have in his possession any arms of such description II 
may be specified in the notification (the armI so specified being 
,hereafter in this section referred to as notifted arms) throup 4-5 
or in any public place in such area; 

(c) authorise any such officer subordinate to the Central 
Government or a. State Government u may be specified in the 
notification,-
(i) to search at any time during the period specified in 
the notillcation any person in or passing through, or any 
premises in or forming part of, or any animal or vessel or 
vehicle or other conveyance of whatever nature, in or passing 
through, or any receptacle Or other container of whatever 
nature in, any public place in such area if such officer has 
10 reason to believe that any notified arms are secreted by such 
person or in such premises or on such animal or in" such 
vessel, vehicle or 9ther conveyance or in S'Uch receptacle or_ 
other cQntainer; 
(ii) to seize at any time during the pedod specified in 
15 the notification any notified. arms being carried by or other-
wise in the possession of any person, through or in a public 
place in such area or discovered through a search under 
sub-clause (i), and detain the same during the period 
specified in the notification. 
gO (2) The period specified in a notification issued under Bull-sec-
tion (1) in respect of any area shall not, in the first instance, exceed 
ninety days, but the Central Government may amend such notifi-
cation to extend such period from time to time by any period not 
exceeding ninety days at anyone time if, in the opinion of that Gov-
: ernment, there continues to be in such area such disturbance of 
public peace and tranquillity as is referred to in sub-section (1) 
or imminent cldngEJ." thereof and that for the prevention of offences 
"involving the use of arms in such area it is necessary or expedient 
so to do. 
30 (3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, re- 2 of 1974. 
35 
45 
lating to searches and seizures shall, so far as may be, apply to any 
search or seizure made under sub-section (1), 
(4) For the purposes of this section,-
(a) ,carms" includes ammunition; 
(b) "public place" means . any place intended for use by, or 
accessible to, the public or any section of t~e public; and 
(c) where the per-iod specified in a notification, as originally 
issued under sub-section (1), is extended under sub-section (2), 
then, in relation to such notification, references iIi sub-section 
(1) to "the period specified in the notification" shall be construed 
as references to the period as so extended.". 
8. In section 25 of the principal Act,-
(4) for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be 
substituted, namely:-
,c (1) Whoever...,... 
(a) manufactures, sells, transfens, converta, repairs, 
tests or proves, or exposes or offers for sale or transfer, or 
Amend-
mertt 
o·r seC.' 
tion 25. 

has in his possession for sale, tr~nsfer, conversion, repair. 
test or proof, any arms or ammunition in contravention of 
section 5; or 
(b) shortens the barrel of a firearm or converts an 
imitation firearm into a fireann in contravention of section 5 
6; or 
(c) acquires, has in his possession or carries, or manu-
factures, sells, transfers, converts., repairs, tests or proves, 
or exposes or offers 'for sale or transfer, or has in his 
possession for sale, transfer, conversion, repair, test or 10 
proof, any prohibited arms or prohibited ammunition hi 
contravention of section 7; or 
(d) brings into, or takes out of, India, any arms or 
ammunition of any class or description in contravention of 
section 11, 15 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than three years but which may extend to seven 
years and shall also be liable to fine. 
(lA) Whoever has in contravention of a notification issued 
under section 24A in his possession or in contravention of a!lO 
notification issued und(i!r section 24B carries or otherwise has in 
his possession, any arms or ammunition shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year, 
but which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to 
fine. . ! !l5 
(IB) Whoever-
(a) acquires, has in his possession or carries any firearm 
or ammunition in contravention of section 3; or 
(b) acqui.res, has in his possession or carries in any 
place specified by notification under" section 4 any arms of 30 
such class or description as has been specified in that noWi-
catiou in contravention of that section; or 
(c) sells or transfers any fireann which does not bear 
the name of the maker, manufacturer's number or other 
identification mark stamped or otherwise shown thE".reon u 35 
required by sub-section (2) of section 8 or does any aet iD 
contravention of ,sub-section (1) of that section; or . .. 
(d) being a person to whom sub-clause (ti) or sub-
clause (iii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 9 
applies, acquires, has in his possession or carries any :firearm 40 
or ammunition in contravention of that section; or 
(e) sells or transfers, or converts, repairs, tests or 
proves any firearm or ammunition in contravention of 
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 9; or 45 
(f) brings into, or takes out of, India, any arms or 
ammunition in contravention of section 10; or 
(g) transports any arms or ammunition in contra-
vention of section 12; or 
(h) .fails ~o deposit arms or ammunition as required by 50 
sub-sectlDn \ .. ) of section 3, or sub-section (1) of section 
21; or 

5 
10 
15 
llO 
go 
35 
45 
7 
(i) being a manufacturer of, or dealer in, ann. or 
ammunition, fails, on being required to do so by rules made 
under section 44, to maintain a record or account or to make 
therein all such entries as are required by such rules or 
intentionally makes a false entry therein or prevents or 
obstructs the inspection of such record or account or the 
making of copies of entries therefrom or prevents or obstr'..teb 
the entry into any premises or other place where anns or 
ammunition are or is manufactured or kept or intentionally 
fails to exhibit or conceals such arms or ammunition or 
refuses to point out where the same are or is manufactured 
or kept, . 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a tenn which shall 
- not be less than six months but which may extend to three yean 
and shall also be liable to fine: 
Provided that the Court may for any adequate and speeial 
reasons to be recorded in the judgment impose a sentence of 
imprisonment for a term of less than six months."; 
(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section .tall be 
subttituted, nam.ely:- ' 
II (3) Whoever sells 'or transfers any ftre~, ammunition or 
other arms- . 
(i) without infol1n:ing the dis1;rict magistrate having 
jurisdiction or the officer in charge of the nearest pollee 
station, of the intended sale or transfer of that firearm, 
ammunition or other arms; or 
(ii) before the expiration of the period of forty-five 
days from the date of giving such information to such dis-
trict magistrate or the officer in charge of the pollce 
station, 
in contravention of the provisions of clause (a) or clause (b) 
of the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 5, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six monthl, 
or with fine of an amount which may extend to five hundred 
rupees, or with both.". 
9. Fir section 26 of the pri!1cipa1 Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
,,2ft. (1) V'¥hoever doe. any act in contravention r)f any of the 
provisions of section 3, 4, 10 or 12 in such manner as to indicate an 
intention that sUch act may not be known to any public servant or 
to any person employed or working upon a railway, aircraft, vessel, 
vehicle or any other means of conveyance, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than sfx months 
but which may extend to seven years and also with flne. 
(2) Whoever does any act in contravention of any of the provi-
sions of section 5, 6, 7 or 11 in such manner as to indicate an intention 
that such act may not be known to any public servant or to any 
person employed or working upon a railway, aircraft, vessel, vehiele 
or any other means of comreyance, s~all bp. punishlll)l~ with imprlson-
Subatl-
tutlon 
of ne" aection 
1orleC:-
tion 28. 
Secret 
contra. 
ventions. 

Amend· 
mentof 
sections 
27 aml28. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
29 
rio 
Amend-
mentot 
section 
30. 
Amend-
mentof 
&ection 
3t. 
Amend-
mentof 
sections 
37 and 38. 
Amend-
menlof 
section 
41. 
Amend-
me'11t of 
section 
44. 
8 
ment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which 
may extend to ten years and also with fine. 
(3) Whoever on any search being made under section 22 cone,alI 
or attempts to conceal any arms or ammunition, shall be punishable 
with ;mprisonment for a term which may extend to ten yell'll and 5 
also with fine.". 
10. In sections 27 and 28 of the principal Act, for the words II , or with 
fine, or with both", the words Oland with fine" shall be substituted. 
11. In section 29 of the principal Act, for the words IISix months, or 
with fine of an amount whkh may extend to five hundred rupees, or 10 
:1 with both", the words "three years, or with fine, or with both" shall be 
substituted. 
12. In section 30 of the principal Act, for the words "three months", 
the words I'six months" and for the words "five htmc!red,J, the worda 
"two thousand" shall be substituted. 
13. In section 34 of the principal Act,-
15 
(a) for the words and figures "Sea Customs Act, 1878", 
words and figures I!Customs Act, 1962" shall be substituted; 
the 8 Of 1878. 
82all862. 
(b) for the word and figures "section 16", the word 
figures "section 58" shall be substituted. 
and 
14. In sections 37 and 38 of the prinCipal Act, for the warda and 
figures "Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898", the words and figure' 
"Code' of Crbninal Procedure, 1973" shall be substituted. 
20 
15. In section 41 of the principal Act, in clause (a), for the word. 
"exempt any person or class of persons", the words and brackets lOIS 
uf'xempt any person or class of persons (either generally or in relation 
to such description of arms and amnmnition as may be spectfted in 
the notification)" shall be substituted. 
16. In section 44 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (2). in clause (4), after the wor(fs fllicen- 30 
sing 8'Ilthorities", the word!=: "including the areas and the categories 
of anns and ammunition for which they may r,rant licences" .han 
be inserted; 
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words "two Buccessive lessioDl, 
and if before the expiry of the session in which it 1s so laid or the 35 
session immediately following", the words "two or more successive 
sessions, and if. before the expiry of the session immediately 
follOwing the sec;sion or the s'uccessive sessions aforesaid" shall be 
substituted. . 
II otl818. 
2 of 18'14. 
17.(1) The Arms (Amendment) Ordinance, 1983, is hereby repHled. 40 4 of 1.33. 
(2) Notwithstandin/! such repeal. anything done or any actiOn taken 
under the principal Act as amend~d by the said Ordinance, shall be 
deemed to have be""n. done or taken undel." the prlncipal Act IS amended 
by this Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Anna Act, 1959 (54 of 1959) was enacted about twenty-four 
years ago. Of late, there has been an increasing incidence of crime 
involving use of firearms. Apart from un licenced firearms, the involve-
ment of licenced firearms in crime has also been on the increase. The 
Arms (Amendment) Bill, 1981 (Bill No. XXI of 1981) was, therefore, 
introduced in Parliament in 1981 to provide for greater vigilance on the 
issue of licences for firearms and sale and transfer of those arms with 
the objective of ensuring that firearms do not come into possession of 
anti-social elements. The Bill also provided for enhancement of 
punishment for offences as also for minim'Um punishment for more 
serious offences under the Act, with the objective of acting as a strong 
'deten-ent. 
2. The aforesaid Bill which was introduced in Rajya Sabha on the 
24th August, 1981 was passed by that HO'USe on 8th September, 1981 arid 
it .is now pending in Lok Sabha. After the passing of the .dill by Rajya 
Sabha, a number of valuable suggestions for further amendments of the 
Arms Act, 1959 so as to make the provisions of ~he Act more stringent 
and effective were received from Mttmbers of Parliament as also from 
other quarters. The intention originally was to move the- necessary 
amendments to the Bill after completing the examination of the various· 
suggestions in depth. However, the trend of recent events in certain 
parts of the country was such that there was an imminent danger of 
extensive disturbance of public peace and tranq'Uillity in ~ertain areas 
and it, therefore, became urgently necessary to make the provisions· of 
the Arms Act more· stringent and effective so as to prevent the misuse 
of arms and the commission of offences involving the use of arms. The 
President, therefore, promUlgated the Arms (Amendment) Ordinance, 
1983 (4 of 1983) on the 22nd day of June, 1983. 
3. Subject to changes aimed at making the punishments for certain 
offences more stringent and to certain changes of a verbal or conse-
quential nature, the Ordinance provided for all the amendments con-
tained in the Arms (Amendment) Bill as passed by Rajya Sabha. 
Further, the Ordinance provided for the insertion of new sections 24A 
and 24B in the Act (vide clause 7 of the Bill). New section 24A W;als 
with prohibition as to possession of notified arms in disturbed areas 
while new section 24B deals with prohibition as to carrying of or 
otherwise having in possession notified arms through or in public places 
in disturbed areas. The Ordinance also amended section 41 relating to 
the power to exempt and sUb-seetion (2) of section 44 relating to the 
power to make rules to bring out the intention underlying those pro-
visions mOre clearly. 
4 .. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance. 
NEW DELHI; P. C. SETHI, 
The 20th July, 1983. 
9 

MEMORANDUM' REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-section (2) of section 13 of the Arms Act, 1959 provides for the 
procedure to be followed by the licensing authority in deciding an 
application for the grant of a licence. Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to 
substitute that sub-section by two new sub-sections (2) and (2A). 
Under new sub-section (2), the licensing authority has to obtain a 
police report on an application for a licence. The time within which 
su~h police reports have to be submitted is left to be prescribed by 
rules. 
2. Clause rl of the Bill seeks to insert two new sections 24A and 24B. 
New section 24A seeks to empower the Central Government to prohibit, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, possession of arms and ammuni-
tion of th~ description mentioned in the notification in any area speci-
fled in the notification, while new section 24B seeks to empower the 
Central Government to prohibit, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
carrying or otherwise having in possession arms and ammunition of the 
description mentioned in the notification through or in any JYllblic place 
in any area specified in the notification. It has' been made clear in both 
the" sections that the Central Government can specify any area in a 
notification thereunder only if it is satisfied that there is extensive 
disturbance of public peace and tranquillity or imminent danger of such 
disturbance in :;uch area and that for the prevention of offences involv-
ing the use of arms in such area or, as the case may be, in public places 
in such area, it is necessary to take action under those sections in respect 
of such area or public places in such area. Under both the sections, the 
Central Government is empowered to authorise any officers subordinate 
to that Government or a State Government to search and seize arms 
in the cirC'Umstances mentioned in those' sections. It has been made 
clear in both the sections that the provisions of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure as to searches and seizures will apply to searches and seizures 
under those sections. 
3. The powers proposed to be delegated under the aforementioned 
proviSions pertain to matters of detail or to contingency involving vary-
ing circumstances which cannot be visualised and provided for in the 
legislation itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of 
a normal character, 
10 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE ARMS ACT, 1959 
(54 OF 1959) 
'" • '" • 
2. (1) In thIs Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
'" • '" • • 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISITION, POSSESSION, MANUFACTURE, SALE, IMPORT, EXPORT AND 
TRANSPORT OF ARMS AND AMMUNITION 
3. No pe~on shall acquire, have in his possession, or carry any firearm 
or ammlmition unless he holds in this behalf a licence issued in accord-
ance with the provisions of this Act and "the rules made thereunder: 
Provided that a person may, without himself holding a licence, 
carry any firearm or ammunition in the presence, or under the written 
a'u.thority, of the holder ,of the licence for repair or for renewal of 
the licence or for use by such holder. 
'" '" '" '" .' 
5, No person shall-
(a) manufacture, sell, transfer, convert, repair, test or prove, or 
(b) expose or offer for sale or transfer or have in his possession 
for sale, transfer, conversion, repair, test or proof. 
any firearm or any other arms of such class or description as may be 
prescribed or any ammunition, unless he holds in this behalf a licence 
issued in accordance with the provisions of this Act ,and the rules made 
thereunder: 
Provided that a person may, without holding a licence in this behalf, 
sell or transfer any arms or ammunition which he lawfully possesses for 
his own private use to another person who is entitled by virtue of this 
Act or any other law for the time being in force to have, or is not pro-
hibited by this Act or such other law from having, in his possession, such 
arms or ammunition; but the person who has sold or transferred any 
firearm, or ammunition in respect of which a licence is required under 
section 3 or any arms in respect of which a licence is required under sec-
tion 4, shall, immediately after the sale or transfer, inform in writing the 
district' magistrate having jurisd~cti9n or the officer in charge of the 
nearest police station, of such sale or transfer and the name and address, 
of the other person to whom the firearm, ammunition or other arms has 
or have been sold or transferred, 
... • '" • '" 
11-
Defini-
tions and 
interpre-
tation. 
Licence 
for 
acquisition 
and posses-
sion of 
firearms 
and 
ammuni~ 
tion. 
Licence 
fOr 
manufac-
ture, 
sale, etc., 
of arms 
and 
ammuni~ 
tion. 

Prohibi-
tion of 
acquisi-
tion or 
posses-
sion by, 
or of sale 
or trans-
fer to, 
young 
persons 
andcer-
tain 
other per-
SODS of 
firearms, 
et.c. 
Grantor 
licences. 
Punish-
ment for 
certain 
offences. 
12 
9 .. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of 
this Act,-
(a) no person,-
(i) who has not completed the ag~ of sixteen years, or 
(ti) who has been sentenced on conviction of any offence in-
volVing violence or moral turpitude to imprisonment for a term 
of not less than six months, at any time during a period of five 
years after the expiration of the sentence, or 
. (iii) who has been ordered to execute under Chapter VIII of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, a bond for keeping the 5 of 1898. 
peace or for good behaviour, at any time during the term of the 
bond, 
shall acquire, have in his possession or carry any firearm or 
amm'l1nition; 
'" '" ... '" ... 
13. (1) ... ... ... ... • 
(2) On receipt of an application, the licensing authority, after making 
such inquiry, if any, as it may consider necessary, shall, subject to the 
other provisions of this Chapter, by order in writing either grant the 
licence or refuse to grant the same . 
... ... ... '" • 
CHAPTER IV 
POWEBS AND PROCEDURE 
... ... '" ... ... 
25. (1) Whoever-
(a) acquires, has in his possession Or carries any firearm or 
ammunition in contravention of section 3; or 
(b) acquires, has in his 'possession or carries in any place specifted 
by notification under section 4 any arms of such class or description 
as has .been specified in that notification, in contravention of that 
section; or 
(e) manufactures, sells, transfers, con't'erts, repairs, tests or 
proves, or exposes or offers for sale or transfer, or' has in his posses-
sion for sale, transfer, conversion, repair, test or proof, any arms or 
ammunition in contravention of section 5; or .. 

13 
(d) shortens the barrel of a firearm or converts an imitation fire-
arm into a firearm in contravention of section 6; or 
(e) acquires, has in his possession or carries, or manufactures, 
sells, tranders, converts, repairs, tests or proves, or exposes or offers 
for sale or transfer, or has in his possession for sale, transfer, conver-
sion, repair, tes~ or proof, any prohibited arms or prohibited amm'Uni-
tion in contravention of section 7; or 
<f> sells ot transfers any firearm which does not bear the name 
of the maker, manufacturer's number or other identification mark 
stamped or otherwise shown thereon as required·,by sub-section (2) 
of section a or does any act in contravention of sub-section (1) of 
that section; or 
(g) being a person to whom sub-clause (ii) or sub-clause (iii) of 
clause (a) of sub-section (1)·of section 9 applies, acquires, has in his 
possession or carries any firearm or ammunition in contravention of 
that section; or 
(h) sells or transfers, or converts, repairs, tests or pI Dves any 
firearm or ammunition in contravention of clause (b) of sub-section 
(1) of section 9; 'or 
(i) brings into, or takes out of, India, any arms or ammunition in 
contravention of section 10; or 
(j) brings into, or takes out of, India, arms or ammunition of 
any class or description in contravention of secti0!l 11; or 
(k) transports any arms or ammunition in contravention of 
section 12; or 
(l) fails to deposit arms or ammunition as required by sub-section 
(1) of section 21; or 
(m) being a manufacturer of, or dealer in, arms or ammunition, 
fails, on being required to do so by rules made under section 44, . to 
maintain a record or account or to make therein all such entries as 
are required by such rules or intentionally makes a false entry therein 
or prevents or obstructs the inspection of such record or account or 
the making of copies of entries therefrom or prevents Or obstructs the 
entry into any premises or other place where arms or ammunition are 
or is manufactured or kept or intentionally fails to exhibitor conceals 
such arms or ammunition or refuses to point out where the same are 
or is manufactured or kept; 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years, or with fine, or with both. 
• • • • • 
(3) Whoever having sold or transferred any firearms or ammunition 
or other arms under the proviso 'to section 5 fails to inform the district 
magistrate having jurisdic~ion or the officer in charge of the nearest pollee 
statio~, of such salle or transfer shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term. which may extend to six months, or with fine of an amount 
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
• • • • • 

14 
28. Whoever-
(a) does any act in contravention of any of the provIsIons of 
section 3,4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11 or 12 in such manner as to indicate an inten~ 
tion that such act may not be known to any public servant or to any 
person employed, or working upon a railway, aircraft, vessel, vehicle 
or any other means of conveyance; or 
(b) on any search being made under section 22 conceals or 
attempts to conceal any arms or ammunition; 
shall be puni<ihable with imprisonment for a term which may exfend to 
seven years, or with fine, or with both. 
27. Whoever has in his possession any arms or s:nmunition with 
intent to use the same for any unlawful purpose or to enable any otner 
person to use the same for any unlawful purpose shall, whether such un-
lawful purpose has been carried into effect or not, be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, 
or with both. 
28. Whoever makes or attempts to make any use whatsoever of a 
firearm or an imitation firearm with intent to resist or prevent the law-
ful arre~ or detention of. himself or any other person shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, or with 
fine, or with both. 
Secret 
contra-
ventions. 
Punish-
mentfor 
possess-
ing 
arms, etc., 
with intent 
to 
use them 
for un-
lawful 
purpose. 
Punish~ 
ment for 
use and 
possession 
of fire~ 
arms or 
imitation Explanation.-In this section the expression "imitation firearm" has firearms 
the same meaning as in section 6. in certain 
29. Whoever-
(a) purchases any firearms or any other arms of such class or 
description as may be prescribed or any ammunition from any otlier 
person knowing that such other person 1s not licensed or authorised 
under section 5; or 
(b) delivers any arms or ammunition into the possession ot 
another person without previously ascertaining that such other 
person is entitled by virtue of this Act or any other law for the time 
being in force to have, and is not prohibited by this Act or such other 
law from having, in his possession the same; 
cases. 
Punish-
mentfor 
knowing-
lypur_ 
chasing 
arms, etc., 
from un-
licensed 
person or 
for deli-
vering 
arms, etc., 
to person 
not enti-
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to tIed to 
six months, or with fine of an amount which may extend to five hundred possess the same. rupees, or with both. 
30. Whoever contravenes any condition of a licence or any provision 
of this Act or any rule made thereunder, for which no punishment is 
p~ovid.ed elsewhere in this Act shill be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
. '" . . ... 
Punish· 
menttor 
contra-
ventionof 
licence or 
rule. 

Sanction 
of Central 
Govern-
mentfor 
warehous-
ingof 
arms. 
Arrest and 
searches. 
Offences 
to be 
cogniz-
able. 
Power to 
exempt. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
15 
34. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Sea Customs Act, 
1878, no arms or ammunition shall be deposited in any warehouse licensed 
under section 16 of that Act without the sanction of the Central Govern-
ment. 
• • • • • 
37. Save as otherwise provided in this Act,-
(a) all arrests and searches made under this Act or under any 
. rules made thereunder shall be carried out in accordance with the 
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 18gS, relating respec-
tively to arrests and searches made under that Code; ~ 
(b) any person arrested and any arms or ammunition seized 
under this Act by a person not being a magistrate or a police officer 
shall be deliyered without delay to the officer in charge of the nearest 
polic{l station and that officer shall-
(i) either release that person on his executing a hond with 
or without sureties to appear before a magistrate and keep the 
. things seized in his custody till the appearance of that person 
before the magistrate, or 
(ii) should that person fail to execute the bond and to 
furnish, if so required, sufficient sureties, produc.! that person 
and those things without delay before the magistrate. 
38. Every offence under this Act shall be cognizable within the mean-
ing of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 18098. 
• • • • • 
41. Where the Central Government is of the oplDlon that it is 
necessary or expedient in the public interest so to do, it may, by notifi-
cation in the Official Gazette and subject to such conditions, if any, as it 
may specify. in the notification,-
(a) exempt ~ny person or class of persons, or exclude any des-
cription of arms or ammunition, or withdraw any part of India, 
from the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act; and 
• • • • • 
44. (1) • '" • • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
(a) the appointment, jurisdiction, control and functions of licens-
ing authorities; 
• • '" • • 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may 
be after it is made before eacb HQuse of ParUa~eAt while it is in ,ession 
8 of 1878. 
S of 1898. 
, of 1898 

16 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in 
which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made, .the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to 
the validity of anything previously done under t~at rule . 
• • • • • ; .. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Arms Act, 1959. 