BW No. '7 of It'O 
-' 
",'t ,., , 
'" 
',: ',' 
"', ,;'{"l' 
,~ , 
,.~~~'~.\ 
--,\ 
\, '" ,', 
< .... : 
,1 
t\~" 
THE MARKING OF HEAVY PACKAGES 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA 
ON 21ST DBCBMBER, 1960) 
"" 

5, of I9SI. 
45 of 186 .. 
• 
BILL No. 87 of Ie 
THE MARKING OF HEAVY PACKAGES 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to a.mend the Marking of Heavy Packages Act, 1951. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Re-
public of India as foIlows:-
1. This Act may be called the Marking of Heavy Packages Short tide. 
(Amendment) Act, 1960. 
5 Z. For sections 4 and 5 of the Marking of Heavy Packages Act, Substitution 
1951, the following sections shall be substituted, namely:- tl~fo~ 
1" 
15 
. ,,,". 
dona4andj. 
"4. (1) The Central Government may, by notification In the Inspectors. 
Olldal Gazette, appoint _such persons as it thinks fit to be Ins-
pectors for the purposes of this Act and assign to each af them 
one or more areas to be specified in the notification, or to NO! 
or more of them the same area to be so specified. 
(2) Every inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
5. Subject to any rules made by the Central Government ~wen of 
in this behalf, an inspector appointed under sub-section (1) pectora. 
of section 4 may-
(a) enter, with such assistants as he considers neces-
sary, and inspect any place or vessel and examine any 
packages found therein; 
(b) if, on such examination, any heavy package is 
found not to- have been marked in aecordance with the 
provision. of .ection 3. direct that the package shall not be 

Penalties. 
Offences by 
companies. 
" 
2 
transported by sea or inland waterway until it has been 
marked in accordance with those provisions: 
Provided that, instead of issuing ... y direedon u 
aforesaid, the inspector may himself cause the packare to 
be marked in accordance with the provisions of section 3; 5 
and in any such case,. the expenses incurred by him for 
such marking' sliall be recoverable as an arrear' of land 
revenue from the person consigning the package for trans-
port. I I 
6. (1) If any person contravenes-
(a) the provisions of section 3, or 
(b) any direetion given by an inspector under clause ('b) 
of section 5. 
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five 
10 
hundred rupees. 15 
(2) If any person wilfully Qbstructs an inspector in the 
exercise of his powers under this Act, he shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees. 
7. (1) Where the penon committing an otfel\Ce under this 
Act is a company, the company as well as evf!ry person in ao 
charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of 
its business at the time of the commission of the Offence shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to ~ 
proceeded against and punished acoordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section sh<l11 25 
render any such person liable to any punishment 1£ he proves 
that the o~ence was committed without his knowle~e oW th~t, 
he. exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of sueh 
offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything .containd in sub-seetion· . (1), 30 
where an offence under this Act has "een committed ~y a com-
pany and it" is proved that the offence. has been committed with 
the consent or connivance of, or that the com~iS$ion of the 
o1!ence is attributable to any neglect on th~, part of" any I 
director, manager, secretary or other offlcer of, the com,pany,35 
sueh director, manager, secretl3.ry or other oftleer shan also be 
. d~e"l~. to. ,be gwilty .of .that. .offence ,and shaY· bf liable to be 
prqc~~ed. agai,nstand ,punished aoc.or~y. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this' s~cHoti.,~' " 
... " " "(II""eOm'PIny"means any body cOrPor~~ and 
. ~~u.~es ,,8' ftrm or oi~io. ~ss~i~_tion of ii)~i~~\la1SJ .. ~.nd 
... in- • 

S 
10 
IS 
20 
2S 
30 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in 
the firm. 
8. (1) No court inferior to that of a Preatdency Magistrate Cognizance 
or a Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence under of otrencea. 
this Act. 
(2) No COU!t shan take cognizance of any offence under 
this Act except on a complaint in writing made by an inspector 
within six months of the date on which the oftence is alleged to' 
have been committed. 
9. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie ~tectiol.l 
against any person for anything which is in good faith done or ~aken ~n 
intended to be done under this Act. ,cod faith. 
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification'in the power to Dl8ke rules. Official Gazette, make rules providing for-
(a) the conditions as to the manner of markin« of 
heavy packages, the manner of their packing and the type 
of covering to be used; 
(b) the cases or circumstances in which the approxi-
mate weight of heavy packages instead of their correct 
weight may be marked; 
(c) any other matter which has to be, or may be, pro-
vided for by rules. 
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as 
soon as may be after it is made before each House of Parliament 
while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two successive :;essions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or 
the session immediately following, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
Ihall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REAsONS 
Section 3 of the Marking of Heavy Packages Act, 1951 (39 of 
1951) requires every person consigning a heavy package for trans-
port by sea or inland waterway from any place in India to have 
marked thereon plainly, durably and conspicuously the gross 
weight of the package. Section 4 prescribes the penalty for the 
contravention of the provisions of section 3. The Act does not, 
however, contain provisions for the appointment of officers or 
authorities for the enforcement of its provisions or defining their 
powers or for· the procedure for" the trial of offences under the Act. 
The Bill seeks to amend the Act to provide for these matters. 
NzwDl:Lm; RAJ BAHADUR. 
The 29th November, 1960. 
4 

'!'he Bill provides for the appointment of Ins~ors for thl! 
enforcement of the provisions of the Marking of Heavy Packages 
Act, 1951. It is not proposed to oappoint full-time officers under the 
Act, but merely to entrust the duties of the Inspector to certain 
officials of the Government of India and of the State Governments. 
Since the Inspectors would be part-time officials the only expendi-
ture that may have to be incurred on the enactment of the Bill will 
be the payment of some remuneration to those part-time officials. 
It is not possible to indicate the expenditure likely to be involved 
but this is expected to be insignificant. 
2. Section 5 of the Act, as amended, provides for the Inspector 
to cause the packages marked in accordance with the provisions of 
section 3 which will involve some expenditure. This is also not 
likely to be significant and will be ultimately recovered from the 
person consigning the package. 

MEMOaANnt1M "M~A:RnmG'b~A1'!t1' L!GlSLA'l'ION 
; Sect1'on 10" proposed-to' be fl'lBelUd by elmse a of the Bill retia'ces 
~n5 of: tli~lAct. . rt el'1'lpo~ the Central GcWernment ~ maite' 
1i.'t1esto pr~ 'for the matters -specltled in that'section'. They re.. 
IHte"to' the- marmer of the ntaI'ldng and pacldng Of heavy patkages-
anti the- cil'etonstmc~ in which the- approximate weight of pact-
agi!t -may lte marked: The tll!legatfon of -le'gisiatrve pewers is thm 
cit -a normal' character. ' 

.' . ,;. '.", 
EXTRACTS FROM THE M.uuaNG 01' HEAVY PACltAGI'B ACT, 1951 
(39 or 1951) 
• • • • • 
4. (1) If any person contravenes the provisions of section 3, he PeuI1ty. 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees. 
(2) If the person contravening the said provisions is a company 
or other body corporate, every m~ging director, manager or secre-
tary thereof shall, unless he proves that the contravention took 
place without his knowledge or thlit he exercised all due diligence 
to prevent such contrave!ltiOl'l,be deeMe<l~ be' g\tUty' of such 
contravention. 
5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Power till 
Gazette, make rules--- make ndea. 
(a) specifying the conditions as to the manner of marking 
of all heavy packages, the manner of packing and the type of 
covering to be used; -. 
(b) specifying the cases or circumstances in which the 
approximate weight of heavy packages instead of their correct 
weisht may be marked. 
. . . .,~ ... ' , . 
. I.' .• ,' :.,' , 
. ' ~.' 
....... 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Marking of Heavy Packages Act, 1951. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 of 
the Constitution of India, reconunended to Lok Sabha the 
consideration of the Bill. 
M.N.KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Raj Bahadur, Minister 
of State in lM Ministry of 
Transport and Commrmica· 
tiotu.) 