ntn No.8, of 19SZ 
THE COAL BEARING AREAS (ACQUJSI-
TION AND DEVELOPMENT) AMEND-
MENT BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 

2oofI9S7· 
• 
Bill No. 87 of 1957. 
THE COAL BEARING AREAS (ACQUISITION AND 
DEVELOPMENT) AMENDMENT BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
.to amend the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) 
Act, 1957. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Coal Beering Areas (Acquisition Short title 
and Development) Amendment Act, 1957. ~e~-
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 12th day of 
10 
June, 1957. 
2. In section 2 of the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Deve- Amf en~ent 
• 0 sectlon 2. 
lopment) Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as the prmcipal Act), 
after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
, (cc) "mining lease" includes a mining sub-lease, and 
"lessee" shall be construed accordingly;'. 
3. In section 5 of the principal Act,- Amend 
of scc:tion S· 
(a) in clause (a), for the words 'lgranted to any person 
under the Mineral Concession Rules which authorises him", 
the words "which authorises any person" shall be substituted; 
and 
(b) in clause (b), the words "granted to any person under 
the Mineral Concession Rules" shall be omitted. 
4. After section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall Insertion. of new acetum 20 be inserted, namely:- gA. 
U9A. If the Central Government is satisfied that it Is neces- Special 
sary to acquire immediately the whole or any part of the land:ra 3 
notified under sub-section (1) of section 4 or any rights in or urgency. 

Amendment 
of lCCtiaa 10. 
AmcDdment 
ofaectioa 
13· 
2 
over such land, the Central Government may direct that the 
provisions of section 8 shall not apply, and if it does so direct, 
a declaration may be made under section 9 in respect thereof 
at any time after the issue of the notification under section 7 .... 
5. In section 10 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), after the words "Central Govern-
ment", the words "free from all encumbrances" shall be 
inserted; and 
5 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "granted by a State 
Government", the words "granted or deemed to have been 10 
granted by a State Government" shall be substituted. 
6. In clause (iv) of sub-section (2) of section 13 of the principal 
Act,-
(a) for the words "during the period commencing from the 
date of tile lease and ending with", the wonls "up to" shalil be 15 
,.bstituted; 
(b) in the proviso. for the words, brackets ~nd lp.tte1"R 
"clauses (il) and (iii)", the words, breckets and letters "clauses 
(i), (ii) anId (iii)" shall be substituted. 
AlMDdmtat 7. In sub-section (3) of section 28 of the principal Act, for the 20 
of..... words "dis, posed of by him accordingly", the following words shall :aI. 
be substituted, namely:-
"d.iiposed of by him as if the objectiol?- had been made in . 
relation to a notification issued under section 7 of this Act in 
respect of such land". 25 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
With a view to enable the public sector to achieve the target of 
eoal production set for it in the Second Five Year Plan, the Cod 
Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957 (20 of 
1957) was passed during the May, 1957 session of Parliament. Bs-
perience in the administration of the Act has indicated the neeellitJ 
to incorporate into the Act a new section empowering the Ce!atral 
Government, in cases of urgency, to dispense with an enquiry 
Wlder section 8 of the Act, the provision proposed being shnilar to 
section 17(4) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894). 
2. As section 13 stands at present, interest on prospecting expen-
diture incurred before the date of the mining lease is not admissible. 
This has been represented to cause grave hardship. It is now pro-
posed to allow interest on all reasonable and bona fide expenditure 
incurred before the date of the mining lease only in those cases 
where a prospecting licence has led to the issue of a mining lease. 
As before, the total interest payable would be limited to 50% of the 
principal, as the maximum compensation available. 
3. It is also proposed to take the opportWlity, thus provided, to 
make certain verool amendments to some of the sections of the Act 
by way of abWldant caution. 
SWARAN SINGH. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 26th November, 1957. 
3 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The only amendment in the amending Bill involving financial 
implications is the proposed amendment to section 13 to provide 
·payment of interest on reasomble and bona fide expenditure incur-
red on prospecting before the date of the mining lease. It is not 
possible at this stage to say accurately the expenditure that will be 
incurred on this account. In the Financial Memorandum attached 
to the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Bill,1957, 
it was stated that on a rough estimate the expediture on acquisi-
tion, appointment of tribunal, etc .• was likely to be about Rs. 100 
lakhs during the Second Plan Period. It is considered that this 
rough estimate of Rs. 100 lakhs will also cover the small extra 
expenditure likely to be incurred as a result of the proposed amend-
ment. 
4 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE COAL BEARING AREAS (AcQUISmON AND DEvE-
LOPMENT) ACT, 1957 
(20 OF 1957) 
• • • • • • • 
5. On the issue of a notification under sub-section (1) of section Effect of notification 4 in respect of any land- on prospect-
ing licences 
(a) any prospecting licence granted to any person under jd mining 
the Mineral Concession Rules which authorises him to prospect eases. 
for coal or any other mineral in the land shall cease to have 
effect; and 
(b) any mining lease granted to any person under the 
Mineral Concession Rules shall, in so far as it authorises 
the lessee or any person claiming through him to undertake 
any operation in the land, cease to have effect for so long as 
the notification under that sub-section is in force . 
• • • • • • • 
10. (1) On the publication in the Official Gazette of the declara- Vesting of 
tion under section 9, the land or the rights in or over the land, ~':t~rin 
as the case may be, shall vest absolutely in the Central Govern- Central 
t (;avern-men. ment. 
(2) Where the rights under any mining lease granted by a State 
Government to any person are acquired under this Act, the Central 
Government shaJ,l, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed 
to have become the lessee of the State Government as if a mining 
lease under the Mineral Concession Rules had been granted by the 
State Government to the Central Government, the period thereof 
being the entire period for which such a lease could have been 
granted by the State Government under those rules . 
• • • • • • • 
13. (1) Where a prospecting licence ceases to have effect under Compenu-
section 5, there shall be paid to the person interested compensation, ~;:~ina 
the amount of which shall be a sum made up of all items of reason-licence. . to able and bona fide expenditure actually incurred in respect of the C'eu:rect. 
land that is to say - right. , , under 
(i) the expenditure incurred in obtaining the licence; ~ 
acquired. 
S etc. 

6 
(ii) the expenditure,if any, incurred in respect of the pre-
paration of maps, charts and other documents relating to the 
land, the collection from the land of cores or other mineral 
samples and the due analysis thereof and the preparation of 
~ other relevant records or material; 
(iii) the expenditure, if any, incurred in respect of the 
construction of roads or other essential works on the land, if 
such roads or works are in existence and in a usable congition; 
(iv) the expenditure, if any, incurred in respect of any 
other operation necessary for prospecting carried out in the 
land. 
(2) Where the rights under a mining lease are acquired under 
this Act, there shall be paid to the person interested compensation, 
the amount of which shall be a sum made up of the following items, 
namely,-
-..-: 
,(i) if the lease was granted after prospecting operations 
had beeD carried out in respect of the land under a prospect-
ing licence, thelUm of all items of reasonable and bona fide 
expenditure actually incurred with respect to the matters speci-
fied in clauses (i), (ii) , (iii) and (iv) of sub-section (1) be-
fore the date of the lease: 
PrOY1ded that where two or ~ore leases had been granted 
in relation to any land covered previously by one prospecting 
licence, only so much of the expenditure aforesaid as bears to 
the total expendIture the same proportion as the area under the 
mining lease in respect of which the rights have been acquired 
bean ,to the total area covered by the mining leases shall be 
payable under this clause; 
(ft) any reasonable and bOM fode expenditure of the nature 
referred to in clsuses (i), (ii) and (iii) of sub-section (1) actu-
ally incurred in relation to the lease, together with the salami. 
if any, paid for obtailling the lease; 
(tH) the expeJ'ldtt1H'e, if any, incurred by way of payment 
of dead-rent or minimum ,royalty during any year or years 
1rheD tllere was no production of coal; 
(iv) interest on any such expenditure referred to in clauses 
(&)" {ii) and (iii.) as has actually been incurred during the 
period commencing from the date of the lease and ending with 

7 
the year in which the rights under the lease are acquired, in-
terest being calculated in the following manner, 1i,b.at is to say,-
interest at the rate of five per centum' per annum in 
respect of the expenditure incurred during each calendar 
year for the first five years commencing from the year in 
which such expenditure was incurred plus interest at the 
rate of four per centum per annum in respect of each subse-
quent year after the expiration of the first five ·years and 
ending with the year in which the rights under the lease 
are acquired: 
Provided that the total sum payable under this clause shall 
not exceed one-half of the total amount referred to in clauses 
(ii) and (iii). 
• • • • • • • • 
28. (1) 
• • • • • • • • 
(3) Any objection preferred under section 5A of the said Act 
in respect of any land covered by any notification issued under sec-
tion 4 of the said Act shall be deemed to be an objection preferred 
under section 8 of this Act to the relevant competent authority and 
may be disposed of by him accordingly; and the Central Govern-
ment may at any time make a declaration under section 9 of this 
Act in respect of the land or any part thereof. 
• • • • • • • • 
NotiflcatiOD' 
under Act I 
of 11194 in 
which pro-
ceediDgsare 
pending to 
be treated .s 
notifications 
UDder this 
Act. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Develop-
ment) Act, 1957. 
The Presidmt has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha, 
the consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secreta~. 
(Sardar Sroaran Singh, 
Minister oj Steel, Min.;s 
and FUel). 