WK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE. METRO RAILWAYS (CONSTRUCTION OF WORKS) BILL, 1978 
(To be/As introduced.J:.n wl\ Sabha) 
1. Page 3, line 20;-
ill "such" ~ "every" 
2. Page 6, lines 1 and 2,-, 
12.!:_ it ehalf" re ad tlbehaJ.f" 
3. Page 8,-
in the marginal heading to cl3llse 17,-
.!<2!: "l&.cquj.stion tl ~ "Acquis1 tion tt 
4. P'lge 8, line :P,-
lEo!:. "wo rds " ~ ad "\'10 rk s " 
5. Page 15,-
in the marginal heading to cl8.use . .38,-
.£Q.!: "companiese" re ad "companies" 
6. Page 22, line 5 from bottom,-
.!2r "store-water" ~ "starn-water" 
7. Page 22, line ,from bottom,-
.!£!: ''Pipe - wa te r" ~ ''Pi pc, wire " 
NEW DELIU· , 

As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA ON 
1 2 MAl l~ Ib 
Bill No. 87 of 1978 
THE METRO RAILWAYS (CONSTRUCTION OF WORKS) BILL, 18'11 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAt7RES 
CH:APTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, commencement and application. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER n 
M2TIIO RAILWAY AaMImSTR.n'ION 
3. General Manager. 
4. Constitution of Advisory Board. 
~. Committees. 
CHAPTER III 
ACQUIsmON 
6. Power to acquire land, etc. 
7. Publication of notification for acquisition. 
8. Power to enter for survey, etc. 
9. Hearing of objection. 
10. Declaration of acquisition. 
11. Power to take possession of acquired land, etc. 
12. RiJlht to enter into the land wheTe right of user, etc., is vested iD 
the Central Government. 
]3. Determination of amount payable for acquisition. 
14. Deposit and payment of amount. 
] 5. Competent authority to have certain POWeTS of civil court. 
16. Arbitrator. 
17. Land Acquisition Act 1 of 1894 not to apply. 
CHAPTER IV 
CONSTRUCTION OF WORKS 
18. Functions of metro railway administration. 
19. Powers of metro railway administration. 
20. Development over metro alignment. 
21. Power to prohibit or regulate construction' of buildings aDd 
excavation. 
22. Payment of amount for prohibition of construction, etc. 
23. Power to underpin building or otherwise strengthen It. 
24. Power to enter, etc. 

it 
CLAUSES 
25. Amount payable for damage, loss or injury. 
26. Right to claim for damages. 
CHAPTER V 
INSPIlCTION 01' METRO RAiLWAY 
27. Appointment and duties of commissioner. 
28. Powers of commissionerS. 
29. Facilities to be afforded to commissioner. 
CHAPTER VI 
MIsCELLANEOUS 
30. Surplus land to be sold or otherwise disposed of. 
31. Notice of accidents and enquiries. 
32. Power to alter the entries in the Schedule. 
, 33. Prohibition of obstruction. 
34. Local authorities to assist. 
35. Prohibition of removal of marks. 
36. Penalty for failure to comply with directions issued under sectJaa 
21. 
37. General provision for punishment of offences. 
38. Offences by companies. 
39. Bar of jurisdiction. 
40. Effect of Act and rules, etc., inconsistent with other enactmeata. 
41. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
42. Power to remove difficulties. 
43. App1icatio~ of the Indian Railways Act, 1890. 
44. Power to make rules. 
45. Saving. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

BIll No. 87 01 18"18 
TIt:~ METRO RAILWAYS (CONSTRUCTION OF WORKS) BILL, 1978 
A 
BILL 
to provi~e for the construction of works relating to metro railways in the 
metropolitan cities and for matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: -
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
~ 1. (1) This Act may be called the Metro Railways (Construction 01 Short 
Works) Act, 1978. tiUe, 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, 
(3) It applies in the first instance to the metropolitan city of Calcutta; 
and the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
10 declare that this Act shall also apply to such other metropolitan city and 
with effect from such date as may be specified in that notification and 
thereupon the prQvisions of this Act shall apply to that city accordingly. 
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Advisory Board" m~ans the Advisory Board constituted 
IS under section 4; 
20 
(b) "arbitrator" means the arbitrator appointed under section 16; 
(c) "building" means a house, outhouse, stable, latrine, urjnal, 
shed, hut or wall or any other structure. or erection, whether of 
masonry: bricks, wood, mud, metal or any other material or any part 
commenef. 
ment and 
applica-
tkln. 
Definition.!' 

Bombay 
Aet III 
ot 1888. 
West 
Ben'gal 
Act XIV 
ot 1965. 
Madras 
Act IV 
ot 1919. 
of a buiiding, but does not include a plant or machinery installed in a 
building Or any part thereof or any portable shelter; 
(d) "commissioner" means a commissioner of metro railway 
appointed under sectio!1 27; 
(e) "competent authority" means any person or authority autho- 5 
rIsed by the Central Government, by notlflcation in the Official 
Gazette, to perform the functions of the competent authority under 
this Aet for such area as may be specified in the DotificatloD; 
(f) "development" with its grammatical variations means the 
carrying oui of building, engineering, mining or other operations in, 10 
on, over Or under land 01' the making of any material change in any 
building or land or planting of any tree on land and includes redeve-
lopment; 
(g) "lana" includes any right or interest in land; 
(h) "metro alignment", in relation to any metropolitan city. 15 
means such alignment of the metro railway as is specified in the 
Schedule under that city and includes the metro railway; 
(i) "metro railway" means a metro railway or any portion 
thereof for the public carriage of passengers, animals or goods and 
Includes,- 20 
(a) all land within the boundary marks indicating the limits 
of the land appurtenant to a metro railway, 
(b) all lines of rails, sidings, yards Or branches worked. over 
for the purposes of, or in connection with, a metro railway, 
(c) all stations, offices, ventilation shafts and ducts, ware- 25 
houses, workshops, manufactories, fixed plants and machineries, 
iiheds, depots and other works constructed for the purpose of, or 
in connection with, a metro railway; 
(j) "metro railway adminiiitration", in relation to any metro 
railway, means the General Manager of that metro railway; 30 
(k) "metropolitan city" means the metropolitan city of Bombay, 
Calcutta, Delhi or Madras; 
(1) "metropolitan city of Bombay" means the area covered by 
Greater Bombay as defined in the Bombay Municipal Corporation 
Act, 1888; 35 
(m) '.'metropolitan city of Calcutta" means the area described 
under the heading "1. Calcutta Metropolitan District" in the SchedWe 
to the Calcutta Metropolitan Planning Area (Use and Development 
of Land) Control Act, 1965; 
(n) "metropolitan city of Delhi" means the entire area ·of the 40 
Union territory of Delhi; 
(0) "metropolitan city of Madras" means the area covered by 
the city of Madras as defined in the Madras City Muni.c1pal Act, 
1919; 
(p) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 45 
(q) ''rolling stock" includes locomotives, engines, carriag,s (whe-
1berpowered or not), wagons, trollies and vehicles of all kinds mov-
ing or intended to move on rails; 

(r) Hto erect", in relation to any building, inciud~ 
.(i) aay material alteration or enlargement of sueh buildtng, 
(ii~ conversion, by structural alteration, into a place for human 
"habitation of such building not originally constructed for human 
5 .. }Jabiiation, 
(iii) oonversion into more than one plaoe for human habita-
tion of such building originally constructed as one such place, 
(iv) conversion of two or more plaQes of human habitation 
in such building into a grea~r humber of such places, 
to (v) such alteration of such building as would alter the 
drainage or sanitary arrangements therein or would materially 
affect its security, and 
(vi) the addition of any rooms in such building. 
(2) All other words and expressions used herein and not defined but 
t of 1890. IS dJifined in the Indian Railways Act, 1890, shall have the meanings, res-
pectively, assigned to them in that Act. 
CHAPTER tl 
METRO RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION 
So TIM Ceatral Govemmentmay, for tltepurposes of tIdB Act, appoint 
20 a General Manager for such metro rall way. 
4. (1) The Central Government may c:onstitute an Advisory Board for 
every metro railway for the purpose of aSSisting or advising that Gov-
ernment on-
(a) the rormulation and co-ordination of plans for the develop-
a, ment of metro railway and its expansion; 
(b) the financing and execution of any project for the construction 
of the metro railway; 
(c) such other matters as may be referred to it for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act and in particular for the purpose of ena1.lr-
30 lng that the functions of the metro railway administration are exer-
cised with due regard to the circumstances or conditions prevailing 
in, and requirements of, the metropolitan city. 
(2) The Advisory Board shall consist of such number of members 
(being officers of the Government) not exceeding nine as may be appoint-
3S ed to it by the Central Government. 
(3) The Central Government shall appoint one of the members of the 
Advisory Board as its Chairman. 
(4) The Central Government shall publish in the Official Gazette the 
names of all the members of the Advisory Board and the Chairman 
40 thereof. 
(5) The Advisory Board shall meet at such times and places and shall 
observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of its business as may 
be prescribed. 
(6) The members of the Advisory Board shall hold office for such term 
4S as may be prescribed. . 
General 
Manager. 
Constitu-
tion of 
Advisory 
BouC. 

C6dUn1t-
tees. 
Power to 
acquire 
land, etc. 
Publica-
tion ot 
notl.fica-
tion for 
acquisi-
tion. 
Power to 
enter for 
survey, etc. 
4 
5. (1) The Advisory Board may constitute as many committees as it 
deems necessary consisting wholly of members of such Board or whollJ 
of other persons or partly of members of the Board and partly of other 
persons for such purposes as it may think fit. 
(2) Every committee constituted under sub-section (1) shan meet at ~ 
SMch times and places and shall observe such procedure in regard to 
the transaction of its business as may be prescribed. 
(3) There shall be paid to the members of the committee wko are ndt 
members of the Advisory Board, such fees and allowances for attendance 
at the meetinp of the committee and such travellinl allowances as' ma, io 
be prescribed. 
CHAPTER IIi 
ACQtJISmON 
S. Where it appears to a metro railway administration that for tbt! 
.construction of any metro railway or any other work connected there- 1$ 
with-
(a) any l~nd, building, street, road or ~ge, or 
(b) any right of user, or any right in the nature of easement, 
therein, 
is required for such construction or work, it shall apply to the Central 20 
Government in such form as may be prellCribfo.O. for acquiring such land, 
building, street, road or passage or such right. of user or easement. 
7. (1) On receipt of an application under section 6, the Central Gov-
ernment, after being satisfied that the requirement mentioned therein is 
for a public purpuse, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare 2, 
its intention to acquire the land, building, street, road or passage, or the 
right of user, or the right in the nature of easement, therein referred to 
in the application. 
(2) Every notification under sub-~tion (1) shall give a brief des-
cription of the land, building, street, road or passage. 30 
(3) The competent authority shall cause the substance of the notifi-
(~ation to b~ published in such places and in such manner as may be pres-
cribed. • 
8. On the issue of a notification under sub-section (1) of section 7, it 
shall be lawful for the metro railway administrationoT any officer or 35 
other employee of the metro railway-
(a) to enter Upon and survey and 'take level of the land, build-
tng, street, road or passage specified in the notification; 
(b) to dig or oore into the 'sub-soil; 
(c) to set out the intended work; 
(d) to mark such levels, boundaries or lines by placing marks 
and cutting trenches; 
40 

,(.) 'to do all other acts necessary to ascertain whether, Ute mem. 
railway can be laid q.pon or under the land, building, street, road Of 
passage, as the case may be: 
Provided that while exercising any power unde;- this section the 
S metro railway administration or such officer or other employee shall 
cause as little damage or injury as possible to 9Uch land, building, street, 
road or passage, as the case may be. 
•• (1) Any person interested in the land, building, street, road or 
passage may, within twenty-one days from ,the date of publication of the 
10 notification under sub-section (1) of section 7 object to the construction 
of the metro railway or any other work connec~e:l therewith upon or 
under the land, building, street, road or passage, as the case may be. 
(2) Every objection under sub-section (1) shall be made to the com-
petent authority in writing and shall set out the gronnds 'thereof and the 
15 competent authority shall give ,~he objector an opportunity of being heard, 
either in person or by a legal practitioner, and may, after hearing aJ 
lSuch objections and after making such further enquiry, if any, as the 
competent authority thinks 'necessary, by order, either allow or disallow 
the objections. 
25 of 1961. 20 E:rplano.tion.-For the purposes of this sub-section "legal practitioner" 
has the same meaning as in clause ·(i) of sub-sectioR (1) of section 2 of the 
Advocates Act, 1961. 
(3) Any order made by the competent authority under sub-section 
(2) shall be final. 
25 10. (1) Where no objection under sub-section (1) of section 9 has 
been made to th~ competent authority within the period specified therein 
or where the com~tcnt au'thority has disallowed the objection under 
sub-section (2) of that section, the competent authority shall, as soon as 
may be, submit a (report accordingly to the Central Government and on 
30 receipt of such report, the Centr;}l. Governmen~ shall declare, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, that the land, building, street, road or passage, 
or the right of user, or the right in the nature of easement, therein for 
laying the metro railway should be acquired. 
(2) On the publication of the declaration under sub-section (1), the 
3S land, building, street, road or passage, or the right of user, or the right in 
the nature of easement, therein shall vest absolutely in the Central Gov-
ernment free from all encumbrances. 
(3) Where in respect of any land, building, street, road or passage, a 
notification has been published undersub-seo~ion (1) of section 7 either 
4') for its acquisition or for the acqUisition of the right of user., or any right 
in the nature of easement, therein, but no declaration under this section 
has been published within a period of one year from the date of publica-
tion of that nl)tific3ltion, the '!;aid notification shall cease to have any 
effect. 
4S (4) A declaration made by the Central Government under sub-section 
(1) shall not be called in question in any court or by any other autho-
rity. 
11. (1) Subject to the prov'isions of section 14, where nnv land, build-
ing, street, road or passage has vested under sub-section (2) of section 
So 10, the competent authority may by notice in writing direct the owner 
as well as any other person who may be in possession of such land, build-
ing, street, road or passage to surrender or deliver possession thereof to 
Hearin. 
of objeoo 
tion. 
Declara-
tion of 
acquisitiOD 
Power to 
take 
possession. 
ot acquir-
ed lane!, 
etc. 

lUiht to 
enter into 
the land 
where 
riiht of 
user, etc., 
is vested 
in the 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Detennina-
tion uf 
amount 
payable 
for 
acquisition. 
6 
the competent authority or any person duly authorised by it in: this tJe-
half within sixty days of the service of the notice. . 
(2) If any person refuses or fails to comply with any direction made 
under sub-section (H, the competent authority shall apply,-
(4) in the case of any land, building, street, road or pusage S 
situated in any area falling within the Presidency-town of Bombay, 
Calcutta or Madras, to the Commissioner of Police; 
(b) in the case of any. land, building, street, road or passap . 
situated in any area other than the area referred to in clause (4), to 
the Executive Magistrate, 
and such Commissioner or Magistrate, as the case may be, shall en10ree 
the surrender of the land, building, street, road or passage to the COln-
petent authority or to the person duly authorised by it. 
10 
12. Where the right of user in, or any right in the nature of easement 
on, any land, building, street, road or passage has vested in the Central IS 
Government under section 10. it shall be lawful for the metro railway 
administration or any officer or other employee of the Central Government 
to enter and do any other act necessary upon the land. building, street, 
road or passage for carrying out the construction of the metro railway 
or any other work connected therewith. 30 
13. (1) Where any land, building, street, road or passage is acquired 
under this Act, there shall be paid an amount which shall be determined 
by the competent authority. 
(2) Where the right of user in, or any right in the nature of an ease-
ment on, any land, building, street, road or passage is acquired under 25 
this Act, there shall be paid an amount to the owner and any other per-
son whose right of enjoyment in that land, building, street, road or 
passage has been affected in any manner whatsoever by reason of such 
acquisition an amount calculated at ten per cent. of the amount deter-
mined under sub-section (1) for that land, building, street, road or 30 
passage. , 
(3) If the amount determined by the competent authority under sub-
section (1) or sub-section (2) is not acceptable to either of the parties 
the amount shall, on an application by either of the parties, to the arbi-
trator, be determined by the 8Jrbitrator.· 3S 
(4) The competent authority or the arbitrator while determinin~ the 
amount under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3), as the case may be, shall 
take into consideration-
(4) the market value of the land, building, street, road or 
passage on the date of publication of the notification under sectton 7; 40 
(b) the damage, if any, sustained by the person interested at the 
time of taking possession of the land, by reason of the severin, of 
wch land from other land; 

7 
(c) the damage, if any, sustained by the person interested at 
the time of taking possession of the land, building, street, road or 
passage by reason of the acquisition injuriously affecting his other 
immovable property in any other manner, or his earnings; 
5 (d) if, in consequence of the acquisition of the land, building, 
street, road or passage, the person interested is compelled to change 
his residence or place of business, the reasonable expenses, if any, 
Incidental to such change. 
14. (1) The amount determined by the competent authority under 
10 section la shall be deposited by the Central Government in such manner 
8S may be prescribed with the competent authority before taking posses-
sion of the land, building, street, road or passage. 
(2) As soon as may be' after the amount has been deposited under 
sub-section (1), the competent authority shall on behalf of the Central 
IS Government pay the amount to the person Or persOns .entitled thereto. 
(3) Where several persons claim to be interested in the amount 
deposited under sub-section (1), the competent authority shall deter-
mine the persons who in its opinion are entitled to receive' the amount 
payable to each of them. 
(4) If any dispute arises as to the apportionment of the amount or 
20 any part thereof or to any person to whom the same or any part there-
of is payable, the competent authority shall refer the dispute to the 
decision of the principal civil co01rt of original jurisdiction within the 
limits of whose jurisdiction the land, building, street, road or passage 
is situated. 
30 
(5) Where the amount determined under section 13 by the arbitrator 
is in excess of the amount determined by the competent authority, the 
arbitrator may award interest at six per cent. per annum on such excess 
amount from the date of taking possession under section 11 till the date 
of the- actual deposit thereof. 
(6) Where the' amount determined by the arbitrator is in exen. of 
the amount determined by the competent authority, the excess amount 
together with interest, if any, awarded under sub-section (5) shall be 
deposited by the Central Government in sucb m8nner as may be pres-
cribed with the competent authority and the provisions of !'Iub..eetions 
35 (2) to (4) shall apply to such deposit. 
15. The competent authority shall have, for the purposes of this Act, 
all the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of 
• of 1908. Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect (.f the follOWing matters, namely:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
40 examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring ,he discoverv and production of any document; 
(c) reception 1I t p.~C1eDCe on aftic \Vits; 
(d) requisitioning any public rec.,rd from any court or offtce; 
4~ (e) issuing cOD1lllission for examin .. tion of witnessee. 
Deposit 
and pay-
ment ot 
amount, 
Competent 
authority 
to have 
certain 
powers of 
civil court. 

8 
t\rhitrator. 18 •. (1) For every metro railway the Central Government shall, for 
Land 
Acqu19tion 
Act 1 of 
1694 not' to 
apply. 
Functions 
of metro 
railway 
administra-
UOA. 
the purposes of this Act, appoint as arbitrator a person who is, or has 
been, or is qualified for appointment as, a Judge of a High Court. 
(2) The arbitrator may, if he thinks it expedient so to do, call in 
his aid one or more assessors and hear the references wholly or par- S 
tially with the aid of such assessors. 
(.1) Subject to the provisions of this section the provisi()ns of the 
Arbitration Act, 1940, shall apply to every arbitration under this Act. 10 of 1940. 
1'7. Nothing in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, shall apply to an 
acquisition under this Act. 10 
CHAPTER IV 
CONSTRUCTION OF WORKS 
18. Subject to the control of the Central Government, the metro 
railway administra!ion shall, for thc' purpose of constructing any metro 
railway or any other work connected therewith,- IS 
(a) make or construrt in, upon, across, under or over any lands, 
buildings, streets, roads, railwavf. or tramways or any rivers, canals, 
brooks, streams or other waters or any drains, water-pipes, gas-
. pipes, electric Iinc'S or telegraph lincs, such temporary or permanent 
inc;lined plancs, arches, tunnels, culverts, IlDlbankmcnts, aqueducts, 20 
bridges, ways or passages, as thc mctro railway administration, 
thinks proper; 
(b) alter the course of any. rivers, canals, brooks, streams or 
water-courses for the purposc of constructing tunnels, passages or 
other works over or und?r them and divert or alter as well tem- 2S 
porarily as pennanenlly, the' course of any rivers, canals, brooks, 
streams or water-courses or any drains, water-pipes, gas-pipes, elec-
tric lines or telegraph lines or raise or sink the level thereof ill 
order the more conveniently to carry them over or undcr, as the 
metro railway administration thinks propet'; 30 
(c) make drains or conduits into, through or under, any lands 
adjoining the ,metro railway for the purpose of convcying water 
from or to the mctro railway; 
( d) erect or construct such houses, warehouses, oftlces and 
other buildings and such yards, stations, engineos, machinery, appa- 3S 
ratus and other words and conveniences, as the metro railway 
admini .. tration thinks proper; 
(e) alter, repair or discontinue such buildings, works and con-
venienct's a .. a(ore .. aid or any of them, and substitute othe ... s in their 
stead; 
" .. (f) draw. make or conduct such maps, plans, surveys or tests, as 
the metro railway administration thinks proper; 
(g) do all other acts necessary for making, malntalnlnt, alter-
ing or repalrlng and using the metro railway. 

9 
19. (1) The metro railway administration shall, for the purpose of 
eOll8tructing any metro railway or any other work connected therewith, 
have power-
(a) to enter into contl'aets and leases and to execute all matru-
5 menta necessary therefor; 
10 
15 
20 
(b) to make such number of rall tracks as the Central Govern-
ment may think necessary upon, under, along or across any land, 
cual, river, street or road on or in the metro alignment and all 
other works and conveniences in connection therewith; 
(c) to open or divert, as the case may be, any street, toad, 
cable, trench, drain (including a sewer), channel, ditch, culvert or 
any other device (whether for carrying of sullage, sewage, oftensive 
matter, polluted water, t.rade emuent, r,ain water, sub-soil water or 
any other object), electric or gas supply line or tele-communication 
line, or telegraph installation, over, across or under any land, buUd-
In" street, road, railway or tramway; 
(d) to burrow tunnels; 
(e) to lay down signalling and other communication facUlties, 
electric sub-stations,. supply liues and other works; 
(1) to regulate drilling' of tubewells or sinking of wells, public 
or private, in the proximate vicinity of the metro alignment; 
(g) to do all other things necessary or expedient for the exercise 
of any of the aforesaid powers. 
(2) While exercising auy powers under sub-section (1), the metro 
25 railway administration shall take such precautionary measures as are 
necessary, shaH do as latHe damage as possible wld shall be liable only' 
for the damage or cost actuaUy suffered or incurred by any person as a 
result of the exercise of such powers. 
20. (1) Any person who proposes to develop any land or building 
30 along or on the metro alignment shall, before commencing such deve-
lopment and without in any way limiting his obligation under any other 
Act to obtain any approval or consent, submit to the metro railway 
administration details of the proposed development and shall complY 
with any conditions imposed by the metro railway administration in 
35 respect thereof. 
(2) The metro railway administration shall, while imposing any 
condition under sub-section (1), have regard to-
(4) the safety of the metro railway; 
(b) such other matters as may be p~escribed. 
21. (1) If the Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary or 
40 expedient so to do for Wlcilitating the construction of any metro railway or 
for ensuring the safety of any metro railway, it may, by notiftcation in the 
O8lciaJ Gazette,~ 
(a) direct that no building or any such development as may be 
.pecified in the notification shall be constructed or made above the 
Powers .,f 
metro 
railway 
adminis-
tration. 
Develop-
ment over 
metroaUan-
ment. 
Power to 
prohibit 
or 
regulate 
construc_ 
tion of 
buildings 
and 
excavation. 

10 
metro alignment or on any land within such distance, not exceeding 
ten metres on either side of the metro alignment, as may be specified 
in the notification and where there is any building on such land also 
direct the ownel' of, or the person having control over, such building 
to demolish such building or _ to make such additions or alterations to S 
such building as may be specified in the notification or to desist from 
making any such development and within such period as may be 
specified in the notification; 
(b) direct temporary evacuation of all persons together with any 
movable property or animal that may be in the custody, control or 10 
posseuion of such persons from &Oy building situated above the metro 
ali,DDlent or in any area within a distance not exceeding twenty 
metres on either side of such alignment and within such period as 
may be specified in the notification: 
Provided that before' issuing any notification under this clause, IS 
the Central Government shall provide every such person temporarily 
with alternative accommodation, which in its opinion is suitable, free 
of cost, or an amount, which in its opinion is sufficient, to procure a 
temporary alternative accommodation. 
(2) Where any property is needed or likely to' be needed for providing 20 
any alternative accommodation under the proviso to clause (b) of sub-
section (1), such prop~rty shall be deemed to be needed for a public 
purpose under section 3 of the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immov-
able Property Act, 1952, and the competent authority under that Act shall 30ol11l1' 
ret{uisition the property in accordance with the provisions of that Act and 25 
such proviSions shall, in relation to such requisition, apply accordingly. 
(3) In specifying the distance under clause (a) of sub-section (1), the 
Central Government shall have regard 10-
(a) the nature and the requirement of the metro railway; 
(b) the safety of the building; 30 
(c) such other matters as may be prescribed. 
(4) Where any notification has been issued under sub-section (1) 
directing the owner or the person having control over any building to 
demolish such building or to make additions or alterations to such building 
or to desist from making any development specified in such notification, 3S 
a copy of the notification containing such direction shall be served on the 
owner of, or the person having control over, such building, as the case 
may be,-
(i) by delivering or tendering it t-o such owner or person; or 
(ii) if it cannot be delivered or tendered, by delivering or tender- 41) 
ing it to the agent of .such owner or person or any adult male meDJ,ber 
of the family of such owner or person or by affixing a copy thereof aD 
the. outer door or on some conspicuous part of the premises in which 
such owner or person is known to have last resided or carried on 
business or personally worked for gain; or failing service by these 45 
means; 
(iii) by PG81. 

11 
(5) Every person shall be bound to comply with any direction con-
laiDed in any notification issued under sub-section (1). 
22. (1) If in consequence of any direction contained in any notification 
Issued under sub-section (1) of section 2.l any person sustains any loss or 
5 __ e, such person shan be paid an amount which shall be determiued 
by the competent authority in the first instance. 
(2) If the amount determined by the competent authority is not ac-
ceptable to either of the parties, the amount shall, on an application by 
either of the partiel to the arbitrator, be determined by the arbitrator. 
10 (3) The competent authority or the arbitrator, while determining the 
IS 
20 
2S 
3S 
amount under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), as the case may be, 
shall take ibto consideration-
(i) tbe loss er damage sustained by such person in his earnings; 
(ii) the diminution, if any, of the market value of tbe land or 
buildin, immediately after the date of publication of such notifica-
tion; 
(iii) where in pursuance of any direction any building has been 
demolished or any additions or alterations to such building have 
been made or any development has been desisted by such person, the 
damage sustained by him in consequence of such demolition or the 
making of such additions or alterations or the desisting from makin& 
such development and the expenses incurred by such person for such 
demolition or additions or alterations: 
Provided that the expenses incurred for such demolition or addi-
tions or alterations shall not be taken into consideration if such demo-
lition or additions or alterations has or have been done by the metro 
railway administration under sub-section (2) of section 36; 
(iv) If any such person is compelled to change his residence or 
place of business the reasonable expenses, if any, that may have to 
be incurred by him incidental to such change. 
23. (1) If the metro railway administration is of opinion that it is 
necessary or expedient so to do for facilitating the CODItruetion of any 
metro railway or for ensuring the safety of any metro railway, it may, 
underpin or otherwise strengthen any building within such radius not 
exceeding fifty metres from the metro alignment. 
(2) The metro railway administration shall give to the owner ~r 
occupier of such building at least ten days notice in writing before under-
taking the work of underpinning or otherwise strengthening the buUding: 
Provided that where the metro railway administration is satisfied that 
40 an emergency exists, no such notice shall be necessary. 
(3) Where tbe underpinning or strengthening was executed in con-
nection with-
(a) the carrying out of the works upon the land where any 
building is situated, or 
Payment 
of 
amount 
for 
prohibi-
tion ot 
construc-
tion. etc. 
Power to 
underpin 
building 
or other-
wise ,tren. 
gthen It. 

Power 
to 
enter 
etc. 
Amount 
payable 
for 
damage, 
loss 
or in-
lUl'1· 
12 
(b) the construction or operation of any metro railway, 
t~e metro railway administration may, at any time after the underpin-
nm.g or strengt~ening of such building is completed and before the expi-
rabon of a perIod of twelve months,-
(i) in a case referred to in clause (a), from the completion OIl 5 
such works; and 
(ii) in a case referred to in clause (b), from the date on which 
traffic was opened in the metro railway, 
enter upon and survey such building and do such further underpinning 
or strengthening thereon as it may deem necessary. 10 
24. (1) With a view to making survey, or to ascertaining the nature 
or condition, of any land or building for the purpose of construction of 
any metro railway or any other work connected therewith, the metro 
railway administratio!1 or any person authorised by that administration 
mny, at any reasunable hour in the day time and after gIving reasonable 15 
notice to the owner or occupier of such land or building, enter upon or 
mto such land or building in, along, over or near the metro alignment to-
(a) inspect the same; 
(b) make measurements and drawings and take photographs 20 
thereof and such other suitable measures as may be necessary 
to explore and check up, by digging trial pits or otherwise, the 
foundation of any building in !1J.e vicinity of the metro alignment; 
(c) take such other measures as the said administration deemll 
necessary and proper. 25 
(2) Without prejudice to the powers conferred on it under section 
19, the metro railway administration may, by writing, request any person 
or body of persons controlling any sewer, storm water drain, pipe, wire 
or cable to carry out at the expense of the metro railway administration 
any alterations thereto which that administration is authorised or may 30 
be required to carry out to meet any particular situation for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act. 
(3) If any difterence or dispute arises between the metro railway 
administration and the person or body of persons referred to in sl,Ib-sec-
tion (2) in relation to any such alterations or the cost thereof, sucb 35 
difterence or dispute shall be determined by the Central Government in 
consultation (wherever necessary) witb the State Government and tbe 
decision of the Central Government in this regard shall not be- called 
in question in any court. 
25. (1) Where the metro railway administration exercises any power 40 
conferred on it by or undeT this Act and in consequence thereof any 
damage, loss or injury is sustained by any person interested in any. land, 
bullding, street, road or passage, the metro railway administration shall 
be liMbic to pay to such person for such damage, loss or injury luch 
amount as may be determined by the competent authority. 45 
(2) If the amount determined by the competent authority under sub-
Metion (1) is not acceptable to either of the parties, the amount payable 

13 
"all, on application by either of the parties to the arbitrator, be detel'-
lDiu.ed by the arbitrator. 
(3) The competent authority or the- arbitrator while determining the 
amount under sub-section (1) or sub-seetion (2), as the case may be, shall 
5 have due regard to the damage, los~ or injury sustained by any person 
Interested in . the land, building, street, ro.ad or passage by reason of-
10 
(i) the remcval of trees or standing crops, if any; 
(ii) the temporary severance of the land, buUdlng, street, road 
or passage; 
(iii) any Injury to any other property whether movable or im-
movable. 
26. No claim in respect of any damage, loss or injury alleged to have 
been caused as a consequence of construction of any metro railway or 
any other work connected therewith uncler this Act shall lie against the 
IS metro railway administration unless such claim is made within a period 
of twelve months from the date of completion of the construction of such 
metro railway or other work in the area in which such damage, loss or 
injury is caused. 
20 
25 
30 
CHAPTER V 
INSPECTION OF METRO RAILWAY 
27. (1) The Central Government may appoint as many persons as it 
thinks fit by name or by virtue of their office to be commi~sioners of 
metro railway. 
(2) Every commissioner shalI-
(a) inspect the metro railway wfth a view to determining whe-
ther it is fit to be opened for public carriage of passengers and report 
thereon to the Central Government; 
(b) make such periodical or other inspections of any metro rail-
way or of any rolling stock used thereon a~ the Central Government 
may direct; 
(c) perform such other duties as may be Imposed on him by or 
under this Act· or any other enactment for the time being in fOl'ce 
relating to railways or required by the Central Government. 
Right 
to 
claim 
for 
damages. 
Appoint-
ment 
and 
duties 
of com-
missioner. 
28. Subject to the control of the Central Government everycommis- Powers 
sioner shall have the power- of com- . 
35. mis-
4S 
(a) to enter upon and inspect any metro raHway or any rolling sioners. 
stock used thereon; 
(b) to make any inquiry or to take any measurement as he 
thinks fit for the performance of his duties under this Act; 
(c) by an order in writing under his hand and official seal 
addressed to any metro railway administration, to require the atten-
dance before him of any officer or other employee of the metro rail-
way and to require answers or returns, to such inquiries as he thinks 
fit to make, frotn such officer or other employee or from the said 
administration j 

!'acUities 
to be 
afforded 
to com-
mis-
sioner. 
Surplus 
land to 
be sold 
or other-
wise 
disposed 
of. 
Notice of 
accidents 
and 
enquiries. 
Power to 
alter the 
entries in 
the 
Schedule. 
14 
(d) to require the production of any book or other doeum.mts 
belonging to, or in the possession or control of, any metro railway 
administration which it appears to him to be necessary to inspect for 
the performance of his duties by or under this Act. 
28. Every metro railway administration shall aftord to every conuni8- 5 
sioner all reasonable facilities for performing the duties or exercising the 
powers imposed or conferred upon him by or under this Act. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
30. Every metro railway administration may, with the previous appro- 10 
val of the Central Government, sell or otherwise dispose of any, land 
vested in the Central Government under the provisions of this Act when 
such land is no lc.nger requi,red for the purposes of the metro railway. 
31. (1) If any acciden~ occurs during the construction of any metro 
railway or at any stage subsequent thereto as a consequence of such IS 
construction and the accident results in, or is likely to have resulted in, 
loss of human being or animail or damage to any property, it shall be the 
duty of 'the meo~ro railway administration to give notice to the Central 
Gov~rnment of the occurrence of any such loss or damage in such form 
and withjn such time as may be prescrihed. 20 
(2) On receipt of a notice undeT sub-section (1), the Central Gov-
ernment may, if it thinks fit, appoint a commission to enquire into the 
accident and report a!l to--
(a) the cause of such accident; 
(b) the manner in which and the extent to which the l'rovhlons 25 
of this Act or any other Act for the time being in force in 10 far as 
those provhions regulate and govern the safety of any person, animal 
or property, have been complied with. 
(3) The commission appointed under sub-section (2), while holding 
an enquiry, shall have all the po~rs of a civil court wh11e trying a suit 30 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1900, in respect of the following mat- 5 of 19011 
ters, namely:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery or' production of any document: 3S 
(c) reception of evidence on afftdavits; 
(d) requisi'~ioning any public record from any court or office; 
(e) issuing ('ommission for examination of witnesses. 
32.. (1) The Central Government may, by notificaiion in the Official. 
Gazette,-
(0) add to the Schedule the metro aUgnment in respect of a 
metropolitan city to which this Act is made applicable under sub-
section (3) of section 1. 

15 .... 
(b) alter any metro alignment specifted in the Schedule if it fa 
of opinion that such alteration is neca;sary for the construction and 
maintenan~ of !the metro railway to which such alignment relates. 
(2) Every notifi'Cation issued under sub-section (1) shall, as soon as 
S may be after it is issued, be laid before each House of Parliament. 
33. No person shall, without any reasonable cause or excuse, obstruct 
any person with whom the metro railway administration has entered 
tnto a contract, in the performance or execution by such person of such 
contract. 
10 34. Every local authority shalll render such help and assistance and 
furnish such information to the metro railway administration as that 
administration may reqUire for discharging its functions and shall make 
available to :the said administration for inspection and examination such 
records, maps, plans and other oocumen'ts as may be necessary for the 
IS discharge of such functions. 
Prohibi. 
tion of 
obstruc-
tion. 
Local 
author!-
ties to 
as-sist. 
35. No pierson shall remove any marks placed or fill up any trench cut Prohibi-
for the purpose of marking levels, boundaries or lines by the metro rail- tion of 
way administration. removal 
36. (1) If any person wilfully fails to comply with any direction con-
tained in any notification issued under section 21, he shall be punished with 
20 imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months. or with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), if any 
person fails to demolish any building or make additions or alterations 
2S thereto in pursuance of any direction contained in any notification issued 
under section 21 within the period specified in the notification, then, 
subject to such rules as the Central Government may make in this behalf, 
it shall be competent for any officer authoriSed by the metro ll'&i1way 
administration in this behalf to demolish such building or make necessary 
30 additions or alterations thereto. 
37. Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rule 
made thereunder shall, if no other penalty is provided for such contra-
vention elsewhere in this Act or the rules, be punishable with imprison-
ment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which 
3S may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
3& (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in 
charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the 
business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
40 guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due 
4S diligence to prevent the commission of such oftE!nce. 
ot marks. 
Penalty 
for 
failure 
to comply 
with' 
direc-
tJOnl 
issued 
under 
section 
21. 
General 
provision 
for 
punish-
ment ot 
offences. 
Oftencea 
by co~­
paniese. 

Bar of 
juris-
diction. 
Effect 
of Act 
and 
rule, 
etc •• iD-
conaia-
tent 
with 
other 
enact.-
menU. 
Protec-
tionot 
action 
taken in 
good faith. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed wtth the consent or conniv-
ance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, S 
I18C:f8tary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and 
.U be liable 1:b be proceeded aaainst and punished accordingly. ' 
Ezp14na.tion.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or 10 
other association of individuals; and 
(b) codirector", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm . 
•. No suit or application for injunction shall lie in any court against 
the Centrai Government or the metro railway administration or any 
officer or other employee of that Government or the metro railway or 
any person working for or on behalf, of the metro railway administra- 15 
Uon, in respect of any work done or purported to have been done or in-
tended to be done by it or the said admintstration or such officer or other 
employee or such person in connection with the construction of any 
metro railway or any other work connected therewith. 
40. The provisions of this Act or any rule made or any notification 20 
issued thereunder shall have effect notWithstanding anything inconsis-
tent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or in any 
instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment other than tMs Act. 
G. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the Central Government, the metro railway administration or any officer 25 
or other employee of that Government or the metro railway for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
(2) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the Central Government or the metro railway administration or any 
officer or other employee of that Government or the metro railway for 30 
any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good 
faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
G. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may. by order, do anything not inconsistent 
with such prOvisions which appears to it to be necessary or expedient for 35 
~he pUfpose of removing the diftlculty: 
Provided that no such order shall, in relation to any metropolitan city. 
be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date on 
which this Act applies or is made applicable to such metropolitan city 
under sub-section (3) of section 1. 

I} of 1890. 
,. ... 
-,.a.$av-e as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions ot this Act 
li~be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the Indian,~W~Ys"t~~ 
44. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the OfIlcial 
S Gazette, make rules to carry out the pur poses of this Act. 
10 
IS 
20 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the rore-
going power, such rules may provide for the following matteril 
namely:-
(a) the times and places at which the Advisory Board shall 
meet and the procedure in regard to transaction of busine9S by the 
Advisory Board under sub-section (5) of section 4; 
(b) the term of oftice of the members of the Advisory Board 
under sub-section (6) of section 4; 
(c) the times and places at which the committees shall meet and 
the procedure in regard to transaction of business by the committees 
under SUb-section (2) of section 5; 
(d) the payment of fees, allowances and travelling allowances 
to the members of the committee under sub-section (3) of section 5; 
(e) the form in which an application for acquisition shall be 
made under section 6; 
(f) the places at which and the manner in which the substance 
of the notification shall be published under sub-section (3) of sec-
tl0. 7; '~,~ 
(g) the manner in which the amount shall be deposited with 
25 the competent authority under sub-sections (1) and (6) of section 14.; 
30 
(h) the matters to be specified under clause ('b) of sub-section 
(2) of section 20; 
(i) the matters to be specified under clause (c) of sub-section 
(3) of section 21; 
(j) the form in which and the time within which a notice shall 
be given under sub-section (1) of section 31; 
(k) any other matter which is required to be or may be pres-
cribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 
3S be after it is made, before each House of Parliament While it is in 
sess~on for.a total period of thirty days which may ~ comprised in ODe 
seSSIon or .m ~wo or more successive seS'Sions, and if, before the expiry 
of the sessIon Immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
40 both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall there-
after have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modifica_tion or annulment shall 
, be without prejUdice to the validity of anything previously done under 
• that rule. 
Applica-
tion-Of 
the In· 
dian 
Railways 
Act, 1890. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 

.vtnJ. 
18 
45. Notwithstanding anythi11g contained in this Act aby prdceed1n;, 
for the acquisition of any land, under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 f~ lollal 
the purpose of any metro railway, pending immediately before the com-
mencement of this Act before any court or other authority shall be con-
tinued and be disposed of under that Act a'S if this Act had not come into S 
force. -
THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 2(h) and sub-section (1) of section 32] 
METROPOLITAN CITY OF CALc1rrrA 

stATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
To meet the inadequacie,s of the existing surface transport system and 
me ever increasing demand of urban commuter traffic in Calcutta, the 
idea of introducing the mass rapid transit system, popularly known as 
, metro railway, has been considered to be, the only solution, and, accord-
ingly, the constt'uction work has been started. 
The methods of construction of an underground metro railway are by 
cut and cover 01' by burrowing tunnels. The metro alignment will pass 
mainly undejl" public roads although, in some portion, the alignment will 
pass .under private properties. Stations and other ancillary works con-
nected with the construction of the metro railway will be located in 
public streets or in road side private premises. The epc:ecution of the 
project in the affected zones necessarily entails road diversions, closure 
of all vehicular and pede,;trian traffic, and diversion and relocation in a 
planned manner of va,rious public utility servic,'; maintained by sundry 
authorities. Build;ng and rebuilding operations in the proximate vicinity 
of a metro railway are also required to be regulated so that such activi~ 
do not jeopardise or endanger the metro railway, tllnnels, alignments and 
other allied installations. Further more, in constructing th~ metro rail-
way, whether by tunnelling or by the cut and cover method, it may" be 
that a certain amount of ground settlemeat occurs requiring, in particular 
cases, underpinning or strengthening of cer~ain old and dilapidated build-
ings or, in extreme cases, compulsory evacuation of people from the 
affected buildings for a temporary period. 
Under section 7 of the Indian Railways Act, 1890, no railway construc-
tion is permissibl~ in case of immoveable property not belonging to the 
railway administration unless the same is acquired under the law for the 
time being in force for acquisition of land. Although land can be acquiT-
ed outright for construction of the metro railway and other incidental 
works under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, thq procedure for such 
acquisition is long-drawn and costly. Since the metro alignment will paSs 
mainly under public land and at places under private properties, acquisi-
tien of mere right of user in the land, building, street, road or passage 
would mostly be: sufficient for the purpose of construction of the metro 
railway or other works connected therewith without acqui!'ing greater 
interest in such land, building, etc. Further, from the initiation of the 
land acquisition proceedings right up to their culmination by taking of 
possession, the whole proc~s involves a time consuming and long-drawn 
procedure which does not seem to afford or ensure quick completion of 
acquisition. 
The present Bill confers necessary enabling powers on th~ Central 
Government for carrying out the aforesaid purposes. The Bill provides 
a speedy and adequate proc~ure for the acquisition of lands, buildings, 
streets, roads or passage or the right of user in, or the right in the nature 
of easement on, Such building, land, etc., by the Central Governm£!l1t to 
the exclusion of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894; 
19 

Adequate provision has been made for the consideration of any objeC-
tion that may be madE!! by any person interested in the land, buildin&. 
road, street, etc., and for payment of an amount for the aforesaid 
acquisition. 
The other main features of the Bill are-
(i) appointment of a commissioner of metro railway for the pur-
pose of the inapey::tion of the metro railway and for such 'othe!' ·dlltlel 
and powers as may be imposed or conferred \lponhim; 
(ii) constitution of Advisory Boards for aiding and advising the 
Ceptral Government in the matter of f9rmulation and co-ordination 
of plans in the development of metro railway; 
(iii) appointment of compe,tent authorities or arbitrators for 
settling disputes as may be referred to such authorities or arbitraton 
under the provisions of the Bill. 
The proposed Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELln; MADHU DANDAVATE. 
The 18th April, 1978. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2(1) (e) of the Bill empowers the Central Government to au~ 
rise any person or authority to perform the functions of competent autho-
rity under the Bill. This will involve an expenditure on the pay and 
aUowances of the' competent authority. The expenditure in tlt .. coaneo-
tion is likely to be of the order of Rs. 40,000 per annum. 
Clause 3 of the Bill requires the Central Government to appoint a 
General Manager for every metro railway. This will involve an expen-
diture on the pay and allowances of the General Manager. A metro 
railway has been sanctioned at present only for Calcutta and a Gen~ral 
Manager is already in position. The expenditure in this connection is 
likely to be of the or-der of Rs. 45,000 per annum (at the maximum of 
the scale). 
Clause 4 of the Bill requires the Central Government to constitute an 
Advisory Board for every metro railway. As the members of the Advi-
sory Board will be officers of the Government no eXJ)enditure on this 
account is anticipated. However, under clause 5 of the Bill the AdvtBtll'Y 
Board may constitute committees and in terms of clause 5 (3) the mem-
bers of the committee who are not members of the Advieory Board are 
E.-t1titled to fees, daily and travellin'g allowances for attendance at the 
meetings. Such .penditure is likely to be of the order of Rs. 50,000 pel' 
, , 
annum. 
Clause 14 of the Bill provides for the amount determined by the COll1-
petent authority under clause 13 in the event o,f acquisition of land, etc., 
being deposited by the Central G.overnment with the competent authority. 
Sub-clauses (5) and (6) of this clause also provide for award and pay-
ment of interest on any excess amount that may be determined by the 
compettmt authority over and above the amount determined by the arbi-
trator. As the Central Government's liability will depend upon the land, 
e.k., acqufr.ed, it is not possible to give a precise estimate of the amount 
in.volved in such acq\lisition. 
Clause 16(1) of the Bill provides for appointment of arbitrator. The 
appointment .of arbitrator will involve an expenditure on the pay and 
allowances of th~ incumbent. Such expenditure is likely to be of the 
Ot'der of Rs. 80,000 per annum. 
Clause 18 of the Sill lists the ~unction (If the metro railway adminis-
tratiOn. !Illis inCllllcies besides c~nstrQCtion of the metro railway all other 
appuPmant w.or-ks like diversion of drains, water-pipes, gas-pipes, etc., 
~r:uQtion of houses, atRctsll, etc. This will involve expenditure to the 
Government. It 1& not poss~ble .to give a precise estimate of the amount 
that may be involved in such c(lllStructiQn. It may ~ however, added 
'that the metro l'8ilwav alraa<ty sanctioned for Calcutta is estimated to 
'IoR-....... -';"" 
21 . 

· l,..1ause. 19 of the Bill ~ea1s with the powers of the metro raUway ad-
ministratlon. The exerclSe, of such powers will involve expenditure to 
the Government. A precise estimate of the extent of expenditure in-
volves in the exe.rcise of such powers cannot be made out. As mentioned 
elsewhere the metro raHway construction for "Calcutta is estimated to 
cost RB. 250 crores. 
Clause 21 (1) (b) provides for a directive being issued for temporary 
evacuationftom any building situated above the metro alignment. In 
that event . it is necessary far the metro railway administration to provide 
temporary alternative accommodation or pay an amount sufficient to pro-
CUre a temporary alternative accommr:dation. Proviaion of temporary 
alternative accommodation or the payment in lieu thereof will involve an 
expenditure, a preciRe estimate of which cannot be given at this stage . 
. '" 'r 
Clause 22 of the Bill provides for the payment of an amount for the 
prohibition or the regulation of construction of buildings and excavations 
within a specified distance of the metro railway. This clause also pro-
vides for the matter being tak~n up to the arhitrat.or if the amount deter-
mined by the compt'ltent authority is not acceptahle to either of the 
parties. The amount involved will depend upon the prohIbition or regu-
lation notified for the purpose. It is not possible to give a precise estimate 
oftha amount that may bE!) involved in making such payments. 
Clause 23(1) of the Bill provides for underpinning or otherwise 
~~rengthening any building within a 50 metre radius of the metro align-
ment for facilitating the constniction of any metro railway or for ensur-
fng the safety of metro railway. Such underpinning anod/or strengthen-
ing will involve an expenditure, a precise estimate of which cannot be 
given. 
Clause 24 (2) confers power on the metro raHway administration to 
request while carrying out the purposes of this Bill nny p('rBon to carry 
out alterations to any sewer, storm~water drain. pipe. wire or cahle at 
the cost of the metro railway administration. Clause 24 (3) provid~ for 
the settlement of any difference or dispute about the alterations OIl" the 
CORt thereof. It is not possible to give the precise estimate of the amount 
thl'lt may be involved in so bearing the cost (\,f any alteration under clause 
24 (2) or as may be decided by the Central Government under clause 
24(3~. 
Clause 25 of the Bfll provides for the payment.of an amount,for ,fI,ny 
dllmage. loss or inj1l'l'Y sustained by anv person interested in any land or 
building as a result (\f the metro rR.i1wav administration enterin'l! into 
such land or building to explore and check up the foundation of any build .. 
tnll in ,the vicinitv ot metro Tl'lilwav ::llhmment bv diJ!~nf' trlal"'i:>its or 
otherwise or i.n requesting RnV person or body of persons to carr" out any 
1llt~r8ti0ll to anv sewera\:!e. store-water drain. pine-water or cabJe; etc .. to 
mP.E>t any particull\f, situatil)n for ca1'Tvtn~ out the . pUT'OOl'lC of this Act. 
RllCh pRvment will involve an E"xpenditu~ to the Govt>mment. th~ extent 
nf wh;ch will dePf'nd upon the fs('ts and circumRtanceg; rif'f'!M!'b CHiie. A 
nrf'dse pstimat~ of the amount ;nvol~ed cannot be given. 

23 
Clause 27 ot the Bill provides for the appointment of comrnlSSlOners 
af metro railway for the purpoSe of inspection of the metro railway • 
. Such appointment will involve an expenditure to the Government on 
account of pay and allowances to the commissioner appointed. Such ex-
penditure is likely to be of the order of Rs. 40,000 per annum per com-
missioner. 
Clau~ 31 of the ~ill deals with the accidents that may occur during 
constJnJction of m~tro railway or at any stage thereafter and provicIes 
for the appointment of a commission of enquiry to enquire into the 
accident. Any such appointment of a commission will involve an ex-
penditure to the Governmen~ on the pay, t~avqUing, da~ly apd other al-
lowances to the mem~r or members qf the commission as may be so 
appbinted. The appointment of such a commiSsion will arise only in the 
event of an acciqent occ~rring. A Pfec~se esti~ate of the exwn<ijture 
involved cannot Pfit givep. 
The Bill does not involve any other recurring or non-recurring 
expenditure. , 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING PELEGATED'LEGISLATION 
Clause 32 of the Bill empowers the Central Governm~t to add to the 
Schedule the metro alignment in respect of a metropolitan city to which 
the legislation applies. It is not possible to visualizq at this stage the 
exact alignment of the metro railway in the metropolitan cities, other 
than Calcutta. This clause also gives power to the Central Government 
to altE, any metrQ alignment specified in the sclredule, 'if ttts of opinIon 
that such alterlltion is necessary for the construction and maintenance of 
the metro railway to which such alignment relates: 
• . , ~ j ~. ~" !! . ! ) 
2. Clause 42 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to provide., 
by order, published in the Official Gazette, for the removal of difficulties 
that may arise in giving effect to th~ provisions of the Bill. 
3. Clause 44 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to carry out the purposes of the Bill when enacted. 'I'h.q matters 
in respect of which such rules may be made, inter alia, relate to the times 
and places at which the Adviso!'y Board shall meet and the procedure 
in regard to transaction of business by the Advisory Board; the term of 
office of the members of the Advisory Board; the times and places at 
which the committees shall m~ and the procedure in regard to transac-
tion of business by the committees; the payment of fees, allowances and 
travelling allowances to members of the committeq; the fO!"m in which 
the application for acquisition under clause 6 shall be made; and the man-
ner in which the amount shall be deposited with competent authority. 
4. Th~ above matters relate to procedure and administrative detans 
and it is not practicable to provide them in the Bill itself. The delega-
tion of legislative power is, therefore, of a nO!"mal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the construction of works relating to metro rawways in the 
metropolitan cities and for mattem connected therewith. 
(Pfoo1. .II""tII DM4Icawte. 
JlitUlter aJ .RcRhDofI •• ) 