1
THE  NEPA LIMITED (DISINVESTMENT OF OWNERSHIP)
BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to provide for disinvestment of shares of the NEPA LIMITED and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS M/s. Nair Press Syndicate Limited incorporated on the 25th  January, 1947
the National Newsprint and Paper Mills Limited for production of newsprint;
AND WHEREAS the State Government of Madhya Pradesh took over the management
of the company by providing loans to the company in the year 1949;
AND WHEREAS the Government of India took over the management of the company in
1958 from the State Government by providing and adjusting loans to the company;
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 87 of 2007

2
AND WHEREAS the name of the company was changed to NEPA LIMITED in the year
1989, and now it is expedient to induct a joint venture partnership of the private sector for the
revival of NEPA LIMITED for the efficient management and optimum use of infrastructure
and productive resources available in the company and to improve financial and physical
performance of the company.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the NEPA LIMITED (Disinvestment of Ownership) Act, 2007.
2. When the Central Government, on the recommendations of the Board for Recon-
struction of Public Sector Enterprises, is of the opinion that disinvestment is to be made in
the NEPA LIMITED, it may pass an order providing for transfer, exchange or relinquishment
of shares in the NEPA LIMITED to any person on such terms and conditions as may be
agreed upon.
3. (1) For the transfer to, and vesting in, any person, the shares of the NEPA LIMITED,
there shall be given to the Central Government by such person or in case such person is a
company, by such company, such consideration, having regard to the book value of assets
and liabilities of the NEPA LIMITED or the valuation made under any other method as may
be agreed upon by the Central Government and such person.
(2) The manner of payment of consideration for transfer of shares of the NEPA
LIMITED to the transferee shall be such as may be agreed upon between the transferor and
the transferee.
4. The Central Government may, in its order made under section 2, specify that disin-
vestment of shares shall be effected by one or more of the following methods as may be
specified in such order, namely: —
(a) by making a public offer or preferential allotment or private placement in
accordance with such procedure as applicable in case of any other Government
company;
(b) by directing the NEPA LIMITED to make further issue of equity capital to the
members of the public or preferential allotment or private placement, as the case may
be, in accordance with such procedure as applicable in case of the Government
company.
5.(1) Every officer or other employee of the NEPA LIMITED, except the chairman and
directors, serving in its employment immediately before the disinvestment of the NEPA
LIMITED under this Act, shall continue in office or service after such disinvestment, on the
same terms and conditions as if the disinvestment of the NEPA LIMITED had not been made
and shall continue to do so until the expiry of the period of one year from the date of such
disinvestment.
(2) Where an officer or other employee of the NEPA LIMITED opts under sub-section
(1) not to continue in the employment or service of the NEPA LIMITED, such officer or other
employee shall be deemed to have resigned.
Short title.
Disinvestment
in the
company.
Manner of
disinvestments.
Provision in
respect of
officers and
other
employees of
the company.
Payment of
consideration
for disinvest-
ment in the
company.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
M/s. Nair Press Syndicate Limited was incorporated as a private enterprise on the 25th
January, 1947 under the name of “The National Newsprint and Paper Mills Limited” for
production of newsprint. The State Government of Madhya Pradesh took over the manage-
ment of the company by providing loans to the company in the year 1949. Government of
India took over controlling interest in 1958 from the State Government of Madhya Pradesh.
The name of the company was changed to NEPA LIMITED in February, 1989. The Head
Office and Registered Office of NEPA LIMITED is at Nepanagar.
2.  The NEPA LIMITED, a public sector enterprise under the administrative control of
the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Heavy Industry),
became a sick industrial company as defined in the Sick Industrial Companies (Special
Provision) Act, 1985 and is under reference to the Board for Industrial and Financial
Reconstruction since May, 1998. In the year 2005, the Government sought advice of the
Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises for revival and restructuring of the
company. The Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises have recommended for
revival of the company through joint venture formation.
3. Since the approval of Parliament is necessary for changing the public character of
the company as it was held by the Supreme Court in the Centre for Public Interest Litigations
Vs. Union of India (2003) 7 SCC 532, the NEPA LIMITED (Disinvestment of Ownership) Bill,
2007 seeks to empower the Central Government to carry out disinvestment.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; SONTOSH   MOHAN   DEV
The 9th October, 2007.
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for disinvestment of shares of the NEPA LIMITED and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Santosh Mohan Dev, Minister of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises)
MGIPMRND—4561LS(S-5)—16-11-2007.