THE NATIONAL MINIMUM PENSION (GUARANTEE) BILL, 2011
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for payment of guaranteed minimum pension to all pensioners including
those who have worked in unorganized and private sector in the country and
for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Minimum Pension (Guarantee) Act, 2011.
 (2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint  but which shall not be later than three months from the date
of assent.
(4) This Act shall also apply to persons retired from employment in unorganized and
private sector.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) “Board” means the National Pension Board constituted under section 3;
Short title,
extent,
commencement
and
application.
Definitions.
Bill No.  87 of  2011
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
(ii) “Fund” means the National Pension Fund constituted under section 5;
(iii) “pensioner” means any person who has served in any office or any public
sector enterprise or any other statutory agency set up by a State Government and is
getting pension by virtue of service rendered by him; and
(iv) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3.  (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Board to be known as the National
Pension Board.
(2) The Board shall consist of:—
(a) a retired judge of the Supreme Court or of a High  Court, as the case may be,
to be appointed by the Central Government, as Chairman;
(b) the Secretary to the Government of India in-charge of the Ministry of Labour
and Employment, shall be the Member Secretary of the Board, ex-officio;
(c) the Secretary to the Government of India in-charge of the Ministry of Finance,
as member;
(d) three members representing major trade unions, to be nominated by the
Central Government, in such manner as may be prescribed;
(e) two members representing Public Sector Enterprises, to be nominated by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(f) three members representing private sector and unorganized sector
pensioners to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be
prescribed;
(g) five members of Parliament of which three shall be from Lok Sabha and two
from Rajya Sabha, who shall be nominated by Presiding Officers of the respective
Houses; and
(h) one member who shall be an eminent economist, to be nominated by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
 (3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairman and other Members of the Board, shall be such as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
(4) The Central Government shall provide to the Board such number of officers and
other employees as it thinks fit for the efficient functioning of the Board.
4. The Board shall perform the following functions,—
(i) to maintain the record of such persons who have retired from employment
from unorganized or private sector and who have attained the age of sixty years and
not getting the minimum pension under this Act;
(ii) to pay such pensioners who are getting less than rupees five thousand as
monthly pension, the difference of the amount in such manner as may be prescribed;
(iii) to lay down such guidelines as it may deem fit with regard to payment of
minimum pension;
(iv) to administer the Fund; and
(v) to perform such other functions with regard to the pensioners as may be
assigned to it by the Central Government.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the
minimum pension of a person who has served in any office or undertaking or authority or
establishment under the control of the Central Government shall be rupees five thousand per month.
National
Pension
Board.
Functions of
the National
Pension
Board.
Fixation of
minimum
monthly
pension.
Officers and
Employees of
the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
National
Pension Fund.
6. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a fund to be known as the National
Pension Fund with a corpus of rupees fifty thousand crore.
(2) The Central Government, the State Governments and the employers in the
unorganized and private sector shall contribute to the Fund in such ratio as may be
prescribed.
(3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donation, contribution or assistance
from individuals, organisations or otherwise shall also be credited to the Fund.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation by the Parliament, release
the necessary funds to the National Pension Board for effective implementation of the Act.
8. The Central Government shall cause to be placed before both Houses of Parliament
an annual report giving full account of the activities and performance of the Board.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to
carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Release of
funds.
Annual report
to be placed
before
Parliament.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

4
SERVER3\F/BILL2011\LS\2287LS
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The condition of a large number of pensioners in India is miserable, sad and frustrating.
They deserve a more decent treatment from the society. They are pensioners because they
served the society once.
It is, therefore, the responsibility of the society to treat them with respect and try to
solve this problems to the extent possible.
This Bill seeks to provide for payment of minimum pension to every pensioner including
those who have worked in unorganized sector and private sector. Since the provision of
minimum pension is also being extended to persons who have worked in unorganized sector
and private sector, it will provide social security for a substantial chunk of the population.
Though it would not solve all the problems of the pensioners, it would provide them some
kind of relief. It would also give them a sense of satisfaction that their problem got a sympathetic
consideration.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY
September 8, 2011

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a National Pension Board. Clause 4
provides that the Board shall ensure that every pensioner is paid a minimum pension under
the provisions of the Act. Clause 6 provides for constitution of a National Pension Fund.
Clause 7 provides for release of funds to the National Pension Board by the Central
Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees thirty thousand crore will
be involved per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty thousand crore is also likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill.
As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of
a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for payment of guaranteed minimum pension to all pensioners including those
who have worked in unorganized and private sector in the country and for matters
connected therewith.
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2287LS—14-11-2011