AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

8 DEC 2006

Bill No. 87 of 2006

' THE FARMERS (OLD AGE PENSION) BILL, 2006
By

SHRIMATI ARCHANA Nayak, M.P. डे
A
BILL
to provide for old age pension to farmers and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (J) This Act may be called the Farmers (Old Age Pension) Act, 2006. Short title,
(2) It extends to the whole of India. exten png
commence-
5 (3) It shall come into force at once. ment.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise tequires — Definitions.

(0 “appropriate Government” means a State Government or Union territory
administration, as the case may be;
(ii) ‘farmer’ mearis a small or a marginal farmer who has attained the age of sixty
10 years and has no income from any source or is living below poverty line; ~ -
(iii) “fund? means the Farmers’ Old Age Pension Fund set up under Sectioh 3; and
(iv) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under the Act.


Constitution
of the
Farmers Old
Age Pension
Fund

Maintenance
of register of
farmers

Release of
fund to the
appropriate
Government

Entitlement
of pension

Powers to
make rules.

3. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a fund to be known as the
Farmers Old Age Pension Fund.

(2) The Central Government and State Governments shall make contributions
to the fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.

4. (1) The appropriate Government shall maintain a register of farmers with all
necessary details in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The appropriate Government shall forward the details of farmers regis-
tered under sub-section (1) to the Central Government trom time to time.

5. The Central Government shall release funds to the appropriate Government
on the basis of the information received under section 4.

6. (1) Every farmer registered with appropriate Government shall be entitled to
a pension of rupees three thousand per month.

(2) The pension so fixed shatl be reviewed periodically.
(3) The pension shall be paid to a farmer through a nationalized bank.

7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.

10


- STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

re is the mainstay of the livelihood of our rural population and it contributes
growth of ‘our national economy. But the living conditions of majority
| farmers have not improved over the years. They live in abject poverty.
attain old age, their suffering increases as they are not in a position to do any
chunk of these farmers own only a few acres of land and since the yield
vagaries of weather. they always live hand to mouth. Therefore, it is necessary

me social security in the form of old age pension to the farmers.

ARCHANA NAYAK


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a fund to be known as the Farmers Old
Age Pension Fund to pay old age pension to the small and marginal farmers to which the
Central Government shall contribute in such ratio as may be prescribed. Clause 5 provides
that Central Government shall release fund to the State Governments required for payment
of old age pension to farmers. The Bill, therefore. if enacted, will inviove expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of india.

It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore per
annum. A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
incurred.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying ‘out the
ae १५९५ of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
power is of a normal character. 5



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for old age pension to farmers and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.

(Shrimati Archana Nayak, M.P)

MGIPMRND—3309LS (S-5)—20.11.2006.