1
Short title.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
DR. SHASHI THAROOR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
2. For article 9 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted, namely:—
Bill No. 87 of  2019
Substitution
of new article
for article 9.
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
“9. Every person who is a citizen of India by virtue of article 5, or is deemed
to be a citizen of India by virtue of article 6 or article 8, shall continue to be such
citizen even if such person has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of any foreign
State.”
3. In article 11 of the Constitution, after the words "acquisition and termination of
citizenship", the words ", dual citizenship" shall be inserted:
Persons
voluntarily
acquiring
citizenship of
a foreign State
are continue
to be citizen
of India.
Amendment
of article 11.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Indian diaspora is the largest in the world, with more than thirty million people
with lndian origin spread across the globe. India is the largest remittance receiving country,
receiving nearly $65 billion a year. It is also a matter of great pride that the Indian diaspora
plays an instrumental role in building nations they reside in. Between 1995 and 2000, over a
quarter of IT and engineering companies started by immigrants in USA, were started by
Indian immigrants. People of Indian origin have also taken up positions of responsibility and
they have risen to high offices such as that of the President of Singapore, the Prime Minister
of Mauritius, Trinidad and Tobago, and Governor- General of New Zealand. Persons of
Indian origin have also been leading lights in the business community, in academia and in the
world of literature.
Many Indians who migrate to other countries in the search of job opportunities, and
those who take citizenship of such countries to seek equality in benefits and in their treatment
in their place of residence, must not be seen as people who lack allegiance to the Republic of
India. In the era of globalization, more people from India will search for opportunities abroad.
By automatically terminating their Indian citizenship when they seek citizenship of countries
of residence, the law effectively cuts them off from their roots and make them feel like they do
not have a real stake in their country of origin.
In recognition of the impact of globalization, many countries provide their citizens the
option of dual citizenship. In response to growing demands from the Indian diaspora for a
similar option, the Parliament amended the Citizenship Act, 1955 to provide for the status of
Overseas Citizens of India or OCIs. However, as per the law, OCIs do not enjoy all the rights
that citizens of India can exercise, especially the right to vote, or to represent India in
international sporting or other competitions. Dual citizenship in its truest sense cannot be
granted through a statute due to article 9 of the Constitution,  which provides for the
automatic termination of Indian citizenship, if an Indian voluntarily acquires the citizenship
of a foreign country.
In order to enforce the idea that each member of the Indian diaspora has an important
stake in the country of their origin, it is necessary to amend the Constitution, to pave way for
statutory reform to allow dual citizenship.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHASHI THAROOR
June 6, 2019.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*****
9. No person shall be a citizen of India by virtue of article 5, or be deemed to be a
citizen of India by virtue of article 6 or article 8, if he has voluntarily acquired the citizenship
of any foreign State.
*****
11. Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall derogate from the power of
Parliament to make any provision with respect to the acquisition and termination of citizenship
and all other matters relating to citizenship.
*****
Persons
voluntarily
acquiring
citizenship of
a foreign
State not to
be citizens.
Parliament to
regulate the
right of
citizenship by
law.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Shashi Tharoor, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—495LS(S3)—19.06.2019.