1
THE HIGH COURT AT ALLAHABAD (ESTABLISHMENT OF A
PERMANENT BENCH AT MEERUT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RAJENDRA AGRAWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the High Court at Allahabad at
Meerut.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the High Court at Allahabad (Establishment of a Permanent
Bench at Meerut) Act, 2016.
Short title.
Bill No. 87 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. There shall be established a permanent Bench of the High Court at Allahabad at
Meerut and such Judges of the High Court at Allahabad, being not less than twenty-five in
number, as the Chief Justice of that High Court  may from time to time nominate, shall sit at
Meerut in order to exercise the jurisdiction and power for the time being vested in that High
Court in respect of cases arising in the districts of Meerut, Bulandshahr, Ghaziabad,  Gautam
Buddha Nagar, Baghpat, Hapur, Saharanpur, Muzaffarnagar, Shamli, Sambhal, Moradabad,
Bijnor, Rampur, Amroha, Agra, Firozabad, Mainpuri, Mathura, Aligarh, Etah, Hathras and
Kasganj.
Establishment
of a
Permanent
Bench at
Allahabad at
Meerut. 5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The State of Uttar Pradesh with a population of around 20 crore is the most populous
State of the Union of India. According to Court News V olume IX April-June 2014, the Allahabad
High Court in the State of Uttar Pradesh has around 23% of the all pending cases in the High
Courts in India. It is the highest pendency of cases among the High Courts in India.
There has been a long pending demand to establish a permanent Bench of the High
Court in western Uttar Pradesh since 1955, when the then Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh
had proposed setting up of the Bench of High Court at Meerut. Jaswant Singh Commission
also recommended the establishment of a permanent Bench of Allahabad High Court in
western Uttar Pradesh.
The number of pending cases from western Uttar Pradesh region are more than half of
the total number of pending cases in Allahabad High Court. The proceedings of cases
arising out of western Uttar Pradesh held in at Allahabad High Court even though there is
Lucknow Bench of High Court in between Allahabad and Western Uttar Pradesh but it has
no territorial jurisdiction over pending cases of western Uttar Pradesh. Western Uttar Pradesh
region with around one-third of State population requires a separate Bench comprising not
less than 25 Judges of Allahabad High Court at Meerut.
Besides this, in a large number of cases, the Government of Uttar Pradesh, its various
departments or the Public Sector Undertakings and autonomous bodies under the State
Government happen to be a party. Therefore, establishment of a permanent Bench at Meerut
will not only reduce unnecessary expenditure from the public exchequer but would also
benefit people from five divisions i.e., Agra, Aligarh, Meerut, Moradabad and Saharanpur
comprising total 22 districts i.e., districts of Meerut, Bulandshahr, Ghaziabad, Gautam Buddha
Nagar, Baghpat, Hapur, Saharanpur, Muzaffarnagar, Shamli, Sambhal, Moradabad, Bijnor,
Rampur, Amroha, Agra, Firozabad, Mainpuri, Mathura, Aligarh, Etah, Hathras and Kasganj.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; RAJENDRA  AGRAWAL
March 10, 2016.
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the High Court at Allahabad at
Meerut.
————
(Shri Rajendra Agrawal, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5317L(S3)—19.04.2016.