THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2010
By
SHRIMA TI MANEKA GANDHI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People  (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provi-
sions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act
shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No.  87 of  2010
As INTRODUCED  IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2.  In the Representation of the People Act, 1951, in Part V , after section 32, the following
sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“32A. In this Part, in sections 32B to 32D, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) “bye-election” means an election to fill a vacant seat or seats in the
House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State between regularly
scheduled general elections;
(ii) “candidate” means a person who has been duly nominated by a
recognized political party to contest any election to the House of the People or
the Legislative Assembly of a State;
(iii) “general election” means any election held, after the commencement
of this Act, for the purpose of constituting the House of the People or the
Legislative Assembly of a State, as the case may be;
(iv) “recognized political party” means a National party or a State party as
defined in the Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968;
(v) “reserved constituency” means a parliamentary constituency or an
assembly constituency reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes; and
(vi) “State” includes Union territories.
32B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law, bye-
law, rule or order for the time being in force, at least one-third of the candidates set up
by every recognized political party for contesting any general election shall be women:
Provided that the number of women candidates set up by any recognized political
party under this sub-section in reserved constituencies in a State shall be at least one-
third of the total reserved constituencies in that State.
(2) In sub-section (1), for the purpose of determining one-third women
candidates, the total number of parliamentary constituencies in a State shall be regarded
as a unit in the case of general election to the House of the People and the total number
of assembly constituencies in a State shall be regarded as a unit in the case of general
election to the Legislative Assembly of that State:
Provided that in the case of States having less than three parliamentary
constituencies, the Election Commission shall determine a cluster of two or more
States (including the State having less than three parliamentary constituencies) and
the total number of parliamentary constituencies in such States shall be regarded as a
unit for the purpose of determining one-third women candidates to be set up by every
recognized political party under sub-section (1) for contesting general election to the
House of the people.
32C. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law, bye-
law, rule or order for the time being in force, at least one-third of the candidates set up
by every recognized political party for contesting any bye-election shall be women.
(2) In sub-section (1), for the purpose of determining one-third women candidates,
the total number of seats which are to be filled by holding bye-election to the House of
the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State, as the case may be, shall be regarded
as a unit:
Provided that the provision of this sub-section shall not apply if the number of
seats of be filled by holding bye-election is less than three:
Provided further that in the bye-election the political party which had set up a
woman candidate from that constituency in the general election shall again field a
woman candidate from that constituency in the bye-election.
Definitions.
Insertion of
new section
32A, etc.
43 of 1951.
C.O. 2959
of 1968.
Compulsory
nomination of
one-third of
women
candidates by
every
recognized
political party
in general
elections.
Compulsory
nomination of
one-third of
women
candidates by
every
recognized
political party
in bye-
elections.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
32D. (1) It shall be the duty of the Election Commission to ensure the compliance
of the provisions of this Act.
(2) Where a recognized political party fails to comply with the provisions of this
Act, for the shortfall of every women candidate, such two male candidates set up by a
political party, as that political party may decide, shall be treated as independent
candidates for all purposes including the allotment of symbol.”.
Election
Commission
to ensure
compliance of
the provisions
of the Act.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The issue of empowerment of women has been raised in different fora in the country
from time to time. Political empowerment of women is rightly perceived as a powerful and
indispensable tool for eliminating gender inequality and discrimination. The level of political
participation of women in any society acts as a reliable barometer of the health of its
democracy.
Given the existing and pervasive gender discrimination in India, women's representation
in politics requires special consideration. Therefore, it is urgently required that special
measures are taken to enhance women's political participation in ways that help them to
influence decision-making at all levels of our society and polity.
Providing constitutional and legal mechanisms to enhance women's representation in
legislative bodies including the House of People and Legislative Assemblies of the States
are necessary for achieving the aforesaid objects.
The previous Central Governments had introduced Bills providing for reservation of
not less than one-third of total number of seats for women in the House of the People and in
the Legislative Assemblies of the States. However, all the Bills lapsed on dissolution of the
House of the People. As a result, no Bill could see the light of the day. At present also, a Bill
on this subject is pending before Lok Sabha.
The debate accompanying the above efforts has greatly highlighted the need for
creation of an appropriate mechanism that achieves the objective of enhanced women's
representation in all legislative bodies without suffering from the flaws of mechanical
reservation and rotation. Such a mechanism should not violate the basic principles of
democratic representation. It should also not result in a distortion of legitimate political
incentives in a constituency and should not reduce women's participation in legislatures to
merely ornamental presence. Additionally, such a mechanism must also provide for the
representation of those classes or groups of citizens including backward classes and
minorities, which are currently not having adequate representation in the legislatures. Informed
public debate and analysis has revealed that the above can be eminently achieved not by a
constitutional amendment that provides for mechanical reservation of seats for women coupled
with mandatory rotation at the end of each term, but by the more democratic and practicable
option of mandating parties to nominate women as their candidates during elections to the
House of the People and Legislative Assemblies of the States.
The Bill, accordingly, seeks to amend the Representation of  the People Act, 1951 with
a view to provide that at least one-third of the candidates set up by every recognized political
party for contesting elections to the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a
State shall be women.
N
EW DELHI; MANEKA GANDHI
July 13, 2010
4

GMGIPMRND—3345LS(S3)—03-08-2010.
LOK SABHARAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
————
(Shrimati Maneka Gandhi, M.P.)