—w

ee

vey शीत

As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

Bill No. 87 of 2000.

THE PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT (RECRUITMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Suri ANANT GANGARAM GEETE, M.P.
A
BILL

{0 provide for regulation of recruitment in the public employment for matters connected
therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (/) This Act may be called the Public Employment (Recruitment) Act, 2000.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government ‘may, by Notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this.Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “appropriate Government” means—
(1) in relation to—

(a) any establishment of any railway, major port; mine or oil-field,
or

(b) any establishment owned, controlled or managed by—

(i) the Central Government or a department of the Central
Government,

vere if

Short title and
extent and
commence-
ment.

Definitions.


3

5. The employer of every establishment who has notified vacancies shall consider all
applications received through employment exchanges and direct from candidates before
‘up any vacancies in the establishment.

6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, order, rule, notification, bye

law, regulation, instruction, judgement of any court of law or tribunal or any quasi judicial
authority or any authority having judicial powers to the contrary for filling up a group ‘c’
post, the regional language of the State or area where the establishment is situated or where
- the vacancy has arisen shall be a compulsory and. pre-requisite qualification before deciding
the eligibility of candidates for filling up any vacancy in that department.

7. Unless the Central Government otherwise directs by notification in the Official
Gazette in this behalf, this Act shall not apply in relation to vacancies which are proposed to
be filled through promotion or by absorption of surplus staff of any branch or department of
the same establishment.

8, The Central Government, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

Consideration
of all applica-
tions received
through em-
ployment ex-
change.
Regional lan-
guage to be
made compul-
sory for Group
“C’ posts.

Act not to apply
in case of pro-
motion or ab-
sorption of sur-
plus staff.
Power to make
rales.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS,

Tthas been observed that there is no proper and uniform policy followed in recruitment
in Government bodies. Only a Strong and clear cut policy will pave way for appointment of
efficient staff in Government undertakings, It has been seen that many Government
departments advertise their vacancies either in large dailies or in employment news only
with the result that only a fewer people have access to information regarding the vacancy
Position in a particular department. In fact, there is a mandatory provision that whenever
vacancy arises, employment exchanges should be notified about it who in tum will forward
details of eligible candidates to the department, This procedure is not followed properly and
as a result even unsuitable candidates get selected in the process.

The Supreme Court in a case has observed that all vacancies arising ina Government
department should be given wide publicity in newspapers including regional newspapers,
employment news, employment news bulletins in radio and ielevision network so that
maximum number of candidates can apply. Many of the depariments taking advantage of the
instructions given by the Government of India regarding the administrative and budgetary
Convenience, publish the vacancies in Employment News only. The vacancies are not
Published in regional languages and as a result people living in backward and far-flung areas
are not aware of the advertisement and as such are not in a Position to apply for the same,

Therefore, through this Bill it is made compulsory that all vacancies should be notified
not only to employment exchanges, employment news, but also published in regional
newspapers in addition to national and other dailies. In this connection it may not be out of
place to mention that a note on recruitment policy in the public sector enterprises was !aid on
the Table of the Lok Sabha on 14 April 1961 in which ithas been stipulated that all vacancies |
should be communicated tu employment exchanges and advertisements should be published
in local languages and local newspapers. It may be seen that even the judgement of the
Supreme Court is not strictly followed.

For any efficient functioning and serving the people better, itis essential that employees
serving in a particular department should know the local or regional language of the area in
which the department is situated, Of late, the regional or local language is not being insisted ]
upon as a pre-requisite qualification in determining the eligibility condition for considering
the candidature for a vacancy. Earlier the regional language or local language was made
compulsory qualification for appointment. However, nowadays ithas been done away with.
Itis proposed in the Bill that for appointment to group ‘c’ posts, regional language should be |
made essential instead of desirable. This will serve two purposes. First, persons speaking
the local language can be appointed who can liasion or communicate with the local people
effectively and also to provide employment opportunities to the local people.

Hence this Bill.

New Deut; ANANT GANGARAM GEETE
March 24, 2000


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

=|
|

A
BILL

to provide for regulation of recruitment in the public employment and |
connected therewith.

(Shri Anant Gangaram Geete, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—141LS—24.04.2000