Bill No. 87 of  2023
THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
By
Sඁඋං Tඁඈආൺඌ  Cඁൺඓඁං඄ൺൽൺඇ , M.P.
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016.
 Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Amendment)
Act, 2023.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date  as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
AS ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ

 2. In section 2 of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (hereinafter 
referred to as principal Act),—
  ( i) after sub-clause (e), the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:—
 “(ea) “clinical psychologist” means a mental health professional with full 
time Masters Degree in clinical psychology with M.Phil from a recognized 
university highly specialized training in the diagnosis and psychological 
treatment of mental, behavioural and emotional illness;”.
(ii) after sub-clause (k), the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ka) “guardian” means guardian, parent or caretaker of a person with a 
disability;”.
  ( iii) after sub-clause (q), the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(qa) “occupational therapist” means a person trained in a branch of 
modern medicine which includes the application of purposeful, goal-oriented 
activity through latest technology for evaluation, diagnosis, and or treatment 
of persons whose function is impaired by physical illness, injury, emotional 
disorder, congenital or development disability, or due to aging process, in 
order to achieve optimum functioning to prevent disability and to maintain 
health;”.
(iv) after sub-clause (v), the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:—
 “(va)  “physiotherapist” means a person trained in a branch of modern 
medical science which includes examination, assessment, interpretation, 
physical diagnosis, planning and execution of treatment and advice to 
any person for the purpose of preventing, correcting, alleviating and 
limiting dysfunction, acute and chronic bodily malfunction, curing physical 
disorders or disability, promoting physical fitness, facilitating healing and 
pain relief and; treatment of physical and psychosomatic disorder through 
modulating psychological and physical response using exercises, physical 
agents, activities and devices including mechanical, electrical and 
thermal agents;”.
(v) after sub-clause (za), the following sub-clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:—
“(zaa) “school nurse” means a professional nurse that practices advancing 
the well-being, academic success, and life-long achievements of students with 
minimum qualification of nursing (GNM) or B.Sc Nursing with registration 
in Nursing Council;
(zab) “Special education teacher” means teacher of concerned speciality, 
with a minimum educational qualification of diploma or B.Ed in ID (MR) for 
intellectual disabilities with registration on Rehabilitation Council of India 
(RCI), Diploma or B.Ed in LD for learning disabilities with registration on 
(RCI), Diploma or B.Ed in MD for multiple disabilities with registration on 
(RCI), Diploma or B.Ed in ASD for autism spectrum disorder with registration 
on (RCI) and Diploma or B.Ed in CP for cerebral palsy with registration on 
(RCI);”.
  ( vi) after sub-clause (zc), the following sub-clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:—
“(zca) “speech-language therapist” means a professional of speciality 
Audiology in speech and language with a minimum educational qualification 
of BASLP;
2
Amendment of 
section 2.

(zcb) “social worker” means a person whose job is social work with a 
minimum qualification of Masters in Social Work;”.
       3. After section 27 of the parent Act, the following new section shall be inserted, 
namely:—
       “27A. (1) The appropriate Government and the local authorities shall 
within their economic capacity and development, undertake or cause to be 
undertaken services and programmes in the areas of  clinical psychology, 
special education, speech and audio language therapy, social work, nursing 
therapy, physiotherapy in consultation with guardians of the persons with 
disabilities. 
         ( 2) The appropriate Government and the local authorities shall, for the 
aforesaid purpose, establish a Block Resource Centre in every block of every 
district of the country.
        ( 3) For the purpose of Rehabilitation of persons with disabilities the Block 
Resource Centre shall be authorised to avail the services from the following:—
(a) Clinical Psychologist;
(b) Special Education teacher;
(c) Speech-language therapist;
(d) Social worker;
(e) School Nurse;
(f) Occupational therapist;
(g) Physiotherapist.
3
Insertion of new 
section 27A.
Establishment of 
Block Resource 
Centre.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
 The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 was enacted to give effect 
to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
(UNCRPD) to which India is a signatory.
 It was enacted with a view to make provisions for our children who are 
differently-abled so that they can get the rights for dual benefits of preventive/
educational aspect and diagnostic/medical aspect. 
 In view of the constant endeavour to facilitate greater ease of living to such 
differently-abled persons, it has become necessary to amend certain provisions of the 
Act. Hence the Bill, namely, the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Amendment) 
Bill, 2023 is proposed to be enacted.
 The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 
2016 with view to provide that—
     (i) the appropriate Government and the local authorities shall establish a Block 
Resource Centre in every block of every district of the country;
     (ii) the appropriate Government and the local authorities shall within their 
economic capacity and development, undertake or cause to be undertaken services 
and programmes in the areas of  clinical psychology, special education, speech and 
audio language therapy, social work, nursing therapy, physiotherapy in consultation 
with guardians of the persons with disabilities; and  
      (iii) the Block Resource Centre shall be authorised to avail the services from 
Clinical Psychologist, Special Education teacher, Speech-language therapist, Social 
worker, School Nurse, Occupational therapist and Physiotherapist. 
      The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
   Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                THOMAS CHAZHIKADAN
March 16, 2023.   
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government and the local 
authorities shall establish a Block Resource Centre in every block of every district 
of the country. 
 The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore would be 
involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
 A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore would also be involved.
5

6
ANNEXURE
Eඑඍඋൺർඍ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Rං඀ඁඍ ඈൿ Pൾඋඌඈඇඌ ඐංඍඁ Dංඌൺൻංඅංඍංൾඌ Aർඍ, 2016
[Act No. 49 of 2016]
 *                 *                *                *              *  
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,―
 *                 *                *                *              *  
 ( e) “certifying authority” means an authority designated under sub-
section (1) of section 57;
 *                 *                *                *              *  
  ( k) “Government establishment” means a corporation established by or under 
a Central Act or State Act or an authority or a body owned or controlled or aided 
by the Government or a local authority or a Government company as defined in 
section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 and includes a Department of the Government;
 *                 *                *                *              *  
 ( q) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and 
the expression “notify” or “notified” shall be construed accordingly;
 *                 *                *                *              *  
 ( v) “private establishment” means a company, firm, cooperative or other 
society, associations, trust, agency, institution, organisation, union, factory or such 
other establishment as the appropriate Government may, by notification, specify;
 *                 *                *                *              *  
 ( za) “rehabilitation” refers to a process aimed at enabling persons with 
disabilities to attain and maintain optimal, physical, sensory, intellectual, 
psychological environmental or social function levels; 
 *                 *                *                *              *  
 ( zc) “specified disability” means the disabilities as specified in the Schedule;
 *                 *                *                *              *  
Deﬁnitions.

LOK  SABHA
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016
(Shri Thomas Chazhikadan, M.P .)