1
Bill No.  87 of  2020
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE RESERV ATION FOR THE SCHEDULED CASTES, THE SCHEDULED
TRIBES AND THE OTHER BACKWARD CLASSES IN
PRIVATE SECTOR BILL, 2020
By
SHRI GANESH SINGH , M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for reservation for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other
Backward Classes in private sector and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Reservation for the Scheduled  Castes, the Scheduled
Tribes and the Other Backward Classes in Private Sector Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5

2
Definitions.
10
2. In this act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "private sector" means any organization, establishment, educational institutes
or institution which is owned fully by private individual or corporation or limited
company or an organization in which the Government of India or a State has no
financial interest and wherein not less than twenty persons are employed; and
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall give due encouragement to private sector to make
provisions for reservation in favour of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes.
(2) The encouragement as provided in sub-section (1) may include—
(i) special concessions under various existing Central schemes; and
(ii) loans from nationalized banks at lower rate of interest.
4. The Central Government shall  cause an annual report to be laid before both Houses
of Parliament on the action taken under this Act.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or  be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Government
provide
incentives to
Private Sector
to make
provisions for
reservation.
Annual
Report.
Power to
make rules.
5
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present, reservation is available for persons belonging to the Other Backwards
Classes, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in service and posts under the
Central Government. The number of posts and appointments in Government sector come
down considerably, especially after the economic liberalization. Today, private sector has
become more important and job-oriented. In such scenario, the private sector is more involved
in the nation building activities alongwith infrastructure and economical projects. People
belonging to Other Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes find it very
difficult to get into Government service due to availability of less number of posts.
Under the provisions of article 16(4) and 16(4A) of the Constitution, Public Sector
Undertakings (PSUs) including Public Sector Banks under the Central Government and Financial
Institutions are following the instructions issued by the Government of  India mutatis mutandis,
Implementation of the Provisions or reservation is a pre-requisite for such voluntary
organizations, autonomous bodies/institutions etc. where the body receiving grant-in-aid,
employs more than twenty people on regular basis and minimum fifty per cent. of its recurring
expenditure is met by grant-in-aid of the Central Government and such body should be a
registered society of any cooperative society and should be in receipt of rupees two lakh or
more from the Consolidated Fund of India as annual grant-in-aid for general purpose.
There are several schemes and special provision in the country for the welfare of the
people belonging to the Other Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
However, in spite of all these measures, there has not been any big change visible in their
socio-economic status. In this situation, their presence is very vital in the private sector in
order to ensure their all-round development.
At present, there is no provision for reservation of persons belonging to Other Backward
Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in private sector. However, the Government
also can not pressurise them to provide reservation. In such a scenario, the private sector
can be incentivised to provide reservation to persons belonging to Other Backward Classes,
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes by way of making provisions for concessions and
special schemes.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GANESH SINGH
February 17, 2020.
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for reservation for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other
Backward Classes in private sector and for matters connected therewith
————
(Shri Ganesh Singh, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—5641LS(S3)—12-03-2020.